FT911-4207

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: Political gifts should go to a vote


   By BARBARA ELLIS


COMPANIES IN which you hold shares may be about to give money to
politicians. When general elections draw close, industry tends to step up
its donations to political parties, and shareholders' funds foot the bill.
However, it could be more than a year before you, as shareholders,learn the
full extent of the generosity the directors have lavished on politicians on
your behalf.
Companies - unlike trade unions - need not ask for shareholders' approval
for political contributions. Shareholders cannot contract out of political
giving. The Companies Act requires directors to report all donations of over
Pounds 200 made for political purposes. But the law can be read as exempting
gifts to organisations such as British United Industrialists which make
donations to political parties.
A report by Pensions Investment Research Consultants (PIRC) says
shareholders have the right to determine political donations and should
exercise it. Authors Stuart Bell and Anne Simpson say companies can make
political donations, but directors must justify the donations as in the
company's interest or risk a charge of acting ultra vires.
PIRC found that 38 of the FT-SE 100 companies made donations to the
Conservative party in 1989-90, contributing a total of Pounds 1.25m - 37 per
cent of its recorded contributions. No other party received donations.
Only one of the 38 had sought shareholder approval. BET, which gave Pounds
20,000 to the Tories in the year ended March 31, 1990, passed resolutions to
make political donations in 1986 and 1989 on a show of hands. Rank did so in
1985.
Marks & Spencer took a vote in 1986, saying the directors believed it 'right
to support organisations committed to policies that will promote and
maintain the economic climate.' Shareholders responded with 263m votes in
favour, 50m against and 313m abstentions. In contrast, when NFC balloted
shareholders, the majority against political payments was 87 per cent.
PIRC identified Taylor Woodrow as the largest corporate donor with a gift of
Pounds 150,320 to the Conservative party and Pounds 20,000 to British United
Industrialists in 1989. Last year, the company slashed its contribution to
Tory coffers to Pounds 24,000.
Taylor Woodrow put the matter of political contributions to a vote at its
1968 AGM, in a resolution endorsing the right of the directors to give
donations to 'anybody whose activities in their judgment are conducive to
the protection of the assets of the company.'
At the 1986 AGM, Taylor Woodrow shareholders voted to amend the company's
articles of association to give the directors broader powers to make
donations. A show-of-hands vote at the 1988 AGM unanimously agreed to
continue the policy.
PIRC recommends that you ask companies in which you hold shares to seek
specific approval for political donations at each annual general meeting.
Directors should state why they consider the gift to be in the interests of
the company and its shareholders.
'Companies may argue that making political contributions is a logical
extension of the directors' powers to act in the company's interests,' said
the report. 'Funding a political party is not a central part of a company's
business.
Any contribution is a reduction in shareholder funds. 'If companies refuse
(to ask for approval), shareholders should propose their own resolutions to
this effect,' says PIRC.

The Financial Times


London Page IV Illustration (Omitted).

910420

