FT911-4365

FT  19 APR 91 / Conservative jitters in Helmut Kohl's heartland


   By KATHARINE CAMPBELL


   FRANKFURT


AS IF the federal government in Bonn were not beset by problems enough, one
of the country's bastions of conservatism is wobbling precariously.
When voters of the Rhineland-Palatinate go to the polls on Sunday, the
Social Democrats are hoping to tip the Christian Democrats (CDU) from 44
years at the helm. Ever since the Land (state) was created after the war,
the birthplace of Chancellor Helmut Kohl has been staunchly conservative.
Now the incumbents are visibly edgy.
While a recent Land election elsewhere hung on the provision of extra school
buses, pre-occupations this Sunday are firmly national. Bonn's
post-electoral imposition of taxes to finance unification - after Mr Kohl's
repeated assurances to the contrary throughout last year - could cost the
CDU its previously secure position.
'Our difficulties come directly from Bonn,' laments Mr Carl-Ludwig Wagner,
the premier. The criticism of his own party leaders is aimed not just at the
failure to allow for the possibility of extraordinary measures in the first
place, but also at the 'muddle in high places' when the tax increases were
announced in February.
Neither Mr Wagner nor his voters doubt the need for higher taxes. But at one
campaign rally after another comes the awkward question: can I trust my
party? The CDU, unsettled by the recently-formed red-green coalition in
neighbouring Hesse, worries that too many voters will stay at home.
Mr Wagner's embarrassment is compounded by having to vote today in the upper
house's (Bundesrat) ratification of the new tax law. While attempting a mild
amendment to appease the rural Land's many commuters (who drive long
distances to industrial centres and to Bonn and will have to pay higher
petrol taxes), the debate can but rub salt in the wound.
To make matters worse, the CDU has two candidates. Springing from
intra-party warfare in 1988 that deposed the popular premier Mr Bernhard
Vogel Mr Hans-Otto Wilhelm, cast as king-maker in the whole episode, will
take over from Mr Wagner at the end of 1992. Mr Wilhelm, a young 50 and
dubbed over-ambitious by some, contrasts with the avuncular Mr Wagner, who
tries to present the double ticket as preferable to a secret deal emerging
mid-term.
Meanwhile, the Social Democratic (SPD) candidate Mr Rudolf Scharping is
basking in the CDU's dramatic decline. 'One doesn't vote for people who lie
like that,' shout the party placards.
Mr Scharping, whose wooden manner can make him appear arrogant, is credited
with galvanising the Land's previously dejected SPD. His cabinet, were he
able to form a government, would consist of 'competent rather than prominent
people' with a sprinkling of non-politicians, notably a banker and
businessman.
Overshadowed though they are by national issues, there are still some
pressing regional issues at stake. In parts a rather sleepy, if scenic
place, the Rhineland-Palatinate has under way an image campaign with the
less than promising slogan: 'The Rhineland-Palatinate is more diverse than
one thinks.'
High among the issues preoccupying the Land, once dubbed the aircraft
carrier of Germany, is social dislocation arising from the withdrawal of US
troops. The Pentagon employs nearly 25,000 German civilians, and will be
leaving behind vast tracts of, in places, heavily-polluted land. Mr
Scharping, once a bitter critic of the American presence, is left promising
to woo new US companies to the Americanised shell-towns.
Meanwhile, the chancellor has made no less than 14 appearances for the
campaign. ('It won't help,' says Mr Scharping lugubriously). In Worms last
week, just 10km from Mr Kohl's home and where he is often seen at Sunday
service in the historic cathedral, even a thunderously loud public address
system could not quite drown the cat-calls from the normally placid home of
Liebfraumilch wine. His message: the SPD, at best reluctant fellow
travellers in the unification enterprise, could scarcely afford to criticise
now.
Among Mr Kohl's worries is that a defeat on Sunday would lose the Bonn
coalition its majority in the Bundesrat.
However, even if the SPD emerges the strongest single party, it may well be
unable to form a government, much hanging on the Greens who currently have
five seats but could fail to attain the necessary 5 per cent of the vote.
With the Free Democrats (FDP) pledged to support the CDU if a government can
be formed, a poor showing by the Greens could leave Mr Scharping with
nothing but enhanced opposition status. Alternatively, with the Greens in,
Mr Scharping believes the FDP, his preferred coalition partner, would be
forced to negotiate. The tea-leaf readers believe the FDP has just about
left the door open.

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Map (Omitted).

910419

