FT911-4140

FT  20 APR 91 / Government pressed on rig liability


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


THE GOVERNMENT was urged by the Commons energy committee yesterday to assume
legal liability for abandoned North Sea oil platforms.
In a report published yesterday the committee raised the controversial issue
of what oil companies should do with their platforms when the oil has run
out. The subject will become more pressing as several big North Sea oil
fields start to run dry. The committee called on the government to be more
flexible in its approach to the question of abandonment.
The report's recommendations have been welcomed by the oil industry for
clarifying issues concerning the abandonment of North Sea fields. The
government said last year that most North Sea platforms would have to be
removed and broken up when the fields they serviced ran out of oil.
Because of the large costs and dangers in removing such large structures,
the industry has always favoured toppling platforms into the sea and leaving
them.
The guidelines have not yet been tested as North Sea operators are only just
facing the prospect of abandoning empty fields.
The Piper Alpha installation, which had to be abandoned after an explosion
that killed 167 men, was given a special concession to be toppled.
The MPs on the committee called on the government to make clear its general
requirements on abandonment, but said each case should be considered on its
merits. The MPs said the industry would set up a fund to pay for commercial
insurance on platforms if the government accepted liability for abandoned
structures.
The cost of removing an installation from its site can be almost double that
of taking only part of it away and toppling the rest into the sea - the UK
Offshore Operators Association estimates a cost of Pounds 4.4bn for total
removal of all North Sea platforms and Pounds 2.4bn for partial removal.
The structures are immense - significantly larger than Shell's 30-storey
headquarters building in London - and can weigh more than 300,000 tonnes. If
left in situ, they could prove a hazard to shipping and fishermen.
Mr Chris Ryan, an official at the association, said: 'We are now looking to
the government to strengthen its guidance to the industry because, before
the end of the century, we will be forced to abandon several fields.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

910420

