FT911-4264

FT  20 APR 91 / A record week on Wall Street: Individuals powered the surge


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


Wall Street has not seen a week like it for a long time. The Dow Jones
Industrial ended above 3,000 for the first time, and both the Standard &
Poor's 500 and the Nasdaq Composite also closed at record highs this week.
On three consecutive days trading volume exceeded 200m shares, and a string
of broking firms announced massive increases in first-quarter profits.
It is individual American investors, not Wall Street's money men, who
deserve most of the credit for rewriting the record book and wiping the red
ink from brokers' balance sheets. The surge in demand for stocks from the
small investor has powered the market's rally in 1991.
A lot of that new money from private investors has been pouring into the
mutual funds. Mr Michael Hines, a vice-president at Fidelity Investments,
the biggest fund management group in the US, said last week: 'The amount of
new business coming into our funds has been high - something in the order of
two to three times what it was a few months ago.'
Investors have also been buying stocks on their own account. In the first
quarter of this year, Dollars 3.06bn of retail investors' money (measured by
orders of 10,000 shares or less) flowed into shares listed on the New York
Stock Exchange, against Dollars 1.36bn in the same quarter last year,
according to Birinyi Associates, the New York-based market analysts.
Individuals have turned to the stock market because they expect the return
there to be higher than on other assets. Real estate is in a decline, and
returns on cash, Treasury bonds, bank certificates of deposit and money
market funds no longer look as attractive as equities because of lower
interest rates.
The switch into stock has been most pronounced from money market funds, the
most popular investment vehicle of 1990. On March 7 individual investors had
Dollars 170bn in money market funds managed by the broker/dealer firms. A
month later, that figure had dropped to Dollars 157bn. Most of the missing
Dollars 13bn went straight into the stock market, say analysts.
In spite of the big rush into equities, individuals are still underweight in
the market by historical standards. Mr Robert Farrell, chief market analyst
at Merrill Lynch, says that only 17 per cent of household financial assets
is currently invested in equities. This compares with 21 per cent at the
height of the 1987 bull market, and the 30-plus per cent seen during the
early 1970s.
A survey of investor sentiment, conducted every month on behalf of Fidelity,
also suggests there is room for more. In the first three months of this year
an average of 41 per cent of private investors surveyed said they intended
to buy more stocks over the next few months. In January last year, only 26
per cent said they would increase their stockholdings. In July 1990, the
last time the Dow touched 3,000, just 16 per cent said they would buy more
shares.
Meanwhile, the institutions have approached the market more warily. Not
wanting to miss out on the rally, they have been buying stocks, but with
little conviction. Mr Laszlo Birinyi of Birinyi Associates says institutions
have been reluctant to jump on the bandwagon. 'Based on the approach to the
market most institutions use, the multiples, earnings, etcetera are not
overly compelling. The market is not necessarily cheap, it's just up.'
He has a point. The overall market is trading relatively high by historical
standards at about 17 times earnings, and about two and half times
companies' book value. The rally is beginning to look tired, the broad
market having risen by more than 30 per cent since its low of October 1990.
The economy will recover this year, but the recession is still biting and
corporate earnings will remain weak for at least another two quarters.
Interest rates look like falling no further, and could even rise again if
inflation picks up amid an economic recovery. It has been a good week, but
nobody on Wall Street is getting carried away. The memories of last year,
when the Dow dropped from 3,000 to 2,365 in just three months, are too
fresh. While a repeat of that decline is unlikely, by mid-day yesterday
there were signs that the market was begining to suffer from vertigo, with
the Dow 24 points below Wednesday's record high.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

910420

