FT911-4263

FT  20 APR 91 / Job In The News: Search for soccer fan with monetary goals -
Chief economic adviser to the government


   By PETER MARSH


WANTED: bright, pragmatic economist, with nose for political issues and
proven organisational abilities. Should be a workaholic and may have to take
a salary cut. Interest in London soccer clubs an advantage.
This job description, or one very like it, is being discreetly circulated
through the financial world in a bid to find a new government chief economic
adviser.
The post at the Treasury became vacant this week following the appointment
of Sir Terence Burns, the current incumbent, as the youngest permanent
secretary at the Treasury for 50 years. Sir Terence, aged 47, is taking up
his new job early next month in place of Sir Peter Middleton, who is leaving
to become a deputy chairman at Barclays Bank.
Although the Treasury said yesterday that an early announcement was
unlikely, the government will probably not want to leave vacant for long the
position of what amounts to its top economist.
Providing top-quality economic analysis - and the policy recommendations
which flow from this - has become all the more important in recent months as
Britain has slid into its most serious recession for a decade. Just how
bleak the next few months may be was illustrated this week when the
government announced the biggest monthly unemployment rise on record,
bringing the jobless total to more than 2m.
Sir Terence is a highly practical northerner, with little interest in
economic dogmas. He was recruited to the Treasury in 1980, from a career in
economics forecasting and consultancy at the London Business School - over
the heads of several established Whitehall insiders.
The succession to Sir Terence presents ministers with an interesting
dilemma. Will the government appoint someone in Sir Terence's own mould  -
an outsider but with the 'people skills' both to get on with ministers and
run the Treasury's 100-strong economics group - or turn to an existing
Treasury official?
Another question is linked to the general election, which must be held by
mid-1992 and which could take place as early as June. Although the Treasury
stressed yesterday that the post of chief economic adviser was a matter for
the government alone, for practical reasons the Whitehall establishment will
probably want to ensure that whoever is appointed would be able to work with
the Labour party.
The issue of who takes over from Sir Terence cannot be divorced from a wider
question of the shift in style by Mr John Major since he became prime
minister in November. Mr Major has sought to convey an image of a 'man of
the people', and one open to new ideas. Both he and Sir Terence are keen
supporters of London football teams.
All these indicators point to the likelihood that several outsiders who are
not working for the government will be on ministers' short lists. Near the
top will be Mr Gavyn Davies, chief UK economist at the London office of
Goldman Sachs, the New York investment bank. The 40-year-old Mr Davies is
highly intelligent and articulate, and by the standards of his profession
fairly unassuming. His well-argued economic commentaries count among Mr
Major's favourite reading. Perhaps most important, he is an avid fan of
Southampton soccer club.
One aspect to Mr Davies's career might, however, be held against him by some
Tory politicians. Although he insists he is nowadays apolitical, he worked
during the 1970s as an adviser to the then Labour government. Since Mrs
Thatcher's election in 1979, he has not always been a supporter of
Conservative policies.
'Turning to Gavyn would have been unthinkable a few years ago,' said Mr
Andrew Britton, a former Treasury official who is now director of the
National Institute of Economic and Social Research. 'But in today's climate,
the fact that someone has been critical of the government in the past could
be an advantage.'
Mr Davies is a City superstar and as a partner in Goldman receives a
superstar's remuneration, reputed in some quarters to be around Pounds 1m a
year. Should he be offered the chief economist's job, he might have to enter
into serious negotiations about the salary on offer - a less than princely
Pounds 76,000.
Another contender from outside the Treasury is Professor Alan Budd, chief
economic adviser at Barclays Bank. He is good natured and highly practical,
as well as capable of being rude about economic theories from all parts of
the spectrum. What is more, he is a good friend of Sir Terence, with whom he
worked at the London Business School in the 1970s. Should Prof Budd be
appointed, he would join at the Treasury not only Sir Terence but another
former LBS economist - Dr Bill Robinson, who was last month appointed as
special economic adviser to Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor.
Among the internal candidates is Ms Rachel Lomax, aged 45 and currently Sir
Terence's deputy. She has been at the Treasury since 1968, knows Whitehall
inside out, and is bright, tough and good-humoured in roughly equal
measures.
Mr Hew Evans is another Treasury official who is almost certain to be on the
short list. He is on the same rank of deputy secretary as Ms Lomax, and is
keenly involved in the discussions about European economic and monetary
union. Interest in European issues is likely to become increasingly
important inside the Treasury during the 1990s as economic integration
proceeds.
Anyone interested in a long shot, meanwhile, should put their money on Mr
John Odling-Smee, a highly rated, former Treasury official. Mr Odling-Smee,
who is 48, a keen cyclist and has worked both for the London School of
Economics and the government of Ghana, was until 1990 a deputy secretary at
the Treasury, where he had worked since the 1970s. He left to take a top job
at the International Monetary Fund in Washington. 'I was surprised to see
him go - he was on a fast track,' said one Whitehall insider. Yesterday Mr
Odling-Smee was not in his office in the US, and was said to be visiting his
family in England.
Whoever takes over from Sir Terence will have to have an appetite for hard
work and - in view of the economic traumas that might lie ahead - be capable
of taking a few bloody noses. He or she might also like to try to emulate
Sir Terence's almost chameleon-like qualities, as a result of which,
seemingly effortlessly, he has glided to the top during the past decade.
'The thing you have to remember about Terry,' said one of his friends
yesterday, 'is that he started as an outsider, and ended up as the most
inside of all the insiders'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Illustration (Omitted).

910420

