FT911-4204

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: Corporate PEPS receive a boost


   By JOHN AUTHERS


   CORPORATE PEPS


personal equity plans which invest in the shares of only one company - were
boosted by the Budget.
Chancellor Norman Lamont allowed up to Pounds 3,000 to be invested in a
single company PEP on top of the Pounds 6,000 allowance for other PEPs. This
means that from January 1 you can put Pounds 9,000 into one company, free of
capital gains and income tax, provided you are prepared to open two separate
plans.
The Budget change is likely to lead to a swift increase in the number of
corporate PEPs on offer, as they can conveniently be used for companies'
profit-sharing or employee share-ownership schemes. According to Richard
Cockman, of CC&P, which currently leads the market in managing company PEPs,
around 1,200 companies are likely to open plans, although many will not,
initially at least, be available to the general public.
Details of the new scheme are still being worked out by the Inland Revenue,
but it is likely that each plan will have to be authorised by the company
concerned - avoiding the possibility of several rival ICI PEPs - and that
existing plan managers will have to re-register as corporate PEP managers.
Meanwhile, single company PEPs are already with us, and are the single
fastest growing sector of the industry, according to Chase De Vere. They are
particularly popular with those who have a longstanding holding in a blue
chip company.
Bradford & Bingley Building Society, which runs the plans for ICI and BP,
reports that since the BP plan's launch in February, 8,000 plans, worth more
than Pounds 30m, have been opened. More than 1,000 investors are interested
in ICI.
All the current plan managers report that many other blue chip companies are
working on PEPs at the moment, while other big players, such as Fidelity,
are considering entering the market. You are likely to have a wide choice
well before the January 1 start for the schemes.
Usually company PEPs have lower charges than other plans, but the inherent
extra risk of holding shares in one company - even a multinational - is
considerable and should be thought through before you invest.
Most advisers now agree that PEPs are best used as a tax-privileged pocket
for part of your portfolio, rather than as a free-standing investment. They
should also be regarded as long-term investments.
If you have a holding which you wish to transfer to a PEP, note that you
will have to sell your shares and then buy them back to transfer them into a
PEP. Some companies - including Abbey National, GRE and Lonrho - offer deals
to cut transfer costs, which you should ask about when opening the plan.
The accompanying table shows all the corporate PEPs now available to the
public. A lot will depend on your view of whether the companies concerned
are good investments, but also pay attention to the start-up fee, annual
charges (sometimes expressed as a percentage of the total value of the
holding), exit charges, and fees for individual deals within the PEP (which
are unlikely to amount to much if you only wish to hold one company).
Bradford & Bingley tel: 0274-555555; CC&P 071-242-8998, Chase de Vere
071-404-5766.

The Financial Times


London Page V Table (Omitted).

910420

