FT911-4054

FT  22 APR 91 / Arts: Chamber Orchestra of Europe - Barbican Hall


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


Following their television series devoted to the earlier Beethoven
symphonies, Nikolaus Harnoncourt and the Chamber Orchestra of Europe came to
London at the weekend to complete the cycle. This was the first time that
Harnoncourt had conducted the Ninth Symphony and the Barbican audience can
count itself fortunate to have caught his interpretation at white heat
straight from the intellectual forge.
Everything about the evening was as invigorating as one could have hoped.
Harnoncourt's performances, with their combination of controversial new
ideas and pounding energy, are guaranteed to exercise the mind as much as
they do the physical senses. The puffing and grunting of the conductor and
his enthusiastic stamping on the podium are only the most obvious outward
signs of the latter.
It is hardly appropriate any longer to refer to Harnoncourt as a specialist
in early music, when he is so often found these days in front of symphony
orchestras. But what he has learned from working with period instruments was
everywhere to be heard here: bright, forward, harsh, aggressively strange
sounds. It was as though Beethoven was to be thrust before us as new and
radical as he must have sounded in his own day.
This was an elemental Ninth Symphony. More raw at the nerve-endings than
Norrington; more expressive than Hogwood, the 'authentic' performances which
it most closely resembled. It also exhibited some of those Harnoncourt
quirks to set musicologists thinking: for example, just when the conductors
named above have argued the case for taking the second movement trio slowly,
Harnoncourt raced through it at double their pace.
The performance was tinglingly alive and is indeed to be recorded live in
Graz later in the year. The COE did not play to the best of its very
considerable ability for Harnoncourt on this occasion; but by then both
orchestra and soloists (Charlotte Margiono, Birgit Remmert, Robert Tear and
David Wilson-Johnson) should have sorted out their problems. The Tallis
Chamber Choir is superb already. I trust that it will be kept.
Nor, in the rest of the evening, was there any hint of routine. For the
platform had earlier played host to not one inspiring musician but two. In
the first half Martha Argerich played Beethoven's Second Piano Concerto with
a spontaneity of feeling, now fiery, now poetic, that must have rivalled the
spirit of the concerto's early performances, when the composer himself, a
great improviser and impassioned soloist, performed it.
Altogether this first of the COE's spring series at the Barbican was an
uplifting occasion. A repeat of this programme is scheduled tonight and the
other two concerts follow over the next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

910422

