FT911-4359

FT  19 APR 91 / Taiwan government gives way on points of democratic reform


   By PETER WICKENDEN


   TAIPEI


FACED with a 17,000-strong street demonstration in central Taipei that
threatened to become violent and protracted, Taiwan's ruling Kuomintang
(Nationalist party) yesterday gave way to the opposition on crucial points
of democratic reform.
The island's Kuomintang-dominated National Assembly is currently meeting to
end a state of war that it has maintained against Peking since 1949.
Although it has long since been merely a war of words with the communists
who threw them out from the mainland, the Nationalists have kept Taiwan
under a form of emergency rule that suspended the constitution and precluded
full democracy.
After leading a night-long, 10km march through central Taipei accompanied by
an estimated 15,000 riot police, Democratic Progressive party leaders called
off the protest when the Kuomintang agreed to consider revising parts of its
proposed amendments to the constitution.
Under the Kuomintang's original plan, the powerful and furtive National
Security Council, which oversees intelligence activities, and two other
agencies under it that were set up to deal with subversive activities, would
retain their present status, outside the control of parliament and under the
direct supervision of the president.
The National Security Council was set up originally to counter the communist
threat. Opposition politicians say they fear that as the Kuomintang pursues
rapprochement with the Chinese communists, with a view eventually to
reuniting Taiwan with the mainland, these agencies would increasingly become
tools for suppressing the outlawed Taiwanese independence movement, from
which the DPP derives considerable support.
Under a consensus reached by the two parties in the early hours, the legal
status of these three bodies could not be fixed before a completely new
locally-elected National Assembly meets to amend the constitution further in
1992.
The present National Assembly is dominated by ancient Kuomintang cadres
elected in mainland China when the Nationalists were still in control there
more than 40 years ago. Under the continuing state of 'war', they have been
frozen in office indefinitely. Despite their age they are now being
empowered by the Kuomintang to make initial changes to the constitution, in
which the state of war has been enshrined.
The old mainland cadres are supposed to scrap the emergency war clauses,
thus ending their own marathon tenure, and retire by the end of the year. A
new assembly will then be elected from the people of Taiwan, plus a few from
overseas Chinese groups. The Kuomintang yesterday also accepted the DPP's
demand that any recalcitrant seniors be forced to step down by the year's
end.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

910419

