FT911-4027

FT  22 APR 91 / UK Gilts: Possibility of big issues casts a pall


   By PETER MARSH


THE possibility of large amounts of gilt issues over the next year cast a
shadow over the market for UK government bonds last week.
The pall was particularly perverse in view of large doses of gloomy news on
the recession front - which at other times would almost certainly have
lifted the market.
In the event, gilts at the long end of the market lost ground by more than
half a point on the week, with shorter gilts staying at roughly the same
price. The 10 per cent Treasury benchmark stock maturing in 2008 closed on
Friday at 92 13/16 , compared with 93 7/16 the previous week. The yield was
pushed up from 9.79 per cent to 9.87 per cent. The shorter dated 10 per cent
bond maturing in 1994 closed at 99 5/16 , the same as a week previously, to
yield 10.25 per cent.
Three sets of economic data at the end of the week argued strongly for the
UK recession turning out longer and bleaker than had been forecast.
The UK jobless total passed the 2m mark in March with the biggest monthly
increase on record. That leaves open the possibility that the total out of
work will climb to 3m by the end of next year.
The government announced the biggest fall in manufacturing output for three
years. This declined by 1.6 per cent in February compared with January and
officials now estimate the year-on-year fall is about 9 per cent, an
increase of one percentage point on earlier in the year.
Fears of a credit crunch were aroused by figures showing that bank lending
in March plunged to its lowest level for 15 years. The Bank of England
announced that bank and building society sterling lending totalled just
Pounds 700m last month, a fraction of the median City forecast of around
Pounds 4bn.
These figures had economists reaching for their history books to examine the
chances of the current recession matching in intensity the one in 1980-81
when the peak-to-trough decline in output reached 6 per cent. Until last
week, many economists believed the current economic decline would result in
a fall of about 3 per cent until the expected recovery this summer: now they
cannot be quite so sure.
Without the prospect of a large amount of gilt funding hanging over the
market, news of this kind might be a cause for satisfaction in bond markets.
The gloomy indications provide every sign that the annual rate of retail
price inflation, 8.2 per cent last month, may come down by more than the
Treasury's forecast rate over the next few months.
It would easily hit 3 per cent by the end of the year, as opposed to the
official projection of 4 per cent. That, of course, assumes a further
reduction in the annual rate of rise in wages.
The annual rise across the economy was 9 1/4 per cent in February, as
opposed to 9 1/2 per cent in January, and all the signs are that the rate
will come down more as the year progresses.
The chief worry for the market, however, is that the public sector borrowing
requirement for the current financial year will turn out to be much more
than the projected Pounds 8bn.
Gilt traders are already resigned to gilt funding over the year of about
Pounds 14bn. Should the borrowing total run to Pounds 12bn or so, as some
predict, the market could be faced with gilt issues of well over Pounds 1bn
a month - a level of supply which could push prices down.
Some of the fears were underlined by figures last week showing that the
borrowing requirement in March, the last month of the financial year,
reached Pounds 3.1bn, the highest figure since 1988.
Although the last month of the year normally provides a high number for
borrowing, the figure could presage the start of high borrowing totals over
the next few months as public expenditure mounts and tax income falls - both
aspects being linked to the recession.

The Financial Times


London Page 28 Graph (Omitted).

910422

