FT911-4212

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: Volumes that speak value - A different
method of share price analysis


   By PHILIP COGGAN


'MORE BUYERS than sellers' is the standard response of one veteran FT
reporter when anyone asks him why a particular share price has risen.
It is spoken in jest, but it is also a truism. The balance of supply and
demand determines prices. So studying the volume of trade in a company's
shares is often just as important as noting the short term price movement.
In the US, share trading has been studied in this way for quite a long time
and has been granted the portentous title of 'volume analysis'.
Why not simply look at whether a price moves up or down? One main reason is
that market makers, faced either with a shortage or surplus of stock on
their own books, have a tendency to mark prices higher or lower accordingly.
Such a movement is unlikely to be sustained because it is not a product of
'real' demand from actual customers, institutional or private.
Similarly it is not much use looking at volume in isolation. Common sense
tells us that every share that is bought is also sold and vice versa. But if
an increase in volume results in a higher price that is a bullish sign,
since buyers have been forced to raise their bids to persuade existing
holders to sell. Similarly, an increase in volume accompanied by a fall in
price is bearish.
Charles Wyatt, of research group Volume Analysis, uses a measure called
cumulative volume to study market trends. The weekly volume figure is added,
if accompanied by a rise in price, but subtracted if accompanied by a fall.
The cumulative volume (cum vol) line will roughly track the share price.
However, if the volume line starts to move ahead, that could be a sign of
strong demand and a forthcoming surge in price.
The top graph shows the GEC price between October and February. In early
January, the cum vol reached a low, but then started to climb ahead of the
share price. That increase preceded a jump in GEC's shares, which rose from
184p to 235p in February.
The bottom graph shows that Hawker Siddeley's share price has steadily risen
this year, helped by rumours of a bid. But the cum vol line has placidly
tracked the share price. Wyatt argues that this shows no sign of the
increased activity that would normally predate a bid.
In a recent article in Investor magazine, Wyatt cited the combination of
rising prices and higher trading volumes that preceded the bids for Ranks
Hovis McDougall in 1988 and for BAT Industries in 1989.
These higher volumes need not necessarily be a sign of insider dealing,
although that does occur. Just as often, the increased trading volume is a
sign that the would-be predator is building up a stake.
Small investors can easily be stocks on bid rumours. Watching the volume
figures can thus prove a useful, although by no means infallible, check. If
there has been little volume, talk of a bid is more likely to be based on
rumour than fact.
The largest shares will naturally enjoy the largest volumes. What counts is
unusually high volume levels. Jerry Evans, an analyst for County NatWest
WoodMac, cites two significant measures.
One is the percentage of a group's shares that have been traded. For
example, the most actively traded share by this measure in the trading week
April 8 to 12 was Frogmore Estates, which was subject to a bid from Southend
Properties and saw 10.3 per cent of its share capital change hands.
The other measure is the value of shares traded. On this measure, the most
active stock in the same period was Pearson, owner of the Financial Times,
due to the placement of Dutch group Elsevier's 8.8 per cent stake.
The interpretations applied to volume analysis can bring it close to
chartism, the study of patterns in share price movements. As an example,
Wyatt cites two key 'rules'.
The first is that 'a sudden increase of volume in a stock is bullish when it
follows a significant downward trend in share price.' The pattern to look
for, he says, is a trickle down in price on steady volume, followed by a
sudden increase in volume with a static price. That can be a sign of the
reappearance of buyers.
The second rule is really the obverse of the first. The pattern is a drift
upward in price on steady volume, followed by a significant increase in
volume but a static price. That, Wyatt argues, is a bearish sign, since it
shows that sellers are on the prowl again.
The important thing for the small investor is not to get too carried away,
but to look at volume as an adjunct to more fundamental analysis. Profits
and dividends are factors investors should never ignore.
Volume analysis is not confined to single shares. Jerry Evans regularly
looks at share trading volume across the whole market. When the FT-SE 100
Index fell, during last year, from 2,150 to 2,000, there was relatively low
volume. This was a sign, he says, that the market was becoming undervalued,
as there was no real selling pressure. However, he argues that the recent
rise in the market is sustainable because it has been accompanied by heavier
volumes.
So how can the private investor track volume movements in shares? The answer
is, only with some difficulty. The FT prints trading volumes in major stocks
every day on its markets page.
However, these figures, which come from SEAQ, lump together customer and
intra-market business and often contain inaccuracies. At least they indicate
the trend and can be used as a guide to changes in volume levels. We also
publish the total customer trades for the market; a rough guide is that over
Pounds 1bn is a heavy day and below Pounds 900m is light.
From now on, Finance and the Family will be looking at major stocks on a
monthly basis and highlighting those where volume patterns are significant.
Readers will thus have a chance to keep up with what is becoming an
increasing popular way of analysing the stock market.

The Financial Times


London Page III Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Illustration (Omitted).

910420

