FT911-4111

FT  20 APR 91 / Interest rate falls aid new house sales: Builder says
recovery represents more than the normal seasonal pick-up


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


SALES of new houses in Britain have improved markedly since interest rates
began to fall in February, according to house builders yesterday.
Mr Nelson Oliver, managing director of Wimpey Homes, Britain's second
largest housebuilder, said its sales had risen by 10 per cent since the
beginning of January compared with the corresponding period last year. Much
of this improvement is thought to have occurred in the past six to eight
weeks.
Mr Ian Courts, managing director of Laing Homes, which built 2,000 homes
last year, said sales in the two weeks before the latest  1/2 percentage
point cut in interest rates, on April 12, had been the best in the past two
years.
Mr Courts said: 'The recovery is steady rather than spectacular but
represents more than the normal seasonal spring pick-up. Sales of retirement
homes, which have been one of the worst affected parts of the market, have
improved in particular.
'Our stock of second-hand homes, acquired as a result of part exchange
deals, reduced by a third last month.'
Since the beginning of February, bank rates have fallen two percentage
points to 12 per cent. In the same period, building society mortgage rates
have fallen from an average of 14.5 per cent to between 12.85 per cent and
12.95 per cent.
Housebuilders say the effect has been to prompt the beginning of a slow thaw
in the housing market rather than a rapid recovery which could fuel price
increases.
Most builders expect they will have to continue to offer some sales
incentives including mortgage subsidies and part exchange deals for a large
part of this year, in spite of the pick-up in sales.
Sir Clifford Chetwood, chairman of Wimpey, warned last month that any
improvement in margins was likely to come too late to make any material
difference this year to housebuilders' profits.
Builders, however, have been encouraged by the rise in the number of
'serious buyers' visiting show houses. Tarmac, Britain's biggest
housebuilder, which constructs between 11,000 and 12,000 homes a year, said:
'There are more genuine buyers around. There is definitely more confidence
and more sales are sticking than previously. A new village in north
Staffordshire started at the beginning of this year has so far sold
everything that has been available.'
Mr Steve Lidgate, deputy manager of Beazer Homes, building about 5,000 homes
a year, says: 'There has been a noticeable pick-up in sales during the last
two or three weeks, dating back to before Easter. This is the first time
this year we have seen reservations rise compared with 12 months ago.'
Mr Richard Mooney, chairman of Taylor Woodrow Homes, said: 'There has been
an increase in visitors to our housing sites, by up to 50 per cent in some
areas, since the start of this year. The level of sales in the last three
weeks has risen by about 25 per cent, although the market still re-mains
very depressed. We still need further reductions in in-terest rates to
restore confidence.'
Bovis Homes said it had just had its best five weeks for reservations since
1988.
Rate competition, Weekend IVChief executives of some building societies
received large pay rises in 1990 - one of the toughest years on record for
the UK mortgage market - and three of them saw their salaries pass the
Pounds 200,000 mark. Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 22

910420

