FT911-4327

FT  19 APR 91 / UK News (Employment): Pay harmony plan finds unions out of
tune - The controversy over Labour's hopes for co-ordinated wage deals


   By JOHN GAPPER


THE words National Economic Assessment seem anodyne enough. 'All the unions
are talking about is a close relationship with the next Labour government,
and there can be nothing controversial about that,' Mr Ron Todd, general
secretary of the Transport and General Workers' Union, told fellow union
leaders in Dundee this week.
Yet it is proving controversial, and it may become damaging if Labour and
the unions fail to tame the issue before the next general election. As so
often in TUC disputes, it revolves around the meaning of words. In this case
the question is whether the three words really mean two others: incomes
policy.
Both the TUC and the Labour party are edging towards their own definitions.
Almost nobody expresses open support for an incomes policy under Labour, the
exception being the Usdaw shop workers' union. Many argue that if an NEA
performs any function, it will be to put pressure on unions to restrain wage
demands.
The dispute has another classic TUC ingredient - a complex web of factional
interests. Although it started last year as a straightforward clash between
left and right, it has developed into a many-cornered tussle between unions
of varying political views and memberships.
There are also shades of opinion within the Labour leadership, with Mr Neil
Kinnock appearing keener than some shadow cabinet members on unions trading
wage restraint for rewards, including a high national minimum wage.
Opponents of the idea believe Mr Kinnock has been influenced by Miss
Patricia Hewitt, his former press secretary, who now leads the Institute for
Public Policy Research. This research group has published a report backing a
strong form of national economic assessment which would set an affordable
pay norm.
Partly because of the controversy so far, the idea has not been fully
defined. Both Labour's policy document this week and a paper drafted for the
TUC's economic committee envisage a two-stage annual process.
The process would start with a statement of economic prospects by the
government in the autumn, followed by an NEA in which the government, unions
and employers would discuss economic indicators including pay and
productivity. The government would decide on the level of the national
minimum wage as part of the NEA debate.
In the strongest version of the idea, this would be followed by a
synchronised pay round in which most bargaining would take place at the same
time based on the outcome of the NEA.
There is little sign that many unions would accept such a strong model.
Support for pay synchronisation has been largely confined to the GMB general
union and UCW communications workers union, and both Labour and TUC
documents instead include a much vaguer commitment to the gradual
'co-ordination' of pay.
Unions supporting a form of wage adjustments under Labour fall into two
camps. In the first are those that believe stable economic growth will be
difficult unless unions take part in a national effort to rein back
inflation. The most vocal exponents are Mr John Edmonds of the GMB and Mr
Alan Tuffin of the UCW.
The second camp includes unions representing low-paid workers who stand to
benefit most from Labour not only introducing a minimum wage, but also
deciding it can afford to increase it regularly over a number of years.
There are at least two camps of union opponents. One comprises the left-led
unions which distrust the NEA proposal and would only consider it if strong
assurances were given that it would not involve any form of wage control.
This group is led by the MSF general technical union. Other opponents, whose
hostility has been even stronger, include the right-led private-sector craft
unions which fear their highly paid members will bear the brunt of any
pressure for wage demands.
The central question for Labour and the TUC is whether they can sustain the
rather uneasy consensus established at the Scottish Trades Union Congress
this week: that unions will publicly oppose any form of wage restraint, but
will nonetheless support an annual NEA in line with Labour's policy.
This is probably a politically acceptable front for the next general
election, but Labour would have problems if hard-line opposition, which
ruled out an NEA, made progress. MSF originally tried to commit the STUC to
an attack on the idea of discussing pay norms or bargaining a national
assessment.
The move was blocked by the TGWU among others, with Mr Todd arguing that an
NEA would not mean wage restraint. He appealed for the unions not to
'conjure out of the air something we are frightened of that is not even on
the horizon.' As long as the TGWU holds this line, Labour's policy looks
secure.
A difficulty would arise if the TGWU changed its mind about what an NEA
means. It will have an opportunity to do so at its biennial delegates
conference in the summer, which falls before the Trades Union Congress in
September. There is likely to be a move by the left at the TGWU conference
to commit the union to opposing economic assessments.
The TUC voting figures would then start to look quite gloomy for Labour. The
AEU, MSF and Nalgo public service union might join the TGWU in voting
against Labour's policy and thus give a vote of more than 3m as a starting
base for NEA opponents.
Those three words are not too painfully controversial for Labour, but they
could become so.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted). Photograph Aiming
at agreement, Alan Tuffin (left), Ron Todd (centre) and John Edmonds, who
favour some pay co-ordination (Omitted).

910419

