FT911-4198

FT  20 APR 91 / Minding Your Own Business: Always remember the human factor
 -Computing


   By DAVID CARTER


THE THEORETICAL benefits of putting your sales and purchase ledgers on to
computer are great. All the number-crunching is done automatically and with
total accuracy. Statements can be printed at the touch of a button. You can
produce an up-to-date printout of a supplier's or customer's account at any
time.
Cash is the lifeblood of any business and many small businesses are badly
short of it. The cash position must be monitored weekly, even daily, so as
not to exceed your overdraft limit. The trio of cashbook, sales ledger and
purchase ledger work together in giving you control of the daily flow of
cash into and out of the business. The cashbook tells you how much you have
in the bank. The purchase ledger tells you how much is due to go out to your
supplier, and when. The sales ledger tells you how much is due in from your
customers and when.
But in practice these benefits may not fully be realised. The introduction
of a computer can show up cruelly the lack of financial skills in a small
business. Businesses buy a computer to do their accounts, then hand it over
to the office junior to run. Sadly this breaks a fundamental rule - the
person who does the accounts needs to understand accounting.
As time passes, errors will creep into any record-keeping system. Invoices
are omitted or put on twice. A cheque for Pounds 115.20 is copied wrongly
into the books as Pounds 112.50. Invoices are posted to the wrong customer
account. These errors must constantly be searched for, detected and weeded
out.
Over the years the accounting profession has devised ways of 'reconciling'
one account book with another in order to eliminate errors. At the end of
each month the bookkeeper goes through this series of reconciliations. If
the totals of two books disagree it signals an error. He works his way back
through all the month's postings until ultimately he finds the source of the
error. Then he reverses it out, enters the transaction correctly and
recalculates the totals. When the totals of the various books finally agree
it signals that errors have been eliminated. Only now are the account books
proven accurate; only now can the bookkeeper start to write up the accounts
for next month.
With a computer the same end of month reconciliations must be done. In some
ways computerised accounts are more exacting than manual. Suppose you have a
customer who is also a supplier. He owes you Pounds 1,000 but you owe him
Pounds 600, so he sends you a cheque for Pounds 400. The account postings
for this are quite complicated. With a manual system you can record the
Pounds 400 receipt in the cashbook, scrawl a note beside it explaining what
happened, and let the accountant sort it out at year-end. But a computer is
rigid and inflexible and you do not have this let-out. You have to get those
account postings on to the computer properly, and you have to get them on
NOW.
So before buying an accounts package you must take a hard look at yourself
and the way you keep your current financial records. Do you employ an
experienced bookkeeper - either part-time or full-time? If not, how
financially literate are you and your staff? (As a rough test, is there
anyone on board who understands the difference between a sales ledger and a
sales daybook?)
What is the state of your current manual system? Are you running a cashbook?
Is it up to date? Is it reconciled to the bank statement each month? Do you
run sales and purchase daybooks? Are they up to date? Do you run sales or
purchase ledgers? Is the purchase ledger reconciled each month to supplier
statements? Do you run control accounts reconciling the ledgers to the
daybook and cash book?
The more often you answer 'No' to these questions, the more of a mess your
books are likely to be in. You will have to get someone in to clean them up
before you can even start to run them on a computer. But even this is not
enough. Part of my own education as a consultant was to sort out a company's
manual books, post them on to the computer, train the staff in operating it
 -and then watch helplessly over the next six months as the computer system
slowly drifted back into a mess similar to that before it arrived.
It is pointless to buy accounting packages to run on your computer if your
staff cannot do the end-of-month reconciliations.
An unreconciled ledger will run to seed and the figures will become
untrustworthy. People then lose confidence in the computer and start blaming
it for being 'wrong'. But what else can you expect if the person running the
accounts does not understand accounting? Bookkeeping is a precise, skilled
and intensely practical craft. So before you buy an accounts package make
sure you have an experienced bookkeeper in place to run it properly, and buy
the package (Pegasus, Sage, or whatever) which he knows and wants to use.
David Carter is a consultant in information systems for small companies.
Tel: 0727-55996.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

910420

