FT911-4363

FT  19 APR 91 / Treuhand to give buy-outs a boost


   By DAVID GOODHART


   BONN


THE TREUHAND wants to promote more management buy-outs in east Germany. They
have accounted for only 5 per cent of the 1,261 industrial companies already
privatised, according to Mrs Birgit Breuel, the privatisation agency's new
president. Foreign sales have accounted for another 5 per cent, with 90 per
cent going to west German companies.
Management buy-outs are expected to be a theme when the newly formed
Managers Association (East) meets Mrs Breuel next month.
However, she made clear yesterday, at a news conference to open the
Berlin-based Treuhand's new Bonn office, that the inadequacies of east
German managers were one of the main obstacles to corporate restructuring.
'We have so far received relatively few workable business plans from those
companies applying for restructuring money,' she said, adding that companies
which expected to get money regardless of the quality of their proposals had
better think again.
Providing the most detailed breakdown so far of Treuhand sales, Mrs Breuel
said that 40 per cent were in the capital goods and motors sector, 30 per
cent in food and drink, 17 per cent electronics and scientific instruments
and 12 per cent chemicals and rubber.
These sales, together with those of the large retail chains, most newspapers
and 200 hotels, had secured half a million jobs, said Mrs Breuel.
For those 7,000-plus companies that remain in Treuhand ownership, the
organisation has more 2,000 outstanding offers. Several key assets have been
given to the east German states: the Meissen china company and the Leipzig
Fair to Saxony, and Carl Zeiss Jena to Thuringia.
Only 333 companies, involving about 90,000 jobs, have been closed by the
Treuhand but Mrs Breuel said fewer closures would be required than
originally feared. She also said that 'privatisation or restructuring' was a
false antithesis and that both would be promoted where appropriate.
About 1,000 of the 8,000 companies which received the original DM30bn in
short-term credit guarantees were no longer in a position to repay their
loans, she said. The Treuhand would continue to pay interest until the end
of the year even on credits that could be repaid and would continue to pay
interest on the DM100bn in corporate debts inherited from the old regime. Mr
Klaus Schucht has just been appointed to the Treuhand executive. He is a
Social Democrat with good trade union connections and has been spokesman of
Ruhrkohle Westfalen, one of Germany's biggest coal companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

910419

