FT911-4355

FT  19 APR 91 / US seeks to block escape from peace process: Another round
of Mideast diplomacy


   By HUGH CARNEGY and TONY WALKER


   JERUSALEM, CAIRO


MR James Baker, the US secretary of state, opens his third round of shuttle
diplomacy in less than six weeks in Jerusalem today, hoping to convert into
reality vague agreements from Israel and its Arab adversaries to hold a
peace conference.
Mr Baker clearly feels that his best chance of exploiting the 'window of
opportunity' he believes was opened by the victory of the US alliance in the
Gulf war is to generate a momentum which carries along all the parties and
allows as little room as possible for any one to wriggle out.
But will it work? There is still deep scepticism on both the Arab and the
Israeli sides, where examples of past failed attempts by US secretaries of
state, from William Rogers to George Shultz, are frequently cited. Both
sides continue to demand that the burden of concessions must fall on the
other.
Arabs express exasperation and anger over the policies of Mr Yitzhak
Shamir's hardline Israeli government - especially recent provocative moves
to expand Jewish settlement of the occupied territories. 'Unless the United
States is prepared to pressure Israel, there is no hope,' says Mr Mahmoud
Riad, a former secretary general of the Arab League. From Israel's point of
view, it is Arab states such as Syria and Saudi Arabia that must give first,
by formally recognising Israel.
'All they have to give is words. We have to give quality assets, the
territory, so people are suspicious,' says Mr Arye Na'or, a former cabinet
secretary to ex-prime minister Menachem Begin.
Against this familiar background of mutual suspicion, Mr Baker is promoting
the idea of a regional conference, under US/Soviet auspices, as a symbolic
opening to a series of substantive bilateral negotiations between Israel and
Arab countries. Parallel talks would take place to deal with the Palestinian
issue.
Israel, happy that the US has adopted the 'two track' approach to bilateral
relations and the Palestinian problem it always favoured, has accepted this
formula - with the important caveat that no disputes in the bilateral
negotiations could be referred back to the full conference where it fears an
Arab majority.
Saudi Arabia and Egypt, the most pro-western of the Arab states, are
prepared to go along with the regional conference proposal. Syria, the more
radical Arab states, and the Palestine Liberation Organisation have not shut
the door. But none are enthusiastic. They want the EC involved - which
Israel does not - and they want the full conference to have powers to ensure
the implementation of decisions taken. Above all, they want the UN to be
involved and the conference to be held on the basis of UN resolutions 242
and 338.
The resolutions call for Israeli withdrawal from occupied Arab lands,
matched by a guarantee of security for all states. This is the basis for the
'land for peace' formula now demanded of Israel by the Arabs, the US and
most of the international community.
Ironically, when resolution 242 was originally passed in 1967 Syria and the
PLO objected, while Israel accepted. Now Israel's position has shifted to
the extent that it will not accept 242 and 338 as dictating a 'land for
peace' settlement to any peace conference.
Mr Shamir is prepared to offer Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank and
Gaza Strip for an interim period, with the prospect of later talks on a
final settlement. But so far he has flatly refused to countenance
relinquishing Israeli sovereignty over the West Bank and Gaza, and has also
said Israel will not give up the Golan Heights to Syria.
'Mr Shamir,' says Mr Na'or, 'is not going to trade off the territories. He
is really ideologically committed to them.' Mr Baker also has to deal with
the vexed issue of Palestinian representation at any talks. The PLO is
highly dubious about the US initiative. It fears the US is seeking to
exclude it from the peace process - as Mr Shamir loudly demands.
'The US seems to be giving way to the Israeli view completely,' said Mr
Jamil Hilal, a PLO spokesman at the organisation's headquarters in Tunis.
But it is willing to play along up to a point in the hope that the process
may provide a pretext for the organisation to escape from the isolation
caused by its support for Iraq in the Gulf crisis.
Mr Baker is working on forming a Palestinian delegation from the West Bank
and Gaza where senior figures show signs of near desperation for any talks
which offer at least some chance of relief from Israel's unrelenting
oppression.
Mr Radwan Abu Ayyash, a prominent pro-PLO leader just released from five
months in jail, said there was a danger the Palestinians would be 'left in
the fridge. If something is cooking, we must be in the kitchen.'
Both local Palestinians and the PLO in Tunis agree that, while a local
delegation would not overtly carry a PLO label, it must clearly have a
mandate from Tunis. 'We want to make Mr Baker realise the address is Tunis,'
said Mr Hilal.
The US secretary of state is almost certainly ready to go along with this.
But, again, Mr Shamir has made repeated statements that any Palestinian
delegation which claimed to represent the PLO would be unacceptable to
Israel. So far, Mr Baker has sought to sidestep such potential landmines in
the interests of keeping the momentum going.
Most notably he has refused to react - at least in public - against a series
of recent moves on Jewish settlements which have enraged the Arabs.
On his latest shuttle trip, which will include Jordan for the first time, he
is likely to encounter a stiffer reaction on such issues from the Arab side,
which sees them as 'confidence-destroying' steps, not the
confidence-building Mr Baker has called for.
There is no doubt Mr Baker is playing against the odds. But there is also no
doubt that he and President Bush, with the Gulf war and a wealth of previous
experience behind them, command a good deal of respect from all parties.
It may just be that reluctance to say 'no' to them can be exploited by Mr
Baker to keep the window of opportunity open.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

910419

