FT911-4127

FT  20 APR 91 / Some ILG creditors to receive 2p in Pounds


   By DAVID CHURCHILL, Leisure Industries Correspondent


UNSECURED CREDITORS of ILG Travel, which went into receivership last month,
can expect repayment of only 2p in the pound when the company is wound up.
The company is a subsidiary of the International Leisure Group which is also
in receivership.
The creditors, who range from Spanish hoteliers to jobbing printers, were
told the news at a meeting in London yesterday by KPMG Peat Marwick
McLintock, the administrators.
Mr Tim Hayward, who held the meeting with fellow administrator Mr Bill
Ratford, said: 'The picture is bleak, and it will be a considerable time
before any dividend can be paid.'
Mr Harry Goodman, ILG's chairman at the time of the collapse was not at
yesterday's meeting, and his whereabouts are uncertain.
The administrators, who are still sorting out ILG's finances some six weeks
after the collapse, believe that liabilities could amount to more than
Pounds 400m.
Assets are unlikely to realise more than Pounds 10m, they said.
Yesterday's creditors' meeting was for ILG Travel, the main holiday
subsidiary of the ILG group which traded under names such as Intasun and
Club 18-30.
Air Europe, the charter and scheduled airline service operated by ILG, is
also in receivership, but the administrators are still hoping to find a
buyer for the airline or some of its assets.
They have already sold ILG's interests in its Italian, German and Spanish
airline affiliates.
ILG's holding company, Hudson Place Investments, is also in receivership,
and further creditors' meetings will be held shortly.
Some 1,550 staff in the travel companies and 1,970 airline staff have lost
their jobs since the collapse. A further 250 staff are helping the
administrators.
The administrators have already sold some of the ILG Travel assets,
including the Club 18-30 brand name.
However, under the rules of the Association of British Travel Agents the new
owners cannot yet call their company by this name. Instead they have
launched a holiday company called The Club which will target the same
market.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Photograph Bleak prospect ahead for creditors, Tim Hayward
(left) and Bill Ratford of KPMG (Omitted).

910420

