FT911-4289

FT  19 APR 91 / Government Bonds: Treasuries slide on news of labour market
revival


US GOVERNMENT bond prices fell sharply across the board yesterday after
signs of an unexpected revival in the labour market.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond was down  23/32 at 96
21/32 , to yield 8.169 per cent.
At one stage the long bond had been almost a full point lower.
The two-year note was even weaker, down  5/32 at 100 9/32 , yielding 6.948
per cent.
Bond prices fell on the news of a 22,000 drop in initial claims for state
unemployment insurance in the week ending April 6.
The market had been expecting a rise in the number of jobless claims, and
analysts said the figures pointed to signs of a recovery in the labour
market, and therefore, in the economy as a whole.
The jobless statistics, following on from last week's promising inflation
data, are likely to reinforce the view that interest rates do not need to
come down any further. The bond market has been troubled in recent days by
suggestions that the Federal Reserve is satisfied with the progress of the
economy, and sees no need for another easing of monetary policy.
The news that Congress had put a stop to the nationwide freight rail strike
also depressed prices, which had been higher on Wednesday on the expectation
that the strike would slow down the pace of economic activity.
IN EUROPE, the London gilts market fell about  3/8 point, despite a series
of economic data considered quite positive for the market.
The main influence on the market was the continued oversupply of paper, with
a further Pounds 335m of new sterling, foreign and corporate bond issues
added to the market yesterday. Interest in the new five-year gilt to be
auctioned next week was described as only moderate.
The long gilt future on the London International Financial Futures Exchange
ended at 91 3/4 , down from 92 5/32 .
Traders are focusing on provisional money supply figures due to be released
later today, particularly bank lending data.
German bonds eased slightly, but substantially outperformed the US bond
market.
The Bund futures contract on Liffe ended at 85.66, down from a closing level
of 85.78 on Wednesday. German monetary policy was left unchanged at
yesterday's Bundesbank meeting.
The French bond market also outperformed the US Treasury market, and was
also a little stronger than German. The yield spread between French and
German bonds narrowed a basis point or two to 46 basis points.
A two- and five-year bond auction in France was quite well received, dealers
said.
JAPANESE government bonds fell slightly yesterday afternoon following the
fall in the US market, but otherwise traded in a very narrow range. Traders
said market sentiment was poor and volumes were low.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

910419

