FT911-4344

FT  19 APR 91 / Policy on export credits is defended


   By PETER MONTAGNON, World Trade Editor


MR MALCOLM Stephens, head of the Export Credits Guarantee Department,
intervened yesterday in the growing controversy over the government's stance
on reinsuring export credits to politically risky developing countries.
He was defending the decision by Mr Tim Sainsbury, trade minister, to block
a parliamentary amendment requiring that such reinsurance be available for
three years after the partial privatisation of the department later this
year.
He said the government was still making a 'significant' commitment to
maintain such a facility.
Had the amendment been passed, legislation would have been needed to extend
the three-year period, he told a Confederation of British Industry meeting.
The government's alternative proposal to keep the need for political-risk
cover under continuous review meant the facility would be available as long
as needed with no limit set on the level or duration of the government's
commitment, he said. Businessmen attending the meeting said they were
sceptical about his efforts to reassure them.
They said the government's commitments were vague and half-hearted. Several
added they were made less credible by the restrictive attitude ECGD has
already adopted towards new political-risk guarantees.
Mr Stephens also sought to calm exporters' fears that the private market
would be unable to provide sufficient general commercial-risk reinsurance
after privatisation. The bulk of such reinsurance commitments have already
been placed, he said.
The government would provide a top-up facility for commercial-risk
reinsurance but, in contrast to its policy on political risk, this facil-ity
would expire after three years.
In a clear indication that ECGD's tough approach on cre-dit to developing
countries was likely to continue, Mr Stephens warned against the
'conventional wisdom' that economic resurgence in Latin America meant the
debt crisis was over.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

910419

