FT911-4192

FT  20 APR 91 / Sport: London plans PR marathon - The capital's plans for
the Olympic Games


   By KEITH WHEATLEY


NEXT Wednesday a decision will be taken which could turn every Londoner into
a marathon participant. That day the British Olympic Association decides
whether to adopt London as its candidate city for the Olympic Games in 2000.
If the answer is yes, a gruelling propaganda campaign against rivals such as
Peking and Berlin will grind on for nearly three years. Around Pounds 8m,
Pounds 1 per inhabitant, will be spent simply to convince the 92 grandees of
the International Olympic Committee that London deserves its favour.
Leading proponents such as athlete-turned-politician Seb Coe argue that to
host the Olympics would put Britain back on the international sporting map
in a way that individual gold medals - such as his own - never could. Others
agree. 'There's an awful negative complacency and lethargy about
international sport in Britain,' says Kate Hoey MP, who is likely to become
sports minister if the Labour Party takes office.
Figureheads such as Coe, Hoey and Richard Sumray (chairman of the London
Council for Sport and Recreation) share youth and enthusiasm. There is an
unspoken view that for too long British bids to host the Olympics have been
the preserve of portly, sober men in grey suits - powerful either
municipally or commercially. Denis Howell, spearhead of Birmingham's bid for
the 1992 Games, must have been the apotheosis - or nadir - of this process.
'People who are involved in sport don't like losing and we've been beaten
badly in the cases of Birmingham and Manchester', says Hoey. 'Because I'm
new to the process I'm keen to get tough and get on with it.' Hoey acted as
honest broker in January to bring two warring factions within the London bid
together.
Coe is still the name most people associate with London's campaign. Barely
had Manchester been eliminated - with five votes - in the IOC vote for the
1996 Games in Tokyo last September than Coe announced London's candidature.
David Teasdale, his business partner, says backroom planning had been under
way for months. 'We kept it secret for fear of hurting Manchester's
chances,' says Teasdale, formerly Britain's top civil servant in sports
administration.
The secrecy meant there had been no liaison with a rival London group,
largely public-body based, and the months of public wrangling before the
shotgun marriage did not enhance Coe's reputation as a diplomat.
Coe, a member of two Olympic commissions, is uniquely well-connected within
the Olympic movement. Yet his celebrity could be a minus. In the monster-ego
world of the IOC members, dealings with anyone except the head of the bid
city are regarded as a little second-rate. During the three years of the
Manchester bid its chairman, Bob Scott, was said by friends to have aged 10
years because of the seven-day-a-week meeting-and-greeting.
Scott - a far more ebullient and clubbable man than Coe could ever be - is
far from certain how easy it is for the central personality to delegate his
papal aura. 'If you are an IOC member you desire to be courted by the boss
from the minute you arrive in his city and you are offended if it doesn't
happen,' he says. During Manchester's candidature nearly 65 IOC members
visited the city. 'The more famous the boss is, the more of a problem it
becomes.'
The big question hanging over a British bid is whether the Olympics is
winnable. 'We have a clear analytical view that you could never win with a
provincial city,' says Teasdale.
Anyone with the slightest knowledge of how the IOC behaves would tend to
agree. London is a glamorous place to spend the best part of a month in
mid-summer. In an organisation where snobbery and a sense of place are
endemic, the chance to attend receptions at Buckingham Palace or the House
of Lords would sway votes.
'I believe and always have done that London is the key to any chance of
Britain holding the Games,' says Sir Brian Woolfson, head of Wembley
Stadium. 'For the rest of the country it would be an Away-day Olympics.'
Would London be ready to pay the full price of attracting votes from IOC
members?In Tokyo the Princess Royal blew the gaff about the gifts - she
refrained from using the dreaded word bribes - passed to IOC members from
candidate cities. It caused a storm, for a few months, and the committee
decided to investigate financial malpractices by a minority of its members
on visits to candidate cities.
Charging twice for airline tickets, expecting to be compensated for
jewellery 'stolen' from hotel bedrooms, and bringing multiple 'guests' are
just a few of the more common ramps practised by IOC members during the last
bidding round. There seems little reason to believe that London would not be
expected to join in. However, Princess Anne, wearing the hat of the BOA
president, has said 'no goodies'.
Sumray, contemplating a dilemma that seldom arose when he chaired Camden
council's social services committee says: 'Atlanta won on its merits and so
shall we.' Accountants Coopers & Lybrand produced a report assessing
London's chances and why a city wins the Olympics. It said: 'Atlanta . . .
was far and away the most creditable package and offered the best Games . .
. Professionalism and profits count for more with the IOC than sentiment and
history in current bids for the Games.'
Of the two realistic sites in London for facilities and Olympic Village both
have problems. Wembley has resonance, history, and - as Woolfson points out
 -could be made into a state-of-the-art stadium for infinitely less than the
cost of a new building.
'There is no economic case for building a new 80,000-seat stadium in Greater
London,' he says. 'It would be totally impossible for any commercial
operator to do such a thing and I don't see the government having any great
enthusiasm to run such a project at a huge loss year after year.'
However, the declared route for the London Olympics bid is the final
undeveloped stretch of Docklands, to the east of the Isle of Dogs. An
Olympic Village would add 30,000 beds at an estimated cost of Pounds 450m
(three times London's present annual expenditure on new accommodation). An
athletics stadium is planned for Silvertown.
Coe, Teasdale and their fellow directors say that they are in talks with
developers such as Mowlem and Olympia & York, and have the London Dockland
Development Corporation as an interim partner during the feasibility stage.
Yet without central government underwriting, it all looks terribly
uncertain. Manchester discovered to its cost that the IOC were not
particularly keen on travelling to look at a derelict site next to the ship
canal to be told that this was going to be a wonderful stadium and shown the
model.

The Financial Times


London Page XI Photograph Docklands dream, the Olympic flag flutters over
Seoul. Will it fly in London? (Omitted).

910420

