FT911-4122

FT  20 APR 91 / Hurd and Waldegrave lead defence of Major


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


MR DOUGLAS HURD, foreign secretary, yesterday led an attempt by senior
ministers to shrug off criticism of Mr John Major, the prime minister, from
within the Conservative party and from people associated with Mrs Margaret
Thatcher, his predecessor.
Mr William Waldegrave, health secretary, and Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, EC
affairs minister, joined a concerted attempt to underline the strengths and
electoral appeal of the prime minister.
In a phrase couched in terms to emphasise the improved atmosphere Mr Major
has created in the cabinet room, the foreign secretary highlighted 'the
style of firm, reasonable leadership now established in Downing Street'.
The chorus of praise which Mr Major received from his ministerial colleagues
came as Labour leaders renewed their attack on the continuing 'dithering'
and confusion over the government's plans for replacing the poll tax.
Mr Hurd likened the events which led to the departure of Mrs Thatcher from
Downing Street last November to an earthquake. He compared the criticism of
Mr Major to 'small tremors of after-shock'.
Mr Hurd told a Conservative supper club at Brize Norton, Oxfordshire, that
the tremors had been 'over-recorded' in the press. He insisted that 'I do
not believe they are of the least significance in the minds of the
electorate'.
Mr Hurd scornfully dismissed the attacks made on Mr Major by Mr Patrick
Robertson, the 22-year-old secretary of the Bruges group, an anti-federalist
body, and Sir Alan Walters, former economic adviser to Mrs Thatcher.
The foreign secretary doubted whether anyone would 'seriously believe that
the opinions of either would, or should, weigh even slightly in the balance
of judgment at an election'.
Giving examples of what he called Mr Major's firm and reasonable leadership
he cited sterling's entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European
Monetary System, the proposal for creating 'safe havens' for the Kurds in
northern Iraq, and the handling of the poll tax.
Meanwhile, Mr Bryan Gould, shadow environment secretary, renewed Labour's
charge that Mr Major lacked flair and decisiveness. Forecasting that the new
local tax to be unveiled next week would be 'a dog's breakfast', he
suggested that Mr Major's inability to exert his authority meant that it was
'the product of a committee without a chair'.
Mr Gould warned that the new local tax would be a 'yuppies' charter' if it
was based on the replacement value rather than the capital value of
property.
It could mean that a single millionaire working in the City and with a
luxury penthouse flat in Mayfair would pay much less than a large
poverty-stricken family struggling to survive in a rundown area.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

910420

