FT911-4260

FT  20 APR 91 / UK Company News: Bundaberg quick to dismiss increased offer
from Tate


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


TATE & LYLE, the UK sweet-eners group, has increased its hostile bid for
Australia's Bundaberg Sugar by 40 cents to ADollars 4.1, valuing the
Queensland-based company at ADollars 319m, or Pounds 141.76m.
Mr Neil Shaw, chairman, said the new bid was 'generous,' and warned: 'This
is our final offer.' Mr Bill Beerworth, the Sydney merchant banker who is
advising Tate, said it was on a 'take it or leave it' basis.
However, Mr Roy Diecke, chairman of Bundaberg, said his board saw no reason
to change its advice to investors not to accept. He said Tate's decision to
raise the bid confirmed the inadequacy of its original offer.
Mr David Poole of Macquarie Bank, the merchant bank advising Bundaberg, said
institutional investors holding around 30 per cent of the shares had
indicated within two hours of Tate's announcement that they would reject.
'The Bundaberg stock price fluctuates according to the sugar price, and it
is low at the moment because sugar prices are low. But the institutions are
looking more to the long term value of the company,' he said.
Analysts were sceptical that the revised offer had been pitched high enough
to succeed. Most said Tate would have to increase it, or drop the insistence
on acceptance by at least 90 per cent of shareholders.
'At ADollars 3.7 the offer was ridiculously cheap; at ADollars 4.1 they are
in no-man's land; but at ADollars 4.4 they might have a chance,' said Mr
Angus Murnaghan, an analyst with Dominguez Barry Samuel Montague, the
investment bank.
In a statement to the Australian Stock Exchange, Tate said the revised bid
represented a premium of 57 per cent over Bundaberg's 1991 average market
price before the original offer in mid-March.
It represented a multiple of 15.4 times Bundaberg's estimated net earnings
for 1991, and 16.8 times estimated earnings for the following year.
Mr Shaw said: 'Bundaberg stockholders have a simple choice. They can take
ADollars 4.1 now in cash or they can wait in the hope that sugar prices will
rise enough to push Bundaberg's stockmarket price to ADollars 4.1.
'On the basis of (forecasts by) the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and
Resource Economics, this could take up to four years.'
Mr Shaw recalled that Bundaberg traded at ADollars 2.37 as recently as
February 18 - a month before Tate's initial offer. The shares closed 2 cents
higher yesterday at ADollars 3.9, but most analysts forecast a significant
fall if the bid fails.
Bundaberg has six processing mills in Queensland and a small refinery in the
city of Bundaberg, which it is in the process of expanding. The company
produced 640,000 tonnes of raw sugar in 1990, accounting for 18 per cent of
Australian output.
The company is also joint owner with Guinness, the UK drinks group, of
Bundaberg Rum, Australia's leading spirits brand.
The acquisition of Bundaberg would give Tate access to low-cost Australian
sugar cane growing and processing, which could boost the group's
profitability if world prices rise following the liberalisation of the
industry.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 8

910420

