FT911-4132

FT  20 APR 91 / Comet wins judgment against BSkyB


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


COMET, Kingfisher Group's electrical retailer, yesterday won a summary
judgment against British Sky Broadcasting for breach of contract over last
year's merger of BSB and Sky Television.
Mr Justice Phillips found in the High Court that a contract Comet had signed
with British Satellite Broadcasting in March 1990 could be carried out only
if BSB continued to run a satellite television service in competition with
Mr Rupert Murdoch's Sky Television until the beginning of February 1991, the
period covered by the contract.
BSB and Sky merged at the beginning of November 1990.
Mr Justice Phillips said yesterday: 'The inference is overwhelming that BSB
would continue to play their part in the joint venture of promoting the DBS
(direct broadcast from the Marco Polo satellite) system at least until the
end of this period.'
The court awarded Comet an interim payment of Pounds 185,000, with the
remainder of the claim to be assessed at a future hearing. Comet is claiming
about Pounds 10m in damages.
Mr Nigel Whittaker, deputy chairman of Kingfisher, said: 'The verdict
vindicates the strong stance we have taken.' Mr Gary Davey, deputy managing
director of BSkyB - in which Pearson, publisher of the Financial Times has a
significant stake - said the satellite company would appeal against the
judgment.
Under the contract with BSB, Comet said it would order a minimum of 50,000
satellite receivers before February 2 1991 and would schedule a further
50,000 for later delivery, with BSB meeting some of the interest costs. The
plans also included a joint promotional campaign.
Comet said it received a letter on November 6 last year from the
newly-merged company instructing it 'to suspend all further sales of BSB
reception equipment and installations and all BSB promotions in store.'
Lawyers for BSkyB argued there was no express commitment to keep running a
service, and this could not be implied.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

910420

