FT911-4131

FT  20 APR 91 / Blue Arrow Trial: Purchase said to be a County transaction


   By JOHN MASON


THE buying of Blue Arrow shares by County NatWest Securities in the 1987
rights issue was a transaction by County NatWest, its merchant banking
co-subsidiary, a former CNWS managing director told the Blue Arrow trial
yesterday.
Mr Peter Dale, a prosecution witness, said he thought the purchase of the
Pounds 50m holding, worth 4.5 per cent of Blue Arrow, was a County
transaction throughout, with CNWS holding the shares to be traded out when
appropriate.
Mr David Reed, a former County director and one of the defendants, had said
before the September issue there was a risk that County could be left with a
substantial number of shares, Mr Dale said. 'It was, and a very large number
of these shares ended up with CNWS,' he said. 'The transaction was seen by
me as a County NatWest transaction.'
County NatWest, NatWest Investment Bank, UBS Phillips & Drew Securities and
seven individuals deny conspiring to mislead the markets over the outcome of
the Pounds 837m issue.
Mr Dale said he could not remember how he was first told of the holding
being taken by CNWS. He could not recall being told by Mr Peter Rimell, CNWS
chairman, that they were being forced to take it, he told Mr Alun Jones, QC
for Mr Stephen Clark, a County director and one of the defendants.
The first he knew of another stake held by County and of an indemnity
covering a further holding taken by Phillips & Drew was on December 17, he
told the court.
Earlier, Mr Stephen Raven, then CNWS deputy managing director, said that
after hearing of the stakes held by CNWS and P&D he had no concern over
possible breaches of disclosure rules or the possibility the arrangement
could be seen as a concert party.
His main concern was how CNWS was managing the position, he told Mr Anthony
Hooper, QC for Mr Reed. He became concerned about disclosure only on
December 17, when County publicly announced a 9.5 per cent holding in Blue
Arrow.
Mr Raven said he was excluded from the meeting on September 29 when CNWS
agreed to take the shares. Mr Rimell had later said it was better he did not
know what had happened, Mr Raven said.
He agreed he was paid almost Pounds 1m in less than a year as deputy
managing director. Asked by Mr Hooper to comment on Mr Rimell's assessment
of him as 'ineffectual', Mr Raven replied: 'It was a pretty ineffectual
team.'
The trial continues on Monday.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

910420

