FT911-4361

FT  19 APR 91 / SPD threatens to block corporate tax reductions


MR BJORN ENGHOLM, chairman-designate of the German opposition Social
Democrats, yesterday promised that his party would veto government plans for
lower company taxes if the SPD won control of the upper house of parliament
in Sunday's regional elections, write David Marsh and David Goodhart in
Bonn. He also firmly ruled out any question of a 'grand coalition' with
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats (CDU), saying the SPD was not
prepared to act as a 'lifebuoy' to help the government weather its problems.
Mr Engholm, due to be confirmed as the new SPD chairman at the Bremen party
conference next month, said he would not support government proposals for a
wider international role for the army.
He rejected as 'out of the question' Mr Kohl's suggestion that the
Bundeswehr might be deployed outside Nato under the auspices of the
nine-nation Western European Union. The government would need some SPD
support in the Bundestag (lower house) to change the constitution in order
to make this possible.
In an interview before the elections in Rhineland-Palatinate, where the SPD
has a good chance of dislodging the CDU from 44 years in power, Mr Engholm
condemned the government's plans to abolish property taxes in the next few
years. Speaking to the FT and three other European newspapers, he said it
was 'the greatest madness anyone can think of' to propose ending this tax on
companies and high-earners at a time of great economic hardship in east
Germany.
A victory in Rhineland-Palatinate would give the SPD a majority in the
Bundesrat, the federal council grouping representatives from the federal
states. The party would thus have power to block important laws, including
tax changes.
Mr Engholm said that if it won Sunday's elections, the SPD would use its
power in the upper chamber responsibly. But the suggested elimination of
property taxes - which bring in DM6.3bn (Pounds 2.1bn) a year - numbered
among 'a few central questions where we will allow the government to go to
the edge and then say, 'That's the end'.'
Mr Engholm's promise of confrontation with the government over taxation
comes as hopes of consensus between Mr Kohl and the opposition over
rebuilding the economy in east Germany have faded.
Observer, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 3

910419

