FT911-4186

FT  20 APR 91 / Wine: Smart enough for dinner - Appetisers


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


IT IS a sign of the oh-so-changed times that Sogrape, the company that once
made such a success of supplying us with oceans of sweet pink Mateus Rose,
is now exporting some of Portugal's arsenal of exciting indigenous grapes,
in fermented and bottled form. It and others are at long last able to supply
wines with exotic flavours but made to modern, world-class standards of
cleanliness and drinkability within a normal lifetime.
Maria Gomes may sound like a comfortingly good cook but is in fact the
peachy yet crisp grape variety from which Sogrape's white Bairrada 1989
Quinta de Pedralvites is made.
With a label discreetly smart enough for the dinner table, it is Pounds 5.79
at Oddbins and would go swimmingly with rich, creamy pates. JR.
Guy Bossard is best known for his organic Muscadet but his Cabernet
Franc-based red Vin de Pays des Marches de Bretagne, also produced without
recourse to the agri-chemical industry, is one of the most charmingly fruity
reds I have tasted in a long while. This is no heavyweight and should be
drunk over the next few months but the importers' price of Pounds 47.40 per
dozen bottles seems a snip - though it will go up the week after next.
Contact organic wine specialists Vinceremos of Ossett, West Yorkshire on
0924-276393 for a versatile red that should beguile served at a wide range
of temperatures with or without food. London stockists include Peppercorn's
Natural Food Market of 2 Heath Street, NW3 and Alara Wholefoods of 58
Marchmont Street, WC1. JR.
Two London wine fairs open to the public: one is at wine merchants Bibendum
in Regent's Park Road, NW1 and takes place today from 10am until 8pm. It
features Neal's Yard cheeses and Charles Carey oils as well as expert wine
advice and tastings including Taittinger champagne. Entry is free. At The
Great Australasian Wine Tasting at The Old Horticultural Hall, Vincent
Square, SW1 on Saturday May 11, the entry fee costs Pounds 10. Tickets to
what claims to be 'the largest range of Oz and NZ wines ever assembled for
one tasting in the UK' are available from The Australian Wine Centre, 50
Strand, WC2 or on 071-925-0751. JR.
The Andre Simon Memorial Fund was established in 1972 to perpetuate the name
of the man who did so much for gastronomy in this country. Every year awards
are made to the authors of books on food and drink. This year's awards were
announced on Wednesday at the Fishmonger's Hall, London, and the food award
winner was Jill Norman for The Complete Book of Spices (Dorling Kindersley,
Pounds 14.99). Jill is a contributor to the Weekend FT's Food and Wine page.
The award for the best wine book was won by Burton Anderson for The Wine
Atlas of Italy (Mitchell Beazley Pounds 25).

The Financial Times


London Page XIV Illustration (Omitted).

910420

