FT911-4055

FT  22 APR 91 / Arts: Die Zauberflote - Frankfurt City Opera


   By ANDREW CLARK


Depleted and disillusioned, the Frankfurt ensemble is back in its home,
three and a half years after the Opera House fire. There is really not much
to celebrate. The production team and some of the cast for Die Zauberflote
were brought in at the last minute. The new stage machinery does not yet
function properly and the repertory for the rest of the season consists of
tried old favourites.
After camping out for so long, the company must now make do with stop-gap
artistic leadership, while a new intendant and music director are sought. We
are a long, long way from those heady days four years ago, when the
company's identity and achievement were so clearly stated by the
Gielen-Berghaus Ring.
Much of the blame for the current mess lies with Gary Bertini, who resigned
as director last December after a vote of no confidence by the orchestra.
Despite his success in engaging talented young singers, Bertini never
convinced the Frankfurt public or opera ensemble that he was the right man
for the job. He was a poor manager of people and he was away too often to be
an effective leader.
Die Zauberflote, staged by Wolfgang Weber with designs by Toni Businger, was
solid and dependable, but without any special touch. The decor consisted of
plain proscenium frames and drop-cloths, linked by variations on a
splintered sun motif. A slim set of dangling strips, red and then blue,
served for the trial of fire and water, and all masonic associations were
dropped. The amplified thunder preceding the Queen of the Night's entries
was hideously loud, but the music was conducted fluently and efficiently by
Marcello Viotti.
The singing had splashes of distinction. Matthias Holle presented the ideal
Sarastro - majestic in voice, every phrase beautifully sculpted and
weighted, a handsome, well-built figure with an air of dignity and youthful
maturity. An unqualified welcome, too, for Teresa Seidl, a Pamina of rich,
noble tone and faultless voice production: 'Ach, ich fuhl's', self-contained
yet expressive, was outstanding. The production could also boast an
unusually well-matched trio of Ladies and Knaben. Christer Bladin's Tamino
was prone to sing flat, Amanda Halgrimson's Queen of the Night cleared the
hurdles with little to spare and Michael Vier - not a natural comedian -
showed that Papageno just cannot fail. After the turmoil of the recent past,
perhaps it is no bad thing that Die Zauberflote should turn out to be such a
low-key affair. From here on, things can only get better.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

910422

