FT911-4088

FT  20 APR 91 / Travel: Purely a cosmetic operation at Copacabana - Tim Burt
at Igazu where the Brazil-Argentina border rumbles and cascades


   By TIM BURT


THE BORDER between Brazil and Argentina rumbles. The ground shakes and a
cloud of spray rises above the jungle.
The frontier itself moves. It carves a wide path through the olive-green
landscape and carries branches and boulders along with it. Suddenly, it
gathers pace and rushes over a great precipice where rainbows shine through
the haze.
These are the symptoms of Iguazu - the waterfalls separating South America's
largest countries. Border traffic is impossible. There is no way to cross
the mass of water that tumbles over a gorge four times wider than Niagara.
The Rio Iguazu rushes down a series of cliffs which for centuries marked the
physical limit of European exploration. Attempts to colonise the river's
upper reaches were defeated by white water cascading through the forest at a
rate of 1,750 cubic metres a second.
Tourism has changed all that. The 275 steps, crevices and hollows that make
up Las Cataratas have become an important attraction for a region long
considered too remote to merit development.
You no longer need a pack mule to get there or a machete to hack through the
undergrowth. But if you are seeking Paradise Lost prepare to be
disappointed. The 20th century has arrived - mostly by air. Thousands of
people fly each year to Iguazu, where they stay in pricey hotels and amble
along purpose-built walkways beside the falls.
Airline pilots obviously think first impressions count: they offer their
passengers a grandstand view of the site before landing. Skimming over the
tree tops, some aircraft bank so low that tourists on the ground duck
instinctively.
Three airports have now been built to cater for the influx of visitors.
Varig, the Brazilian carrier, flies to one; Aerolneas Argentinas serves
another and LAP of Paraguay lands at Ciudad Stroessner, the nearby town
named after that country's retired dictator.
Most visitors fly from Rio de Janeiro, 730 miles to the north-east, or from
Buenos Aires, more than 600 miles to the south. The flights are managed with
dexterity by Iguazu's air traffic controllers whose radar screens monitor
not only incoming traffic but also the constant hubbub of helicopters
buzzing into the air with pleasure trippers.
But the congested skies cannot detract from the spectacle of strings of tiny
birds flitting through the spray. Tourists who take the walkway to the
Devil's Throat, the largest single-drop waterfall, linger on the viewing
platform to watch swallows struggling to reach their nests through the
curtains of water.
The birds live off rich pickings on the forest floor. The Iguazu national
park serves up bloated caterpillars and spiders the size of your fist. The
caterpillars blossom into giant butterflies as bright as Chinese kites. Some
are luminous yellow and green; others sport air force roundels. They gather
in clouds to drink from the lagoon at the foot of Dos Hermanos, the name
given to a pair of smaller falls.
Swimmers who brave the lagoon can dry off with a brisk walk towards Isla San
Martin, an island at the foot of some of the largest falls. The outcrop
rises 100ft out of the water and is served by an old wooden boat that bumps
across the fast-running current. Some visitors go no further than the shore;
the fittest climb the step-ladder to the summit.
The island, reached from the Argentine riverbank, offers unobstructed views
of the monkeys and toucans playing on the Brazilian side. San Martin itself
hums with life. Every few feet a beetle crunches underfoot. The ugly insects
appear at the bottom of a food chain which includes turkey eagles, coral
snakes, toads, ant-eaters - even jaguars.
Homo sapiens, as usual, sits astride the top of the chain. At Iguazu he is
served by snack bars which pose a threat to the other animals by dispensing
canned drink and burgers in polystyrene packs. The fast-food wrappings
rarely find their way into the rubbish bins painted green by the park
authorities. Old tin cans are left to rust on the ground and the ant-eaters
have learned to pick their way round discarded paper cups.
There are, however, pockets of uncluttered jungle. The pathways to them are
too steep and overgrown for the blue-rinse-and-sneaker brigade. Tour guides
marshal elderly visitors along the widest walkways before returning them
safely to their air-conditioned buses. Other paths are left to adventurers
who do not mind scratching and stumbling through the foliage.
By late afternoon the restaurants are laying their tables; in Puerto Iguazu,
the Argentine town 10 miles away; hotel boilers are working overtime to
shower their hot and bothered guests; and the jungle is just coming to life.
Timid animals make use of the empty walkways as darkness falls in the
rainforest. By this time the last airliner has taken off and the helicopter
pilots are sitting down to eat. The falls, meanwhile, are in full flow. The
humidity increases and the vegetation seems to perspire. It gets very dark.
All travellers hate getting lost, even intrepid ones. Losing your way in the
dark at Iguazu has only one consolation: it is a good way to lose weight -
you shed pounds in sweat. You also lose your nerve.
The tourist maps are unreliable and difficult to read by torchlight. And
missing the last bus back to town can be costly. Either you have to camp out
with the wildlife or crank up your credit card to use the International
Hotel half a mile from the falls.
It takes a cool head to pick the right track when the only reference point
is the deep splash of a nearby waterfall. The prospect of slipping and
sliding over a precipice concentrates the mind wonderfully.
British Airways (London: 081-897-4000) and Varig (071-629-9408) fly to Rio
de Janeiro, with connections to Foz do Iguazu, the Brazilian airport. BA
also flies to Buenos Aires, with similar connections to Puerto Iguazu in
Argentina. Tour operators such as Journey Latin America (081-747 3108)
arrange inclusive tours to the region.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

910420

