FT911-4188

FT  20 APR 91 / Cookery: Helpings for the hearty


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


PORTUGAL is not the place to go to if you are trying to lose weight. The
Portuguese have large hearts and large appetites to match. They like to tuck
in twice daily to fulsome meals, and tea and cake shops beckon in between.
The influences of nouvelle cuisine, if they exist, were not evident during
my brief visit. I met only homely comfort food, plainly cooked and simply
presented, much of it good. Chaps who have never really grown out of nursery
food will love it, and of course you can move straight on to sticky Elvas
plums and glasses of port when there is no nanny to chivvy you about eating
up everything - although I doubt that many will want to leave out the creamy
cinnamon and lemon-scented rice pudding.
The Portuguese make excellent soups (most meals begin with soup) and
first-class bread. I particularly liked the heavy maize-meal loaves, white
of crust and golden crumbed.
Maize was one of the vegetables brought back from the New World, along with
tomatoes, peppers and potatoes. All these are vital to Portuguese cooking
now, as are the spices seafaring traders returned with from the East, but
the vegetables we were served most often were roots and cabbage.
I bet the Portuguese word for garden is cabbage patch. They have a variety
of cabbage that is all their own, couve gallega. It ought to be a national
emblem, like the Welsh leek, so ubiquitous is it. When finely shredded it is
central to caldo verde, probably the nation's favourite soup, and it is
often mixed with potatoes or moistened bread to make a version of migos,
another hugely popular dish, this one a sort of Portuguese
bubble-and-squeak.
Two of my most vivid images of Portugal concern cabbage. First the sight of
them growing. Every other house seems to boast a single tall row of them.
Standing sentinel by the gate, on long leggy stalks with their large
loose-leafed heads undulating in the breeze, they appear to wave you on your
way.
I saw them a second time in the market, vast squeaky green piles of them
being stuffed into manually operated slicing machines. The machines looked a
bit like my old fashioned meat mincer but were as large as the grinders in a
coffee merchant's. The cabbage emerged as fine as grass cuttings, was packed
into bags and snapped up by shoppers as fast as it was prepared.
Kale is probably our nearest equivalent to Portuguese cabbage, spring greens
can be substituted at a pinch, and I dare say a Whitehall secret service
letter shredder would slice them suitably finely, though you can of course
chop them by hand.
The other convenience veg I found in the market and have not seen elsewhere
was massa de pimentao. This looks disconcertingly like tomato ketchup, but
is in fact a flavoursome paste of skinned and pureed red peppers seasoned
with a little garlic and salt and drizzled with oil so that it will keep for
a couple of days.
Turnip tops, harvested before the root ball is formed, are another favourite
vegetable, while fresh green coriander leaves are the best-loved herb.
Fruit stalls were piled with citrus of all sorts, grapes, figs (including
the best dried figs I have ever tasted), quince and pomegranates.
Driving east from Lisbon towards the border with Spain, through the regions
of Ribatejo and Alto Alentejo, the fertile countryside grows increasingly
lovely. Cork oak and olive groves flourish, eucalyptus shade the road and
quinces fruit grow in the hedgerows. The whitewashed villages are Persil
clean and postcard pretty. Signs of highly mechanised agriculture are few.
We stopped at a farm where I saw my first pomegranate tree. Indulging my
whim, the good natured owner allowed me to climb the tree to pick the fruit,
which I did and promptly fell to the ground. That was ignominious enough.
What was worse was the discovery that I had brought a couple of branches
crashing down with me, crushed under the weight of my Portuguese acquired en
bon point. The taste of that ultra-fresh fruit was exquisite.
The contrast between countryside and capital was marked. I did not stay long
enough in Lisbon to explore it so maybe I did not give myself the chance to
be charmed. But one night was long enough to be appalled by the noise and
the traffic, and long enough to be impressed by the police. I mean a
restaurant of that name, O Policia (tel: Lisbon 76.35.05). This is no
sophisticated city slicker of a place but an unpretentious establishment.
The decor is uninspired but the service is friendly and efficient and the
food was the best I ate in Portugal.
Appetisers included a fine example of presunto ham, neither too dry nor
salty, a creamy ewe's milk cheese, and miniature salt cod fishcakes.
However, the best dish by far, outstanding by any standards, was a richly
savoury casserole that is a speciality of the Alentejo region.
The idea of combining surf with turf has never really appealed to me before,
though I confess I am not averse to steak and kidney pudding with a few
oysters slipped under the crust just before serving, but the Portuguese
marriage of pork with clams as achieved by the kitchen at O Policia was full
of excitingly subtle flavour. Here is my attempt at making this splendid
dish, based on the recipe given by Edite Vieira in The Taste of Portugal
(Robinson Publishing):
PORK WITH CLAMS Serves 4-6 - depending on whether appetites are Portuguese
or modest British.
Loin or leg of pork weighing 2 lb after the rind and bones have been
removed; 2 lb Venus clams; 1 large onion; 3 garlic cloves; 1 tablespoon
sweet paprika; a bay leaf and 2-3 sprigs of parsley; 8 fl oz dry white wine;
2-3 teaspoons wine vinegar; 1 oz lard; 2 tablespoons or so olive oil; 1
tablespoon maize meal or oatmeal.
Chop then crush the garlic to a paste with the paprika and a teaspoon each
of salt and olive oil. Cut the pork into large bite-size chunks. Toss it in
the paste to coat it. Pour on the wine and vinegar. Cover and leave to
marinate overnight.
Drain and dry the pork, reserving the marinade. Let the lard and a couple of
tablespoons of olive oil sizzle in a flameproof casserole or heavy-based
stewpot. Add the meat, colour it all over and remove it.
Chop the onion and fry it gently for five minutes. Return the pork, pour on
the marinade, add the bay leaf and parsley. Cover and cook over a gentle
flame until the meat is perfectly tender. Use a simmer-mat, turn the meat
occasionally and add a splash more liquid if necessary.
While the meat cooks, prepare the shellfish. Fresh clams lack the barnacles
and beards of mussels but they tend to trap a lot of sand in their shells.
To rid them of this, put them into a bucket of cold water, add salt and a
little maize or oatmeal and leave for half an hour. With luck they will open
and feed, disgorging sand in the process. Repeat using fresh salt water and
meal.
Discard any clams that do not close their shells when tapped. Put the rest
into a pan with a few spoonfuls of clean water. Cover and cook for a few
minutes, shaking the pan occasionally, until the clams open.
Throw away any clams that do not open. Add the rest, still in their shells,
to the pork and pour on the juices from the clam pan, straining them through
a muslin-lined sieve. Cook for a few minutes more and check seasoning before
serving with plenty of good bread, preferably Portuguese cornbread, or
boiled or steamed potatoes.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV Illustration (Omitted).

910420

