FT911-4221

FT  20 APR 91 / London Stock Exchange: Equities give ground in nervous trade


WARNINGS that several central banks may not favour further cuts in interest
rates depressed UK equities yesterday and focused investors' attentions on
the domestic political scene. A clear signal from the Bank of England that
UK base rates are staying at 12 per cent at present was seen as an
unpromising backcloth for the local elections to be held early next month.
Trading volume was unexciting but the market traded a downward, albeit
erratic course throughout the session, and was not helped at the close by an
early fall of 18 Dow points in the new Wall Street session.
At the close, the FT-SE Index was down 18.3 at 2,520.1, just above the day's
low. After opening lower following New York's failure to hold on to the Dow
3,000 mark overnight, shares rallied and then fell away again in London.
Seaq trading volume fell to only 465.8m shares yesterday, compared with
798.1m in the previous session. Trading levels in the equity market have
been more significantly more volatile since the market moved into the new UK
financial year earlier this month.
This week, the opening leg of the two week equity trading account, has seen
London lose six Footsie points as domestic factors hindered its response to
Wall Street's attempts to settle above the Dow 3,000 figure.
Yesterday's setback in the London market appeared to be a delayed reaction
to the possible political implications of this week's list of UK economic
data, notably the sharp rise in unemployment to above 2m in March, a
development which re-wakened speculation over the Government's prospects in
the impending local elections as well as over the likely timing of the next
general election for parliament. Some equity strategists believe that the UK
stock market has not yet taken the political outlook into its estimates of
market performance over the remainder of this year.
The slow pace of UK bank lending in March, announced yesterday, was seen as
underlining concern over recessionary pressure. But the session was
overshadowed by the fall in sterling against the dollar, as well as on the
sterling exchange rate index. The Bank of England's signal to the London
money markets, together with warnings against interest rate optimism from
the German Bundesbank and from US sources, left the London looking
distinctly unhappy.
Hopes that economic recovery is 'just round the corner,' may prove
premature, commented Mr Ian Harnett, chief economist at Strauss Turnbull.
However, the government bond market held fairly steady, ending the session
with minor gains at the long end of the range. Cater Allen withdrew from
making markets in UK government bonds.
Retail trading volumes in equities began to recover at the end of the week
after falling during the end-tax year period. However, volume remains below
March levels.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

910420

