FT911-4020

FT  22 APR 91 / Monday Interview: Sweden's restless iconoclast - Pehr
Gyllenhammar, Volvo's executive chairman, talks to Robert Taylor


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar is a man who arouses strong and mixed feelings among
his fellow Swedes. For nearly 20 years he ran Volvo, building it up to
become the largest private company in Scandinavia. His personal style of
enlightened despotism upsets those Swedes who dislike entrepreneurial
success and prefer equality to individual achievement. Some question his
business acumen, others think him vain and arrogant.
His admirers like his imperial style of running Volvo and his keen
sensitivity to changing customer tastes which has given the company a
favourable image to a more discriminating car owning public.
Above all, no one has been able to ignore him. For the past five years since
the assassination of the former prime minister Olof Palme, Mr Gyllenhammar
more than any other has personified to the outside world the changing face
of Sweden.
Last October he stepped to one side and handed over the actual running of
Volvo to a younger executive, Mr Christer Zetterberg, whose background is in
banking and forestry. It was a move that surprised many who could not really
believe the charismatic Mr Gyllenhammar was going to disappear quite so
easily from the corporate scene he has dominated for so long.
In fact, his resignation as chief executive has not signalled his early
retirement. On the contrary, as he will demonstrate at Volvo's annual
shareholders meeting on Wednesday, the dapper 56 year old is more ebullient
than ever in his new role as the company's executive chairman with more time
and energy to take a wider strategic view both of Volvo and Sweden's future
in the new Europe.
Articulate and opinionated, he remains an iconoclast ready to point a
questioning finger at Sweden's taboos. Take that long-standing holy of
holies, Swedish neutrality. 'It was the single biggest psychological
obstacle to our country joining the European Community.' Or the often
insular attitudes of his countrymen: 'We still have an island mentality.'
Last August he gave vent to such views in a controversial article in
Sweden's leading newspaper Dagens Nyheter. His passionate diatribe brought a
surprisingly sympathetic riposte from Sweden's prime minister Ingvar
Carlsson and a short debate on the subject erupted. It ended less than two
months later with the astonishing announcement by the ruling Social
Democrats that they now favoured Swedish EC membership.
'We move slowly in this country,' he explains. 'We take small steps in the
same direction.' His sense of timing on that occasion was acute. He did not
dictate the change in attitude but his words hit home publicly at the very
moment when Sweden's policy-makers were reappraising what neutrality meant
in post-Cold War Europe.
Mr Gyllenhammar has helped on other occasions to focus national attention
and cast doubt on traditional Swedish attitudes. He argues that the tide of
opinion is now moving decisively in the free market direction he has
advocated for a long time.
'Over the past 20 years Sweden went much too far in creating an
over-dominant public sector based on high taxation. The Social Democrats did
not nationalise industry but they thought they were free to nationalise
people's incomes,' he explains. 'As a result the country became unbalanced.'
Mr Gyllenhammar believes Sweden is suffering from what he calls a 'lost
dynamism' resulting from stagnant economic growth. But he also thinks it is
moving rapidly towards the creation of a social market economy under those
same Social Democrats who did so much to make the country uncompetitive.
Unfashionably, he has words of praise for the much reviled Mr Carlsson. 'I
think he has been very courageous.'
'Sweden could have been paralysed over the past two years but it has not
been. Mr Carlsson's government has been making all the changes necessary.'
He points to the country's recent reform that shifts the tax burden from
incomes onto goods and services; the compromise over nuclear power that
means reactors will not be closed down prematurely; and above all to the
abolition of foreign exchange controls and the greater financial freedoms
that have come to Sweden.
In his opinion, the current record low unpopularity of the Social Democrats
(they only have 30 per cent support in the polls) five months before the
next general election stems from the bewilderment of many of the party's own
loyalist supporters at the magnitude of the liberalising changes it has
made. 'The exceptional domination of Sweden by the Social Democrats may well
be coming to an end,' he says.
Mr Gyllenhammar is also convinced opinion is moving favourably his way on
the vexed question of collective bargaining. For years he has campaigned to
break up Sweden's famed system of centralised wage negotiations. 'We have
much more flexibility in Volvo than we had 10 years ago,' he argues. 'In the
past we more or less had equal pay for everyone. It seemed rational at the
time.'
He is also convinced the Swedish Krona should be linked to the exchange rate
mechanism of the European Monetary System. 'We cannot devalue any more. Now
we are about to apply for membership of the EC, it would be good for Sweden
to accept the necessary financial disciplines from the outside that we need
to reform ourselves.'
Unlike other Swedish employers, he takes a highly radical view of the
controversial issue of company law. Mr Gyllenhammar is a strong opponent of
Sweden's elaborate two-tier system of share ownership which enables
companies to be controlled through acquiring a large number of voting shares
but very little equity. 'I have always been in favour of the principle of
one vote, one share,' he says.
In his new job Mr Gyllenhammar spends a great deal of his time on the
construction of Volvo's new strategic alliance based on cross-ownership with
the French state-owned company Renault, a move which has aroused doubts and
criticisms across the auto industry worldwide. Many observers question
whether the two companies have enough in common to work closely together and
point to what they see as the lack of any single central control in the
alliance.
Moreover both Volvo and Renault have suffered financial setbacks over the
past year, with Volvo recording a loss in 1990 for the first time in 60
years.
Mr Gyllenhammar does not seem unduly worried. 'We are going through a rough
time, especially on the car side, but we have strong reserves,' he explains.
'We have new models in the pipeline over the next five years which will
return us to a highly competitive position.'
And he still insists the marriage will work. 'There are no escape clauses in
our agreements with Renault,' he admits. 'There is only one way for us to go
and that is forward. The realisation of this is what is pushing us
together.'
Fluent in English and French, Mr Gyllenhammar himself moves easily around
western Europe as a founder member of the Business Roundtable of European
industrialists.
And he is concerned about how Europe will develop during the 1990s. He has
co-founded another organisation designed to promote the cause of the north.
'In Germany interests are moving south. We are already talking about a
Milan-London axis and one from Madrid to Frankfurt.' He believes this must
be counter-balanced by another axis that links up the Nordic region to north
Germany.
It almost sounds as if Mr Gyllenhammar is devoting more time to such grand
strategic questions these days than to his own business. But he is certainly
not short of work. On Wednesday, he will be confirmed as deputy chairman of
Sweden's largest bank, Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken. Last week he became an
adviser to the newly-formed European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
in London.
Sometimes, he implies, his energy level seems too high for the lofty
position he now occupies. 'My new job is a big change for me,' he admits. 'I
am nervously active and there are days when I do feel uncomfortable.' But he
insists he is never tempted to stride down the corridor from his own office
in Volvo's ultra-modern headquarters to become Mr Zetterberg's back-seat
driver. 'On the contrary, I walk the other way.'
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
PERSONAL FILE
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
1935 Born in Gothenburg, son of president and chief executive, Skandia.
     Educated Lund University.
1959 Married Eva Christina, daughter of Gunnar Engellau, the then chief
     executive of Volvo.
1961-64 Amphion Insurance Co, Gothenburg.
1965-1970 Skandia Insurance Co, becoming president and chief executive
     officer.
1971-1990 Chief executive, Volvo.
1990 Executive chairman of Volvo.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 38 Photograph 'We are going through a rough time' (Omitted).

910422

