FT911-4092

FT  20 APR 91 / Sponsors call the tune: The hard life of amateur choirs


   By MARILYN BENTLEY


THERE MUST be a streak of musical masochism in the British character. Why
else would the members of over 850 choral societies gather to sit and be
harangued by sometimes charismatic and often bad-tempered conductors?
Amateur singers work like professionals; many sing like professionals. Their
reward - the intense creative pleasure of making music - is the reward of
amateurs.
In British choral music, the word amateur is misleading. Apart from the
opera companies, and a few smaller groups, Britain has no professional
choruses. Whether it's a Huddersfield Christmas Messiah or Beethoven's Ninth
at the Albert Hall Proms, chances are those harmonies issue from amateur
tonsils. What is more the chorus is the only component which comes free.
Promoting a quality choral concert is a considerable financial undertaking.
Last season, East London Chorus performed Monteverdi's 1610 Vespers, a work
requiring very modest resources compared with the large scale 19th century
repertoire, at St John's, Smith Square. But the balance sheet is sobering:
the six soloists cost Pounds 2,200; the orchestra Pounds 2,600 plus a fixing
fee of Pounds 50; the hall hire was Pounds 600; the conductor's fee Pounds
350;orchestral music parts cost Pounds 225; organ and harpsichord Pounds 300
and publicity Pounds 1,000. A total of Pounds 7,325.
The concert was a sell-out. Even so, the total income was Pounds 3,440 -
less than half the cost of the single performance.
The better-known concert soloists can command Pounds 1,000 to Pounds 1,300 a
performance. For works such as Verdi's Requiem, which demand operatic
voices, a leading soloist can cost up to Pounds 2,250. Orchestras,
similarly, do not come cheap. As with singers, famous names attract
audiences, but they also increase the financial burden on the voluntary
promotors, whose chief resources have traditionally been ticket receipts
from halls of limited capacity, chorus membership fees and public grants.
Professional fees have increased ahead of inflation, while public funding
has diminished. In England, grants from regional arts associations represent
6 to 7 per cent of professional expenses. This year Greater London Arts
announced that it was to withdraw all funding to amateur music groups. The
unpaid professionals of the music establishment are turning increasingly to
the business community for support.
It is not easy to generate sponsorship, particularly in a recession.
Choruses have to be as professional in their marketing as they do in their
music-making.
'We have to indicate that we operate to the same standards as our sponsors,'
says Michael Kibblewhite, conductor of ELC. 'If they're used to glossy
material, that's what we have to have. Packaging is important.'
This commercial realism may conflict with what amateur singers regard as the
raison d'etre of chorus membership - the pleasure of music-making. Most
choral societies have in their constitution some reference to fostering the
public appreciation of choral music. But for Kibblewhite, concert-giving in
the televisual 1990s has to be seen in a wider, less elitist context.
'We're performing organisations. That doesn't just involve the sheer
enjoyment of making music. It's exciting other people, playing to packed
halls, everything you gain from contributing to a complete and successful
performance.' Success, in these terms, means the highest musical standards
matched by presentation and visual appeal - 'which brings us back to costs'.
'For even the smallest concerts of the standard repertoire, such as the
Monteverdi, or the Mozart Requiem, you're going to have to find Pounds 3,000
in sponsorship,' says Kibblewhite. 'We've got to the stage now where if a
concert isn't sponsored, we don't do it.
'In terms of artistic development, it's bad news. As sponsorship becomes
more important, the repertoire spirals in on the old classics.'
A sponsor will look for the most attractive commercial proposition; and this
is more likely to be Messiah than Messiaen. To commercial sponsors, amateur
choruses have one significant attraction: they have a strong community
identity. The ELC may have earned its reputation through west London and
South Bank concerts, but it still retains a performing base in east London.
It is this local identity, in an area little thought of as a centre for the
arts, which attracted one of the largest employers in the area, Tate & Lyle.
'We put in about Pounds 5,000 a year,' says David Tate, director of
corporate affairs. 'We are not major arts sponsors and never will be,
although we were particularly pleased by ELC's professionalism. It's the
community support we wanted. We felt it was a manifestation of our interest
in the area and its social and cultural activities.'
The London Rubber Company joined the ranks of ELC's sponsors last season
under its brand name, Durex. 'We chose ELC because it's local to us,' says
Ian Franks. 'We saw it in terms of a public relations exercise rather than a
marketing move. Durex's target market is the 16-25 year olds - probably not
the same people who would go to ELC concerts.'
But Franks is enthusiastic about the result, which attracted a government
ABSA award for first-time arts sponsorship. 'We were very gratified to
receive the award. With any sponsorship you're looking for media coverage
and we've had more than our share. As a community venture and our first look
at the arts, it was Pounds 2,000 well spent.'
East London Chorus perform Carl Orff's 'Carmina Burana' today and tomorrow
at The Old Town Hall, Stratford East.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

910420

