FT911-4214

FT  20 APR 91 / Markets: Why banks profit at your expense - Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


KEEP A close eye on your bank and building society.
Each is likely to take every opportunity over the next few months to widen
its margins at your expense - to increase the charges you pay and to reduce
the interest rates you earn.
The changes are a reaction to an era when financial institutions were eager
to win the public's business - and were prepared to compete hard for the
privilege. The challenge from building societies forced banks, for example,
to pay interest on current accounts. The margin between mortgage rates and
base rates was narrowed - to the benefit of borrowers.
Now these changes are being reversed. The rate payable on interest-bearing
current accounts has fallen to derisory levels. Lenders have used the recent
falls in base rates as a chance to widen their margins - when base rates
were 15 per cent, the typical mortgage rate was 15.4 per cent, a spread of
0.4 of a percentage point. Now that base rates are 12 per cent, the going
rate for loans of under Pounds 60,000 is somewhere around 12.85 to 12.95 per
cent, almost double the earlier spread.
Halifax, which cut its rate to 12.95 per cent this week, pointed out that
borrowers had been protected by artificially low margins from the effect of
high interest rates. Now that rates were falling, societies are merely
returning the spread to previously prevailing levels.
However, overdraft rates have in many cases increased over the past year, in
spite of the fall in base rates. Annual rates are as high as 39 per cent on
some accounts, if you run up an unauthorised debt.
The cause for all this is the squeeze on the profits of the financial
sector. Banks, in particular, have only just recovered from the problems
they caused themselves by over-lending to the Third World in the late 1970s
and early 1980s. Now after a long period of high interest rates, coupled
with a slowdown in economic growth, they are facing a sharp rise in bad
debts affecting both their corporate and their personal customers.
Bank profits have fallen, and although their managements are making some
attempt to cut costs (not before time if you consider the level of City
salaries), they are also making every attempt to increase their revenues.
Some building societies too are feeling the pressure. Note that after base
rate cuts, some announce a cut in mortgage rates for new borrowers (which
will cost them little, given the lack of activity in the housing market) but
make existing borrowers wait weeks or months before they benefit.
Private customers have moved from being courted to being exploited, and they
will have to look a lot harder for the best deal.
In the 1980s, part of the rationale behind the intensive competition in the
personal finance area was the idea of cross-selling. Individuals attracted
by a particularly competitive rate on one product could then be sold more
profitable services such as life and travel insurance.
Now, with profits under pressure, individual products are having to pay
their own way. A good example is credit cards, where in the past, users who
paid off their bill promptly, paid nothing at all. Many cards now charge an
annual fee.
Banks and building societies can normally rely on customer inertia to
prevent them from losing too many accounts when they make these changes. It
involves a lot of bother to change cheque books, credit cards, standing
orders and the like. But the discerning saver will need to monitor his
accounts carefully.
We have already seen a number of building societies change their accounts -
introducing new tiers of savings accounts with more attractive rates than
the old. There is nothing wrong in that, except that in most cases they have
not written to savers to notify them. Although the changes are advertised in
branches, many, including the old and disabled, rarely visit their branch.
They will probably not notice the change for some time and will lose out
accordingly.
In the current climate, savers and borrowers need to read the small print
very carefully. It is tempting to throw away communications from your bank,
especially as so much is junk mail aimed at selling you new products. But
sometimes banks will slip information on changes in fees and charges into
otherwise harmless-looking publicity blurb.
And if your bank or building society does start to offer a poor product, be
prepared to change your account. There are now, for example, a number of
institutions offering high interest cheque accounts. Some require
substantial balances; but some do not.
Every Saturday, the Weekend FT publishes a table called 'The Best Rates for
Your Money' which highlights the most attractive rates on offer across a
number of investments, including Tessas and guaranteed income bonds.
But you still need to be careful not to be 'suckered in' by a particularly
attractive rate, only to find that a few months later, the bank or society
ceases its marketing drive and loses its competitive edge. This is
particularly true of inflexible products such as Tessas or mortgages where
it can be costly to move from one institution to another.
The moral is: Don't trust 'em an inch.

The Financial Times


London Page II

910420

