FT911-4072

FT  22 APR 91 / Growing finance scandal pressure on French PM


   By IAN DAVIDSON


   PARIS


THE long-running scandal over the illicit financing of French political
parties, which has been contained in a murky twilight zone between the
judiciary and the state, now begins to look as if it could endanger the
government.
The weekend saw a chorus of demands from opposition leaders for the
resignation of the justice minister and his deputy, and the announcement by
the Magistrates Association of a day of protest on May 16, their fourth such
protest in the past year.
The rising pressure over the financing scandal increases the current
difficulties of the minority government of Prime Minister Michel Rocard,
which has recently had to abandon or delay two parliamentary bills, because
it could see no way of putting together the necessary majority in the
National Assembly.
The scandal is essentially historical. In the past national and local
construction companies were milked on a massive scale by the Socialist party
for contributions: FFr52m (Pounds 5.2m) in 1986, FFr53m in 1987, FFr70m in
1988. The basic facts came to light in 1989, and led that year to a new and
more rigorous party finance law which should be making any such system
impossible.
But the issue now at stake is whether the long-delayed judicial
investigation into the scandal will publicly discredit the Socialist party
leadership. The other political parties also had various illegal methods of
raising their finances. But because the Socialist method was nationally
organised, many of their top politicians have been identified by name as
having been involved.
The intensity of the pressure on the government was yesterday confirmed by
the deputy justice minister, Mr Georges Kiejman, in terms which seemed to
acknowledge that Mr Rocard could be in danger. He dismissed the opposition
demands for his own resignation, but appeared much less dogmatic on Mr
Rocard's tenure of the prime ministership.
'Should this left-wing policy be carried out by a different leader?' he
asked. 'Perhaps we should put a new wrapping round the motor.'
The government's current difficulties coincide with a sharp dip in the
popularity both of President Francois Mitterrand and of Mr Rocard in the
opinion polls. During the Gulf war both of them benefited from an upsurge in
public confidence, but the latest figures indicate this may be over.
A poll by IFOP for the Journal de Dimanche newspaper gives Mr Mitterrand 47
per cent support - down 9 per cent from the previous poll in March. Mr
Rocard gets 40 per cent - 3 per cent lower.
It is now becoming difficult to believe that the investigation into the
finance scandal can be conclusively stifled.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

910422

