FT911-4320

FT  19 APR 91 / Parliament and Politics (Local Election Diary): A Utopia
united in its indignation


   By IVO DAWNAY


'Welcome to Utopia,' said Ted, the cheerful official from the Milton Keynes
Development Corporation as, outside, arctic gales struggled to uproot the
pedestrian shelters of Midsummer Boulevard.
He was not being ironic. Briefed on the city project back in 1967 by the
late Richard Crossman, Ted had decided he would prefer the 22,000 acres of
North Buckinghamshire countryside in question to stay just that.
Now, like many other early sceptics, he is a passionate convert. To most
residents, the traffic grid, the 27,000 free parking spaces, the
mirror-glassed commercial zones and the 14m planted trees dotted round
man-made lakes are the ultimate expression of rational, modern living.
If an outsider complains that the city combines the culture of canned music
with the charm of an airport terminal, Milton Keynesians will point to the
clean streets and graffiti-free housing.
Mr Chris Pym, a Liberal Democrat councillor, also defensively commends the
place as a Mecca for community activists. 'You can have a bright idea on
Monday, get the money on Wednesday, and be under way on Friday,' he says.
*****
So how will the Utopians vote? As progressive thinkers, perhaps, Milton
Keynes residents could better adjudicate between the competing claims of the
political parties to have found the true path to Britain's future.
Unfortunately, it appears not. Like the rest of us, their eyes are firmly
fixed on poll tax bills and mortgage rates. For years, the borough has
returned Mr Bill Benyon, a diligent Tory MP, but left the city council
frequently hung between the three main parties. After two years of a
Lib-Tory pact, the voters punished their political masters for the poll tax
by returning Labour with its first-ever outright majority of two seats. That
is likely to increase marginally after May 2.
But a poll tax bill - expected before capping and the budget changes to top
Pounds 450 - has upset some residents, with the Tories generating mileage
from their claim that at least Pounds 27 of this can be attributed to
non-payers.
With Milton Keynes being split into two seats at the next general election,
Mr Edward Ellis, the Tory leader, is taking the May polls philosophically.
'When there is a Labour government in Westminster the council will be
solidly Tory,' he contends. 'With a Tory government, we are hanging on by
our bootstraps.'
*****
Currently the greatest concern for the council comes as a consequence of the
winding-up of the Development Corporation, due to finish its work in March
next year.
A fierce battle has now broken out over responsibility for Milton Keynes'
parks and housing. Starved by Buckinghamshire County Council of things to
administer - even car parking is controlled by the county - all three main
parties are determined to take control of both.
But, under Whitehall guidelines, the corporation has now put responsibility
for 10,000 houses out to a tenants' ballot and plans to turn the parks into
free-standing trusts, responsible to the Charity Commission.
The borough councillors are livid, united in opposition. Without the bulk of
public housing and the parks, Mr Ellis says the city would be left only with
cleaning, recreation and community development in its hands.
No greater proof is needed of Milton Keynes' arrival at the age of majority.
Twenty-one years after the first sod was turned, Crossman's Utopian city is
united in its indignation with Whitehall.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Illustration (Omitted).

910419

