FT911-4173

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: Cabalistic secrets - Jackie Wullschlager reviews
'Dibouk]' in Brussels


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


THE DYBBUK, a malevolent spirit in Jewish folklore, came alive with a
vengeance for the opening of the play named in his honour, Dibouk], when a
vicious smog descended on the auditorium of the Brussels National Theatre.
We coughed and spluttered and strained our eyes until the curtain rose on a
smoke-filled synagogue whose stagey mist had gone further than intended.
Candles flicker, rabbis sway and pray, Talmudic students, side-locked and
skull-capped, bend double over wooden benches and recite as if mesmerised.
In the haze, the outline of each figure is kept fuzzy, like an old
photograph, suggesting a mysterious past about to fade from view. Ghosts,
spirits, cabalistic secrets: seldom does theatre transport you so instantly
to a foreign world as Moshe Leiser and Patrice Caurier's production of this
Jewish folk classic.
Solomon An-Ski, a founder of the Yiddish theatre, wrote The Dybbuk in 1916,
set it in a Polish-Lithuanian village and filled it with images which are
astonishingly close to those of early Chagall: a bride (Evelyne Didi) flying
across the stage, here held aloft by a group of beggars with whom she dances
on her wedding day; the towering figure of the law-giver in black hat and
gown; the romantic violinist; the haunted old man who wanders into the
'shtetl' with a legend on his lips. And as in a Chagall picture, the
supernatural slides easily into the everyday, accepted fatalistically by
An-Ski's chorus of chanters and story-tellers. It makes vivid, exotic drama,
unlike anything in the mainstream European tradition.
An-Ski's tale concerns Hanan, a poor Hassidic student who falls in love with
Leah, daughter of a rich merchant, and dies when she is promised to someone
else. But on her wedding day his soul enters her body and, speaking in his
voice, she rejects her fiance and remains possessed by the 'dybbuk' until a
rabbi discovers a strange and legitimate union between the living and the
dead.
There are some piercingly dramatic moments: Hanan literally dancing himself
to death at the party to celebrate Leah's engagement; the wedding guests
held in motionless horror when Leah screams out under the bridal canopy;
goose-pimpled bridegroom Johan Heestermans failing to smash the customary
glass and reeling in terror as he finds himself on the verge of marrying one
possessed. But most of all, this is theatre of sustained raw emotion and
continuous high-pitched moods. Gestures turn into dances, a meeting becomes
a jig on top of a table. Palms of hands are projected outwards to implore,
defend, insist, damn. Young men whirl and twirl like dervishes and maraude
across the stage in a celebratory conga shrieking 'Mazel Tov' ('good luck').
Music underlines the action; beggars look in on the wedding feast while an
accordion-player out in the cold plays in counterpoint to the violinist
celebrating within. It works as authentic eloquence rather than mere
theatricality, probably because it comes directly out of the Hassidic
traditions of frenzied dancing, singing and praying.
In this context, the more type-cast the role, the better the performance:
Szymon Zaleski as raggedy, feverish Hanan who finds the Talmud 'cold and
dry' but the Cabala 'the way to the heavens'; Jean-Luc Buquet as Heno'h, the
concerned friend who watches in horror as he devours the forbidden lore;
Bernhard Ballet's rich merchant Sender, a Shylock safe and cosy on home
territory. And treat of the evening: the Russian actor Serguei Yourski
playing the larger-than-life old rabbi Azriel, offering wisdom from beyond
the grave like a benign, still-human Commendatore.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII Photograph Igor Ticzka and Roland de Pauw in Moshe Leiser
and Patrice Caurier's production (Omitted).

910420

