FT911-4059

FT  22 APR 91 / Management (Training on Trial): A Tec in microcosm - Paul
Cheeseright considers the progress made by one of the smaller councils,
North Nottinghamshire, in its first year


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


The board met for 48 hours. It looked at what it had been doing, marked
itself out of five on each sector of its activity and came to an average of
about 2.5. It peered into the next year.
This was not a major international group brainstorming its way out of
recession, but the North Nottinghamshire Training and Enterprise Council,
one of the smallest of the 82 Tecs set up by the UK government to nudge
national training practice into line with business needs and to foster local
economic growth.
North Notts was the first Tec off the mark in the East Midlands, starting
work a year ago in a flurry of local publicity. But the board, designed, as
in all Tecs, to be the instrument for private sector supervision of
training, remains incomplete. There was one vacancy, for a representative of
the leisure/tourism industry, before the embarrassing resignation last
November of Anthony Darbyshire, the then chairman, when his group called in
the receiver.
Composition of the board reflects both the government's preference for the
private sector, and the structure of the north Nottinghamshire economy. The
biggest employer is the local health authority. The biggest private sector
employer is British Coal. Both are represented on the board.
The other private sector members come from medium-sized companies, for north
Nottinghamshire is an area of small and medium businesses: pockets of high
technology industry and some textiles but an economy which has been based on
agriculture and a slimmer mining industry.
Tony Wilkinson, now the chairman, comes from one of these medium-sized
companies - a hardware store chain bearing his name, with an annual turnover
of about Pounds 120m.
For Wilkinson and his private sector colleagues, hand-ling public sector
money demands a new mode of thinking. The fact that the UK government is
reducing spending on training is frustrating, but, beyond that, there is
concern that discussion time for the Tec budget is limited, and that
government funding goes in blocks of 12 months.
In the Wilkinson business, budget discussions for any financial year start
five months before. With the Tecs, 'there is just a few weeks between
discussions and the money arriving,' Wilkinson notes, and then, at the end
of the year, 'if there is a surplus, all the money goes back.' This, as he
puts it, 'is an unusual concept for business.'
By February, North Notts had an indicative budget for the financial year
beginning in April, but nothing more. It remained in negotiations with
Whitehall about the treatment of allowances, hitherto administered by the
Employment Service, for those engaged in what North Notts calls adult
training, but is usually known as employment training and aimed at the
unemployed.
If it can obtain control of these allowances then its 1991-92 budget will
rise. If not, then it will show a slight increase in money terms over the
previous year. That is, it would decline in real terms.
The amounts of money are not vast because North Notts is one of the smaller
Tecs. In 1990-91, the government grant was Pounds 8m for youth training,
Pounds 3m for employment training and Pounds 1.5m for business support.
These proportions demonstrate how, in financial terms, the 'enterprise'
element of 'training and enterprise' is a minor addition to what the
government had in any case been spending on training through the Training
Agency. North Notts in this respect is typical of the Tecs nationwide.
But it is different from some and will feel the effects of this minor
addition more than many because of the emphasis laid on 'enterprise' in its
corporate plan. There is a similar emphasis in the plans of the Lincolnshire
Tec, while the Birmingham Tec, for example, seems to be putting its stress
on the 'training' element.
The economy of North Nottinghamshire is such that without the enterprise
there will not be jobs for the beneficiaries of training. Unemployment runs
up to 25 per cent in some districts. Hence, the injunction in the Tec
corporate plan that investment in training opens the way for improved
business performance and thus to improve the survival rate of small
companies.
The small business support budget and the 5 per cent limitation on the
amount which can be switched from one budget heading to another mean,
however, that the main burden of fostering the enterprise will have to come
from company resources.
North Notts is trying to win company support through a membership scheme of
the Tec. The target is 200 members by June; so far it is 87. Membership is
conditional on signing a code of practice which states, inter alia, that
'every employer should have a clear but flexible plan which sets out
objectives' and that 'business plans should consider how employees will
contribute to the plan and specify the arrangements for meeting their
development needs'.
This notion of the Tec encouraging companies to help themselves is followed
through in the plans for a new business centre, where the Tec has aligned
its ideas with proposals along broadly the same lines from the Mansfield
District Council. Such a centre, which would provide technological and
business advice facilities, would be open to companies only if they are
making provision for training and have a business plan. On the steps taken
towards the formation of the centre, the Tec board gave itself two out of
five.
Such initiatives, although likely to bear long-term fruit rather than have
an immediate impact on companies wrestling with recession, are the
concomitant of the efforts to provide a better trained and educated
workforce. The focus of these efforts, in budgetary terms, is youth
training. In the North Notts area, 80 per cent of the places for which the
Tec has signed training contracts are occupied and 34 per cent - more than
double the figure at March 1990 - of the trainees are in employment.
Since last June, no contracts with the training institutions have been
signed unless the institution has plans to raise the quality of its service.
(Tec Board mark: four out of five.) But there are two catches here, and both
of them have national implications as other Tecs face the same problems.
The first is that North Notts has not yet been able to establish a mechanism
of evaluating those who provide training, because it is not immediately
obvious who should do the evaluating. It could be they Tec itself.
Alternatively, consultants could be hired. Either way there would be an
extra burden on a straitened budget.
The second is that the measurement of quality is the number of national
vocation qualifications which are granted to those taking the courses. The
difficulty here is that the framework of national vocation qualifications
has not been fully established. 'You can't ask someone to deliver something
which is not deliverable,' Wilkinson commented.
Against the background of these difficulties, it is not surprising that the
Tec board gave itself a mark of two out of five for the action, as the
corporate plan put it, 'to build relationships and reach agreement with
industry training organisations on the establishment and monitoring of
standards locally.'
Even less satisfying for the TEC has been the question of employment
training. Just a quarter of those going through the system end up with jobs.
Of those referred to training only five per cent end up with jobs. 'This is
abysmal if we are honest with ourselves. We need to do something radical,'
says Pat Richards, the North Notts Tec chief executive, who has worked for
most of her life in the Department of Employment.
Outside the Tec, among those which provide training such as the chamber of
commerce, there is some confusion about local policy on employment training.
The Tec had initially given emphasis to directing the training towards the
grant of national vocation qualifications.
Now it appears more anxious that those who take the training have a job. But
the jobs are not available.
All of this suggests that relations between the Tec and those who provide
training - that is those who obtain contracts to undertake youth and
employment training schemes - are in a state of flux. But the numbers are
relatively small.
The North Notts Tec deals with some 30 training organisations. In the
Birmingham area the number of organisations providing training for the
financial-clerical sector alone is three times that.
Two consequences flow from the small number of training organisations
involved in North Notts.
First, while the training contracts absorb the greater part of the Tec
funds, there should be few accounting problems. Spending can be controlled
centrally.
Accounting at Tecs generally has become the subject of scrutiny following
expressions of Whitehall concern that some Tecs had lost control of money
spent on training contracts. North Notts has taken consultancy advice from
Price Waterhouse on its business planning.
The second is that the Tec can organise its activities simply along
geographical lines, as does Lincolnshire, but in contrast to Birmingham Tec
where there is an attempt to establish a series of sectoral agreements
between employers and training organisations.
The simplicity of the organisation means that there is no interposing layer
of control between the Tec itself, on one hand, and the employers and
training organisations, on the other.
Indeed, in the long run, the great strength of the North Notts Tec may be
that, for the first time in a community that is more tightly knit than that
of a conurbation, it is the instrument for bringing together all the players
in the game of training and enterprise: the employers and unions, the
training organisations and the local authorities.
Previous articles in this series were published on November 28, December 3,
10, January 2, 7, February 4 and March 18.

The Financial Times


London Page 19 Illustration (Omitted). Illustration (Omitted). Illustration
(Omitted). Illustration (Omitted). Photograph In spite of cuts, British Coal
is still one of the main employers in the North Nottinghamshire area
(Omitted).

910422

