FT911-4185

FT  20 APR 91 / Food: Lisbon: where the fishwives rule '. . . As bad a
tongue, if it be set on, as any oyster-wife at Billingsgate . . .' -
Although strongly influenced by Spain, Portugal has a cuisine of its own.
Weekend FT food and wine writers sample its traditions


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


SHAKESPEARE may have had it right. From Billingsgate fish market to ports
and docksides on the far side of the world, fishwives can be creation's
crudest, most foul-mouthed creatures. But the dramatist and I differ in our
basic approach to the women who stand behind fishy-smelling market stalls.
As a lover of good language, he had little sympathy for them. As a lover of
good fish, I do.
I doubt if Shakespeare ever made the short walk down the Thames from the
Globe theatre to Billingsgate fish market at an hour and season when
fishwives are apt to be at their crudest, foul-mouthed worst. Not long ago I
left a comfortable bed to wander the Lisbon waterfront at just such a moment
 -three o'clock on a cold winter's morning. I can report that compared to
the tempers most of us would develop while messing about with slippery, iced
fish on a rain-swept morning, the mood displayed by these much-maligned
women remains a model of reason.
Whatever the Bard's opinion of fishwifery, it is an honourable profession.
The Portuguese, I found out, do not denigrate their fishwives as we do ours;
they value them highly. But then neither do the Portuguese abuse fish as we
on this scepter'd isle do. Not for Lisboans batter-coated fish fingers,
mushy peas and soggy chips - they do with fish, I discovered, what
Shakespeare does with words.
For some reason there are few Lisbon fishwives over the height of five feet
two inches. They are tiny, wrinkled, baggy women with kerchief-covered hair
and little disposition for fashion; they wear heavy skirts below ragged
pullovers or anoraks, tie plastic aprons around non-existent waists, and
display raw, red knees and hands that look freshly skinned. Nonetheless, on
the wharves of the Tagus River beside Lisbon's main market, the Mercado da
Ribeira, they are undisputed queens.
Later on in the day this market will see more than 1,000 men and women at
work piling crates of oranges and lettuce, making pyramids of big yellow
squashes, and carrying great sacks of carrots balanced on their heads -
fresh fish, meat, poultry and vegetables are all sold in vast quantities
here. But at 3 am this is the private realm of the fishwife, the purveyor of
some of the most sought after foods in the country.
Down at the water, where strong winds whip the waves of the Tagus estuary
into a dirty brown froth, fish arrive by boat and lorry from ports up and
down the Portuguese coast - from Nazare, Peniche and Avero to the north of
Lisbon, from the Algarve, Sesimbra and Setubal to the south. Packed in ice
in shallow crates, the catch - some of it still wriggling - is rattled on
trollies over rain-splashed cobbled streets to the dock's main auction hall.
It may be hard to detect, but there is some order among the scores of women
milling about here in the glare of white-tiled surfaces and bright
florescent lighting. Shouting, cajoling, mocking, and gesticulating, they go
about their business with all the lusty energy and forcefulness they and
their sisters everywhere are famous for.
Some pile crates of fish high on to weigh-scales, others drag them along the
floor with metal hooks, while still others make vigorous inspection of their
contents. Chapped hands stroke the dark striped bodies of sea bass. Noses
pinched with cold sniff at the gills of red mullet. Practised eyes measure
the length of long, flat scabbard fish coiled into their crates like so many
lengths of silvery fire hose. Nylon string sacks of clams and mussels; crabs
with claws stopped open with wooden pegs; chocolate-dark lobsters that will
soon be flaming red; all come in for intimate perusal and evaluation.
The night's vital moments come when individual lots of fish are put up for
auction. Here, as in much of the rest of continental Europe, bidding for
fish is made on descending, rather than rising, prices. The successful
bidder is she who makes the first bid as the auctioneer progressively lowers
the price for the item on offer. As a system it is as fair as the one we
know, but it does introduce a greater element of tension; instead of having
multiple chances to bid for a lot, the potential buyer has only one.
That the women are bidding for turbots and conger eels rather than Turners
and Constables does not make the auction any less interesting for those
involved. As in any other domain of public activity in Portugal, connections
and personal prestige count for a good deal at the fish market. Many of the
fishwives, as an alternative to selling their auction purchases directly to
market customers, act as buying agents for Lisbon's hotels and seafood
restaurants. Here the politics of fish buying can be bloodthirsty and
unforgiving. As every Lisbon restaurateur knows, having a fishwife of power
and influence fighting on your side can make or break you.
Curiously, Portugal's most popular fish can be found at the market but is
not on sale at the fish auction. The cod or bacalhau so beloved of the
Portuguese is not bought fresh but heavily salted and dried as stiff as a
board. Requiring up to three days of soaking before use, it forms the basis
of more than 300 dishes, making inspired use of such simple ingredients as
potatoes, onions, eggs and olives. Not so long ago the humble food of poor
Portuguese living inland and unable to obtain cheap, protein-rich fish any
other way, bacalhau has today taken on prestige status and is found on the
most elaborate of menus.
Once the waters of Newfoundland's Grand Banks teemed with cod and for six
months every year were home to a large Portuguese fishing fleet. Today,
however, the Banks are overfished and the fleet is depleted. Much of
Portugal's cod is purchased from Norway. Of the country's 11,000 working
boats fully two thirds are powered by oar or sail, and only about 100 are
deep-sea vessels. Steeply rising cod prices have now put bacalhau out of
reach of the people whom it originally benefitted.
Fish nonetheless remains a staple of most Portuguese people. But few popular
dishes, no matter how modest, bear any resemblance to the horrors that issue
from that most English of institutions, the fish and chip shop.
Fisherman themselves boil up huge kettles of fish soup on the beach using
sea water, onions, garlic, tomatoes and part of the day's catch. All over
the country, fresh, fat sardines are cooked out in the streets by village
women using small grills made of baked earth; accompanied by a glass of
refreshing vinho verde, they make a delicious summer meal. Even that most
frugal of poor man's dinners, acorda de mariscos, is a delight; requiring
nothing more than the addition of an egg, fresh coriander and the water in
which shrimps have been boiled, it transforms yesterday's stale loaf into a
fragrant bread stew.
After my early morning exertions at the fish market, I felt I had earned
something more than bread stew. I took a local train out to Cascais where
the Tagus meets the open sea. No longer just a quaint little fishing
village, Cascais is home to some of the most elegant fish and seafood
restaurants in Portugal.
Here you can listen to Atlantic rollers pounding the beach, and watch
high-prowed, brightly-coloured wooden fishing boats bobbing on an even more
brightly-coloured sea. More importantly, you can do all this and at the same
time sit at a restaurant table and choose from among the best and freshest
fish in the world.
I went to a restaurant named after its owner, Joao Padeiro, a man celebrated
as a minor god in Cascais for the quality of his fish. After a bowl of Senor
Padeiro's shellfish soup and a plate of his reknowned fried sole, I, too,
celebrated all manner of minor gods. Not least among them was that array of
little ladies who begin their day rather early at the Mercado da Ribeira.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV Photograph Catch of the day, Portuguese fishermen bring home
the spoils (Omitted).

910420

