FT911-4319

FT  19 APR 91 / Parliament and Politics: Major banks on lower bills for an
escape route - The Poll Tax


   By RALPH ATKINS


MR JOHN MAJOR will attempt next week to rescue the government from the poll
tax morass by publishing comprehensive figures intended to show how the
proposed relacement will keep household bills as low as possible.
The amounts paid under the new property-based system will be set out in
consultative documents on Tuesday or Wednesday. Exemptions are expected for
the lowest-paid, marking a significant break from the principle that
everyone should pay some of the community charge. No register of individuals
will be needed for the new system.
Cabinet spent an hour yesterday fine-tuning the proposals for a tax based on
two-people in a house or flat but with reductions for one-person households.
Properties would be grouped into a number of bands, with assessments
depending on elements of both house size and capital value. The aim would be
to take account of large variations in property prices across the country.
Downing Street appeared confident that cabinet ministers originally opposed
to a return to a property tax were now 'positive' about the plans put
forward by Mr Michael Heseltine, environment secretary.
The government's package will include strict capping powers to curb high
spending local authorities.
There will be consultation on parts, but not the broad thrust, of the
proposals. Scotland and Wales will have the same framework but possibly with
some variations.
The final demise of the poll tax will raise hopes among ministers of an end
to the traumatic and politically damaging rows within the Conservative party
over alternative forms of local taxation - even though the new system will
not be in place until 1993.
By setting out 'exemplifications' for all local authorities the government
hopes voters will make favourable comparisons with other systems of local
government tax systems - particularly Labour's 'fair rates' scheme.
Mr Major also appears anxious to quash accusations of dithering by
publishing as much detail as possible ahead of the May 2 local elections.
Although approved by the cabinet, publication has been delayed over the
weekend for the compilation and printing of the sets of figures. Officials
said the accompanying documents would be 'substantial'.
A separate paper on the structure of local government will expand on
proposals already set out by Mr Heseltine for a 'rolling' system of changes,
based largely on the preferences of local electors.
These could see the widespread dismantling of county councils but the
emphasis will be on extensive consultation before decisions are reached.
Downing Street appeared anxious to avoid unnecessarily large-scale changes,
suggesting Mr Heseltine's more grandiose plans may have been trimmed.
The continuing delay over the publication of the consultative documents
again provoked attacks from Labour yesterday.
Mr Bryan Gould, the shadow environment secretary, said the government was
'still running scared'. He suggested it might leak some details selectively
over the weekend. Alternatively, 'the government is so lacking in confidence
in its decision that it chooses to keep the House of Commons and the
electorate in the dark,' Mr Gould said.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Photograph Winning a positive response, Michael Heseltine
yesterday (Omitted).

910419

