FT911-4211

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: It pays to be Scottish


   By CLARE PEARSON


CUSTOMERS OF Scottish Power and Hydro Electric should be smiling this week
following the announcement of the shareholder incentives for the flotation
of the two Scottish electricity companies.
Advisers have put together a package for customers which is closely modelled
on the generous deal available when the English and Welsh regional
electricity companies (Recs) were sold last autumn.
Other UK investors have not been forgotten. But they stand to get only a
relatively measly 1-for-20 share bonus if they hold shares bought in the
offer until June 30 1994.
By contrast, customers of Scottish Power and Hydro Electric can opt for
money off their electricity bills in respect of holdings in their own
company as well as a share bonus in the other.
Customers can choose whether to plump for a package comprising shares in
both companies or just buy shares in their own, while other investors will
be able only to buy the package. Details of the incentives are as follows:
Non-customers: the 1-for-20 share bonus, up to a maximum of 150 shares.
Customers who apply for shares only in their own company: The choice of
either Pounds 18 worth of electricity vouchers for every 100 shares
allocated, up to a maximum of Pounds 270 worth of vouchers, OR a 1-for-10
share bonus, up to a maximum of 300 bonus shares.
Customers who apply for the package: the choice of vouchers or bonus shares
in their own company and, on their allocation in the other company, a
1-for-20 share bonus up to the non-customer maximum.
As in the Recs' sale, customers who opt for vouchers will also benefit from
getting their first one before Christmas - ahead of having to pay the second
instalment on their shares, due in May 1992. Since it looks as if the record
date for the dividend is likely to fall before then too, that gives local
investors the prospect of an attractive first-year return.
Minimum investment levels were also announced this week, and these too
reflect the government's determination to attract as much local investment
as possible.
For customers buying shares in only their local company, the minimum first
payment has been set at a modest Pounds 100. But those customers applying
for the package will have to pay Pounds 300, the same as non-customers.
Payment for the shares will be in three instalments. The fully-paid share
price will be revealed next month, but the fully-paid minimums are being
indicated at Pounds 250 and Pounds 750.
Remember that you will only become eligible for incentives if you register
with the Electricity Share Information Office (tel: 041-414-1414).
As far as customers are concerned, registration guarantees preferential
allocations in the event of oversubscription - and if the current level of
interest is maintained, that will be very important.
Registrations have already reached 2m, which means that the flotation is
level-pegging with last November's Recs' sale, in which allocations were
scaled down greatly. Non-customers who register are not being guaranteed
preferential treatment although they may get some priority over other
members of the public.

The Financial Times


London Page III Table (Omitted).

910420

