FT911-4235

FT  20 APR 91 / International Company News: Credit Lyonnais overtakes BNP


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


CREDIT Lyonnais, the French state-owned bank, yesterday reported an 18.5 per
cent rise in last year's net group profits. Credit Lyonnnais has now
overtaken Banque Nationale de Paris (BNP), also state-owned, as France's
second largest bank in terms of profit.
Group net profits at Credit Lyonnais rose to FFr3.7bn (Dollars 660m) from
FFr3.13bn, a contrast to the halving in BNP's net earnings to FFr1.6bn,
announced a day previously.
Mr Jean-Yves Haberer, the chairman, said the results were gratifying but it
was impossible to forecast the outlook for 1991, which was already proving
to be an 'atypical year'.
Mr Haberer confirmed that 'nearly all the conditions are ready' for Credit
Lyonnais' long-awaited share exchange accord with Commerzbank of Germany,
which he hoped to conclude this year. Total group loans outstanding rose by
20.5 per cent to FFr692bn, while customers' deposits advanced by 25 per cent
to FFr580bn.
Provisions rose slightly, by 3 per cent to FFr6.5bn, within which an extra
FFr593m of provisions for country loans lifted the bank's coverage of
exposure to country risks to 60 per cent.
It had to lift provisions for bad customer loans by 91 per cent to FFr4.1bn,
reflecting the general economic squeeze on borrowers.
There was also a FFr842m provision for writedowns on the value of Credit
Lyonnais' securities portfolio, 10 times the figure set aside the previous
year.
Group operating income rose by 15 per cent to FFr11.66bn, reflecting
'excellent' results from the French leasing businesses, significantly higher
earnings from life insurance and Clinvest - the investment banking division
 -and the first contribution from Altus Finance, the treasury bank acquired
from Thomson-CSF at the end of 1989.
Foreign subsidiaries' contribution rose by 67 per cent to account for 31 per
cent of net profit.
This continues the previous year's trend, with the exception of Brazil and
Argentina, which had to make large provisions.
London-based Credit Lyonnais Capital Markets - formerly Alexanders Laing and
Cruikshank - halved its losses last year and was heading towards
profitability, said Mr Haberer.

The Financial Times


London Page 10 Photograph Haberer, outlook uncertain (Omitted).

910420

