FT911-4163

FT  20 APR 91 / Allies and Iraq discuss refugees


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ANKARA


US AND allied commanders yesterday crossed into northern Iraq and held a
50-minute meeting with Baghdad officials, seeking assurances that Iraq would
not interfere in the setting up of havens for the thousands of Kurdish
refugees camped in the Turkish mountains.
Lt Gen John Shalikashvili, the US general commanding the force entrusted
with establishing the havens in the north of Iraq, said on returning from
the Harbur customs post to the Turkish side of the border: 'As is always the
case with these initial meetings some issues remain to be worked and will be
worked in due time.'
He warned Iraqi officers in the town of Zakho, with a population of
5,000-10,000 to stay out of the way and allow the construction of camps.
Gen Shalikashvili said the havens plan would go ahead. He gave no details of
the talks beyond describing 'a very frank exchange of views which gave me
the opportunity to make the points I wanted to make'. He did not indicate
whether more contacts with the Iraqis were planned.
Air Vice Marshall Dick Johns, leader of the British reconnaissance party,
along with French, Italian and Canadian military officials, was also present
at the talks with about six Iraqi officials, held near an Iraqi border post.
The talks were the highest level contact between the allies and the Baghdad
regime since the ceasefire agreement in February.
They came ahead of the arrival over the weekend of contingents of US, UK and
French troops, who will be entrusted with securing the refugee safe havens,
before eventually handing them over to the United Nations.
Already there are almost 6,000 US military personnel in Turkey including
2,000 marines. An advance party of British marines from the 3rd Commando
based in Plymouth is expected to fly into Diyarbakir at the weekend. They
will then go to Silopi, the allies' forward base for the safe haven
operation.
More than 200 French military survey experts are due to arrive today. The
combined allied force is expected to number about 16,000 troops.
'We are prepared to move in and start the effort erecting infrastructure for
the first camp,' Gen Shalikashvili said before meeting the Iraqis.
Italy is to send 500 troops to help build a camp for 60,000 Kurdish refugees
in northern Iraq. In the Netherlands the Dutch cabinet approved plans to
send up to 1,000 military personnel to defend havens for the Kurdish
refugees.
In Baghdad this week Iraqi and UN representatives agreed terms for the
setting up of relief stations in north Iraq and it remains to be seen how
well the UN plan will complement the allied relief plan.
However, yesterday's meeting is seen as an early sign that Baghdad may
co-operate in allied relief work it had previously denounced as interference
in its internal affairs.
In the US the White House welcomed the Iraq-UN agreement and said it did not
see the plan as a rebuff to President George Bush.
The plan 'appears to provide a basis for the UN to take over the operation
we will establish', said Mr Marlin Fitzwater, the presidential spokesman.
The UN and the allied camps were essentially the same, he said.
Allied officials stress their military relief operation is temporary. Mrs
Lynda Chalker, the UK overseas development minister, said the allies would
probably be 'in business here not weeks but several months'.
Mrs Chalker, visiting the camps this week, emphasised the need to hand over
the operation to the UN. 'The urgency of putting UN personnel on the ground
is critical,' she said.
In the camps, aid officials say the allies will still have to win the
confidence of the refugees before they will make the long trek back.
The longer the delay, the more the camps in Turkey will be consolidated and
the less likely the refugees are to want to return to north Iraq, aid
officials say.
Continued on Page 22
Iraq admission, Page 3
West takes up burden, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 1

910420

