FT911-4065

FT  22 APR 91 / Red faces in Mexico over phone taps


   By DAMIAN FRASER


   MEXICO CITY


MEXICO'S NATIONAL Human Rights Commission (CNDH) has deeply embarrassed its
paymasters, the federal government, by complaining officially that its
telephones are tapped and that the offices of its president, Mr Jorge
Capizo, were being bugged.
The Commission found two microphones and a transmitter hidden in its offices
early last month, and after failing to find out who was responsible for
putting them there, sent the offending technology to the Attorney General's
office last week. In a brief statement the latter said the listening devices
were extremely unsophisticated, thus suggesting that they were not planted
by the government.
Although telephone tapping is illegal in Mexico, it is widely believed to be
one of the favourite activities of Mexico's security-conscious Interior
Ministry, known as Gobernacion. Last September, Mexico's two leading
opposition parties, and the Mexico City Assembly Commission demanded an
official inquiry into allegations that opposition and business leaders,
journalists, and even government members were having their phones tapped.
The CNDH was set up by President Carlos Salinas last June amid growing
concern about Mexico's deteriorating human rights record. This latest
incident will do nothing to abate that concern. At the time CNDH was
inaugurated, Americas Watch wrote that torture was 'endemic' in Mexico
'practised by most, if not all, branches of the federal and state police, as
well as by the armed forces'. A few months later Amnesty International
reported that 'Mexico today is a human rights emergency.'
Even though CNDH nominally answers to Gobernacion, it has been surprisingly
effective in discovering and reporting human rights violations, which
probably explains why its phones were bugged. Its recommendations have led
to the release to a number of quasi-political prisoners.
The CNDH has reserved some of its harshest criticisms for the Federal
Attorney General's office, which, ironically enough, is responsible for
finding out who put the bugs in the commission's offices.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

910422

