FT911-4182

FT  20 APR 91 / Books: Little matters of life and death


   By MARY HOPE


BEGINNING TO END by Stanley Middleton Hutchinson Pounds 12.99, 233 pages
THE QUEEN OF THE TAMBOURINE by Jane Gardam Sinclair-Stevenson Pounds 13.95,
227 pages
THE MIDDLETON formula is as gruff and abrupt as ever: Clark, a young teacher
arrives at one of those schools where excellence still prevails, in a
greyish Midland town. On the way to his digs he helps Stapleton, a sick old
man, who invites him to his home. Stapleton is a retired solicitor, whose
well stocked mind is a curmudgeonly match for Clark: they trade and identify
literary references.
Stapleton's daughter, Jenny, is quietly assertive, self-possessed,
emotionally untouchable; she introduces Clark into a circle of provincial
acquaintances who weave a tempting dance around him. In the background there
is a puzzling, unexplained suicide. Pearson, one of the circle, an
unfulfilled teacher, dies in a stupid drunken accident. Stapleton dies.
Clark rejects a former girlfriend because of her individual character; at
the end of the book he is set, tentatively, to marry Jenny.
Middleton's narrative modesty and lack of adventure mask one of the most
authoritative voices writing today. Nothing very exciting ever happens in
his novels: but then nothing very exciting ever happens in most peoples'
lives. The real drama, as he has always shown, is the way in which people
struggle to realise their own emotional and moral truth and to deal with
others with the same rigour. In addition there is the little matter of death
to cope with. For Middleton, compromise is death, either spiritual,
emotional or natural: the premature deaths in this novel are of men who have
not fulfilled their own expectations: 'people talk of some private sense of
not coming up to the mark'.
Education is not just a setting that Middleton (the ex- schoolmaster)
handles best: it is the whole matter of the book. Life is education, and the
liberal conferences, quotations and assessing tropes are all there to hammer
home the message. All this may sound desiccated, tedious, pompous, but
reading Middleton is not like that at all. Apart from his meticulous
exactitude of setting - the provincial paraphernalia are cherished rather
than scorned in the Cooper/Braine/Amis mode - the conversations have the
oblique cadences of reality, a lightning allusiveness which teases out the
complexities of human converse, spoken and unspoken. And at the core of the
book, there is a reference to the Red Cross Knight of Spenser's Faerie
Queene, 'a hero who was not constantly victorious, who himself needs
rescuing, who is put to training in a hard school': the reference to Clark's
initiation into the moral universe is obvious. Middleton's novels are also
hard schools, and, for that reason, profoundly rewarding.
Jane Gardam's new book is painful, fluent and witty, an account of a
mid-life crisis which provides the opportunity to dissect a suburban, middle
class life which must be familiar to many readers. Eliza Peabody is
beautiful, religious, rich, witty, childless, temporarily husbandless - and
fifty. She writes a series of letters to a neighbour who has abandoned her
family and taken off to the East: disapproval turns to envy. Eliza's letters
are a witty commentary on her own condition, and a searching examination of
the lives trapped beneath comfortable Wimbledon exteriors: a brave woman
writer with erring husband, a mother wrapped up in her children's exam
results, a chaotic curate's family, a nouveau riche film couple. But there
is trickery: Eliza's situation is gently revealed to be more complex as her
state of mind begins to worry the neighbours. Hints are dropped; an
eccentric, independent spinster admonishes 'Face what you know. Grow up.'
The unravelling of Eliza's history is a masterly piece of literary and
psychological trompe l'oeil: her projections are slowly disentangled until,
at the end, a very different picture emerges. The only constant is her clear
vision of a certain life: 'I suppose I was only observing in you what was to
be seen less dramatically in many women of our age . . . boredom and
knowledge. The rich, middle class, educated Englishwoman, tired at last by
the rigours of mid-stream life, looking in the glass in the morning and
seeing the face of a middle-aged woman look back. And unable to greet her.'
This is a skilful tour de force, almost a psychological thriller, buoyantly
told and uncomfortably hard hitting beneath the stylistic intention.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

910420

