FT911-4102

FT  20 APR 91 / Markets: Dow Jones rides the elevator up and down - Wall
Street


   By NIKKI TAIT


A COUPLE of traders, riding the elevators at Salomon Brothers on Thursday,
had the happy but slightly incredulous look of men who had just won the
jackpot at Las Vegas.
'Sixteen times earnings,' muttered one, referring to the current
price-earnings ratio on the Dow. 'There can't be much more in it'.
Sure enough, having closed above the 3,000 mark for the first time on
Wednesday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average eased back in the following
session and by Friday morning was falling more steeply.
While most pundits can find a rationale for the recent rise, there is a
strong suspicion that the market may not have much further to go in the
immediate future.
The rise is built on an economic recovery and, to judge from the current
reporting round of quarterly corporate earnings, this is only at an
embryonic stage. Plenty of chairman's statements have muttered about
'cautious optimism' and 'some indications' of a pick-up. Few have noted
anything more concrete.
Moreover, there is still a question mark over the Federal Reserve's policy
on interest rates. The steady run of interest rates cuts, delivered between
October and February, has had a 'double whammy' effect. The policy
stimulated the economy while driving down cash returns and encouraging
investors back into the stock market.
Whether the market can expect much more help from this quarter in the
immediate future is a moot point. A week ago, in the wake of some fairly
comforting inflation figures and poor employment data, the markets thought
that further easing of rates was odds-on. Yet, on Monday morning, there were
clear signals that the Fed was not so minded, as it drained money from the
banking system by selling Treasury issues.
There is a growing school of thought that, having missed this window, the
Fed will take no action before the next meeting of the policy-setting Open
Market Committee on May 14. By then, key data concerning the economy's
performance in April will be published.
That said, there seems relatively little reason for the market to tumble
from its highs. Whatever the pace of the US recovery there is increasing
evidence that the recessionary corner has been turned. Moreover, the latest
rally has been broad-based and analysts acknowledge that Thursday's
correction, in itself an inevitable reaction, was modest.
One further unknown is the extent to which acquisition activity may pick up.
For the past six months at least, deal-making has been at a virtual halt and
many merger professionals have turned to restructuring business instead. In
large part, this downturn has echoed the banking debacle, with lenders
unwilling to fund new transactions while they battled to get their capital
ratios into shape.
No-one is keen to predict a speedy resurgence on this score and certainly
this week's spate of US banking results were scarcely a matter for pride.
But, anecdotally at least, some investment bankers report that lenders are
showing greater interest in reviving a modest deal flow. This improvement
seems to reflect interest from relatively healthy overseas banking groups,
but some deal-makers count US names on their lists.
As for the reporting season itself, this has brought a mixed bag of figures
and similarly disparate market reactions. In general, the US bank stocks
were modest gainers last week. Citicorp rose Dollars  3/8 to Dollars 16 3/8
on Tuesday, in spite of reporting first quarter earnings of Dollars 70m,
down from Dollars 231m, after increasing loan-loss reserves by Dollars 200m.
Others, such as Wells Fargo, Manufacturers Hanover and Chemical Bank, also
firmed.
The drug companies, too, unveiled commendable figures. Merck shares rose by
more than Dollars 3 to Dollars 113 mid-week as the group reported a 21 per
cent rise in earnings per share.
In food and drinks, Philip Morris rolled in with a 21.5 per cent earnings
rise, in line with expectations, while Coca-Cola created rather more
reaction with a 13 per cent increase in profits, at the top end of
predictions. More surprisingly, Sears Roebuck, the nation's largest
retailer, joined in the fun, with its shares gaining Dollars 2 1/8 at
Dollars 39 1/2 on Thursday after reporting a virtual doubling of first
quarter profits - thanks in part to asset sales, but with the underlying
business at least showing some improvement.
But for paper groups, publishers and some computer companies life remains
tough. Apple Computer shares fell on Monday on static quarterly profits and
a significant decline in gross margins.
The stream of new issues, meanwhile, keeps coming as companies take
advantage of investors' renewed interest. On Thursday, RJR Nabisco, taken
private via the record-breaking Dollars 25bn leveraged buyout masterminded
by Kolhberg Kravis Roberts, announced that it had completed an offering of
115m new shares - increased from the initial 75m - to net nearly Dollars
1.3bn. Clearly, KKR reckons that raising money is attractive. And that may
be as good comment as any on the current market levels.
 ------------------------------
Monday     2933.17 + 12.38
Tuesday    2986.88 + 53.71
Wednesday  3004.46 + 17.58
Thursday   2999.26 -  5.2
Friday     2965.59 - 33.67
 ------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II Graph (Omitted).

910420

