FT911-4046

FT  22 APR 91 / Gorbachev critics demand early crackdown


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Mikhail Gorbachev is under increasing pressure to choose between
building a reforming coalition government and tackling the Soviet Union's
economic crisis through repression.
An influential group of hardline Communist deputies, Soyuz, called on the
Soviet leader on his return from a far-east trip at the weekend to impose a
state of emergency throughout the Soviet Union to combat economic chaos and
bring rebel republics to heel.
'Let Gorbachev impose the state of emergency and show he is a man,' said Mr
Yuri Blokhin, co-chairman of Soyuz, at a meeting which featured impassioned
attacks on Mr Gorbachev's leadership. 'If he does not, the situation will be
more painful,' he added.
Soyuz has decided to set up a national movement to press for a crackdown.
But efforts are also under way behind the scenes to persuade Mr Gorbachev to
unite with opposition democrats and republican leaders and form a coalition
government capable of conducting effective economic reform.
Mr Vadim Bakatin, a presidential adviser and the former liberal interior
minister, said he hoped Mr Gorbachev would heed his advice to compromise.
'There are only two possible outcomes: either war or co-operation,' Mr
Bakatin told reporters at a conference of economists and politicians. 'He is
an intelligent man.'
The liberals are advocating a return to the ideas of the 500-day plan
supported by the republics but rejected by President Gorbachev last year.
These include an economic union among republics allowing for a single market
and currency, a drastic financial stabilisation programme and an early start
to privatisation.
Mr Valentin Pavlov, the Soviet prime minister, is due today to present to
parliament an anti-crisis programme including price rises, slow
privatisation and a ban on strikes. But the plan has been criticised as too
vague by the country's leading economists. It also assumes political support
which the government lacks.
Striking coal miners demanding a new government and market reforms are
threatening to bring crucial industrial sectors to a standstill. Republics
seeking genuine sovereignty or outright independence have cut sharply
contributions to the central budget. Recent price rises have angered the
population without significantly improving supplies. Workers from around the
country are threatening to join the miners' strike.
Mr Grigory Yavlinsky, the main author of the 500-day programme, said the
latest government plan failed to provide solutions to the budget crisis, the
threat of hyperinflation or the steep decline in output and foreign trade.
Mr Nikolai Petrakov, until recently the president's economic adviser,
denounced the Pavlov plan as 'nothing more than a political declaration' and
a 'ruse' to attract western support. He said it offered no serious
solutions.
'Given this approach, the only kind of solution proposed by the government
is a violent one, leading all the way to a state of emergency and martial
law,' he said yesterday.
It is this option which is being urged on Mr Gorbachev by Soyuz, which has
threatened otherwise to try to vote him out of office at an emergency
congress of the country's super-parliament.
This would do nothing to cure the troubled Soviet economy. Soyuz's economic
proposals seem limited to putting the transport system under military
control, and banning strikes and all political activity.
The extent of support for Soyuz - which yesterday appealed for support from
the KGB, the armed forces and industry leaders - remains unclear.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

910422

