FT911-4317

FT  19 APR 91 / Arts: Peter Grimes - Coliseum


   By MAX LOPPERT


Peter Grimes returns to the company - or, more accurately, the direct
descendant of the company - that gave the work its premiere. Tim Albery's
new English National Opera production (sponsored by TSB) is a shock of the
most challenging and invigorating kind. In its way it must prove as eye- and
ear-opening as was the Royal Opera's, by Elijah Moshinsky, in 1975: a
further notable stage in the progress of a great and important 20th-century
opera.
This is not at all the Aldeburgh we know. Lines and groupings belong to
Expressionist art. The chorus gather in clumps like characters in a Grosz
cartoon, a very North European Lumpenproletariat with faces often concealed
by the lighting, then climactically revealed in shapes of twisted violence.
The colours and visual currents of the staging belong to Nolde rather than
John Piper - the back and side panels painted in simmering sweeps of
crimson, black and grey, the general dullness of hue suddenly transformed
into threatening brilliance by fine shifts of light.
Though one gains the impression that old photographs have exercised a strong
influence on the set designer, Hildegard Bechtler, the modulation of visual
realism into a non-realistic world is achieved with extraordinary, and
specifically non-English, sophistication. Sea walls are angled to the point
of caricature; poles and boat-lines seem to curve into the distance;
Grimes's hut, cut in cross-section, is like a white sea-creature perched
unnaturally on the top of a startling blue cliff. In detail, and while its
1990s modernity is pronounced in countless ways, this Grimes reminds me of
nothing so much as the old Caspar Neher-designed Wozzeck at Covent Garden.
This is intended as high praise. But even if the ENO team have been entirely
uninfluenced by that landmark British production, a larger link with Wozzeck
comes across throughout the evening. For myself, I have never before been
made so constantly aware of the impact of Berg's opera on the construction
of Britten's, or the ties of kinship between the characters of both. In
Albery's staggeringly powerful and precisely-achieved production, the opera
becomes its leading character's nightmare just as Wozzeck becomes its; and
it moves with taut dream logic between states of frozen stillness and
regimented movement.
The chorus rise up from the floor - a great theatrical coup, this - in the
Prologue. Lines of blank bodies and faces are spread across the stage during
the storm. The violence of the hunt has never seemed more menacing, more
stirred up by irrational emotion. The character of Bob Boles, often a
crypto-whimsical cartoon, seems to sum up the style: in Graeme
Matheson-Bruce's terrifying account he is angular and frightening, a
dream-figure who haunts the action.
This is the most coherent Grimes I have encountered. In it, there is a place
for the fisherman's visions and ravings, the pub crudities (Auntie and her
'nieces' - Ann Howard, Rosa Mannion, Claire Daniels - dressed like fugitives
from Mahagonny), the drably expressive poetry of the daily working round;
everything hangs together. There is a price to be paid. The romance of
moonlight and birds wheeling, of local comic exchanges and Borough gossip,
of bright Sunday morning sunshine, is pictured in the music but finds no
echo in the staging. Characters like the magistrate Swallow (John Connell,
superb), the carter Hobson (Mark Richardson), the widow Sedley (Anne
Collins), and particularly the blunt, clear-sighted Balstrode (Jonathan
Summers in magisterial form) all belong to the world of Brecht; the
neo-Romantic English cosiness of Montagu Slater's libretto is expunged.
And so, to an extent, are the folk-opera influences that were no less
pressing on Britten than that of Wozzeck. There is no Porgy warmth in this
performance, no Boris grandeur. In David Atherton's magnificently controlled
conducting, which inspires the ENO orchestra and chorus to their highest
flights of corporate artistry, the score is closely geared to the activities
on stage. This is, therefore, a Grimes full of bated-breath silences, fierce
scratches of percussion, and remarkable verbal clarity from almost all on
stage; the staccato treatment of the great 'Grimes]' choral cries is
indicative of the approach.
Is Albery's price too high to be paid? The answer must be a matter of
individual taste; for myself, the production is nothing less than
revelatory. Philip Langridge in the title role is truly its pivotal point.
Mr Langridge, wiry of frame and sharp of profile, with a lyric tenor now
capable of surprisingly powerful outburst, is never placed to ham it up in
the central spotlight; his ability to make psychological and dramatic sense
of the outsider (learnt, no doubt, from playing Laca in Jenufa) reverberates
through the performance. No tenor, not Jon Vickers, not even Peter Pears,
sings all of the music equally well; Mr Langridge has passing trouble with
the Es of the pub soliloquy, firmly dealt with.
He is as crucial to the success of this Grimes as Vickers was to
Moshinsky's. And so is Josephine Barstow: sublimely economical, her
naturally striking stage presence distilled to a rare potency, singing with
a wealth of quiet colours and poetic nuances, she 'explains' Ellen's
active-passive modes more cogently than any other I have heard or seen.
There was too much scene-change noise at the Coliseum on Wednesday; this was
the only faint flaw on one of the ENO's great evenings.

The Financial Times


London Page 21 Photograph Philip Langridge as Peter Grimes in Tim Albery's
new production for English National Opera (Omitted).

910419

