FT911-4076

FT  22 APR 91 / Shying away from calls for growth: Peter Norman and Stephen
Fidler look ahead to a G7 meeting


   By PETER NORMAN and STEPHEN FIDLER


THE FINANCE ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven
leading industrial countries could be heading for their most difficult
meeting in years, when they gather next Sunday in Washington.
During his recent tour of Europe, and at the informal meeting in London
eight days ago of the G7 finance ministers, Mr Nicholas Brady, US treasury
secretary, surprised his partners by calling on them to adopt more clearly
expansionary policies.
The plea, which took the form of a call for lower interest rates, threatens
to exacerbate already fraught relationships between the US and some of its
partners.
On the world economy, Mr Brady argued that the seven - the US, Japan,
Germany, France, Britain, Italy and Canada - should concentrate their
economic policies on fighting slow economic growth rather than inflation.
Referring to the collapse of communist regimes and the end of the cold war,
he said: 'We've had the most significant change in world history in all our
lifetimes and the idea that we're not going to approach that turn in world
history with a positive, optimistic strategy doesn't occur to me as right.'
His belief that the world risked global recession and a credit crunch won
some support at the meeting with fellow finance ministers in London. Mr
Pierre Beregovoy, France's finance minister, came closest to identifying
with Mr Brady's cause, although he also received some backing from Mr Guido
Carli, the veteran finance minister of Italy.
Mr Ryutaro Hashimoto, Japanese finance minister, admitted that Japanese
economic growth had slowed and that slower economic growth was a greater
risk to the Japanese economy than higher inflation. follow a neutral
macro-economic policy for the time being.
The US approach was opposed by Mr Norman Lamont, UK chancellor. British
officials say that the fight against inflation remains the central plank of
economic policy, despite last week's figures showing a record monthly rise
in unemployment. Mr Theo Waigel, German finance minister and Mr Michael
Wilson, his Canadian counterpart, also put the battle against inflation at
the top of their domestic policy agendas.
Their view was that the US administration was falling into an old,
discredited trap of believing that there is a trade-off between growth and
inflation.
Mr Brady's approach was most explicit at a lunch-time meeting with Mr Karl
Otto Pohl, Bundesbank president, and other members of the bank's directorate
a few days before Mr Brady's London visit. There he attempted to persuade
the Bundesbank to lower interest rates with the argument that the world was
threatened by a global recession and credit crunch.
Mr Brady's plea was flatly rejected by the Bundesbank, which sees no sign of
recession in west Germany and no reason to lower its interest rates in the
face of domestic inflationary pressure.
European monetary officials believe that the US move is geared to domestic
politics and part of a White House-inspired campaign to encourage the US
Federal Reserve to ease the monetary reins.
However, there are fears that, if the US persists with its campaign among
the G7, next week's meeting - at the spring gathering of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank - will be very difficult.
The G7 meeting will differ in one important respect from that in London  -
the central bank governors will be there. The presence of such
anti-inflation hawks as Mr Pohl and Japan's Mr Yasushi Mieno may tip the
balance against the US initiative in a group that looks almost split down
the middle.
The meetings will also channel continued pressure from the US on Japan to
make its promised Dollars 9bn contribution to the Gulf war costs.
Also on the agenda is a capital increase for the International Finance
Corporation, the World Bank's private sector affiliate. In return for its
support to the bank, the US wants to see more World Bank involvement in the
private sector. It has said that 50 per cent of the lending of the World
Bank group should be 'directed towards' that sector by 1995.
The US envisages this leading eventually to direct lending to the private
sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 2 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted). Photograph Brady,
Beregovoy, Lamont, Subtly divided over expansion (Omitted).

910422

