FT911-4058

FT  22 APR 91 / The Week Ahead: UK markets focus on trade figures -
Economics


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


AFTER last week's grisly unemployment figures, the UK markets should be
focusing on tomorrow's trade and current account data for March.
Last time round, sharp re-estimates of the UK recorded trade inflows on the
invisibles produced a smallish deficit of just Pounds 192m in February.
Economists do not expect to be so pleasantly surprised by the March figures,
which should more closely reflect the underlying trend in imports. This is
suffering from slower world trade growth and the weak level of sterling
against the dollar.
March retail sales are today expected to rise by 0.5 per cent - primarily
predicted on the back of the recent cuts in interest rates to stimulate the
economy.
Trade figures are out in France on Wednesday, with the markets expecting a
Ffr4bn deficit. The annual French unemployment rate is likely to rise to 9.3
per cent in March.
The UK data is bound to be recessionary, but recent evidence of producer
price inflation and average earnings is likely to slow the pace of interest
rate reductions.
In the US, durable goods and shipments orders out tomorrow and gross
national product on Friday should give further clues as to the depth of the
current downturn. So will retail sales and wholesale trade figures in Canada
 -another recessionary Anglo-Saxon economy.
Other important events and statistics, with median market forecasts from MMS
international, the financial research company, include:
Today: UK, CBI/FT survey of the distributive trades, provisional retail
sales for March (0.5 per cent). Australia, housing finance for February (3
per cent).
Tomorrow: Canada, 30-year government bond auction. US, durable goods (0.1
per cent) and shipments orders. UK, visible trade balance (down Pounds 800m)
and current account (down Pounds 300m) for March. Germany, Q3 and Q4 gross
domestic product. Japan, personal income and expenditure for February.
Canada, retail sales (flat) and wholesale trade for February.
Wednesday: US, International Monetary Fund publishes world economic outlook
report, auto sales (6m). France, 1990 GNP revision, trade balance (Ffr minus
4bn). Japan, second quarter economic outlook. UK, provisional constructional
orders for February. Bank of England holds auction for Pounds 1.2bn 10 per
cent Conversion stock due 1996.
Thursday: US, import and export price index for March and Q1, existing home
sales and first quarter housing vacancies, money supply, initial claims. UK,
building society new commitments (Pounds 3bn). France, unemployment rate for
March (9.3 per cent). Japan, retail sales for March (4.9 per cent).
Switzerland, Basle and Geneva consumer price indices for April.
Friday: US, officials meet to prepare IMF/World Bank spring meetings, first
quarter advance GNP (minus 2.5 per cent) and deflator (4.1 per cent) fourth
quarter after-tax profits (1 per cent) bank credit for March, commercial and
industrial loans. Japan, March CPI (3.8 per cent) unemployment rate,
industrial production (down 0.2 per cent).
During the week: Germany, April cost of living (0.3 per cent), March import
prices (0.5 per cent), Japan trade balance, and current account, Italy CPI
for April and trade balance for March.

The Financial Times


London Page 20 Chart (Omitted).

910422

