FT911-4216

FT  20 APR 91 / The Long View: Keeping the chairman under control


   By BARRY RILEY


SHELL, BP, Sainsbury and Courtaulds, among many other large and successful
companies, have got it wrong, but the Institutional Shareholders' Committee
has got it right. Such, at least, was the implicit claim this week by the
ISC when it produced its statement of best practice on the role and duties
of company directors.
Good corporate governance is fundamental to the health of any modern
economy, and because institutional shareholders nowadays own something like
60 per cent of the shares in British listed companies they have the right -
indeed, the duty - to make known their views on how companies should be run.
However, fund managers seem to be taking a disappointingly narrow line. They
are almost completely ignoring the challenge of practices elsewhere in the
world, even in the rest of the European Community. Instead, they are
protecting their cherished right to buy and sell shares in companies without
entering into any form of longer-term commitment.
Any absentee landlord needs some sort of local agent to collect his rents
and make sure the tenants are not burning the furniture. This appears to
explain the peculiar preoccupation of the institutions with the role of
non-executive directors, and more particularly with the focus on their
independence, defined as freedom 'from bias, involvement or partiality'. But
if he is not involved, what is the non-exec doing on the board at all?
Outside directors are common enough in other jurisdictions, but normally are
clearly representative of major shareholders, bankers, customers, suppliers
or other interest groups; in Germany, where two-tier boards are the rule,
the workforce is represented too.
Along with this emphasis on independent directors goes a preoccupation with
non-executive chairmen: the roles of chairman and chief executive should be
split, as a way of controlling excessive power.
However, according to an analysis by the investor relations consultants Dewe
Rogerson, only 18 out of the 100 constituent companies of the FT-SE Index
embody this split formula in a pure form, with a non-executive chairman.
About half of these companies are banks and insurance groups, which
historically have favoured the predominantly non-executive board of
directors. You cannot say, however, that this form of governance has been
obviously successful from the shareholders' point of view. The City of
London has provided plenty of part-time jobs through the old boy network.
But over several decades the share prices of clearing banks, merchant banks
and general insurance companies have seriously underperformed the stock
market as a whole (and these sectors are currently awash in bad debts and
underwriting losses).
It seems a very strange time to be suggesting that this formula should be
more widely applied across British industry. Indeed, banks like NatWest have
streamlined their boards (although Midland's experiment with a combined
chairman and chief executive turned out to be disappointing). Moreover
Lonrho, not a company where the corporate governance has exactly been to
institutional investors' tastes over the years, has long adopted the
recommended split role formula; this suggests that structures alone will not
go far towards solving problems of excessive power concentration.
Another 42 out of the 100 Footsie companies also divide the top
responsibilities, although in a less clear way, so that the chairman is a
full-time executive but also has a chief executive officer. This leaves
another 40-odd companies where the executive chairman rules unchallenged: in
such cases, says the ISC, there is a particular need for a heavy
representation of independent non-executive directors.
These paragons need to be wise, strong and experienced, and yet must not
expect any substantial reward, certainly not any participation in share
option schemes or pension plans. There must be no compensation for loss of
office, says the ISC, even though being occasionally awkward and unpopular
may be a requirement for a good non-exec. Few such marvellous individuals
exist, yet the institutions have felt obliged to invent them because they
need some body of representatives to act as surrogate institutional
shareholders on the board. Many of the functions of independent
non-executives could be carried out by shareholders themselves through
resolutions and votes at annual and extraordinary meetings, but the modern
institutional shareholder has no time or taste for such responsibilities.
As far as I can see, the only way in which the ISC's formula could be made
to work would be through the setting up of sub-institutions which could
recruit, train and perhaps also motivate the non-executive directors. In
this way the delegation of shareholder control might be formalised. But how
could all shareholders be required to share the burden?
It is a muddle, and the reason why investment institutions are reluctant to
suggest clear structural solutions such as two-tier boards or the formal
recognition in statute law of non-executive directors and their
responsibilities is that other interest groups would demand representation
too, including the feared trade unions: the Bullock Report of the late 1970s
has never been forgotten.
However, British companies probably have to move in the direction of closer
informal links with partners, customers and suppliers, and the attitudes of
institutional shareholders are presently standing in the way of this. The
best companies have strong leadership, and look for long-term commitment
from all their stakeholders, including workers, suppliers and financiers. A
high level of involvement on all sides will tend to prevent excessive
concentrations of power: that is how it works in Japan, for example, and
when things go wrong various sources of help are available.
The here today, gone tomorrow shareholder does not easily fit into this
structure, and it is not obvious that the independent director can
satisfactorily plug the gap.

The Financial Times


London Page I Illustration (Omitted).

910420

