FT911-4330

FT  19 APR 91 / The Blue Arrow Trial: Markets 'misled' over rights issue


   By JOHN MASON


THE markets were misled over the outcome of the 1987 Blue Arrow rights
issue, a former deputy managing director of County NatWest Securities said
at the Blue Arrow trial yesterday.
Mr Stephen Raven, a prosecution witness, said press statements by County
NatWest and Phillips & Drew, the advisers to the issue, gave the impression
that all the shares had been placed in the market and so did not reflect the
true position.
He told Mr Nicholas Purnell QC, prosecuting: 'We certainly misled people
into thinking this issue had been far more of a success than it really was.'
The shares taken by CNWS and County's corporate finance division did not
amount to placing them, he said.
County NatWest, NatWest Investment Bank, UBS Phillips & Drew Securities and
seven individuals all deny conspiring to mislead the markets over the Pounds
837m issue.
Mr Raven said he only learnt CNWS had acquired 31.2m shares, 4.5 per cent of
the Blue Arrow equity, on October 14 when Mr Philip Rimell, then CNWS
chairman, said P&D had a similar position and both stakes were indemnified
against loss.
After the stock market crash, he raised with Mr Peter Dale, then CNWS
managing director, his concern about how the position was being maintained
following the fall in the Blue Arrow share price.
He was told not to concern himself because NatWest, the parent bank, and Mr
Thomas Frost, its chief executive, were aware of the situation, he said. Mr
Raven, a member of the Stock Exchange council, said he told Mr Dale CNWS had
to be absolutely open with the exchange about the holding.
Mr Raven said he only learnt County had another tranche of Blue Arrow shares
shortly before it announced it held a disclosable stake.
He was concerned that CNWS might be seen as acting in a concert party, but
both Mr Charles Villiers, the former chairman of County, and Miss Elizabeth
Brimelow, the former County compliance director, told him legal advice had
been taken over the move.
Mr Raven denied a suggestion from Mr Jeremy Roberts QC that he only became
concerned once he realised that there would be some 'flak' and press
attention when County announced its disclosable holding.
Mr Roberts, for Mr Jonathan Cohen, a former County chief executive, said Mr
Raven was concerned, as a Stock Exchange council member, not to be
embarrassed by this. That was not relevant, Mr Raven said. He had been
concerned only with the facts.
The trial continues today.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

910419

