FT911-4091

FT  20 APR 91 / Property: Buyer beware - you may have to sell one day


   By JOHN BRENNAN


AS THE Estate Agents (Property Misdescription) Bill wends its way through
Parliament all the old jokes about misleading sales particulars are being
given a re-run.
There is no effective counter-argument to such a piece of legislation, even
though the very title of the Bill is disparaging.
The Institute of Trading Standards Administration (ITSA) has been
campaigning for this change since 1969 when it became clear that the Trades
Description Act failed to cover agency particulars. Who would argue against
the proposition that agents should be obliged to provide factual information
about the properties on their books?
There is, however, one fact that punctures much of the self-congratulatory
discussion surrounding this legislative binding of the 'rogue' agents. The
sales agent's client is the vendor. That statement of the obvious always
provokes a bemused response. Everyone knows that sales agents act for the
people selling the property, so why repeat the point?
Well, although everyone knows whose side the agent is on, it tends to be
forgotten by the majority of buyers within minutes of their first
conversation at an estate agency. It certainly will have moved to the far
back of their minds by the time they have chosen a property and have started
to negotiate on price.
Agents are not neutral. They are the last people to be called on to police
the property sales particulars prepared for their clients because they are
paid, specifically, to present those properties in the best possible light
and to achieve the best possible sale price.
Patently misleading sales particulars are commercially counter-productive.
Only an incompetent agent will try to sell a house or flat which prospective
buyers can see at a glance bears no relation to the glowing description in
the sales particulars or which attempts to disguise faults that even a
cursory survey will reveal.
The institute of trading standards says the legislation would give trading
standards officers teeth to take action against more unscrupulous agents who
might be tempted to deceive house buyers.
The legislation will require agencies to disclose a property's faults. If
they fail to do so they face fines of up to Pounds 2,000 in a magistrates'
court or unlimited fines if the case is taken to the crown court.
The Bill does not deal with housebuilders or developers' sales as such.
Buyers are expected to welcome this overdue control on sales hype.
Indeed, Hugh Dunsmore-Hardy, President of the National Association of Estate
Agents, cheers the legislation.
He says: 'It is the small, undesirable minority who bring the whole of the
industry into disrepute who should be worried, and the NAEA is as keen as
anyone to have them outlawed.'
The real question left unanswered by the enthusiasm for additional legal
controls is just how enthusiastic the newly protected buyers will be when
faced with an agency required to list the negatives about their home when
they come to sell?
Consumer protection cuts both ways and, unfashionable as it is to make the
point, it is probable that it is the lawyers who will be the real
beneficiaries of this partial dilution of caveat emptor.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

910420

