FT911-4315

FT  19 APR 91 / Leading Article: A painful shake-out


THERE WAS never any doubt that one of the consequences of a long period of
exceptionally high interest rates, combined with Britain's entry into the
exchange rate mechanism (ERM), would be a massive labour market shake-out.
Even so, an exceptionally dismal set of official figures yesterday,
including the sharpest monthly jump in the seasonally adjusted unemployment
figures on record, indicates that the process is proving more brutal than
many expected.
After a dramatic acceleration in unemployment in the first three months of
this year, there must now be a real risk that unemployment will top 2.5m
well before autumn and that peak unemployment in the present cycle might go
well above 3m. Yet for all the talk of a change in climate in pay
bargaining, average earnings are a long way from showing an adequate
response.
The underlying increase in average earnings is admittedly down by a full
percentage point, to 9 1/4 per cent, since its peak last July. But that
compares with an underlying inflation rate of perhaps 5 per cent by year
end, giving a real rate of increase that looks high when compared with the
prevailing norm in continental Europe. Comparisons with Germany, where the
Bundesbank worries about British-style pay claims from IG Metall, are
irrelevant: the Germans are at a different stage in a cycle that has been
freakishly affected by the shock of unification. The more interesting
yardstick is France, where the trade-off for sharply reducing inflation has
been an unemployment rate averaging more than 10 per cent since the
mid-1980s, when currency realignments went out of fashion.
Competitive disinflation
It may be that the index of average earnings is not wholly representative,
or has yet to capture the more recent signs of moderation in pay
settlements. But the annual rate of increase in underlying average earnings
over the past decade has never fallen below 7 1/2 per cent, which is one
measure of how painful convergence with French inflation rates will be. And
if part of the case for ERM entry is increased competitiveness, convergence
is not enough. The game of competitive disinflation calls for more.
The output index suggests that February's manufacturing output was back to
the level of the second quarter of 1988, which is consistent with a deep and
protracted recession. Unit costs continue to rise faster than average
earnings, pointing to a substantial loss of competitiveness. Yesterday's
unemployment figures suggest that industry now responds more quickly to such
a cold climate than in the past. Against the background of a record
corporate sector financial deficit and exceptionally high real rates of
interest, companies are seeking to restore productivity growth and profit
margins chiefly by shedding labour.
Wage settlements
This torpid adjustment to new circumstances within the ERM carries a
powerful echo of the experiment with money targetry in the early 1980s.
Despite a clear monetary signal, the labour force continues to demand pay
settlements that reflect last year's inflation instead of this year's
financial clamp. Yet the government and most employers remain hostile to any
form of national pay co-ordination.
There are, however, some modest signs that positions are beginning to
soften, most notably the interest recently shown by the Number 10 Policy
Unit in some kind of pay co-ordination. If the monthly unemployment figures
continue to shock, as did yesterday's, that interest may be less readily
stifled in future. What is required is a switch, preferably one agreed by
employers and unions without anything more than a certain amount of
government encouragement, towards forward-looking pay bargaining instead of
the present tacit backward indexation of wages. In the absence of some such
mechanism Britain will be condemned to pay a needlessly high price in
unemployment for price stability. This is one area where Mr John Major could
usefully show that radical ideas have not departed with Mrs Thatcher, even
if they would not necessarily be to the former prime minister's taste.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

910419

