FT911-4067

FT  22 APR 91 / The European Market: Single Community market in gambling is
a long-odds bet - The prospect of placing a cross-border wager post-1992 is
not much of a runner


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   BRUSSELS


PUNTERS BETTING on whether the European Community will have a truly single
market by the end of 1992 would be well advised first to check whether they
can make a cross-border wager. They will not find it easy.
The 1985 White Paper on the single EC market said nothing about harmonising
the myriad national rules fragmenting the European gambling market. Such
regulation has traditionally been been devised either for social reasons or
to raise national tax revenue.
But it is becoming harder to ignore the economic impact of Europe's 'luck
industry', encompassing race betting, football pools, gaming and lotteries,
which chalks up an annual turnover of some Ecu45bn (Pounds 31bn). Brussels
is also receiving increasing complaints from gambling companies seeking to
expand beyond their national boundaries and from governments as eager to
protect tax revenue as their citizens' morals.
So, the European Commission is priming itself with a major study on gambling
being prepared by management consultants Coopers & Lybrand, and trying to
see whether a dash of Euro-regulation is warranted.
Most of the cross-border disputes concern the two biggest money spinners:
National lotteries. These turn over some Ecu17bn a year, of which about
Ecu3bn goes in tax to the 11 EC governments which permit national lotteries.
Curiously for a country which tolerates most other forms of betting, the UK
limits the pay-out on lotteries, effectively restricting them to local
charities.
Football pools operators such as Littlewoods have quashed recent talk of a
national UK lottery by doing a deal with the Treasury. The latter is cutting
the pools betting levy, from 40 per cent to 37.5 per cent, provided all the
saving is put into a trust, which will get Pounds 40m a year from the pools
operators and will fund sports and the arts.
Britain will therefore continue to attract attention from foreign lottery
operators, particularly the Germans whose big money prizes have tremendous
drawing power, even though it is illegal to solicit Britons' participation
in foreign lotteries. Last year UK Customs impounded 3m German lottery
tickets. That cost the German agents some Pounds 2m, and temporarily stopped
the trade. But such policing will not seal the British market off for ever.
Many Danes, Belgians and Dutch already nip into Germany to buy lottery
tickets. These three countries' governments worry about losing tax revenue
to Germany. One option is to follow Luxembourg's example and do a
revenue-sharing deal with the German lottery in return for letting the
latter operate openly in the grand duchy.
Horse race betting. Regulation varies widely, coming under agriculture
ministries in the Netherlands and Italy, the Pari Mutuel Urbain (PMU) state
monopoly in France, and regional governments in Germany. Only Britain and
Ireland allow corporate bookmakers on a big scale.
The ambition of two of these organisations - Ladbrokes and the PMU - to
spread out of their home bases is rocking the status quo. Ladbrokes has
taken the initiative by filing a barrage of complaints against PMU with the
European Commission.
Brussels is now investigating whether the PMU has received illegal state aid
from the French government by means of tax write-offs; whether it is abusing
its dominant position by giving French punters poor service; and whether it
is discriminating against Ladbrokes by refusing to extend to the British
bookmaker in Germany the broadcasting of French races which the PMU already
provides to German bookies.
Ladbrokes is also fighting to establish itself in Germany, where a
loosely-worded federal law against corporations entering bookmaking is being
interpreted differently in the Lander (states). Rhineland-Palatinate has
allowed Ladbrokes in, but North Rhine-Westphalia and Hesse have not.
However, Brussels discounts any special discrimination against Ladbrokes by
the latter two Lander because they bar all corporations from bookmaking.
PMU has countered by contesting Ladbrokes' allegations and by making a
partial entry into Belgium, a market dominated by Tierce Ladbrokes' 900
betting shops. Since last month, PMU punters in northern France can bet on
Belgian races. The PMU appears to be hoping for a change in Belgian law
which would allow it to take Belgian bets on French races, as Ladbrokes can.
Ladbrokes has not yet carried the fight into France, the second biggest EC
horse race betting market after Britain. The PMU could easily fend off such
a challenge if it got the French government to impose on British bookies the
financial conditions under which it operates, according to Mr Frank
McFadden, a former Ladbrokes employee who is writing the Coopers & Lybrand
report for the Commission,
The PMU pays 73 per cent of stake money to punters, 14 per cent in tax to
the government and returns 13 per cent (less its own costs) to its owners,
the French race courses. British bookmakers give punters a better deal,
paying only 8 per cent tax on stake money and 1 per cent to the Levy Board
for the upkeep of race courses. Mr McFadden believes that as profit-making
organisations, British bookmakers could not live with the rake-off demanded
from the PMU.
Governments are generally less allergic to organisations such as Ladbrokes
or PMUs, which establish themselves in the countries where they take bets,
than to companies which solicit bets across borders. One of the largest is
the London-based SSP. Mr Peter Andersson, SSP's managing director, says that
while countries like Britain and France do not allow foreign companies to
advertise for bets, it is almost impossible for them to prevent direct mail
or telephone sales.
Liberalisation of telecommunications and financial services in Europe will
further erode obstacles to cross-border gambling. 'What's to stop me setting
up McFadden Sky Television and, on the pretence of running an English
language educational channel, taking credit card bets on a lottery?' asks Mr
McFadden rhetorically. The 1989 EC directive on trans-frontier broadcasting
was silent on betting.
What ultimately distinguishes gambling from other financial services such as
banking or insurance is that many people think it ought not to expand. Yet
cross-border competition will create growth in gambling, which responds in a
highly elastic way to new products. UK betting turnover has grown 20 per
cent in the four years since satellite broadcasting of races began, while
introduction of a lottery in Ireland barely dented horse betting there.
So the Commission may decide, in the end, that gambling is one sector of the
EC market that should be kept deliberately fragmented.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Illustration (Omitted).

910422

