FT911-4075

FT  22 APR 91 / Indians massacre villagers


   By DAVID HOUSEGO


   MALANGAM, KASHMIR VALLEY


INDIAN security forces tied up and shot seven men and boys, all members of
the same Kashmiri Moslem family, in this remote village at the weekend, in
what seems to have been a calculated act of brutality to deter villagers
from helping Kashmiri separatists.
Villagers who witnessed the killing say that the seven, aged from about 12
to 35, had their hands tied behind their backs lined up against a wall and
shot at about a yard's range by members of the Border Security Force (BSF),
a paramilitary force used in internal security.
Sharif Din, 45, who had been ploughing in a field below, said that the seven
 -who had already been beaten up - died weeping and protesting their
innocence.
The seven bodies were laid out in the courtyard of the police station at
nearby Bandipur where the BSF - identified as 116 Batallion - had taken
them. Skin had been badly torn by the stony tracks over which they had been
pulled. Two boys still had rope around their feet and another was wearing a
shoe, the pair of which we had seen on the mountain.
The BSF reported to the police that the seven had been killed in
'crossfire'. An eighth man had been killed earlier at Malangam on Saturday.
He was Mirza Khan, an area commander of the little-known Al-Buraq militant
group, for whom the security forces had been searching and who was found
with a weapon. At some point, he had taken shelter in the house of Raja Ali,
whose family was questioned and then shot.
The apparently cold-blooded reprisals by the BSF against villagers they
believed to be shielding militants or weapons is further evidence of
breakdown in discipline among Indian forces in Kashmir.
On Friday, Mr Girish Saxena, governor of Kashmir state, said in an interview
that the security forces had been told to use restraint because every excess
won recruits for the militants. 'We are taking every action to ensure that
any ugly incident is not allowed and that excesses are minimised.'
There are signs of more restraint in Srinigar, the capital, but his orders
seem to have had little effect in rural areas where much of the fighting now
is.
India has not allowed Amnesty International to visit Kashmir to investigate
repeated reports of human rights violations. Three weeks ago, Kashmiri
extremists kidnapped two Swedes in Kashmir in an attempt to force Amnesty or
a UN agency to visit the state, in a move that has been widely condemned
here.
As we entered Malangam village late in the afternoon, hundreds of villagers,
almost all men, were gathered on the hillside to bury the body of Mirza
Khan. The BSF had been unable to remove it because they had come under fire
from other militants. The killings had done more to win sympathy for the
separatist cause than almost anything one could imagine.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

910422

