FT911-4191

FT  20 APR 91 / Motoring: Three stars, one winner


   By STUART MARSHALL


BUSINESSMAN'S express was a handy phrase coined when one could drive as fast
as one liked on motorways. Those days have gone, except on Germany's
autobahnen, yet the term persists and manufacturers keep introducing them.
A businessman's express is a saloon car that will transport four people and
luggage in comfort and relative silence at speeds of up to 155 mph (250 kmh)
 -almost twice the 130 kmh (81 mph) French limit.
The three latest are the Vauxhall Lotus Carlton (alias Opel Lotus Omega),
Mercedes-Benz 500E and Ford Scorpio 24v. All are luxuriously trimmed and
much more powerful versions of everyday executive cars.
They get their extra muscle in different ways. The Carlton's 3.6 litre
in-line six is twin turbocharged and intercooled to develop 377 horsepower
against the 204 bhp of the General Motors engine on which it is based.
Mercedes-Benz's solution is the simplest - perhaps the best. A standard 32
valve, 5-litre, 326 horsepower V8 as used in the 500SL is shoehorned under
the bonnet of a 300E saloon. There are no turbochargers or intercoolers,
just an intelligent engine management system to minimise fuel consumption
and exhaust emissions and stop the most leaden footed driver exceeding 155
mph (250 kmh).
Ford, too, eschews turbocharging for its Scorpio 24v. With Cosworth
Engineering it set out to extract as much power from an off-the-shelf 2.9
litre V6 as was compatible with reliability, refinement and driveability.
All three have catalytic converters, use unleaded petrol and meet the
strictest anti-pollution regulations. They have stiffer suspensions, uprated
anti-lock brakes and wider wheels. Vauxhall and Ford have limited slip
differentials, the Mercedes-Benz 500E a full-blown electronic traction
control system.
Mercedes-Benz 500E and Scorpio 24v buyers can only have 4-speed automatic
transmission. The Lotus Carlton has a 6-speed manual box with no automatic
option and bizarre overall gearing. In sixth, 1,000 rpm equals 43 mph (69
kmh). This may make for tranquil cruising but first gear is so high, and the
clutch so heavy, that anyone but a weightlifter would find traffic driving
miserable.
I will not repeat my comments about the Carlton after I drove it last
autumn. its aerodynamic aids make it look as aggressive as a helicopter
gunship. It is the last car most businessmen would want to drive in a city
centre or motorway tailback. In spite of that, 180 orders have been taken.
The 500E is a different car. It is for sophisticated buyers with deep
pockets (or understanding finance directors) who do most of their driving on
the Continent. It is a limited edition assembled by Porsche and only
available with left hand steering.
There is little to show it is not a normal Mercedes 300 except for slightly
lowered suspension and bulging wheel arches to accommodate fat, ultra low
profile tyres. Even though it is good for 155 mph (250 kmh), it is innocent
of the air dams and boot lid spoilers other makers feel are obligatory on
quick (and quite a few not very quick) cars.
The Ford Scorpio 24v, too, gives no outward sign of its extra power (195 bhp
compared with the standard engine's 150 bhp). Though an Inter City 125
express rather than a French TGV among cars, it is good for 140 mph (225
kmh). All one can see are the most discreet of bootlid badges and squat,
short-sidewalled tyres.
By far the best of the three is the 500E. This is as it should be. At Pounds
57,220 with cloth seats it is more than twice the price of a Scorpio (Pounds
27,893 with optional leather), Pounds 8,175 dearer than the hide trimmed
Lotus Carlton (Pounds 49,045). Whether inching along in traffic, cruising
silently on the motorway or devouring miles on cross-country roads, the 500E
was the perfect driving companion. It accelerated like an executive jet and
gave a sense of overwhelming power, always under perfect control.
If the Scorpio 24v did not reach the same heights it was agreeably
responsive and snappy, with an excellent driving position and sharp turn-in
on corners. Being quite high geared it was mechanically relaxed on motorways
though I found the transmission disconcertingly eager to downshift into
third at 80 mph (129 kmh) on slight gradients.
Both Mercedes-Benz 500E and Ford Scorpio illustrate the perils of cosmetic
tyre fitments. The manufacturers seem to think business drivers will feel
cheated if their performance-boosted cars do not have such ultra-wide tyres.
The 500E's squat, 55 series Dunlop D40s give a huge amount of grip, instant
steering response and a surprisingly good ride. Tyre noise is muted, too.
But the downside is what they call 'tramlining'. The wide footprints make
the tyres try to follow tiny imperfections on the road surface. Even on
apparently smooth motorways you can never sit back and let the car follow
its nose.
This lack of straight-line stability is about the 500E's only fault. In
every other respect it is a superlative machine. It is no longer fashionable
to say so, but a large engine and automatic transmission in a chassis
designed for high speed driving are the makings of a really fine car.
The Scorpio's stiff suspension and even fatter 50 series Pirelli P700 tyres
give a driver handling and cornering capability he can not responsibly
exploit off a circuit. There is nothing wrong with the suspension's basic
shock absorbency. But he (I can not imagine any businesswoman being
attracted to such a car) has to put up with an unacceptable level of noise
on all but the smoothest roads.
Even worse is the impossibility of making the Scorpio keep a straight line
on a motorway. I cannot think of any high-performing executive-class car
more fidgety and inclined to tramline. A less aggressive and slimmer tyre
might make the car look less macho. But it would, I am certain, be nicer to
drive.

The Financial Times


London Page XI Photograph Refined performer, Mercedes-Benz 500E, a
medium-sized car with a big engine (Omitted).

910420

