FT911-4343

FT  19 APR 91 / German and Scots groups to build Skye link


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


THE Edinburgh-based Miller Group, in a joint venture with the German company
Dywidag, was yesterday nominated as the Scottish Office's preferred
contractor to build a bridge from Kyle of Lochalsh to Skye at a cost of
Pounds 23m.
The project will be financed by tolls levied for 25 years by a consortium
involving the contractors and Bank of America. These will be based on the
present one-way ferry charges of Pounds 4 for a car, adjusted for inflation.
The bridge will be the first privately financed toll bridge in Scotland.
Trafalgar House is completing a privately financed toll bridge across the
Thames at Dartford and one will be built by John Laing and GTM Entrepose of
France across the Severn.
Miller Group and Dywidag (whose full name is Dyckerdorff & Widmann) beat
Trafalgar House and Morrison Construction in tendering to build the bridge.
They are to build a box-girder bridge made of pre-stressed concrete with a
central span of 250m, making it the largest bridge of its kind in the
northern hemisphere.
A company named Skye Bridge Tolls has been formed to oversee the financing,
construction and operation of the bridge. Bank of America, which is also
involved in the Dartford bridge, will provide finance.
Construction is expected to start next April for completion in April 1995.
As well as finalising a contract with the Scottish Office, the start depends
on parliament passing the new Roads and Street Works Bill which will allow
projects of this kind to go ahead without a separate act of parliament.
Yesterday Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, Scottish Office environment minister,
said he hoped that the tolls would compare favourably with ferry fares.
Miller Group said that opening tolls would be in line with ferry charges,
with discounts for local residents.
Mr James Miller, chairman of Miller Group, said he was confident on the
basis of traffic forecasts that the bridge would pay for itself in 25 years.
At present the ferries carry 450,000 vehicles a year.
The project, which will remove some of the magic of going by sea to Skye,
has been controversial. Although most of the 9,000 residents of the island
believe it will be better than the ferry service operated by the state-owned
Caledonian MacBrayne, which is subject to long delays in the summer, they
object to paying tolls on the proposed bridge. Opponents of the bridge fear
it will irrevocably alter life on Skye.
While the crossing by ferry to Skye takes only four minutes, it transports
visitors to the most magical, as well as the largest, island in the
Hebrides. Thousands of touristscome for the magnificent vistas of lochs,
distant islands and above all the Cuillins, perhaps the most awesome
mountains in Britain.
While the island suffers from high rainfall, which justifiesSkye's
euphemistic title of the 'misty isle', in the summer tourists swarm in
Portree, the island's capital, and the narrow roads.
The people on Skye work at crofting, fishing and farming, as well as in
hotels and tourist shops. However, an increasing number are incomers from
England and southern Scotland. Many have come to retire or escape the modern
world on the other side of the water.
The Scottish Office has said that if Skye were to obtain a toll-free bridge
in the normal course of the roads programme it would have to wait well into
the next century.
Environmentalists have said a bridge would ruin a fine view of the Hebrides
and some proposed building a tunnel. The Scottish Office rejected that idea
as too costly but the height of the bridge was lowered by five metres to 30m
in order to blend better into the scenery.

The Financial Times


London Page 8 Map (Omitted). Photograph Road to the isles, artist's view of
the proposed bridge between the mainland and Skye (Omitted).

910419

