FT911-4110

FT  20 APR 91 / Local group may build HK airport


   By JOHN ELLIOTT


   HONG KONG


A GROUP of Hong Kong's ethnic Chinese property companies is considering
mounting a HKDollars 60bn (Pounds 4.3bn) private-sector bid to build an
international airport in the colony.
The move would circumvent a diplomatic impasse between the UK and China over
the Hong Kong government's own HKDollars 100bn plans.
Mr Gordon Wu, a leading Hong Kong construction entrepreneur who controls
Hopewell Holdings - one of the group discussing the bid - will go to Peking
tomorrow at the invitation of senior Chinese government officials to discuss
the plan. He is expected to meet Mr Lu Ping, Peking's top official with
direct responsibility for Hong Kong affairs, who is at the centre of the
row.
Mr Wu prepared a HKDollars 25bn-HKDollars 30bn private sector plan in 1986
to build an airport with linked port facilities at the Chek Lap Kok site off
Lantau island. This was backed by Mr Li Ka-shing, one of the colony's top
entrepreneurs, who is believed to have been in touch with Mr Wu about the
latest plan. The government turned down the 1986 proposal but chose the same
site for its project.
The move comes when Hong Kong is considering shelving its plans because it
believes China wants an unacceptable control over the project. This could
set a precedent for other areas before China regains sovereignty over Hong
Kong in 1997.
China is concerned about the project's cost and wants to be able to
'examine' all borrowings. Hong Kong regards this as unduly restrictive. Hong
Kong has offered to limit borrowings to HKDollars 10bn and to ensure its
existing HKDollars 73bn fiscal reserves do not drop below HKDollars 25bn by
1997.
The government this week began a contingency plan for expanding the capacity
of the existing single-runway Kai Tak airport if the new plan is shelved.
Kai Tak is severely congested and is expected to reach saturation point in
1993-95. Options include shortening an overnight landing and take-off
curfew, giving preference to wide-bodied aircraft, and improving facilities.
This plan will be considered at an emergency meeting today of the colony's
executive council which is believed to be determined not to give way to
China's demands.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

910420

