FT911-4019

FT  22 APR 91 / Interference: duties and rights


   By IAN DAVIDSON


With appalling swiftness, the Kurdish refugee catastrophe has put the
brilliance of the military victory in the Gulf into a chilling new
perspective. Even before a shot was fired, it was obvious that the UN-backed
coalition was courting political disaster. These fears are now confirmed.
But it is a terrible pity that it has taken the deaths of tens of thousands
of Kurds and Shias to prick the bubble of nave self-satisfaction over what
looked like a surgical military victory.
As US illusions have been shattered, President George Bush has been harshly
criticised for the apparent failure of plans for a new world order. Military
victory seemed to promise a rapid return home for the troops; instead, the
US, with Britain and France, is embarking on a new operation to protect the
Kurdish refugees - one which must be open-ended in time and scope, and will
probably end badly.
Some blame the disaster on military errors in the tactics of war
termination. The US had command of the air, and could have prevented Saddam
Hussein's helicopter massacres of Kurdish and Shia communities. In narrow
terms, this criticism may be well-founded; but it is beside the point.
The point is that the war was likely to start a political chain reaction,
which could not be controlled from outside nor interdicted by military
means. The UN coalition was always confident of military victory against
Iraq, but thereafter it was likely to face two uncomfortable options: it
could take responsibility for the ensuing mess, or it could walk away under
cover of a convenient UN resolution or two.
The least likely scenario was that an efficient war would be followed by an
effective peace; and so it has proved. Victory was quick and total, and the
mess is comprehensive.
Some have compared the Gulf war of 1991 and the Falklands war of 1982. In
both cases an autocratic regime invaded and captured a neighbouring
territory to which it had long laid claim; in both cases the invading power
was breaking international law, and had to be evicted by military force.
The analogy breaks down, however, over a difference of geography: Kuwait
shares a land frontier with Iraq; the Falkland Islands are separated from
Argentina by a large stretch of Atlantic Ocean. British military operations
in 1982 were confined to a restricted zone round the Falklands; once the
Argentines were defeated militarily on the islands, the UK was insulated
from any responsibility for the political fall-out in Argentina by 500km of
open sea.
In the Gulf war, there was no sensible way of evicting Iraq from Kuwait
without carrying the war into Iraqi territory, first by bombing, and then by
invasion; but once the primary military victory was won, and US forces had
come to rest in southern Iraq, they were saddled with significant
responsibility for the local political fall-out. That responsibility could
not be ended by the formal end of the war.
In response to the Kurdish catastrophe and the desperate sufferings of the
refugees, President Mitterrand has put forward a new concept for the
international law books: a 'right of interference' which, on ethical and
humanitarian grounds, should be able to over-ride the domestic sovereignty
of a national state. His moral feelings do him credit; but his proposal is
altogether too modest when set against the reality of the situation on the
ground.
The historic plight of the Kurds antedates the Gulf war by many decades, and
the primary responsibility for their suffering must be laid at the door of
the governments of the region. But since the Kurds' present distress is
directly linked to the Gulf war, the UN coalition has not just a right, but
a moral duty to interfere on their behalf, and perhaps on behalf of the
Iraqi people in general.
Mr Bush is criticised for not delivering his new world order, but the
criticism is unjust. If a UN-authorised war to drive Iraq out of Kuwait is
part of the new world order, then you have to take what comes with it: the
right of force projection comes with the duty of interference. If the
problem is Iraq and Saddam Hussein, then there is no surgical solution.
It is not clear whether Mr John Major has reached, in principle, a similar
conclusion. Yet the British prime minister's plan for safe havens for the
Kurds has carried the duty of interference a long way forward. No matter if
his initial motive was primarily domestic, to rebut accusations of political
weakness; his impulse has nevertheless changed the international agenda.
It is also having a double effect in Europe: it is changing the political
agenda for the Europeans, and it may be changing the European agenda for the
British.
In response to the unification of Germany, Mr Mitterrand insisted that
political union in Europe must go hand in hand with economic and monetary
union, and Chancellor Helmut Kohl was only too ready to agree. But the Gulf
crisis has proved that the stakes in political union are much more than
theoretical, and former great powers such as Britain and France have
demonstrated that they intend to play a world role.
But a world role for these countries is now only possible in the context of,
and with some moral backing from, membership of the European Community. If
Mr Major needs to add some inches to his stature, the Community is the place
that can supply platform soles. He already knows that there are no political
prizes to be won from foot-dragging on economic and monetary union. So maybe
it is better politics to represent the Community, not as the black citadel
of supra-nationality, but as a gleaming fortress to sustain British
greatness.

The Financial Times


London Page 38 Illustration (Omitted).

910422

