FT911-4314

FT  19 APR 91 / Consolidation of counter-revolution: The policy aspects of
the careers of Burns and Middleton


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Sir Terence Burns is the first chief economic adviser to make it to Treasury
permanent secretary. He is, for that matter, the first card-carrying
economist to do so. Nevertheless, there is nothing surprising about the
changes. Sir Terence (or 'Terry', as he is universally known) has had a much
wider range of interests than previous economic advisers, who were expected
to concentrate on the short-term forecasts.
Burns was a policy strategist as well as analyst. (Indeed he was often
referred to as 'Treasury strategists' in reports of non-attributable
briefings). He was understandably more interested in his share of Treasury
administration than in the more arcane minutia of the latest journal
articles; and he was widely respected even by those who disagreed with him.
He would almost certainly have obtained the Number One position had Mrs
Thatcher still been prime minister and Mr Lawson chancellor.
Thus yesterday's announcement is a consolidation. The real revolution - or
rather counter-revolution - goes back to 1979, when Burns was appointed
chief economic adviser at the age of 35 over the heads of many establishment
economists, earning headlines like 'Maggie's most unlikely mandarin'. He was
a miner's son who had grown to distrust the mainstream Keynesian orthodoxy
for pragmatic, not political reasons.
The counter-revolution goes back even further to the mid-1970s, when Sir
Peter Middleton, as a young official, began taking seriously magnitudes like
the money supply and the public sector borrowing requirement. Mr Denis
Healey, who was then Labour chancellor, had a lot of time for Middleton's
heresies, despite his own remarks about 'punk monetarism'. Healey actually
welcomed Middleton's appointment as permanent secretary in 1983.
Nevertheless, with the advent of the Conservative government Middleton and
Burns could move more overtly to the new approach. The main sponsors of the
medium term financial strategy were Sir Geoffrey Howe and Nigel Lawson
rather than the more sceptical Mrs Thatcher.
The reaction against technical monetarism, when inflation nosedived in the
early 1980s, despite sky-high M3 numbers, posed problems for all these
people. But perhaps slightly less for Burns than for Middleton, as the
former had never really been a City-type monetarist and soon devised the
notion of a 'nominal framework' which could encompass either money supply or
exchange rate objectives.
But it left little room for the post-war idea of a government spending its
way into full employment - a notion already discarded by James Callaghan.
However, conversion did not come easily either to the Labour party or to
Conservative 'wets'. Roy Hattersley declared that he would not expect to
work with Burns if he became chancellor. The present shadow chancellor is
far too shrewd to make such statements and would in all probability be glad
to take advantage of Burns's experience.
Burns and Middleton have both been advocates of a strong and stable exchange
rate and of ERM membership for purposes of economic policy. Bu they have not
pretended to be enthusiastic Eurocrats. Unlike many other monetarists, Burns
was always sceptical of floating exchange rates and could live with a
European currency, although he probably feels more culturally drawn to the
US or even Japan than to Europe.
But they regard these ultimate matters as ones for politicians. Middleton,
indeed distanced himself from Lawson's shadowing of the D-Mark as much
because of his belief in prime ministerial decision as for more technical
reasons.
Both men share the credit for establishing a new framework which is likely
to remain whichever party is in power and whoever is chancellor. But
together with the Bank of England and most other economic analysts, they
failed to see the demand inflationary effects of the credit liberalisation
of the 1980s.
Treasury watchers will be interested to see if a new chief economic adviser
is appointed, or whether Burns prefers to advise himself. There would be a
certain cunning in keeping the position vacant until after the next
election. A Labour chancellor will then be able to appoint his own economic
adviser without the bitterness involved in replacing anyone else. A
Conservative or minority government would be able to move up Bill Robinson,
Norman Lamont's personal adviser, or Rachel Lomax, the present deputy chief
Treasury economist, effortlessly into Burns's old job.
Either way we would be back with a happy Treasury, with only the
perversities of the British labour market and outside shocks to disturb it.

The Financial Times


London Page 22 Illustration (Omitted).

910419

