FT911-4335

FT  19 APR 91 / Fall in manufacturing output gathers pace


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff and KEVIN DONE


THE RATE of decline in output by manufacturers appears to be increasing,
underlining concern that the recession is some way from reaching its trough.
Officials at the Central Statistical Office yesterday estimated that
seasonally adjusted output by volume fell in February at an annual rate of 9
per cent, as against the 8 per cent seen in January 1991 and in December
1990.
Since manufacturing production reached a peak a year ago, it has declined in
each subsequent month, mirroring Britain's overall economic decline. In
November last year the CSO's estimate of the year-on-year fall was 6 per
cent and in October the figure was 3 per cent.
Although manufacturing accounts for less than a quarter of overall UK
output, activity in this sector is important because many other areas of the
economy, including services, depend on it. In the three months to February,
manufacturing output fell by 2.1 per cent compared with the previous
quarter. Between January and February the reduction in output was 1.6 per
cent, the biggest fall for three years.
The reduction in factory output was partly offset by increased production by
the energy and water industries, which in the period between December and
February saw a spurt of 0.3 per cent compared with the previous quarter.
This resulted mainly from improved output by the North Sea oil sector,
sparked by an end to maintenance work and by increased demand caused by the
February cold snap.
In February energy and water output expanded by 11 per cent. However, the
rise will probably prove a statistical 'blip' which will not be sustained.
In the three months to February, output by all production industries -
including manufacturing, energy and water - fell 1.5 per cent compared with
the previous quarter.
The decline in manufacturing in recent months has affected virtually all
industries - including the food, drink and tobacco sector which for much of
last year had been relatively buoyant.
Yesterday's figures will increase interest in next month's release by the
government of the manufacturing statistics for March, which could contain
hints of an upturn.
UK car production fell by 2 per cent in March to 123,495, the first monthly
drop in output since July last year, writes Kevin Done.
Export production last month at 60,274 was 85.9 per cent higher than a year
ago, but output for the UK market fell 32.4 per cent to 63,221.

The Financial Times


London Page 10 Photograph Output cools, figures show that the recession is
some way from reaching its trough (Omitted).

910419

