FT911-4164

FT  20 APR 91 / Dollar rises sharply on recovery hopes: Weakness of pound
and D-Mark helps to strengthen US currency


   By PATRICK HARVERSON, KATHARINE CAMPBELL and DAVID MARSH


   NEW YORK, FRANKFURT, BONN


GROWING confidence in the outlook for the US economy and stable domestic
interest rates sent the dollar sharply higher against the world's main
currencies yesterday.
Sterling, already weakened by Thursday's bad UK unemployment and
manufacturing output figures, lost 5 cents to Dollars 1.722 in London and
slipped further in New York to Dollars 1.7215.
The rise in the dollar, which helped to depress share prices on Wall Street,
was partly a reflection of a lower D-Mark. The US currency climbed more than
3 1/2 pfennigs in London to DM1.736, a level it maintained in New York, as
the foreign exchange markets continued to express concern about the effect
of unification on the German economy.
Currency dealers in New York said that international investors remained
hungry for the dollar, which has already appreciated sharply this year,
because they believed the US economy was on the brink of recovery from
recession.
Although economists are divided on how fast the economy will pull out of its
dive, there is a widespread belief on international markets that the worst
of the recession is over.
The dollar is also in demand because investors do not expect any further
cuts in US interest rates. Last week the Federal Reserve, the US central
bank, decided not to ease monetary policy in the wake of government figures
showing the rate of producer and consumer price inflation slowing.
Following that decision, some of the international money that fled the US
during the steady round of interest rate cuts between late 1990 and February
this year has returned, pushing up the dollar in the process.
The absence of central bank intervention yesterday to halt the dollar's rise
added to suspicion in the markets that the US authorities were happy to see
the dollar strengthen. Although other central banks do not like too strong a
dollar - because it puts up the price of imports and feeds inflation into
their economies - the Fed can afford to let the dollar climb because it
helps to keep the lid on US inflation.
Demand for the US currency in New York was further boosted by technical
factors, with dealers and corporate investors moving to cover short
positions in the dollar before the weekend.
The dollar firmed against the D-Mark in spite of a clear reaffirmation by
the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, that monetary policy would be kept
tight in the face of concern over mounting inflationary pressures.
Mr Karl Otto Pohl, Bundesbank president, told an economists' society in
Frankfurt that 'the environment for price stability has recently
deteriorated considerably', with the inference that another interest rate
rise could not be excluded. The Bundesbank last raised official rates at the
end of January.
The German central bank has also clearly become concerned at recent weakness
in the D-Mark as a further potential contributor to higher prices.
Mr Helmut Schlesinger, deputy president, in a television interview described
the German central bank as unhappy with developments in the dollar-D-Mark
exchange rate, although he added that the current situation was not serious
enough to provoke the Bundesbank to act.
Mr Pohl said the sharp contraction in the country's trade surplus
represented a desirable non-inflationary way of accommodating the spurt in
consumer demand arising from German unification. However, the process could
not continue indefinitely without negative effects for the currency and its
anchor role in the European Monetary System.
US officials have repeatedly made clear they would like to see the
Bundesbank ease its restrictive stance but yesterday's remarks from
Bundesbank officials forcefully ruled out the possibility.
Mr Pohl's remarks were clearly for domestic consumption at a crucial moment
in the current wage round. Referring to a 'destabilising' wage policy, he
hinted that inflationary settlements could trigger higher interest rates.
On Wall Street the dollar's strength added to downward pressure on share
prices, with investors selling US multinational stocks because of the
dilutive impact the rising dollar has on their overseas earnings.
Profit-taking in the wake of the market's recent rally, and selling linked
the expiration of stock index futures and options contracts, added to the
downward pressure on US equity prices.
At the close the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down 33.67 at 2,965.59.
 -----------------------------
Pause for thought Page 6
Money Markets Page 11
London Stocks Page 13
World Stocks Page 19
Lex Page 22
 -----------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 1 Graph (Omitted).

910420

