FT911-4093

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: Tessa returns holding firm


   By JOHN AUTHERS


REMEMBER TESSA? Amid much bally-hoo at the beginning of this year, banks and
building societies launched a new range of products, generally at very
attractive rates of interest.
Competition for new accounts is still holding many Tessas at what may be
artificially high levels, while the steady cut in base rates since February
has not been reflected, except in the deals offered by a few banks.
According to Money Facts, which provides the Weekend FT's 'Best Rates for
your Money' (on page III), only two Tessas offered 15 per cent or better
when the scheme was launched.
By mid-February, in spite of a fall in inflation and indications that base
rates were set to fall, 12 Tessa providers were offering 15 per cent or
better. Now, only three of Money Facts' original sample are that high -
Cambridge, Skipton, and National Counties. Abbey National cut to 14 per cent
last week.
Many providers, particularly among the building societies, seem to have been
influenced more by competition than by the prevailing economics of what they
could afford to offer to savers. They could be using Tessas as 'loss
leaders'.
Few accounts have shed as much as the two percentage points that have come
off base rates this year, showing that building societies believe there is
still new custom to be won.
Societies who started more conservatively, with rates in the middle range -
including Halifax and Cheshunt - have increased their rates over the last
three months to strengthen themselves against the competition.
Banks, on the other hand, do not seem to be trying, and tend to offer around
1.5 per cent less than building societies. For example, Lloyds is now
offering 12 per cent, compared to 14.5 per cent at the end of January - a
decline which has actually been faster than the fall in base rates. Other
banks which have recently cut rates include TSB, down a percentage point to
13 per cent, and Ulster, also down a percentage point to 12.5 per cent.
Plainly Tessas do not behave with the classical simplicity of gilts or
mortgages. John Woods, of Money Facts, said: 'If there is a trend, it is
that banks really do not seem to have been prepared to offer very high rates
to get Tessa business. Building societies are holding their rates until at
least the end of this month, if not longer.'
Perhaps investors need not look too carefully at marginal differences in the
interet rate. If a Tessa offers a low initial investment, and low charges if
you wish to transfer, it may be a safer bet.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

910420

