FT911-4089

FT  20 APR 91 / Travel: Purely a cosmetic operation at Copacabana -
Virtually all Rio's inhabitants seem to have perfect bodies. Nicholas
Woodsworth investigates


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


FOR SOME days after I arrived in Rio de Janeiro I wandered about much vexed.
Whether lying on the sand at Ipanema, sipping coconut cocktails at
Copacabana or dancing a midnight samba at the Scala Club, I was confronted
with the same nagging question - how is it that the people of Rio all have
perfect bodies?
It seemed to me unjust. Go to any of the large international tourist hotels
in Rio, sit around the pool, and you will be surrounded by the usual ghastly
mix of grub-white northern flesh: paunchy Britons, saggy Germans, varicosed
Dutchmen, hip-heaving Belgians, thigh-thwacking Americans. No matter how
exotic the background of palm trees and blue water, no matter how skilfully
cut the bathing costume, one can only admit that the more these bodies are
covered, the better theylook.
But walk down to any of Rio's beaches, where the bodies are hardly covered
at all, and you will be struck by a total contrast. On Ipanema, Flamengo,
Botafogo or Copacabana beaches, all the people, rich or poor, black or
white, socialite or slum-dweller, are beautiful.
There are about 15 kilometres of beaches in the city of Rio. They are
approximately 30m wide. On a sunny day (there are few in Rio that aren't)
cariocas, the people of Rio, head en masse for the beach. Among a vast
confusion of towels, parasols, volleyballs, joggers, ice-cream sellers, beer
coolers, musicians, beach bats and delta-wing gliders, there is on average
one prone and skimpily-clad body for every two square metres of sand, or so
it appeared to me.
By my calculation, that makes 750,000 people on the beach on an ordinary
day. The odd thing is that, against all the laws of averages, each and every
one of these bodies is sublimely shaped.
All flesh here is perfect flesh. From forehead to foot it is firm, smooth,
deeply tanned and unmarked by wrinkle, sag or pimple. This being so, there
is a great deal of self-confidence about showing it all off. Each of these
people might have been selected for an underwear advertisement, except that
they are wearing much less than any underwear advert would require.
Men wear bathing suits that would get them arrested elsewhere. The women are
even more striking. If the Brazilian textile industry is in a straitened
condition, it is probably due to them - the bikinis they wear are so lacking
in substance that they are known as fio dental, dental floss. Apart from
three tiny cloth triangles held in strategic frontal positions by cotton
string, there is nothing to them.
While the rest of the world sags ever deeper into an ugly mess of flab and
cellulite, cariocas of all ages continue to wander lithely along the beach,
immune to the effects of gravity or advancing years. Surely there is some
explanation? My scientific curiosity could no longer be held back. I decided
to contact a medical man.
Jose de Gervais is a third-generation member of a distinguished Rio medical
family. A slim and youthful 40, he is a specialist in micro-surgery. These
days, though, his greatest professional pleasure comes from combining
medicine with a love of aesthetics, design and sculpture. He is, in fact,
one of Rio's busiest plastic surgeons.
I met de Gervais and his wife Angela, a psychoanalyst, one evening in their
vast flat overlooking Ipanema. De Gervais had emerged from 10 hours in the
operating room. Nonetheless, such is his passion for his work that over iced
drinks he responded enthusiastically to my doubts and queries about Rio and
its heavenly bodies.
There are, he told me, several factors responsible for Rio's physical state
of grace. Some of them are obvious. First, Brazil is a nation of young
people. More than 70 per cent of the population is under 30 years.
Nor can even the most casual observer fail to notice the effect of local
geography and climate on the way people here live. Rio's balmy tropical
weather, spectacular natural setting, sandy beaches and warm waters all
conspire to create a culture that approaches life in a highly physical
manner. This is a society that lives not by its intellect but for and
through its senses.
Cariocas are a people who pursue pleasure with a determination rarely found
elsewhere. Song, dance, football, carnival and their exuberant sociability
all express a natural sensuality. So does their passion for the beach.
Leaving behind their clothes, this is the one place where cariocas efface
their social and economic identity.
Quite naturally, the vibrancy of this beach culture has given cariocas a
pre-occupation with their bodies. And it is here that a third element, one
of some cunning and duplicity, comes into the picture. If your body begins
to displease you on the beach, all you have to do is change your body.
While Angela poured fresh drinks, Dr de Gervais trained a projector on a
wall. For the next half-hour I looked at slide after slide recording magical
before-and-after transformations: flabby thighs turned firm, tummies made
taut, breasts become bouncy.
Since the 1960s Rio has been the world capital of plastic surgery. More than
300 plastic surgeons make their living there. Business is good. De Gervais
knows 90-year-olds who return regularly every five years for face-lifts. He
has worked on entire families, remaking grandparents, parents, children,
aunts and uncles.
Those cariocas who can afford it, it seems, would as soon have cosmetic
surgery as buy a new dress. 'In Rio,' de Gervais told me, 'we are not afraid
or ashamed of plastic surgery. Everybody believes it can improve their
lives.' In many cases it does. That desirable and sought-after girl from
Ipanema may be everything the song says she is, but chances are she has had
a little help along the way.
I asked de Gervais about the most popular cosmetic operations. Nose jobs, it
appears, are out these days, 'mini-liftings' of the upper face in.
Lyposuction, the removal of localised fat from hips, thighs and upper arms,
is also very popular.
But one part of the female anatomy counts above all else in Rio. 'In
America,' said the doctor, 'there is a fascination with the breast - bigger
is better. Here it is quite different. It is the bottom that matters. If the
breast is small so much the better, one can wear a smaller bikini top. But
if the bottom is small it is very disappointing.'
As he talked, de Gervais leaned out of the window and gazed at the women
strolling along Ipanema. 'I am always too critical,' he said. 'I cannot sit
in a restaurant or at the beach without saying this one needs more cheekbone
or that one needs less hip. In fact, there isn't a woman in the world who
couldn't be improved.'
At this point his wife felt compelled to break in. To my untrained eyes
Angela did not look as if she needed any improvement at all. She said that
the good doctor was always telling her she needed work 'here, here and here'
 -indicating eyebrows, cheeks, jaw-line. 'He keeps insisting, and I keep
refusing.'
The doctor leapt to his own defence. 'But of course] It is only natural.
What I do for other people here I should do also for my wife. Rio, after
all, is not like any other place. Where else in the world is it easier to
operate on one's wife than it is to find a new one?'
Nicholas Woodsworth travelled to Brazil with British Airways, tel:
081-897-4000. In Rio he was the guest of the Rio Sheraton (tel: 274-1122).

The Financial Times


London Page XIII Photograph You need plenty of cheek on Rio's Copacabana
beach (Omitted).

910420

