FT911-4206

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: MI cuts cold calls


   By PHILIP COGGAN


   MI GROUP, the life assurance group, plans to phase out cold calling


unsolicited selling by telephone - by the end of the year, according to
Simon Ingram, chief executive.
Reports that cold calling had already been abandoned were incorrect, as
staff at the Financial Times, who are still approached by MI salesmen, can
vouch.
But Ingram, who took over from the colourful but controversial Trevor
Deaves, says that prospecting by cold calling is not efficient, annoys
potential customers and gives the company a bad image.
Ingram, who had previously been head of the sales force, said that although
MI staff were paid on a commission-only basis, they were not rewarded if the
policy was not maintained for at least two years. This, he said, helped
ensure that clients were not sold inappropriate policies.
MI is hoping to put the cold calling controversy behind it. The key question
an investor should ask about any life company concerns its investment
performance.
Here the company still has plenty of work to do. Many of MI's funds have not
been in existence for long; the Managed fund, for example, was only started
in December 1988 and Finstat figures show that its performance places it
139th out of 183 funds over the two years to April 1.
Of the seven MI funds with ten-year records, all have below average
performance records and four are in the fourth quartile (bottom 25 per
cent). Of the 10 funds with seven-year records, eight have below-average
performance records and three are in the fourth quartile.
Over five years, the record is slightly better. Half are above average and
half below; and there is even a top-quartile performer, the Gilt-Edged Fund.
But it is not a record to inspire investors by any stretch of the
imagination.
MI clients can, also, however link products to a range of funds offered by
outside managers such as Fidelity, Framlington, Gartmore, Henderson and
Perpetual.

The Financial Times


London Page V

910420

