FT911-4208

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: The Mirror enigma - The flotation of a
famous newspaper


   By CLARE PEARSON


IF YOU were going to dream up a company likely to revive the offer for sale
market, long somnolent outside of privatisations, you would probably not
pick Mirror Group Newspapers, part of Robert Maxwell's business empire.
Maxwell will keep slightly more than 50 per cent of MGN shares. His
reputation for unpredictability and secrecy sits oddly with a flotation
aimed at the public.
The company is coming to the market later this month via a part-public offer
and is conducting a full-trimmings marketing campaign. Television
advertisements will feature Mirror cartoon character Andy Capp and columnist
Anne Robinson but readers will not be be favoured over other share
applicants,
It all seems a lot of fuss for a share sale expected to raise at most Pounds
250m, with only about Pounds 80m targeted at private investors. The balance
will be spread thinly between institutions in the UK North America and
continental Europe.
The company has interests in forest products and commercial printing in
North America but its main activity is newspaper publishing, including the
Daily and Sunday Mirror, The People, the Daily Record and the Sunday Mail,
as well as racing and free papers.
From the pathfinder prospectus, which was published this week, it emerges
that these titles are valued at Pounds 625m. This document also demonstrates
the remarkable transformation in their profitability effected under
Maxwell's stewardship.
Pre-tax profits have increased from virtually nothing when Maxwell bought
the company from Reed International in 1984. Last year they rose from Pounds
31.9m to Pounds 53.3m. Operating margins increased from 15.8 to 19.8 per
cent.
The company has been reaping the benefits of Pounds 500m of investment. It
has been at the forefront of colour technology and of clever techniques
which appeal to advertisers, such as inserting and regionalisation.
No-one expects growth in profitability to continue at similar rates. But,
MGN advisers argue, the company has emerged as a firmly-based and
cash-generative business underpinned by a stable readership base, which is
important for tabloids because circulation accounts for a large proportion
of revenue.
Even so, observers believe the pricing of the shares, due to be announced on
April 30, will have to take account of the nervousness, widespread among
institutional investors, over MGN's chairman and majority shareholder.
So look carefully for comments on how the market reacts to the pricing
before deciding whether to apply.

The Financial Times


London Page IV Illustration (Omitted).

910420

