FT911-4183

FT  20 APR 91 / Books: No such thing as a hero


   By STEPHEN AMIDON


THE REDUNDANCY OF COURAGE by Timothy Mo Chatto & Windus Pounds 13.99, 408
pages
IN THESE days of a 'New World Order', it is perhaps as good a time as any to
spare a thought for the woebegone people of East Timor. Located at the end
of the Indonesian archipelago, this small island was brutally annexed 15
years ago by its giant neighbour, just seven days after winning independence
from Portugal. Since then, Indonesia has ruled the purloined island with a
singular ruthlessness - some 200,000 Timorese are reported to have perished.
The West has hardly raised a word of complaint, keen not to alienate
Indonesia's obliging dictator, Suharto. For some, the new order is little
more than the same old song.
The Redundancy of Courage, Timothy Mo's fourth novel, is his attempt to
humanise this catastrophe, to flesh out the moral quandaries inherent in all
such tragedies. Although he has fictionalised the situation by calling the
victors the malais and the vanquished the Danuese, there is little doubt
that Mo's novel is based closely on East Timor, right down to the colourful
berets sported by the conqueror's murderous forces. In it, Mo tells the
story of Adolph Ng, a homosexual Chinese hotelier who is drawn reluctantly
into the conflict. In the days after the malais invasion, Ng literally
accommodates the enemy when his posh resort is used as HQ for an enemy
commander. When Danuese guerrillas raid the hotel, Ng is forced to join
them.
For four years he wanders the hills of Danu with the rag-tag army under the
leadership of the charismatic Osvaldo Oliveira and his dour, pious brother,
Martinho. Ng transforms from an effete nuisance into the guerrilla's leading
sapper, devising booby traps that create havoc among the malais.
Despite the giddiness of these military successes, Ng grows disillusioned
with the rebel cause, particularly after Martinho defects to the enemy and
Osvaldo orchestrates a brutal atrocity against native prisoners. The
hotelier-turned-guerilla is eventually taken captive, saving his skin by
becoming houseboy to the bored wife of a malai colonel. In the end he wins
his freedom with an act of betrayal against the rebels he once fought
beside, ending up wandering various Western cities, having learned the hard
lesson that 'resistance was futile and bravery superfluous', a lesson
tempered only by the thought that there will always be a new generation of
Danuese to carry on the battle.
Despite a wealth of detail, authenticity of character and nobility of
impulse, The Redundancy of Courage never really achieves its necessary
power. It is simply too diffuse to grip the reader, with overly detailed
descriptions of military hardware, meandering pace and Ng's flat narration
combining to bog the story down. Mo also has trouble bringing home the
novel's message, which seems to be that, although courage may be redundant
in facing down certain intractable forces of domination, it does sow the
seeds for future generations to overcome repression and injustice. 'There's
no such thing as a hero,' Ng finally realises, 'only ordinary people asked
extraordinary things in terrible circumstances - and delivering.'
It is a perfectly sound point, though Ng's eleventh hour recognition of it
seems strangely muted, tacked on to this pessimistic story rather than
implicit in it. Precious little that happens to our unpleasant narrator - so
cynical, so bent on saving his own skin - prepares either him or us for this
epiphany. His valedictory sentiments ring hollow, making the novel not quite
as lucid or powerful as its urgent subject requires.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

910420

