FT911-4200

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: The case for gilts - The chances of
future gains for investors


   By SARA WEBB


NEXT Wednesday, the Bank of England will hold its first gilts auction in
nearly three years. The auction is for Pounds 1.2bn of 10 per cent
Conversion stock due 1996 and is part of a much wider programme of gilts
issuance - as the budget deficit forces the government to return to
borrowing.
What does this mean for the private investor? Should he be buying gilts?
Most financial advisers caution against investing in gilts now, but some
think there are still considerable gains to be made in foreign fixed
interest markets.
The gilts market performed well at the end of 1990 and the beginning of this
year as successive cuts in the base rate meant a rise in gilts prices,
providing capital gains for investors. However, financial advisers are more
cautious about the prospects for this market - partly because the supply of
gilts is going to increase over the next couple of years, and partly because
they feel that the gilts market is already discounting the prospect of any
future cuts in interest rates.
According to some estimates, the Bank of England may have to issue up to
Pounds 1bn of gilts a month to meet the Public Sector Borrowing Requirement.
So there is some concern in the gilts market that this flood of new paper
will be rather hard to digest, with the result that gilts prices could be
depressed.
Not everyone subscribes to this view. John Kendall, economist at Baring
Sterling Bonds, points out that it will be some time before the volume of
new issues results in the gilts market reaching its previous peak.
While Simon Corbett, investor adviser at James Capel, is unenthusiastic
about the forthcoming auction of five-year gilts, he points out that clients
who want to receive a regular fixed income should consider gilts of a longer
maturity with coupons of 9 or 10 per cent.
These could provide a good opportunity to lock into a high interest rate,
especially as by this time next year interest rates may have fallen much
further, particularly if inflation has fallen greatly.
However, at the moment some of the highest yielding bonds are those issued
by foreign governments. Government bond markets in the US, Canada, New
Zealand, Australia, Spain and Italy have all performed strongly in recent
months as bond yields have fallen. But which markets are expected to show a
strong return in the coming months?
According to James Leslie of Guinness Flight Global Asset Management, which
runs a couple of global bond funds, Spain, Australia and New Zealand still
provide good opportunities for investors. Interest rates in these countries
have been high in order to keep inflation at bay, but are expected to come
down soon.
'During 1990, interest rates round the world were driven to high levels as
governments sought to stifle inflation resulting from the heady growth of
the 1980s. As a result, the conditions for a sustained decline in both the
level of global inflation and interest rates and a significant advance in
international bond markets are now in place,' says Howard Flight of Guinness
Flight.
Steven Major, a bond analyst with UBS Phillips & Drew, is particularly
bullish about the Spanish and Portuguese bond markets. The Spanish market
has been opened up to foreign investors and withholding tax regulations on
Spanish bonds have been relaxed.
Spain outperformed other bond markets in local currency terms last month and
was one of the top performing markets in the first quarter. Although yields
on Spanish bonds have fallen from 15 per cent to 12 per cent since January,
they could fall still further.
The Portuguese bond market is comparatively small, but Steven Major says
that yields of between 18 and 19 per cent are expected on the new Public
Investment Fund (FIP) government bond which is due to be launched soon.
The problem for the individual investor is that it is not easy to invest in
these small foreign markets, particularly if you only want to place a few
thousand pounds in bonds. The simplest way is to invest in foreign bonds is
through a managed fund, which provides a range of investments.
Several managers run global bond funds including Mercury Asset Management,
Guinness Flight, Commercial Union and Fidelity. But investors should be
aware that fixed interest investments are not entirely risk-free. Bond
prices can fall, and with foreign bonds, exchange rates create an additional
risk.

The Financial Times


London Page V Photograph Chasing a bull market, Spain's performance has been
impressive (Omitted).

910420

