FT911-4209

FT  20 APR 91 / Finance & The Family: Poll tax bills on 'empty' homes -
Casebook


   By JOHN AUTHERS


POLL TAX may be due for abolition but it continues to cause problems for
those who have to pay it. Several problems of interpretation have emerged
concerning the charge levied on homes left unoccupied by the owner for a
matter of months.
The strict rule is that the standard community charge is payable on any
second home other than a charge-payer's sole or main residence. The standard
charge is levied by the authority where the property is, rather than where
the payer lives, and will normally be twice the personal community charge
for that area.
However, the imposition of the charge is more subtle than many people
realise. The Community Charge Registration Officer (CCRO), an official of
the council which levies the charge, has broad powers of discretion to
decide whether a house is an individual's 'sole or main residence'.
The rule of thumb suggested by the Department of the Environment is that if
you live somewhere for more than six months in the year, it should be
counted as your main residence.
This suggests that the reader who let his holiday home for 11 weeks will
have to pay standard community charge on it for the full year. The only
exception would be if the people who stayed there were using it, at the
time, as their main residence. In that case, they would pay community charge
on the property for the period they lived there, and the owners would pay
standard community charge for the rest of the year.
Similar problems afflict expatriates who let their houses. One FT reader was
abroad for the five months following the introduction of poll tax, during
which time the tenant of his house paid the tax. When the reader returned he
was charged for the full year because it had been his sole or main residence
for 12 months, even though he had only been present for five.
The CCRO was acting within his discretion and following the six-month rule
of thumb. The charge is on the person, not the property, according to the
DoE. The fact that the tenant had been paying poll tax for five months did
not affect the owners' liability if, in the CCRO's opinion, he had access to
it as his prime residence throughout the period.
A number of lessons arise from this:
The CCRO has wider and more subtle powers than many people realise. You have
a right of appeal, which should be made to the CCRO at the town hall which
issued the poll tax bill.
Remember the six-month rule. You are likely to pay the charge for a full
year if you lived in a property you owned for more than six months of the
year.
If you are letting a property to someone who will be using it as their sole
or main residence, you might tell them that they should register for the
charge. Otherwise they will cost you extra money. The DoE will expect the
owner to pay the poll tax, unless a tenant has registered the house or flat
as his sole or main residence.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

910420

