FT911-4352

FT  19 APR 91 / Baghdad and UN sign accord to aid Kurd refugees


   By MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS, UN Correspondent


   NEW YORK


IRAQ and the United Nations yesterday agreed on a plan to care for Kurdish
and other refugees and displaced persons in the country through the
establishment of UN-run 'humanitarian centres'.
The accord, disclosed in a 21-point memorandum signed by Mr Ahmed Hussein,
Baghdad's new foreign minister, and Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, the official
in charge of UN humanitarian aid for the region, appeared to create a
potential policy conflict between the world body and the main Western
powers.
Independently of the UN, US, British and French troops are to be deployed in
northern Iraq over Baghdad's objections to feed, shelter and defend the
Kurds fearing Iraqi military reprisals.
The agreement reached grew out of an Iraqi offer to discuss the problem with
UN officials after the Security Council condemned the repressive measures
against Kurds and Shias and called for immediate access to the country for
international relief efforts.
Iraq rejected the resolution and reaffirmed that position in the accord,
which also stressed its sovereignty and the need for non-interference in
Iraqi internal affairs.
However, the government welcomed UN efforts to promote 'the voluntary return
home' of displaced persons and to take humanitarian measures to avert new
outflows of refugees. UN humanitarian centres will be set up wherever needed
and be run by international civilian staff, including the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, with the help also of the Iraqi Red Crescent Society. As well as
providing humanitarian aid, foreign officials will monitor the overall
situation.
'Routes of return' will be set up to ensure safe travel for groups of
refugees returning home, under UN protection.
Provision is made for United Nations aid to be airlifted. Iraqi military and
government officials are committed to facilitate the safe passage of
emergency relief throughout the country.
The government undertakes to help establish UN sub-offices to back-up the
main centres in Iraqi towns.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

910419

