FT911-4024

FT  22 APR 91 / International Bonds: Renewed demand encourages borrowers in
sterling


   By SIMON LONDON


A STEADY supply of sterling denominated bonds has been one of the few
consistent features of the international bond market this year. So far this
year Pounds 4.9bn of non-government sterling bonds have been sold in the
international and domestic bond markets, against Pounds 5.7bn during the
whole of 1990.
This flow of new issues has been supported by renewed international demand
as overseas investment institutions have increased portfolio exposure to
sterling. Enthusiasm has grown as the UK currency's position within the
European exchange rate mechanism has looked more secure.
In recent weeks this process of sterling stock building has been accelerated
by the weakness of the D-Mark on the foreign exchange market. Fears of a
further devaluation in the German currency have prompted defensive buying of
sterling paper by European investors.
European investors have also been extending the duration of their exposure
from short-dated bonds to maturities between five years and 10 years.
This has been matched by disaffection among UK institutional investors with
the longer end of the sterling yield curve. The UK government's funding
programme is overhanging the longer end of the gilts market, against which
Eurosterling bonds are priced.
Hence there has been a convergence of demand from UK and overseas investors
at between five years and 10 years. Borrowers including Sears, National
Westminster Bank, ANZ Bank, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, and
Export-Import Bank of Japan last week tapped this ready pool of demand.
Moreover, fears that the UK government's extensive funding programme will
crowd corporate borrowers out of the market have been partially allayed.
Investment institutions are increasingly looking for value in non-government
or supranational bonds.
There is an increasing body of opinion that the yield spread of corporate
bonds over sovereign paper is no longer an accurate reflection of additional
credit risk - there are bargains to be found.
This has already been reflected in a narrowing of corporate yield spreads in
the secondary market. For example, the yield spread on Trafalgar House's 10
7/8 per cent Pounds 100m bond issue maturing 2014 peaked at 340 basis points
over gilts towards the end of last year and has now narrowed to 270 basis
points.
In the new issues market, it is perhaps significant that both National
Westminster and ANZ could place in total Pounds 160m of 10-year subordinated
paper in the same week. The cost of capital to the banks was high (225 basis
points over gilts for ANZ), but such paper can now be sold in the mainstream
of the market.
Indeed, far from fearing 'crowding out', many analysts regard the return of
the UK government to the bond market as a positive development for corporate
borrowers in sterling. The government funding programme has attracted
attention to the sterling bond market and increased liquidity in the swaps
market.
Overall, the prospects for companies borrowing in sterling appear
favourable. Since many companies are finding it hard to raise committed
funds from banks - themselves short of sterling capital as last week's
issues demonstrate - a receptive sterling bond market could be important.
The question facing corporate treasurers is choosing the correct maturity
and timing for new issues. Without the full support of UK investment
institutions for long-dated bonds, the cost of traditional debenture issues
may be punitive. The long end of the market also faces most competition from
the anticipated flood of government paper.
Yield spreads at the longer maturities are already less attractive than
under 10-years. For example, Halifax Building Society's six-year paper
yields 50 basis points over UK gilts whereas its bonds maturing 2014 yield
180 basis points over gilts.
In addition, fewer corporate treasurers are willing to lock in at current
interest rates for 20 years or more now that sterling is in the ERM. In the
longer-term, ERM disciplines should ensure convergence of European interest
rates and result in lower sterling bond yields.
In contrast, locking into five-year funding with gilts yielding a little
over 10 per cent may seem more attractive. UK interest rates may not fall
much further this year and may even rise again next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 29 Table (Omitted).

910422

