FT911-4318

FT  19 APR 91 / Technology: Little engine goes to Detroit


   By DAVID FISHLOCK


An idea for a type of compact internal combustion engine, developed in
Britain, will be introduced later this month to the US motor industry in
Detroit. Its backers claim that the engine can deliver power from as little
as half the space required by conventional engines of this kind.
For car designers the compact engine offers improvements in aerodynamic
efficiency and a reduction in fuel consumption. Its power density is also
attractive to light aircraft designers and in mobile industrial engines.
In the mid-1970s Brian Collins, then an engineer at the Railway Institute in
Perth, Australia, wanted to simplify the four-stroke engine. He argued that
fewer parts would mean that less can go wrong.
He used a mechanism called the scotch yoke to link the piston in the engine
to the crankshaft. This replaces the usual connecting rod which moves about
a pin, causing the piston to drive the crankshaft and so the wheels. The
scotch yoke allows one end of the rod to be fixed, so the highly stressed
pin is no longer necessary.
'Collins wanted a way of putting a higher volume of engine capacity round a
single crank pin,' says Graham Mountain, technical director of the engine
project. Subsequent development in Britain has shown that the scotch yoke
can reduce engine size and weight by as much as 150lb for an eight-cylinder
engine.
In 1980 Collins formed Collins Motor Corporation (CMC) to develop the new
engine. The central feature of this engine is the strength of the yoke
itself, and its lubricating systems. It comprises a scotch yoke arrangement
with hydrodynamic slider bearings. The slider block is mounted on a
conventional crankpin bearing and therefore orbits in a circular path. The
flat sliding surfaces of the slider block bear on the sliding surfaces of
the yoke assembly, which is attached to the pistons and moves along the
cylinder axis.
Harry Close, an engineer on the board of TNT Shipping and Development, the
chief source of CMC's development funds, has become closely involved in the
problem of transferring the engine technology to the motor industry's
factories. 'We're selling a technology - and people don't really want to buy
a technology,' Close contends.
Its main rivals are high-speed versions of today's engines, and
turbo-charged engines. The design has introduced no new manufacturing
problems, but the bearing design has caused difficulties. Close has a
graveyard of broken components caused by failures in lubrication for sliders
that stop and reverse at the end of each stroke, in a design which needs a
larger bearing area than for the equivalent conventional engine.
CMC has built a family of prototype engines and even installed some in
current car models. But Close says CMC's aim will be to continue as a
technology vendor, further exploring its compact engine not only for the car
industry but also for other markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

910419

