FT911-4175

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: Church episode - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


THE ENTHRONEMENT of the new Archbishop of Canterbury has been more of a news
item than that ceremony usually is, with rumours of pop music and so on -
'like a Cup Final,' said the Rev Leslie Griffiths in Thought for the Day.
Interest in the ceremony and the man at its centre was deeper, I suspect,
than it was in the nature of the Anglican Church itself, which Dr Carey now
heads. Radio 3 has scheduled three programmes in which Dr David Edwards,
Provost of Southwark, examines the influence of The Anglican Communion
around the world.
The first of these, on Wednesday, was a descriptive feature, with relatively
little theological moment. Dr Edwards first examined the church in Kenya. We
heard parts of services in Turkana and in Kakamega; in each of them there
was an element of tribal use. Yet in Turkana and Kakamega, adherence to the
Anglican communion is strong and increasing. African tradition is
incorporated in Kenyan Anglicanism, though not where it is clearly wrong,
like killing twin children at birth. Wrong? 'By our standards' must be the
criterion; Dr Edwards might have found time for this point. Is the church
involved in politics? The death of the Bishop of Eldoret in a motor smash
may not have been accidental.
Then to the Anglican communion in America, the Episcopal Church in the US,
or ECUSA. Whereas the Kenya church tends to be strict, ECUSA is liberal. It
has women priests, bishops even, and will 'marry' gay couples, though the
Episcopal Synod of America (also Anglican) is against all this. The new
Archbishop clearly has a widely varied communion before him.
'Moscow] Moscow]' cries Irina in Chekhov's Three Sisters, but no one tells
us anything about Moscow except that it has two universities. (Chekhov's
life, by the way, is in the good serial now being repeated on Radio 4 on
Wednesdays, Literature is my Mistress, Medicine my Wife.) Radio 3 and 4 make
up for Chekhov's reserve, but in differing ways. Michael Ignatieff, on Radio
4's Grand Tour last week, was as keen as Irina, but with actual knowledge.
He likes the hot-water pipes in the Metro stations, the sexy fur-swathed
girls in the streets, the 'achingly beautiful' 18th-century buildings, the
splendid GUM, a kind of state Sainsbury's. He dined in the Praga restaurant,
where the top floors are for nomenklatura. The whores thronging the hotels
are 'in the service of the state', for they bring in the hard currency.
Ignatieff sees it with the loving eyes of his Russian father.
Christopher Hope's two programmes on Radio 3, on Wednesday and Friday, gave
an alternative view. One constantly felt appraised. The Intourist driver was
still learning his job from tapes. The hotels were like detention-centres;
the floor-lady's greeting was 'Good evening, would you like to sell
something?' Voices came through the ventilation-shaft, including the voices
of a Muslim choir holding a service. At the Praga it was almost impossible
to book a table; when one seemed to be booked, it was reserved for the wrong
day. All customers had to wait for a cancellation to leave room. At the
Skaska, out of town, there was 'no need to book', but after an hour's wait
the place had suddenly become full. I expect Michael Ignatieff had better
contacts.
Radio 4's Classic Serial on Saturdays is a real classic this time, George
Eliot's The Mill on the Floss, made into five hour-long instalments by
Michelene Wandor. If you like the novel, you will like the serial as long as
it goes on like last Sunday's instalment. The Tulliver ensemble were as
enjoyably quarrelsome as Eliot made them. Maggie (Hilary Martin, truly
tiresome) has let Tom's rabbits starve to death, and has just announced that
she will run away and join the gipsies. Tom (Richard Pearce) is a genuinely
good-tempered little boy. We meet all those sisters and their foibles, and
Mr Tulliver (Terry Molloy) has his financial concerns with Mrs Glegg and Mr
Moss. Philip Martin is the director, using lots of suitable Mendelssohn
music. Take it from here.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

910420

