FT911-4043

FT  22 APR 91 / Industry with changes in the pipeline: Process plant
contractors are confident that the latest crisis in a history of booms and
busts is behind them


   By ANDREW BAXTER


WHEN Davy, Britain's biggest independent process plant contractor, was
pushed into selling its German process operations last month, the
transaction was a sharp reminder of the risks inherent in the business.
The sale was triggered by Davy's disastrous Pounds 120m contract to build
Emerald Producer, an oil production platform on which it has already made
provisions for losses of Pounds 70m.
Process plant contracting - designing and building everything from chemical
and pharmaceutical plants to oil rigs and refineries - has always been
risky.
If all goes well with a contract, the profit margin is likely to be between
3 and 5 per cent; if things go disastrously wrong, the contractor can end up
losing 25 per cent of the value of the deal or more.
Despite these risks - graphically illustrated by Davy's problems - UK-based
process plant contractors are confident that the latest crisis in a long
history of booms and busts is behind them.
While other sectors of the economy flourished from 1982 to 1987, markets for
big plants were battered by collapsing oil prices, the Iran-Iraq war and the
Third World debt crisis.
Now the boot is on the other foot. The UK-based contracting industry, the
world's biggest after the US, is watching its counterparts in manufacturing
suffer.
'That's a reflection of the different cycles on which these sorts of
investments are made,' says Mr Michael Milner, director of the British
Chemical Engineering Contractors Association.
'Home office' employment in the UK - designers, managers and other staff but
excluding employees on UK sites - has risen from 14,000-15,000 at the low
point for the industry's fortunes in the mid-1980s to about 22,000, in line
with the last boom at the end of the 1970s.
In an industry which depends crucially on its people skills this is a good
indicator of business conditions. The upturn has been spurred by increased
orders from North Sea clients and - until recently - from the petrochemical
industry, and by worldwide demand for pharmaceutical plants.
The UK outlook remains patchy. Earlier this month the Chemical Industries
Association forecast a 14 per cent fall in new capital spending in 1991-93
compared with 1988-90.
But a wave of rationalisation, changes in ownership and cross-border
link-ups over the past decade have created a much stronger, more
international industry.
Two of the five biggest players in the UK - John Brown and Matthew Hall,
ranked numbers four and five - are owned by broad-based publicly-quoted UK
companies, Trafalgar House and Amec. The two biggest, Bechtel and Foster
Wheeler are of US ownership and origin, and Humphrey & Glasgow, number
three, is US-owned but of UK origin.
The UK industry is attempting to protect itself from downturns by following
a three-pronged strategy, leading in each case towards collaboration deals
or acquisitions:
Gaining access to new markets. The most important is continental Europe,
where acquisitions are necessary to compete against entrenched local
companies such as Technip of France and Italy's Snamprogetti.
Last month Amec, the engineering and property group which owns Matthew Hall,
announced the FFr110m (Pounds 10.9m) purchase of a 20 per cent stake in
Serete, France's leading independent design engineering and construction
management group.
Amec was following in the footsteps of John Brown, Britain's leading
engineering contractor. Over the past decade, John Brown has considerably
expanded its European presence, notably through its 49 per cent stake in
Sofresid, the second biggest French process plant contractor.
Other deals are in the pipeline. Humphreys & Glasgow International, part of
the US company Enserch since 1983, and a venerable name in UK process plant
contracting, is looking at a joint venture in Czechoslovakia.
Broadening the technology base.
In 1989 John Brown, probably the world's leading polyethylene plant
contractor, bought Chemetics, a processing systems specialist, from ICI, and
is now looking at another similar deal, says Mr Allan Gormly, managing
director. 'As a matter of deliberate policy, we are starting to increase our
portfolio of proprietary processes,' he says.
For every takeover there are dozens of working arrangements that often begin
with a particular contract and develop into long-term collaboration. 'The
way we get into Europe is by collaboration,' says Mr Frank Hart, H&G's
managing director. 'Someone like us says to Lurgi (of West Germany) 'You've
got some technology which we can use in the UK, can we work together?' or
vice versa.'
These deals have put the UK contractors roughly in the middle of the world
industry in technology terms - they have more proprietary processes than the
large US contractors but fewer than the more specialised German companies.
Searching for finance. UK companies feel they are at a disadvantage in
arranging export credit for deals. 'The UK is now applying criteria for
creditworthiness that were being thrown out of the window in the 1960s and
1970s,' says Mr Hart.
The solution is to take the search for credit elsewhere. Mr Hart is talking
seriously to Japanese suppliers with readier access to financing. 'To make a
project work you need reputation, technology and finance,' he says.
Such finance opens the door to opportunities in the promising Asia-Pacific
region. Faced with competition there from a growing number of competent
indigenous plant builders, UK contractors have a competitive weapon in their
relatively balanced range of technologies.
Another potentially promising market, eastern Europe, poses different
problems. UK-based groups feel they will find it hard to make an impact in
eastern Germany, because Lurgi and Uhde, the two best-known German
contractors, are owned by Metallgesellschaft and Hoechst, both of which
intend to invest heavily in the east.
Elsewhere in eastern Europe, contractors face the problem of wondering who
to talk to now that centralised purchasing has collapsed.
In coming years, UK contractors are likely to move design work abroad to get
closer to the local contractors with which they will have to co-operate in
Asian markets.
Despite its problems, Davy has made as much progress as any of its rivals in
preparing for these changes. Where it can, it is moving detailed design and
engineering work to its Indian affiliate Davy Powergas, and in February it
inaugurated a South Korean joint venture, marrying its process technology
and project management with Shinwa Engineering's detailed engineering,
procurement and construction skills.
The company's share price, at 134p is less than half its peak in July 1989 -
but double the fire-sale 65p it reached last November. Spie-Batignolles, the
big French construction company, owns 14.5 per cent of Davy, and close to
another 20 per cent is in the hands of three big institutional investors.
The increasing cost of bidding for contracts and the need to share
development spending will lead to a continuing consolidation in the
industry. Davy's misfortunes, coupled with this industry trend, make it
increasingly likely that the company's days as an independent contractor are
numbered.

The Financial Times


London Page 25 Graph (Omitted). Illustration (Omitted).

910422

