FT911-4170

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: This is serious bilge . . .


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


IN CASE some of you have not somehow already heard, John Adams's The Death
of Klinghoffer is the new opera about the 1985 hi-jacking of Achille Lauro
by Palestinian terrorists. Its Brussels premiere on March 19 was reviewed
here by Max Loppert, and now it has begun its tour of the globe. It went on
to Lyon and in due course will visit Brooklyn, Los Angeles and San
Francisco. An opera that might have been dedicated to, and at some points
conceived by, Vanessa Redgrave, it is the kind of serious and important
bilge that everyone should see once.
Everyone involved has their better passages. The composer Adams's most
stirring writing is in his choruses and in some orchestration. The director
Peter Sellars's use of huge live video-screens, showing a singer blown-up as
if on TV documentary (shades of Twyla Tharp's Bad News) is striking. Some of
the librettist Alice Goodman's efforts both at vernacular talk and at
lyrical reflection are more successful than others.
But none of this alters the central emptiness and theatrical ineptitude of
this show. Most of Adams's word-setting is drear; even when you can
sometimes make out words and sentences, you lose the drift of paragraphs.
The use of amplification and synthesiser makes us feel we are no longer at a
live performance. Though Goodman's libretto may be influenced by the Bach
passions and certain opera, she is above such petty matters as laying out a
what-happens-next narrative or developing dramatic tension between
characters. And the hand-jive semaphores that Sellars gives his solo
singers, as in his Magic Flute, have neither dynamic sense nor theatrical
dimension.
In this context it is always a relief to see Mark Morris's choreography,
which alone seems to enjoy such basic aspects of theatre as
characterisation, space, rhythmic variety, gestural force. > He is the
greatest choreographer to be working in opera since Frederick Ashton, but
here he is shackled, and his talent obscured.  Morris's most obvious problem
is the monotony of much of Adams's music. But, at a deeper level, the whole
show - even though Morris has long been involved in the planning of it, with
his Monnaie Dance Group - is anti-Morris: by which I mean it is opposed to
what Morris's best work exemplifies.
Time and again, Morris's choreography has shown that his constant theme is
human diversity. In Dido and Aeneas he was both Dido and Sorceress and the
same dancers played, with brilliant differentiation but not a single change
of costume or make-up, courtiers and witches. The point - no-one could miss
it - is to show just how startlingly various each human being can be. 'I am
large, I contain multitudes' could be his motto.
Klinghoffer, by contrast, is about human uniformity; and makes glib swipes
at the West in so doing. > The Prologue is in three parts: chorus of exiled
Palestinians; American family discussing the news; chorus of exiled Jews.
See? Those exiles - they're all the same.
The un-American sentiments of Klinghoffer are, of course, the work of
American artists. The opera tell you nothing about the Middle East but
plenty about white middle-class liberal American guilt. > It displays much
the same thinking as Sellars's Los Angeles Festival did last summer: 'The
American century is over, Eurocentric culture is dead, let's celebrate 'the
other.'' In context of the events of the last nine months in the Middle
East, it is all the easier to see Klinghoffer for what it is: hollow,
pretentious, effete and phoney.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

910420

