FT911-4142

FT  20 APR 91 / Yugoslav PM devalues by 31% and defends reforms


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


MR ANTE Markovic, Yugoslav prime minister, yesterday announced a 30.7 per
cent devaluation of the dinar, amid rising opposition in the republics to
the federal government.
Addressing the federal parliament, he defended his programme of economic and
political reforms, but said the devaluation - the second in four months -
would compensate for an excess in public spending over the past nine months
equivalent to Dollars 5.4bn. The dinar, which will remain tied to the German
D-mark, will be pegged at 13 dinars to DM1. It was 9:1.
Mr Markovic criticised communist Serbia and Montenegro, and the
independence-minded Slovenia and Croatia, four of the six Yugoslav
republics, for blocking his stabilisation programme. He said the programme
was responsible for the growth of exports, a Dollars 2.43bn surplus in the
balance of payments and the increase of hard currency reserves - which are
about Dollars 6bn - and the convertibility of the dinar.
His speech comes amid fears of an unlikely alliance between the governments
of Serbia and Croatia to topple the prime minister. 'The opponents of the
reform process, who have completely different motives, have almost united
and the decisive battle will take place in this building,' he said in his
televised speech.
He said the republics' political battles had 'paralysed a united Yugoslav
market', stopped trade among the republics, the transformation of
socially-owned property to private property and the restructuring of the
banks.
The republics had exceeded planned public spending, raised wages and adopted
laws which violated the federal constitution, and Serbia and Montenegro had
illegally printed and issued banknotes, he said.
The policies were a result of 'labour pressures or political structures
which want to keep power or social peace. . . which increase inflation and
decrease currency reserves,' he said.
He warned: 'It is realistic to expect a return of inflation until conditions
are created for carrying out the whole programme. The country is not in a
position to bear one more attack of hyperinflation.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

910420

