FT911-4119

FT  20 APR 91 / London market's pause for thought: The Stock Exchange is
consolidating its first-quarter gains


   By BARRY RILEY


This week the London stock market appeared to take a breather. As measured
by the FT-SE 100 index it just failed to emulate the record-setting form of
Wall Street's Dow Jones Average, which closed above the 3,000 resistance
level on Wednesday.
In April the UK stock market has been consolidating its sparkling
first-quarter gains. When the Footsie recorded its all-time closing high of
2,545.3 on April 5 it was showing an improvement of some 19 per cent since
the turn of the year.
Stockbrokers have celebrated the strong leap in turnover. In recent weeks
the London market has often been trading 500m or 600m shares daily, whereas
last autumn 400m represented a good day. Brokers sense a sea-change: 'This
is business as usual, whereas the past couple of years have been quite
abnormal,' says Mr Bill Smith, head of UK equity research at Barclays de
Zoete Wedd.
Interestingly, however, the broadest measure of the London equity market,
the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index with currently 666 constituents, has failed
narrowly so far to breach its old high of July 1987. It was within 0.7 per
cent of that peak on Wednesday, but as much as 24 per cent short if you
allow for inflation since 1987.
These inflation-adjusted figures put the share price surge into some
perspective, and they serve to moderate the impression that the stock market
is booming in the middle of the worst recession in a decade. Indeed, the
statistics of the economic setback this week appeared to give investors
pause for thought: the lure of lower interest rates is no longer enough to
overcome the fears of damage to companies.
Moreover the rise in share prices in recent months has attracted a big
flurry of new share issues. On Tuesday, for example, Hanson launched a
Pounds 500m convertible bond issue and there have been several other
sizeable offerings during the week. Already in mid-April the total of rights
issues is approaching the Pounds 3.4bn recorded for the whole of 1990. In
addition there has been a Pounds 1bn-plus wave of placings by companies of
share stakes as they attempt to turn strategic holdings and bid platforms
into cash.
Rising share prices have only a partial domestic explanation. Above all, the
strength of the UK equity market this year has been part of an international
phenomenon, founded upon Wall Street. It has not been the recovery hopes of
British investors that have been paramount, but rather those of American
share buyers.
From a global point of view the UK market in fact turned in only a slightly
above-average performance in the first quarter, on the basis of the
FT-Actuaries World Index series expressed in local currencies. With a 15.4
per cent capital gain up to March 31 the UK was behind France but a little
ahead of the 14.1 per cent of the US and the 13 per cent of Japan.
If you allow for the relative strength of the dollar and the yen, the UK
slips down the league table: in sterling terms Wall Street scored a 26 per
cent gain and Tokyo was up 20 per cent in the three months.
The US is some way ahead of Britain in its economic cycle. Interest rates
have been falling there for much longer, and have fallen much lower. Hopes
of an early economic recovery are therefore more realistic, although it has
to be said that the ratings of US stocks have become ambitious.
In the UK the year opened with British shares fairly cheap by international
standards, but with investors badly worried by the imminent Gulf war and by
the domestic economic problems. At the same time, British investment
institutions were becoming nervous that their high levels of liquidity might
leave them vulnerable should the market turn up. At the end of 1990 pension
fund portfolios were liquid to the extent of 7 or 8 per cent, the highest
level for years. Altogether the long-term institutions had about Pounds 35bn
sitting on the sidelines.
The scene was therefore set for the triggering of an institutional buying
panic. As the allies stormed through the desert, and Wall Street rocketed,
the London stock market followed suit. Share prices rose 11 per cent in
February alone, and successive cuts in sterling interest rates served to add
fuel to the fire.
Moreover, although some of the worst fears about the state of the British
economy have been realised, with output taking a dive, the news from the
company sector has been dreary rather than disastrous. Savage dividend cuts
have been few and far between, and it begins to look as though average
dividend growth may be no worse than 5 per cent for 1991 as a whole,
compared with the zero that the pessimists were anticipating a few months
ago. True, profits will be down, but if investors are minded to think in
terms of recovery they will not be particularly concerned with the level of
earnings per share at the bottom of a cyclical trough.
Private investors have jumped on to the bandwagon. 'A few weeks ago there
was fierce activity,' says Mr David Jones, chief executive of Sharelink, a
leading private client brokerage. 'Our investors were acting in unison with
the market as a whole.' But this private client business has apparently
slackened off recently.
Unit trust sales have also responded strongly to the market's upturn. Net
investment of Pounds 826m in February was bigger than anything that had been
seen in a single month since before the October 1987 crash. But unit trusts
are bought by life insurance companies as well as private investors, so it
is difficult to be sure about the level of direct participation by small
investors.
'It would be a mistake to think there has been a bonanza,' says Mr Tim
Miller, marketing director of M & G. 'It takes a very long time for people
who have been burned by a collapse like that in 1987 to regain their
confidence.' M&G's sales of personal equity plans were down in 1990-91,
despite a late boost from the market's rally, and that seems to be typical
around the industry.
The change of mood in the stock market has extended to the small company
sector, which had such a bad time last year when there was a swing to big,
safe stocks. The Hoare Govett Smaller Companies Index underperformed the
FT-SE 100 by as much as 15 per cent in 1990, and January this year extended
the same trend. In February, however, investors began to move back into this
illiquid sector, and small company stocks suddenly became scarce: they
outperformed the Footsie by 5 per cent or more in February and March.
Meanwhile the leading stocks have begun to mark time, and the equity market
strategists are preparing for a continuing wave of issues which could reach
Pounds 10bn for the year. According to Mr Smith, pension fund liquidity is
back to 5 per cent, which is within its normal range.
Hazards for later in the year could include further profits disappointments
if the economic recovery proves slow to materialise, and possible election
scares. But in general the City experts believe there will be at least one
more leg to the bull market within the next 18 months or so; all the same,
London may continue to look to Wall Street for leadership.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Illustration (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Table (Omitted).
Chart (Omitted). Chart (Omitted).

910420

