FT911-4050

FT  22 APR 91 / The mystery of German money


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


One minor but conspicuous cost of German unification is the statistical
confusion that has ensued. A leading example concerns the monetary
statistics, which are now being published for the whole of Germany.
Comparisons with a year ago are, however, impossible as monetary unification
only took place last July and it took a little while for the population to
adjust.
Some economists who should have known better have fallen straight into this
trap and have been saying that the German money supply has been growing at
20 per cent, using this figure as part of their campaign against both the
European Monetary System and the goal of European Monetary Union. This
percentage is wholly spurious and results from comparing the broad money
supply for the whole of Germany with that of west Germany alone a year ago.
The Bundesbank's recommended method of assessment is to compare the latest
available all-German figure for February with the average for the fourth
quarter of 1990 and annualise the result. This gives 3.5 per cent growth for
broad money, which is well within the Bundesbank target range. Narrow money
(M1) is not targeted. The best estimate here is 6.1 per cent, little
different for the west German average of the last few years.
Bundesbank analysts warn that the monetary numbers may give too favourable
an impression, as there have been downward distortions due, for instance, to
the dismantling of the former east German trade monopolies. But the
underlying rate of monetary growth is still nowhere near 20 per cent. The
true reasons for concern arise from a broader range of indicators.
For instance the weakness of the German Mark is telling us something. It is
more than the mirror image of dollar strength, as the D-Mark has also fallen
against the yen and been relatively weak inside the EMS currency grid. A
falling exchange rate may be both a symptom of over loose monetary policy
and a direct contributor to inflationary pressures, as experience in
countries such as Britain and France has long shown.
The Bundesbank's fears are still modest by the standards of other countries.
While inflation speeds up, growth is likely to slow down, a typical
experience of any country late in an economic cycle. Wage settlements may be
7 per cent rather than the 6 per cent hoped for early this year. Consumer
price inflation is expected to increase from 2 1/2 to 3 1/2 per cent by the
end of the year - half of the rise reflecting tax increases. But there is a
worry that this forecast may be exceeded and inflation rise to 4 per cent or
slightly above.
There is indeed more than a 50-50 chance that for a few months from this
autumn, headline German inflation rates may exceed headline British rates.
One cringes in advance at the way in which the more partisan UK tabloids
will celebrate. But this completely artificial crossover will reflect
nothing more than the different cyclical positions of the two economies,
plus the deficiencies of the British Retail Prices Index, which produce wild
gyrations around the underlying inflation rate.
A look at underlying cost comparisons might bring even British Conservative
publicists to their senses. Pay costs per unit output have been rising by 2
per cent per annum in German industry compared with a purported 11 per cent
in the UK. The last figure is another British statistical own goal
reflecting an exaggeration of the productivity slowdown normal in recession.
But even if we take 4 1/2 percentage points off the official British
measure, there is no doubt whose underlying inflation is likely to remain
higher. Sterling is unlikely to take over the anchor role from the D-Mark in
the foreseeable future.
So far the Bundesbank has concentrated on fighting unreasonable US demands
for an easing of policy. Even if it has to tighten further, there will still
be scope for other EC countries to narrow or even reverse their interest
rate differentials against Germany instead of following suit. The D-Mark's
sound money reputation is an international public good to be preserved.

The Financial Times


London Page 23 Illustration (Omitted).

910422

