FT911-4213

FT  20 APR 91 / Markets: Analysts call for a return to fundamentals - The
Bottom Line


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


INTEREST RATES have eased, the markets are looking healthier than they have
in a long time, and there is a definite mood of optimism in the air.
But in the aftermath of last year's string of corporate failures fund
managers and analysts alike are raising the call for a more sober assessment
of companies' prospects and the value of their shares than has been
fashionable in the last decade. Fundamental analysis, we are told, is back
in style, even for smaller companies.
The new trend is being heralded by Credit Lyonnais Laing with a study that
looks at smaller companies in the context of their cash flow and debt risk -
two areas that have been largely hidden or ignored by the market in the
heady years of the last decade when all that really mattered was a company's
ability to paint a rosy picture of unlimited growth.
The lesson of the 1980s - as the Accounting Standards Board's recent draft
rules for the reform of company accounts recognises - is that it has clearly
been too easy for UK companies to hide the real state of their finances
behind a jungle of statistics that has eluded not only investors and
analysts but, presumably, professional accountants as well.
'A lot of companies have been able to get around the fact that they are not
generating cash by making acquisitions. With companies that went bad in the
recession, the crack was already there and the recession only brought it out
into the open,' says Sarah Wrigglesworth, smaller companies analyst at
Credit Lyonnais Laing.
Hence the importance of moving from the past bias towards a company's
price/earnings multiple to paying more attention to its cash generative
ability. 'Earnings can be fiddled with,' says Wrigglesworth. Cash flow
cannot.
The ability to generate cash flow is also more critical in a recession when
it is not so easy to borrow from the banks. Companies will need to be able
to finance themselves through organic growth.
This is particularly true for smaller companies, which tend to suffer first
from any economic downturn and credit squeeze and benefit last from any
improvement in borrowing conditions.
Smaller companies' gearing is also twice that of larger companies, while
their interest cover is half that of the larger companies, according to CLL.
The CLL report, which will be published early next week, looks at 39
companies in terms of their funds flow and debt position, highlighting where
each company's finances look constrained and where there is room for
flexibility.
CLL's research has found that the average smaller company trades on an 8
times cash flow multiple against a market average of a 13 times earnings
multiple.
So which are the companies that are financially sound by CLL's analysis,
either because they are sufficiently cash generative or have been successful
at raising funds?
One company that has been successfully generating cash in line with profits
is Rolfe and Nolan, which sells software licenses for the back office
management of futures and options trading.
Rolfe & Nolan has been very cash generative, with trading cash flow rising
from Pounds 110,000 in February, 1987 to Pounds 797,000 last year. Clients
pay an upfront fee, costs are very low and the group is paid by customers
before they have to pay costs.
At the other extreme is Pentos, the bookseller. The group has seen sales
grow strongly but this has been accompanied by a high level of capital
expenditure, which has absorbed cash.
At the same time growing sales has meant a rising stock level which has
increased working capital. Trading cash flow has fallen from a recent peak
of Pounds 10.3m in December 1988 to Pounds 7.6m last year and is expected to
fall further to Pounds 4.8m by the end of this year. Gearing at about 35 per
cent and interest cover at near five times is, nonetheless, still
comfortable.
 ----------------------------------
       SMALL COS INDICES
 ----------------------------------
                           % chg
                           on wk
CSCI      1017.4            +1.0
HGSC*     1245.66           +0.8
As of Apr 18. * Capital gains version
 ----------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II Chart (Omitted).

910420

