FT911-4053

FT  22 APR 91 / Target for discontent: Microsoft has become a focus for
industry ire


   By LOUISE KEHOE


When Microsoft's popular 'Windows' program received a 'Best New Business
Software Product' award at a recent computer software industry event in San
Francisco, the audience of industry executives booed and hissed.
This outburst of public animosity reflects rising resentment towards
Microsoft among its competitors and even some of its partners in the
personal computer industry, who charge that the company is using 'bully
tactics' to expand its dominant position in the market for personal computer
programs.
Industry grumbles have now come to the attention of the US Federal Trade
Commission which has told Microsoft that it is conducting a broad anti-trust
investigation into 'third-party allegations that the company has monopolised
or has attempted to monopolise the market for operating systems, operating
environments, computer software and computer peripherals for personal
computers'.
'I don't believe we are doing anything illegal or unethical,' insists Mr
Mike Hallman, Microsoft president. The commission has not raised any
specific charges, he says, adding that envy of Microsoft's success is behind
much of the criticism. Industry observers agree that there are a lot of
'sour grapes' among those who wish that they could have matched Microsoft's
performance. Certainly, as the world's largest and most profitable computer
software company, Microsoft makes an easy target.
With 1990 revenues of Dollars 1.18bn, Microsoft dominates the market for
programs that run on personal computers. Already for the first three
quarters of fiscal 1991, Microsoft has reported revenues of Dollars 1.3bn.
The company is widely acclaimed as one of the best-managed computer groups,
and PC users clearly have benefited from its dozens of products.
Yet within the computer industry, Microsoft has become the company that
competitors love to hate. Mr Bill Gates, its chairman and founder, receives
much of the blame. At 35, he is an entrepreneurial legend, a self-made
multi-billionaire. Intensely competitive, Mr Gates 'always plays to win '
and to leave the other guy knowing that he has lost', says a long-time
business associate.
Founded in 1975, Microsoft rose to power in the early 1980s as the developer
of MS-DOS, the 'operating system' program that controls the basic functions
 -such as retrieving or saving data - of IBM-compatible personal computers.
Since then, the company has played a pivotal role in the personal computer
industry, in part because of its ties to IBM.
Microsoft has expanded its hold on the systems software market with programs
such as OS/2, a more powerful PC operating system, and 'Windows', which
gives IBM-compatible computers many of the attributes of an Apple Computer's
Macintosh.
But the company has also established itself as the premier supplier of
applications programs - such as word processors and spread sheets - for
Macintosh and as a challenger to market leaders in two of the main segments
of the market for IBM-compatible applications programs.
As Microsoft has grown, so has its power to influence the industry,
particularly in the areas of standards and the direction of technology. But
this power has also bred resentment.
Microsoft 'is like a tall teenager who has yet to achieve the maturity that
goes with his stature', says Mr Dick Williams, president of Digital
Research, a long-time Microsoft competitor. Aggressive sales tactics may
have been acceptable when Microsoft was a 'small, scrappy company', he
suggests, but today 'they have an extremely adverse impact upon all other
players in the industry'.
Even IBM, long Microsoft's closest partner, appears to be distancing itself
from the software company. Last week IBM held a series of seminars to lay
out its future PC operating system strategy. Microsoft played no part in the
presentations.
The long-time allies now acknowledge differences of opinion over the
direction of PC software. While Microsoft is promoting its 'Windows'
program, in combination with DOS, as the operating software of choice for
most PC users, IBM is firmly committed to a new generation of software based
upon OS/2, an operating system that the two companies developed together.
Since Microsoft has an interest in both programs this might appear to be an
'in-house' squabble, but in reality its outcome could determine whether
Microsoft takes control of PC software standards, or cedes that role to IBM.
'IBM intends to deliver OS/2 2.0 . . . that will provide a better DOS than
DOS and a better 'Windows' than 'Windows,'' says Mr James Cannavino, IBM
vice-president in charge of personal computer operations.
In another move that has raised questions about the Microsoft-IBM
'marriage', IBM has recently been licensing PC software from several
Microsoft competitors.
Microsoft's relationships with some other key players in the personal
computer industry are also strained; for instance, the software company is
in the middle of a legal fight with Apple Computer over alleged copyright
infringement of Macintosh software. Hewlett-Packard, the leading supplier of
desk-top computer printers, is also antagonistic. 'Microsoft cares more
about winning than relationships,' charges Mr Doug Carnahan, general manager
of the printing systems group at HP.
Microsoft's strategic relationships last only as long as the company sees an
immediate benefit, according to other industry executives. Its loudest
critics are, however, among its competitors in the market for personal
computer applications programs. They take a dim view of Microsoft's dual
role as both a systems software and applications programs developer.
Critics charge that Microsoft's in-house applications program developers
acquire advanced knowledge of future changes in operating systems and
related software, giving them an unfair advantage over outside competitors.
The company can beat competitors to market with applications programs that
take advantage of new features of the operating systems developed in-house,
competitors complain. Yet even if Microsoft's applications developers do
benefit from advance information about systems software, the company is not
doing anything illegal.
'Microsoft is not unique in developing both systems software and
applications,' Mr Hallman protests. 'IBM, HP, Digital Equipment and Apple do
it too.' Microsoft is, however, the only sizeable PC software company that
straddles both sides of the software market.
'We treat our applications division just like any other software developer,'
adds Mr Hallman. Microsoft holds regular developers' conferences to share
its plans with outside applications programmers, and has a senior executive
in charge of 'developer relations', he points out.
This has not dimmed the dislike of Microsoft among dozens of smaller PC
software companies. Those that attempt to compete head on in the PC
operating systems market claim that the market leader uses 'tie-in pricing',
linking purchases of its applications programs to prices for its operating
systems programs.
Others make claims of being drawn into sharing their product secrets with
Microsoft in licensing or acquisition talks, only to see Microsoft launch a
competing product after the talks have broken down.
To allegations that Microsoft has exploited smaller companies, Mr Hallman
responds that it is difficult to address 'non-specific' charges. 'But we
have a very clear set of guidelines on business practices. We have to deal
with other companies without exploiting those contacts.'
The FTC investigation into Microsoft's business practices could go on for
months, even years, and may lead nowhere. Legal experts say that no evidence
has emerged to suggest that Microsoft is in violation of anti-trust laws. In
the meantime, however, Microsoft may be forced to confront its lack of
popularity in an industry where inter-company relationships are crucial.
'One lesson we have learned,' Mr Hallman acknowledges, 'is that we need to
make sure that we communicate fully with all our partners.'
Another lesson may be that Microsoft must temper its marketing tactics while
it is under the scrutiny of federal regulators. Though it is a midget in the
computer industry as a whole, in the personal computer software industry
Microsoft is a giant. It cannot throw its weight around without being
labelled a bully.

The Financial Times


London Page 22 Illustration Microsoft chairman and founder Bill Gates,
always plays to win (Omitted).

910422

