FT911-4040

FT  22 APR 91 / International Company News: A fixture that sets even tougher
goals - Manchester United prepares for its stock market kick off


   By JANE FULLER


WHILE Manchester United's players prepared for their appearance in
yesterday's Rumbelows League Cup final at Wembley, the head of the business
had a set of even tougher London fixtures.
Mr Martin Edwards, chief executive and holder of just over 50 per cent of
the shares, came to the City last week to seek support for Manchester United
plc's flotation next month.
He was expecting a mixed reception, not surprisingly when Tottenham Hotspur,
the only football club on the main market, has its shares suspended pending
refinancing or a takeover.
Mr Edwards's message is that Manchester United is different.
Although he shies away from analysing the Tottenham debacle, the contrast is
as visible as Paul Gascoigne's tears:
Tottenham floated to relieve debt, United has cash.
Tottenham lost a lot of money by diversifying into clothing, United swears
it will stick to what it knows.
Tottenham has suffered from a part-time approach to management, United
claims to be more professional.
United has, for example, sought the services of Professor Roland Smith,
chairman of British Aerospace and a prolific holder of directorships, as
non-executive chairman.
In hunting for a finance director, it is said to have laid far more stress
on professional rigour and public company experience than on the wearing of
a red and white scarf.
Mr Edwards, a board member since 1970, succeeded his father as the club's
head in 1980 after running the retail side of the family meat business. He
has run the club full-time and looks more like a sober northern businessman
than a footballer manque: not for him the coiffed hair, Riviera tan and
tendency to call women 'sweetheart'.
His conservative demeanor should help with a sale of shares that aims to
raise about Pounds 17m, valuing the company at between Pounds 35m and Pounds
40m. In the process, the directors' holding is set to come down from 76 per
cent to less than 40 per cent and Mr Edwards will receive several million
pounds. He is coy about what he will do with the money, other than paying
off the debt run up to build his stake. About Pounds 7m should come to the
club through the sale of new shares.
The expected value placed on United is way ahead of the Pounds 20m tag
attached to the abortive 1989 takeover offer by Mr Michael Knighton, a
property dealer.
Mr Edwards said the new investors apparently had additional funds available
to complete Old Trafford's redevelopment, but the deal was called off when
doubts arose about the ultimate destination of the shares.
This time the proposal is to go to the stock market to raise about half the
Pounds 12m-Pounds 13m needed to rebuild the Stretford End. Apart from
fulfilling the Taylor report requirement on all-seater stadia, the project
will complete United's complex of restaurants, executive boxes and bars.
Work is set to start in 1992 and be finished by August 1994.
United has picked an ideal time to present its figures and forecasts. It
happens to be in the middle of two excellent years of profit growth.
Substantial increases in revenue from cup runs, price rises and TV fees are
coinciding with a comparative lacuna in spending on facilities and players.
In 1989-90, a profit of Pounds 2.1m (Pounds 1.8m) was knocked back to a
pre-tax loss of Pounds 3.1m by spending on players. This year, which ends on
July 31, profit before tax and transfer fees is forecast to reach Pounds
5.5m with between Pounds 500,000 and Pounds 800,000 coming off for
transfers. Mr Edwards reckoned about a third of the Pounds 5.5m could be
attributed to cup runs.
For next year, United and its merchant bank Henry Ansbacher have been
working on the likely 'core profit', based on league games and the first
round only of domestic cup competitions. The pre-tax figure they have
arrived at is at least Pounds 5m, a near 40 per cent increase.
Mr Edwards says this will be helped by two extra home games from an enlarged
first division and by price rises. Over two years the gate revenue from each
home match, which attracts an average of 44,000 people, could rise from
about Pounds 260,000 to Pounds 400,000.
Assuming a normal tax charge of 35 per cent and 12.5m shares, earnings per
share on a 'core' Pounds 5m would be 26p. If the flotation price was 300p,
the prospective p/e would be 11.5, bang in line with the leisure sector.
The figures also suggest that United's resources would be sufficient to
cover the Pounds 4m it must find for the Stretford End development, after a
Pounds 2m grant from the Football Trust.
But what of the transfer-fee drain? Mr Alex Ferguson, team manager since
1986, has spent at least Pounds 13m on players, offset by about Pounds 8m
sales. The club was, nevertheless, cash positive in July 1990.
Ansbacher says one way to smooth out the impact is to have a reserve fund to
which money is transferred below the line. It would be fed from 'non-core'
money made in cup competitions.
Tottenham's method of putting players on the balance sheet and depreciating
them is not favoured. Working out the potential residual value of a human
has its complications, and United was also wary of possible changes in rules
governing transfers.
Mr Edwards said United would try to limit the expense of team building by
bringing on more of its own players. But following two seasons of cup
success, he could also relate the investment to considerable extra earnings.
It all sounds hunky dory, but the uncertainty of such runs is reflected in
their exclusion from core profit. And to present a steadier picture, Mr
Edwards draws attention to the less glamorous revenue from catering and
souvenirs.
For the sport's sake, the hope is that United will at long last show that
football can be a sound investment, laying to rest some of the ghosts raised
by Tottenham.

The Financial Times


London Page 26 Photograph Martin Edwards, United's chief executive and
holder of some 50 per cent of the shares (Omitted).

910422

