FT911-4313

FT  19 APR 91 / Chief of troubled NatWest Investment Bank resigns


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE unexpected resignation was announced yesterday of Mr Howard Macdonald,
the chairman and chief executive of NatWest Investment Bank, the troubled
subsidiary of National Westminster Bank.
The sudden departure of Mr Macdonald, one of the City's highest-paid bankers
last year, comes after a warning from Lord Alexander, the NatWest chairman,
that the investment bank has two years to return a profit on its securities
business or face closure.
NatWest sought yesterday to depict Mr Macdonald's resignation as a natural
progression in the development of NWIB. But coming after only two years, it
marks a further severe blow to the bank's senior management.
Formed to take advantage of the City's Big Bang reforms in 1986, NatWest
lost its first chairman and its first chief executive, Mr Charles Villiers
and Mr Jonathan Cohen, after losses experienced in 1987. Both face criminal
charges, alongside NWIB, over the way the failure of a rights issue for Blue
Arrow, the employment group, was not disclosed to the stock market in 1987.
Their successor, Mr Terry Green, a NatWest director who ran the investment
bank for a year, was later forced to resign following a critical Department
of Trade and Industry report into the Blue Arrow affair.
Mr Macdonald, a Scot whose background was in the oil industry, was brought
in to rebuild the bank's senior management and to bring it through the
traumatic aftermath of Blue Arrow. His departure after two years appears to
leave that job incomplete.
But in a statement yesterday Lord Alexander said: 'Mr Macdonald has
completed the task for which he was appointed and he has been successful in
introducing the procedures and the senior personnel necessary for putting
NWIB on a firm footing for the future.'
Mr Macdonald is replaced as chairman by Sir Geoffrey Littler, 60, whom he
recruited from the Treasury two years ago. The new chief executive will be
Mr John Drury, a 39-year-old Australian who joined the bank last year from
Capel Court Investment Bank.
Sir Geoffrey suggested yesterday that Mr Macdonald had been looking for the
right moment to leave, after a 'wearing' two years during which he had coped
with the backlash from clients to the Blue Arrow charges, and with a slump
in the securities markets.
NWIB plunged to a Pounds 49m loss last year, because of losses in its
equities division. That brought its losses in its six years of operations to
a total of Pounds 275m. The bank has said that its securities operations
were profitable in the first quarter of this year, thanks to the upturn in
securities markets.
Mr Macdonald's income has made headlines in recent weeks, and is thought to
have caused resentment at a time when NWIB is struggling to cut costs. He
was paid Pounds 497,612 in 1990, a 60 per cent increase from 1989. Most of
the increase was because of a delayed bonus relating to 1989, rather than
being related to the bank's performance last year.
Markets 'misled' Page 11Cautious strategy Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 24

910419

