FT911-4060

FT  22 APR 91 / Management: Bulletin Board


   By LISA WOOD and JAMES BUXTON


The Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) has launched a campaign to
educate its 7,500 members about National Vocational Qualifications, writes
Lisa Wood.
'Eventually the travel industry will have a range of NVQs for all the travel
and tourism related sectors,' says the ABTA National Training Board; it has
assessed and set standards for the NVQs and has incorporated the Certificate
of Travel Agents Competency (COTAC), the original basic educational
qualifications for the industry.
No qualifications are necessary to become a travel agent although ABTA
members must have one individual in each branch who has a COTAC
qualification plus 18 months' relevant experience.
Take-up of COTAC qualifications traditionally has been 'fairly low'
according to the ABTA training board, with personality and ability to sell
to travellers considered by many employers to be more important than
qualifications. The travel industry is, however, the seventh largest
provider of Youth Training (YT), funding of which is increasingly becoming
dependent on the acquisition of NVQs.
The range of NVQs for the travel industry include:
Level 2 for travel agents which takes in COTAC 1 (Air and General) together
with Travel Agency Tasks from June 1991.
Level 3 for travel agents which takes in COTAC 2 (Air and General) together
with Supervisory Skills from June.
Level 4 for agency managers which takes in the Certificate of Travel Agency
Management plus suitable experience.
The NTB is currently working on an NVQ level 1 qualification for entrants to
the travel industry.
An extra Pounds 16m has been allocated by the government for intensive
occupational training in high technology.
This sum will be used as part of the Department of Employment's programme of
High Technology National Training which forms part of the Employment
Training.
The courses of intensive professional level training leading to Higher
National Certificate or postgraduate level qualifications will be run at
Colleges of Further Education and Higher Education Institutions throughout
the UK.
The Department of Employment says the courses would provide opportunities
for people who would otherwise be unemployed. The courses selected are
intended to meet a skill shortage, lead to vocational qualifications at HNC
up to postgraduate level and include an industrial placement with an
employer.
The Pounds 16m will fund 327 courses and provide 5,100 training places.
According to Robert Jackson, the employment minister, 'these courses will
play a vital role in the government's strategy to provide excellent
opportunities for unemployed people to obtain high level qualifications.'
The British Institute of Innkeeping is hoping that magistrates will take
greater account of training and qualifications before they grant licences to
potential new publicans.
The move, endorsed by the governing council of the Institute, is the first
clear call by the licensed trade's professional body for increased attention
to be given to standards of entry.
The Institute, with its series of induction, qualifying and membership
examinations said it had established a proper infrastructure for progressive
professional career development. It said that with the running of public
houses increasingly acknowledged as a complicated balancing act of
commercial business pressures and recognised social responsibilities, the
Institute was keen to see that improved standards were both encouraged and
fostered through minimum training requirements.
A significant number of former Training Agency staff have either rejected
offers to work for Scottish Enterprise (SE), the new body which, with local
enterprise companies (Lecs), is responsible for training and enterprise
development in Scotland, writes James Buxton.
SE, which came into existence this month, has replaced the Scottish
Development Agency and the Training Agency (TA) as the parent body of 13 new
local enterprise companies in Scotland outside the Highlands. It has no
equivalent among the Tecs in England.
Of the 701 TA staff in Scotland who were offered positions with SE, 482 have
accepted posts either with the parent body or the Lecs, either leaving the
civil service or joining SE on secondment. Some 197 have refused to join SE
and a further 22 are still undecided. Of 641 former SDA staff, 600 have
accepted jobs with SE or Lecs.
TA staff are offered the choice of leaving the civil service for SE or
joining SE on a three-year secondment, an arrangement which some Lec chief
executives have criticised. 'It was a sensible arrangement for TA staff
joining Tecs in England where there is no central body like SE,' says one,
'but here it just complicates matters creating two categories of staff.'
The SE core should have an establishment of between 410 and 420 people but
60-70 posts are still unfilled.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

910422

