FT911-4351

FT  19 APR 91 / Bush education initiative seeks national testing


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday unveiled plans for a national voluntary
system of examinations as part of an ambitious strategy for raising the
quality of American education, writes Michael Prowse.
Mr Bush said his 'America 2000 Strategy', which builds on educational goals
agreed jointly with state governors in 1989, would create a 'new generation
of schools' for tomorrow's students while making existing schools 'better
and more accountable'.
The 34-page blueprint devised by Mr Lamar Alexander, education secretary,
contains 'bold, complex and long-range' reforms that will require change in
every American community and home.
The most controversial element is likely to be a voluntary national
examination system, called American Achievement Tests, which will lay down
requirements in the core subjects of English, mathematics, science, history
and geography. National and state report cards will help parents monitor
their children's achievement.
The plan also envisages the creation of a business financed non-profit
organisation - the New American Schools Development Corperation - that would
award contracts for the development of non-traditional types of school.
Research and development teams could include companies, universities,
think-tanks, management consultants and others. There will be limited
federal support for the start up costs of 535 new-style schools.
New incentives to encourage choice in education are also a main plank of the
new strategy. The administration wants states and localities to give parents
greater freedom to choose schools. It proposes restructuring federal
assistance for disadvantaged pupils so that cash follows students to the
school of their choice.
The administration also intends to boost vocational education by encouraging
business and labour to devise job-related skill standards and 'skill
certificates'. But industry standards will be voluntary.
The proposals for national tests are likely to attract the most vocal
opposition. States and localities, which have primary responsibility for
education, have jealously guarded their independence in the past.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

910419

