FT911-4193

FT  20 APR 91 / Motoring: The lager louts of the press - As they say in
Europe


   By JAMES MORGAN


THE BRITISH are often seen as the lager louts of the international press
corps. At this week's inauguration of the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development that sentiment gained further currency among officials who
felt the new bank was roughly handled by the UK media.
There was a certain lack of respect for idealistic ambition and a philistine
inclination to sneer at the elegant ideological constructs of better
educated races. In fact the official newspaper of the conference, Conference
News, even managed to get itself banned for sneering at Jacques Attali, the
president of EBRD.
In France things are different. Le Monde headlined its editorial 'A Bank for
Europe.' It pointed out that the idea was French and that it had been put
together in a mere 18 months. Providing certain conditions were met, 'The
bank will play an extremely positive role as a 'catalyser' of funds.'
But the British are not alone. In the leading Italian business paper, Il
Sole 24 Ore, Alessandro Merli wrote that the EBRD, 'Was born of the Gallic
imagination, typically inclined to grandiose projects, of Jacques Attali,
the intellectual and former adviser to President Mitterrand, and now head of
the bank.' In the face of the hype, John Major, the British prime minister,
'had made a few simple observations. The west could not instill by its own
will reform in the east.' And the Bank had to put 60 per cent of its money
into private enterprise 'which is small and could suffocate in the fresh air
of competition.'
Signor Merli used a light touch of the rapier. His German opposite number,
Klaus Engelen of Handeslblatt, adopted an altogether rougher approach. He
quoted Georg Krupp, a Deutsche Bank director, who said: 'The East Europe
Bank must itself first find out what it is to do.' Engelen continued: 'So it
is with all unwanted children. Once it is there, it has to be accepted and
cared for.'
The Germans have never quite got over the Anglo-French carve-up which
ensured a Frenchman ran the bank in London. They always wanted Onno Ruding,
the solid Dutch finance minister, to be in charge.
But the French have won another victory - in Czechoslovakia at least. There
the EBRD is known by its French initials, BERD, and its arrival was
acclaimed by the intellectual Prague daily Lidove Noviny under the heading
'Attali - Man with a Vision.'
'It is the first pan-European institution where all the countries of the
continent will sit as equal,' the paper said.
But in Slovakia things are a little different. There the papers argue that
free markets are all very well for the Czechs but not the Slovaks, who
depended heavily on arms exports under the Communists. So it is that the
Slovak Communist Party can enjoy a modest level of popularity as its
newspaper, unoriginally called Pravda, is able to satirise the new system in
some rather funny cartoons.
There is a general search for an alternative to capitalism that isn't
socialist. In Zagreb last week I picked up a copy of Nedeljna Dalmacija, the
kind of newspaper one never sees outside its local region. In it a Tihomil
Radja suggested that Croatia's problems could be solved by a return to a
system 'that hasn't been known for 50 years - mortgages.' Croatia's foreign
debt of Dollars 2.9bn could be paid off by mortgaging Croatia. And money
would pour in for it would be based 'on the soundest asset of all -
property.' This model also fulfilled a particular need for the part of the
world - allowing a highly decentralised economy. There seem to be a few
problems; for example it is not possible for foreigners to own property in
Yugoslavia. This might discourage potential mortgage holders, so I fear the
EBRD will have a hard job getting its message across in some client
countries.
The relationship between Hamburg's heavyweight, Die Zeit, and 'Tory Party
General Secretary Chris Patten' continues to blossom with another half page
on the 'Architect of Renewal.' Patten has recently shown himself a devotee
of the social market economy as practised by the ruling Christian Democrats
in Bonn.
The Germans are always glad to find a foreigner whose interest in them lies
outside the period from 1933 to 1945, but Patten may not be entirely
grateful for this interest. His admirer, Jurgen Kronig writes: 'The contrast
with his predecessor Kenneth Baker could not be sharper: Baker operated
rather greasily, preferring to play on the keyboard of demagogy which really
pleased only the faithful.'
Which brings me naturally to the answer to the competition of three weeks
ago Nobody won. Le Monde had noted the unwitting contribution the new
British government had made to European Unity. What was it? It was the
increase in VAT to 17.5 per cent which meant that Britain was no longer
among the low VAT countries.
This ensures that the vision of Nigel Lawson, the former UK chancellor, of
Community tax harmonisation through competition, has been blown apart.
Lawson saw Britain's low VAT-regime as a model for others and feared
Brussels would impose higher rates, given half a chance.
James Morgan is Economics Correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

910420

