FT911-4104

FT  20 APR 91 / Oftel may clarify telecoms policy


   By HUGO DIXON


CONFUSION over the future of Britain's telecommunications has forced Oftel,
the industry's watchdog, to consider producing a document to clarify
matters.
Much of last month's white paper outlining government policy was complicated
and, in some cases, imprecise, giving the appearance that it had been rushed
out - some say, in order that the government could proceed with its sale of
more British Telecom shares.
The white paper - by Oftel and Mr Peter Lilley's Department of Trade and
Industry - announced that the BT/Mercury Communications duopoly would be
abolished and the Pounds 10bn-a-year market thrown open to new competitors.
Many important details about how this policy would be implemented were left
for Sir Bryan Carsberg, director general of Oftel, to decide at a later
date.
BT's competitors have been particularly incensed by proposals for how much
they will have to pay for connecting their networks to BT's. Personal
communications networks (PCN), the next generation of mobile communications,
and cable television companies argue that they are going to be charged too
much. The competitors are angry that Oftel is planning to fix
inter-connection rates on the basis of BT's historic costs, a move which
they say will penalise them for the company's past inefficiencies.
They are also opposed to the idea that they should help pay for BT's losses
on renting lines to its customers via a surcharge known as the 'access line
deficit'. Oftel has proposed this surcharge to prevent new competitors
taking the most profitable parts of the market.
But Mr Alan Harper, business strategy director of Unitel, one of the PCN
operators, said BT had the best of both worlds: 'They have 98 per cent of
the customer base and want us to pay for them. If they don't want these
local operations, let them give them to the cable companies or the PCN
operators.'
Mr Harper attacked the fact that inter-connection rates would be determined
in behind-closed-doors talks between Oftel and BT because the watchdog had
decided not to reveal confidential information about the company.
Sir Bryan said Oftel had no comment to make at present on the
inter-connection dispute except that he would consider representations.
Oftel also confirmed that he might bring out a clarification document.
Other issues requiring clarification include whether the international
duopoly has been abolished and whether 'equal access', which would allow
customers to choose between rival long-distance services by dialling
different codes, will be introduced.

The Financial Times


London Page 22 Photograph Sir Bryan, no comment on inter-connection dispute
(Omitted).

910420

