FT911-4219

FT  20 APR 91 / World Stock Markets: Consensus forecasts in conflict with
strategy - Earnings, and precedent


   By PETER MARTIN


IN TERMS of forecast earnings, most of the world's big equity markets are
clearly overvalued, according to the IBES team at the New York broker Jones
Lynch and Ryan.
IBES spends its time gathering consensus earnings forecasts from brokers'
analysts around the world. Its latest caulculations, as at the end of March,
reflect the bull market that followed the start of fighting in the Gulf war.
Setting earnings estimates for the next 12 months against current equity
prices and interest rates, IBES calculates that the Canadian, German,
Italian, UK and US stock markets are as high as at any time in the past
three years. The Japanese market is not quite so steeply priced, says IBES,
but of the seven biggest industrial countries, only the French market still
seems to offer good value.
Not everyone shares the view that the world's stock markets are mostly
marching together into dangerous territory. Still, even the most
enthusiastic bull might be given a moment's pause by the IBES prospective
price earnings ratios. The prospective world p/e is now 13 (excluding
Japan); Germany and Italy are at 15, Canada at 14 1/2 , the US at 14 and
Japan, with its historically high-growth expectations, at 39. Only the UK
and France - at 11 1/2 and 10 respectively - are more reasonably priced. Two
months ago, 12 of the 26 countries IBES follows had single-digit p/es, with
four below 8. Now, only five have p/es in single figures, with only New
Zealand still below 8 (at 7).
Those who are still bullish have their own set of numbers to point to. Mr
Joe Rooney, European strategist at James Capel, is recommending an
overweight position in continental European equities - based in part on
analysis of how bull markets have developed in the past two decades.
Comparing the first three months of any rally with the next 12 months, Mr
Rooney concludes that, for most big continental markets, the gains in the
second period far outstrip the gains in the first. In Germany, for example,
the average gain in the first three months of a bull market has been 14 per
cent; the average gains in the next 12 months has been 28 per cent. In
France, the numbers are 17 per cent and 27 per cent respectively.
That leads Mr Rooney to the conclusion that though the gains in the first
three months of the current rally have been stronger than average  - 21 per
cent in the German DAX index, for example, and 25 per cent in France's
CAC-40 - there is still some way to go for continental markets overall.
Indeed, one notable pessimist has changed his tune in recent weeks, on the
German market at least. Morgan Stanley's European strategist David Roche -
who was afraid at one point in the rally that his unrelievedly gloomy views
might force him to be one of the first post-perestroika defectors to the
Soviet Union - has started recommending German shares for the first time in
months.
His argument is that the bad news on the costs of east German reconstruction
is now in the price; and that Germany is likely to be the only country
where, over the next few years, the share of national income devoted to
profits grows as the share devoted to wages shrinks.
Put more baldly, his view of the German market can be summed up in three
words: 'laggards catch up' - and the DAX is still, at present prices,
lagging nearly 19 per cent behind its peak a year ago and 9 per cent behind
the FT-SE Eurotrack 100's performance since the rally started in
mid-January.
In some eyes, of course, that is exactly where it deserves to be. Mr Julian
Target, European strategist at Baring Securities in London, says 'a new
Wirtschaftwunder just isn't going to happen in eastern Germany'.
One reason: after the Second World War there was no home market in Germany
and a cheap D-Mark - so the obvious outlet for entrepreneurial energies was
the export of manufactures. Today, there is a huge domestic market and a
dear D-Mark, so it makes more sense for entrepreneurs to go into the
services sector.
'Germany is turning into an Anglo-Saxon style consumption-led economy,' says
Mr Target; and that is bearish for the big publicly quoted manufacturing
stocks. He recommends the Austrian market as an alternative for those
seeking Germanic virtues in their investments.
In the background to all the European markets has been the strong rise on
Wall Street, reflected symbolically this week in the Dow-Jones Industrial
Average's passage through the 3,000 mark for the first time.
On most measures, Wall Street is now more exposed than other major markets,
with US bonds looking markedly better value than equities. Yet, as Mr Peter
Lyon of Smith New Court in London points out, in the US as elsewhere the
signs that normally accompany a market top - rapid economic growth, for
example, or a sharp rise in commodity prices - are not present.
'If the global economy goes on decelerating', he says, 'this contradiction
could be resolved by better bond markets rather than weaker equities'.
Though the scope for lower bond yields is less in the US than elsewhere, he
still believes that long-term dollar interest rates have further to fall.
If the US market is now about to pause, the worldwide bull market may
splinter. Instead of marching up together, global equity markets may soon be
following their own paths - raising the rewards of picking markets, but
adding to the risks.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

910420

