FT911-4362

FT  19 APR 91 / States resist Pohl plan to slim Bundesbank


   By DAVID MARSH


   BONN


A SIMMERING dispute over the future of the German Bundesbank flared up
yesterday when reform proposals from Mr Karl Otto Pohl, the central bank
president, came under unusual direct attack from two regional Bundesbank
board members.
The outcome of the row, which is over Mr Pohl's wish to slim the bank's
unwieldy decision-making apparatus by closing some regional central banks,
will have an impact on Germany's policies regarding European monetary union.
The desire of German federal states (Lander) to maintain some influence over
domestic monetary policy indicates the scale of political misgivings about
eventually giving up currency sovereignty to a European central bank.
Mr Heinrich Schreiner and Mr Norbert Kloten, the presidents of the
Rhineland-Palatinate and Baden-Wurttemberg central banks, criticised Mr
Pohl's plans in separate newspaper articles in what Bundesbank officials
said was an increasingly evident spirit of 'rebellion' within the ranks of
the 18-man policy-making Bundesbank council.
The council decides the main elements of German monetary policy, above all
changes in the discount and Lombard rates. It groups 11 regional central
bank presidents and seven Frankfurt-based directorate members.
The council has been divided for several months over Mr Pohl's proposals to
cut the number of regional central banks to eight in united Germany from the
present 11 in west Germany. The restructuring, requiring new legislation by
October, results from unification with east Germany.
Increasing the uncertainty, Bonn has so far failed to decide whether to
support Mr Pohl's streamlining plans or to support Lander proposals to set
up five new central banks for the east German states.
A government official said Mr Kohl would have to make a decision, after
talks with Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, in the next four or five
weeks. 'This is a considerable problem - there is a conflict between the
Bundesbank and the Bundesrat (the upper house of parliament representing the
federal states),' the official said.
Mr Schreiner, the president of the Rhineland-Palatinate's central bank,
suggested in an article in the economic daily Handelsblatt that the smaller
central bank council favoured by Mr Pohl and other directorate members would
increase the Bundesbank's susceptibility to political pressure.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

910419

