FT911-4340

FT  19 APR 91 / Labour-market road still seeks a turning: The jobless
figures offer more than just milestones in the recession


   By RACHEL JOHNSON


YESTERDAY'S unemployment figures offered more than just milestones in
labour-market history. With their clear message that unemployment has yet to
peak, they provided a strong antidote to hopeful talk of the recession
bottoming out.
First, the milestones: The 113,000 monthly rise (to 2.1m) in seasonally
adjusted unemployment in March was the biggest since records began 20 years
ago; it was the first time the jobless total has passed 2m since December
1988; and the Department of Employment announced the first 'significant'
drop in service-sector employment for nine years.
This corroborates the picture that started emerging at the start of the
current recession, showing the service sector in the south-east worst hit.
The latest data also confirm that the recession struck quickly. Employment
in the 15m-strong service sector grew by 86,000 in the second quarter of
last year. By the fourth quarter, this had turned into an 82,000 fall - even
bigger than the 72,000 fall in the manufacturing sector (with around 5m
employees).
Unemployment is still rising fastest in the south-east, although in Northern
Ireland - an area which had resisted the national trend of rising
unemployment - there was also an unusually big increase in March, as the
slowdown in the housing market held up spring recruitment in the
construction industry.
After the twelfth consecutive monthly rise in unemployment, however, these
regional and sectoral disparities seem less important. Unemployment is now
rising in all UK regions and in all parts of the economy.
On the basis of last month's figures alone, it appears the recession is as
deep as the one in 1980-81. The biggest monthly fall in employment in the
last recession was of 109,600, which occurred in November 1980.
As unemployment data lag behind economic activity, the question that needs
to be answered now is how much, and for how long, unemployment will continue
to rise in the light of the government's forecast - which it repeated
yesterday - that economic growth is due to return in the second half of this
year.
Earnings, unit labour costs and productivity figures published yesterday did
not offer signs of the recession lifting or of a topping out in the
unemployment rate, which rose to 7.4 per cent of the workforce from 7 per
cent in February.
Average earnings across the whole economy eased a little, by a quarter of a
percentage point, to produce an underlying increase of 9 1/4 per cent in the
year to February. This was the result of falls in the increases of average
earnings in the economy's three main sectors.
Government officials said yesterday it would be misleading to read too much
into these falls. Lower wage settlements were exerting less of an influence
than the decline in bonus payments and overtime hours as a result of the
recession.
The recession has also de-pressed production so much that wage and salary
costs per unit of output have risen to their highest level for a decade -
11.6 per cent in the three months to February. In the three months ending in
February, productivity in manufacturing was down 1.8 per cent.
'With unit labour costs well into double figures, firms will be shedding
staff rapidly to try to get them down,' said Mr Christopher Johnson,
economics adviser to Lloyds Bank.
This week's producer price data have suggested companies are so far
resisting cutting factory gate prices in order to stay in business - so the
redundancy rate is likely to rise.
The bleak labour-market figures have, for the moment, retarded hopes of the
recovery roused by the recent cuts in interest rates.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, said yesterday: 'I'm still confident we
will see the upturn in the second half of the year.' Economists are
considerably less confident.
Most forecast unemployment rising by a further 0.5m to about 2.5m by the end
of 1992. Some are more pessimistic, pointing out that in the last recession
unemployment rose for five consecutive years, and that not until GDP returns
to yearly trend growth levels of around 2 1/2 per cent to 3 per cent will
employment growth resume. They expect the total to reach 3m next year.
The Treasury said the rise in unemployment was 'very regrettable'. But it
pointed out that the rise did not necessarily mean the recession was 'still
deepening'. With one set of figures, talk of bottoming out has been
overtaken by concern that the recession has not yet reached its trough.

The Financial Times


London Page 10 Map (Omitted). Chart (Omitted).

910419

