FT911-4044

FT  22 APR 91 / Reuters plans joint venture into telecoms


   By JOHN HUNT


REUTERS, the international information technology group, is holding talks
with Thames Water and STC, the British telecommunications group, about the
possibility of forming a network to transmit Reuters financial information
to clients in the City of London.
The new telecommunications company would provide a challenge to British
Telecom and to Mercury, the Cable and Wireless subsidiary, which are used by
Reuters to transmit information to its City clients.
Expansion into other markets, such as Tokyo and New York, would be a logical
next step if a London operation proved a success. However, Reuters declined
to discuss such a move.
A spokesman for Reuters yesterday confirmed that exploratory talks had taken
place with Thames and STC but said that they were still at an early stage
and no decision had been taken.
'It would be to form a network primarily to provide information to Reuters'
clients within the metropolitan area,' he said.
He said that any challenge to BT and Mercury would only come once a decision
had been reached. 'We are far from that stage yet.'
Reuters wishes to take full advantage of the newly liberalised
telecommunications market. In the new company Thames would provide the sewer
pipelines through which fibre-optic cables could be laid to provide the
network.
STC, which was bought late last year by Northern Telecom of Canada, would
provide technical expertise and Reuters the clients and the knowledge of the
financial information market.
The new regime in telecommunications has prompted several outsiders to enter
the market. Last week it was announced that British Waterways, the public
utility which runs the UK canal system, had lined up with US Sprint, the
third-largest US long-distance telecoms carrier, to provide an alternative
long-distance network in the UK.
The newly privatised electricity supply industry is also considering
entering the market.
British Rail earlier announced plans to lay cables alongside its tracks.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

910422

