FT911-4087

FT  20 APR 91 / Travel: From Barcelona to London via romps in Baghdad - It
is good to walk in Barcelona these days, thinks Jimmy Burns, after a
three-day visit to the Olympic city


   By JIMMY BURNS


IT WAS Cervantes who wetted the appetite for Barcelona long before the term
'city break' had been dreamt up by tour operators: the city was 'the seat of
courtesy, the haven of strangers, the refuge of the distressed, the mother
of the valiant, the champion of the wronged, the abode of true friendship,
unique both in beauty and situation.'
I arrived late on January 6, that day when the Catalans share a rare common
bond with the rest of Spain - the feast of the Epiphany. Barcelona airport
was not so much a seat of courtesy as in a bit of a tangle because of work
on a new terminal. We were herded across a building site and along a
makeshift corridor, strip-lighted and smelling of feet. A bigger airport
should have been built years ago.
Nevertheless, the work should be completed well in time for the summer
Olympics that Barcelona is staging next year - or so I was told by Carolina,
the affable 'guide' provided by the main organising board for the games, who
took me up the Montjuic mountain which overlooks the city.
When I had last been in Barcelona in 1976, after Franco's death, my guide
then had talked only of the Catalan civil war dead buried there. Now the
cemetery and the fortress, once an infamous prison, are but blips on the
horizon. Conversation focused instead on the architectural enterprise of the
Olympic 'ring' with its cluster of futuristic sports centres and electric
trees interspersed with the more sedate pavilions and orange groves dating
from the occasion of the 1929 International Exposition.
It touched, too, on one of Barcelona's more controversial characters -
'Cobi,' the official Olympic mascot. 'He is not round and clearly defined as
Mickey Mouse,' said Carolina. 'He is a conceptual representation of a
Pyrennean dog, very avante-garde, very Catalan.'
Down at the Olympic village, I was given a guide more in keeping with the
prospect of leisure and repose. She was called Eva and was Swedish. She
explained that the Barceloneses had spent most of the 20th century with
their backs to the seafront, but were now in the process of rediscovering
the advantages of building homes nearer to it.
Here, too, was a metamorphosis: a promotional video spoke of a vibrant
Barcelona not in the process of expansion but of becoming a more accessible
and comfortable city to live in, and for once the official-speak was not far
off the mark.
I was somewhat apprehensive about a new tower block being made out of
pre-fabricated glass. 'All the materials are imported, the wardrobes are
from the US and the bathrooms are from Sweden,' boasted Eva. And it was
difficult to imagine, through the dust and the earth-moving equipment, just
what a new ring road would do to city life once it was completed.
Yet the promise of the Olympics has meant that one of the Mediterranean's
ugliest industrial suburbs has been bull-dozed and four kilometres of sewage
have been replaced by a near-pristine beach.
Eva had said: 'If you want any further information of any Olympian nature
contact the office.' But I was in the mood for unofficial guides now, and so
took to the streets alone.
The Olympic buildings are the prime example of the most extensive urban
renewal programme to be carried out in Barcelona for more than 100 years.
Blame it on Franco that in the 1960s and 1970s large chunks of the city were
left to crumble or swept aside by ugly high-rises and highways.
Thank the liberated luminaries of the local autonomous government that
Barcelona's urban renewal programme is, in the main, underlined with good
taste and inspiration.
It is good to walk the streets of Barcelona these days. There is a surprise
at the turn of each street corner. As part of the new civic plan, the plazas
are being decorated with a wide variety of major late modernist sculptures.
In London and some American cities, street life has surrendered to the
environmental plunder of advertising, traffic and retail centres. But the
sculptures in the Catalan capital defy the pessimism that art can only
compete with city life in the museum.
The sculptures are too numerous to list and take more than three days to
appreciate, but two in particular deserve a mention. At the very least one
can puzzle for many minutes at the monument to Picasso created by Antonio
Tapies in the Parc de la Ciutadella, a giant still-life of cubist shapes
inside a glass-box which is streaming with water and quivering in reflected
light.
The same can be said for one of the last big works by Joao Miro near the
bull-ring: a 20m-high moon-calf, ponderous and mystical, which probably
strikes a more vital note with the majority of Catalans, and with visiting
tourists, than bull-fighting itself.
However, the sculptures alone were not sufficient to alleviate the stress of
city life I had brought with me from London. Several strolls up and down
Barcelona's boulevards - the Ramblas - and the nearby old quarter were
necessary.
Along the Ramblas and within the maze of alleys which make up the old
quarter I saw poverty-stricken jugglers and whores - some of whom could have
been grandmothers - musicians and flower-sellers, Gothic churches and Roman
ruins; I thought of the brothel on the Carrer d'Avinjo where Picasso is
believed to have lost his virginity, and of the shoe-shiners and their
changed political allegiances which George Orwell wrote about in Homage to
Catalonia.
People now sat on benches rather than threw Molotov cocktails from behind
the barricades, but the shoe-shiners in the magnificent Placa del Rei remain
a good source of local gossip. There were businessmen reading newspapers and
gays wrapped in conversation in old coffee houses; mothers leading children
and intellectual poseurs.
The Ramblas and the old quarter have been incorporated into the civic plan:
as a result, both are safer and cleaner. Police, present but unobtrusive,
stroll around with the same relaxed air as everyone else. They are there to
help tourists - a welcome contrast from my last visit when the police seemed
only too keen to hit you on the head.
What little that remains of the old red-light district, the Barrio Chino, is
rather seedy and just a little threatening with its pimps and drug-dealers.
Generally, however, cobblestones are being swept, facades painted, buildings
renovated. Brothels judged to have been too disease-ridden and decayed to be
salvaged are being torn down and turned into squares with sculptures.
The city's inhabitants seem to want to live on the reputation of being
hard-working, unlike other Spaniards. Barcelona is not quite as frenetic as
Madrid, and probably more conformist and less filled with humour. Meals,
including lunches, nevertheless often turn out to be rather longer than
promised: reassuringly Spanish, in other words.
'This house is an eating-place for the epicure, a glowing hearth for those
who long for the warmth of a home, a gallery for those who seek delights for
the soul, a tavern for those who love the shade of the vine and true essence
of the grape, a Gothic beer-garden for lover of the north, and Andalusian
patio for those of the south; it is a house of healing for those who suffer
from the sickness of our century, a refuge of friendship and harmony for
those who shelter beneath its roof.'
Thus was the founding pledge of the Els Quartre Gats tavern which attracted
the young Picasso in his early years as a painter. They have insulated the
rooms with cork ceiling and installed air-conditioning, but the decor
remains generally unchanged from Picasso's time. Thinking of Picasso, I had
Catalonia's cheapest, tastiest and most nourishing snack there: pa amb
tomaquet: large slices of freshly-baked white bread smeared liberally with
tomato, oil and garlic, accompanied by a plate of smoked ham.
My companions were Sofia and Fernando, two young local professionals who,
nostalgic for Picasso, bemoaned the fact that other tables were taken up by
tourists.
'In Picasso's days the avante garde was frowned upon by society and had to
seek refuge in places like this. Nowadays the avante garde are setting up
their own art galleries and designing the reconversion of old palaces,' said
Fernando, whose own reconverted real estate office lay in the old quarter.
There are many good restaurants, but my favourite was Siete Portes. Once the
home of a 19th century colonist, the restaurant, decorated with low-hanging
wood beams and chintz lampshades, is an institution. Everyone from Lorca to
King Juan Carlos has lunched here, but don't be put off by that.
If present trends continue, there will be more and more Barceloneses moving
back into the old quarter and out to the sea-front where new flats are being
built. For the moment, however, the works of the artist Gaudi remain among
the more permanent landmarks of the city, defining its character in images
of radical artistic endeavour.
In the Parc Guell, Gaudi's contorted mosaics glistened in the brilliant
midday sun, while the fairy-tale turrets of the gate-house and lizard-shaped
fountains added their note of eccentricity. Like the Ramblas, the park
seemed very much recovered by the people: children kicking footballs, old
men sharing card games, lovers losing themselves in the forest of palm trees
and pines.
I returned to London via Baghdad, thanks to Xavier Agullo, a journalist who
writes for one of Barcelona's leading newspapers on cultural matters and
other eccentricities. Agullo looks like a cross between Al Pacino and Robert
de Niro, and with his ankle-deep leather coat and snake collar would fit
into the Bronx. He works at night and sleeps during the day.
Baghdad was a nightclub down near the port, on the edge of the Ramblas. It
was decorated in artificial mosaic and mirrors and had a stand by the
box-office selling giant plastic dildos.
'We find that our clients want something to remember us by,' said the
manager, who insisted that his was the best show of its kind in Europe. The
audience was made up largely of young middle-class couples out for a giggle.
To go to Baghdad has become fashionable.
For two hours we saw all manner of things performed on stage, quite
explicitly and at close-quarters. Some of this was done alone, some in
pairs, some in trios, some even between a member of the audience and one of
the performers. None of them had much to do with love, and it reduced the
act of sex to a repetitive grind.
Much more genuine fun was had at Salsa, a spacious place in a converted
underground garage where some of the wilder and less pretentious Catalans
dance their souls out until late the following morning.
There and in the nightclubs we frequented afterwards I felt submerged in
life, a necessary final fix before returning to London.

The Financial Times


London Page XII Photograph Barcelona, a vibrant city where the best thing to
do is to soak up the atmosphere (Omitted).

910420

