FT911-4120

FT  20 APR 91 / Leading Article: The new consensus


THE COINCIDENCE of the publication of the Labour party's new manifesto with
the elevation of Sir Terence Burns to permanent secretary in the Treasury
and the largest ever monthly increase in UK unemployment says much about the
current consensus in British macroeconomic policy. As the government's chief
economic adviser Sir Terence has done as much as any man to form the views
that the Labour party now accepts and the monthly jump of 113,000 in
unemployment reflects.
The economic policy establishment has, in the Labour party's words, embraced
the aim of 'getting interest and inflation rates down to German and French
levels and keeping them down'. It has also embraced the means, sterling's
participation in the ERM. The UK is, by implication, committed to accepting
whatever level of unemployment is required to push not the headline rate of
inflation, but the underlying rate, down to some 2-3 per cent a year.
It was not always thus. In 1979-81, when the government was trying to follow
targets for broad money, Sir Terence was intellectually beleaguered. In
March 1981, the notorious letter from 364 university economists asserted
inter alia that 'present policies will deepen the depression, erode the
industrial base of our economy and threaten its social and political
stability'.
At the time unemployment was 2m, not very different from today's 2.1m and
the economy was, as now, in deep recession. Yet this time no howls of
complaint come from the universities. In a remarkable reversal of roles,
protests come not from 364 Keynesians, but from six monetarists - including
Sir Alan Walters, Mrs Thatcher's former economic adviser - in another
celebrated letter, that to The Times on February 13 this year.
Should one conclude that British economists do not care about recessions, so
long as they are brought about in the approved way? Did the 364 economists
merely think monetarism intellectually contemptible and the six judge the
ERM despicable, while neither side cares about what is happening to the
economy?
Converging views
One should not be quite so cynical. Views have not only changed, but
converged. Far more British economists would now accept that macroeconomic
policy cannot target real activity. On this, the Treasury has largely won
the debate. For its part, the Treasury - but not all the erstwhile
monetarists - has abandoned its faith in monetary control and embraced once
more that long-standing object of British affection, an
exchange-rate-oriented monetary regime.
The Treasury is, to be sure, always right at the time. But it is not always
right in retrospect. Its attempt to stick to broad money targeting in the
early 1980s led to the deepest recession since the Great Depression. The
Treasury's abandonment of such targeting in favour of the exchange rate has
led, in the end, to what is likely to be the second deepest recession since
the Great Depression.
Stagflationary swamp
One can only hope that this time the Treasury knows what it is doing. If it
does and governments persist, it offers salvation. But first it offers
blood, sweat, toil and tears. With producer price inflation at 6.3 per cent
for the third month in a row, underlying earnings up 9 1/4 per cent over the
year to February, unemployment rising at an annual rate of a million over
the past quarter and manufacturing output down 4.6 per cent between the
latest quarter and the same quarter of a year ago, the UK is deep in the
stagflationary swamp.
The new consensus says this is inescapable. It also says that growth is to
come from microeconomic adjustment. Unfortunately, here there is ground for
pessimism, since the key market is, as always, the UK's most sclerotic, that
for labour.
Notwithstanding all the reforms of the Thatcher era, a rise in unemployment
of almost half a million has so far lowered the underlying rate of inflation
of earnings by a mere percentage point. The price of attaining inflation at
German levels may be rates of unemployment stuck, as in France and Italy, at
10 per cent or still more for years. This is depressing enough. Still more
depressing is the Labour party's suggested response: a minimum wage,
ultimately of two-thirds of the median male hourly rate.
Fortunately, not all the Labour party's ideas are this indefensible. If the
UK is to make a success of its new consensus on economic policy, it does
need some sort of National Economic Assessment. But the best way would, once
more, be the German one: via outside economic advice from well-financed
economic research institutes. Then the twists and turns of Treasury policy
would be subject to the external critique that they patently need, and the
next change in policy might, for once, not be a lurch, but something rather
smoother.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

910420

