FT911-4064

FT  22 APR 91 / De Klerk aims to revive economic ties with EC


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN, Africa Editor


THE REVIVAL of economic ties with the European Community as a key factor in
South Africa's efforts to ensure that political negotiations are accompanied
by economic recovery will be stressed by President F. W. de Klerk during his
visit to London, which officially begins today.
Pretoria officials are confident that the sanctions battle is all but over.
Last week the EC lifted embargoes on imports of iron and steel and gold
coins, and the US is expected to lift trade and investment bans later this
year.
But officials, increasingly concerned about the political consequences of a
continuing recession marked by rising unemployment, admit that prospects for
new investment are poor unless the violence that has cost over 4,000 lives
in the past four years is stopped, and formal talks on a new constitution
get under way.
Mr de Klerk, due to have a working dinner tonight with Prime Minister John
Major as well as holding talks for the first time with the Labour party
leader, Mr Neil Kinnock, is expected to defend Pretoria's efforts to end
township violence and to place the burden of responsibility on the African
National Congress (ANC).
This charge will be countered by accusations of government complicity when
Mr Nelson Mandela, the ANC deputy president, arrives in London later this
week. Earlier this month the ANC threatened to break off contacts with
Pretoria unless the government met the terms of an ANC ultimatum on violence
by May 9.
Mr de Klerk, who has gone some way towards meeting the ultimatum, is also
expected to argue that the recession exacerbates political tensions.
Before leaving South Africa for London, he said: 'Sanctions are crumbling,
and they will continue to crumble. We have reached a stage where one could
even say that sanctions have become a contributing factor to violence.'
In meetings with bankers and businessmen during his visit, Mr de Klerk is
expected to urge them to take advantage of trade and investment
opportunities, portraying South Africa as a locomotive for growth in the
region.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Photograph Can de Klerk keep the lid on South Africa's
political cauldron? (Omitted).

910422

