FT911-4199

FT  20 APR 91 / Minding Your Own Business: Maze maker struggles to find the
thread - A company trying to plot a way through hard times


   By NICK GARNETT


ON THE WALL in Adrian Fisher's office hangs one of those perplexing drawings
by the Dutch artist Escher of staircases winding into four-dimensional dead
ends. It is an apt decoration for the man whose company claims to be the
biggest designer of mazes in Britain.
Since setting up in the early 1980s, Minotaur Designs has accounted for 22
of the 100 or so mazes that dot Britain. The intricate sinuosity of its
paths and hedgerows has been the biggest spur in more than doubling the
number of Britain's labyrinths, making it the most maze-conscious country
outside Japan.
The British Tourist Board has designated 1991 the Year of the Maze, so
business for Minotaur should be blooming.
'It is hardly doing that,' says Fisher. 'It has been quite thin recently.
People have ideas but they don't have the money.' So thin, in fact, that the
company has made a mental sideshift in its work on enigmatic twists and
turns. Redesigning bus route maps now accounts for almost a third of its
Pounds 130,000 yearly turnover.
Fisher, who is 39, is a former administrator with ITT who had made a hobby
out of maze history. He was offered his first contract to design a labyrinth
after writing a letter on the subject to The Times in 1980. By 1983 Minotaur
Designs, which resides in the top floor of a house in Harpenden,
Hertfordshire, was set up.
'I borrowed Pounds 12,000 on a loan guarantee scheme. That was not clever,'
says Fisher. 'It would have been better to stick it on the mortgage because
it really hits cash flow when you most need it.'
Some of the money went on a computer, used for book keeping though not maze
design. Minotaur's meandering teasers are drawn by pen on paper. 'It was
very tough during the first two years. Income was half of what it was at ITT
and I had no experience of marketing and selling.'
The company spends a good deal of time and money on promotion - though not
direct advertising - attracting customers which include stately homes open
to the public, private houses and local authorities. One of its goals is to
maintain the tradition of the fantastic variety in labyrinths which are an
ancient form of both amusement and religious expression. The oldest mazes
include a rock carving dated 1700 BC in Sardinia and a 13th century pavement
at Chartres Cathedral. Britain's oldest hedge maze is at Hampton Court and
the most complex, with tricky U-turns, is at Longleat House, Wiltshire.
A third of all mazes designed by Minotaur are made of hedges. These include
an Alice in Wonderland labyrinth in Dorset which portrays the Mad Hatter and
other creatures from the story and a yew hedge maze at Leeds Castle
incorporating a grotto. Non-hedge labyrinths include a brick path at Parham
Park, West Sussex and a unicorn and lion brick pavement in the town centre
of Worksop. One of the biggest is a maze of 80 wall mirrors with visual
deceptions and central fountain at Somerset's Wookey Hole.
Fisher ('I hate jigsaws') says there are 12 categories of maze. These
include unicursal - with a single path and no junctions - and processional -
with a quick exit - to very complex three-dimensional ones with bridges and
underpasses. Many of the 200 mazes built during the Japanese maze craze that
took hold in the mid-1980s are large wooden structures on several levels.
The Japanese, overcome by boredom, have since dug up 70 of these.
'We are in even less than a niche market, more of a crevice market,' says
Fisher. 'Maze is minimalist art. The business of creating mazes is to ensure
they fit into the landscape, that they are great fun for children and that
they have hidden meanings.'
The Marlborough maze at Blenheim Palace encompasses a design inspired by the
stone carvings of Grinling Gibbons. The Saxon maze at Herb Farm, Sonning
Common, is in the shape of four mythical Saxon sea creatures. The Gardeners'
labyrinth at Capel Manor, Enfield, traces the steps of early plant
gatherers.
The total cost of building one of these whimsical conundrums ranges from
Pounds 10,000 to Pounds 100,000 and up. Of this, Minotaur's fees for design
and overall project management will be about a quarter. Fisher charges a
daily rate of Pounds 450. Employing a landscape specialist, Lesley Beck, as
well as another maze designer, Randoll Coate, Minotaur uses a variety of
artisans on contract. The mechanics of putting together a maze, the main
contractor for which might be a landscape design company rather than
Minotaur, can pose difficulties. One or two subcontractors have done a bunk
without completing the work satisfactorily.
'We now encourage clients to shortlist local contractors,' says Fisher. Some
clients get carried away and start meddling. 'We had one case where they
poured concrete for a maze in the wrong place and having designed the
labyrinth we had to subsequently change the entry and exit point. That is
very annoying.'
Fisher has recently had a book published on the art and mythology of the
maze and is writing a British maze guide. This together with the Year of the
Maze should have generated a lot of business. It is unfortunate that this
effort, which cost about Pounds 30,000 in time and money, was made when high
interest rates began puncturing people's pockets. Fisher says Minotaur
received just Pounds 4,500 in sponsorship during this period.
'Interest rates are devastating. If we had had this Year of the Maze
campaign two years ago I think we would have probably had 20 landscape
commissions during this year. As it is, we have had very, very little. There
is less money and less business about.'
Minotaur is looking for some large maze contracts of around Pounds 200,000
and, at the other end of the business, it is marketing a Pounds 3,000
portable maze made of plastic pieces. Fisher believes though that the
designing of bus route maps and related work such as sign systems for
airports could become increasingly lucrative. It is ironic that a company
designing puzzles in which people might get lost is now seeking to help them
find their way.
Minotaur Designs. 7 Holly Bush Lane, Harpenden, Herts AL5 4AL. Tel:
0582-461880.

The Financial Times


London Page VI Photograph The Italianate maze at Capel Manor gardens,
Enfield, north London, designed by Adrian Fisher and still growing
(Omitted).

910420

