FT911-4311

FT  19 APR 91 / Hopes rise for agreed Kurdish camps: US and Iraqi officers
to discuss refugee havens as UN makes separate deal


   By Our Foreign and Political Staff


A TOP level meeting between US and Iraqi military commanders is set to take
place today, raising hopes that Baghdad will not impede efforts to set up
camps in northern Iraq to save hundreds of thousands of Kurdish refugees.
The US European Command in Turkey announced yesterday that Lt-Gen John
Shalikashvili, who will command up to 15,000 Allied troops charged with
building and protecting the camps above the 36th parallel, would cross into
Iraq and meet Iraqi officers near the town of Zakho at noon.
Yesterday Iraq and the United Nations agreed on a separate plan to care for
Kurdish and other refugees and displaced persons in the country through the
establishment of UN-run 'humanitarian centres' controlled by civilians.
The accord was disclosed in a 21-point memorandum signed by Mr Ahmed
Hussein, Baghdad's new foreign minister, and Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, the
official in charge of UN aid for the region.
The UN-Iraq agreement conflicts with the moves already under way to send US,
British, French and now Dutch troops to set up and defend safe havens in
Iraq, although western and UN officials hope to reconcile the two proposals.
Mr Richard Cheney, the US defence secretary, said the US and its Gulf war
allies would hand over control of refugee camps in Iraq to the UN and other
international organisations as soon as possible.
'We're moving in the direction of passing on the responsibility as soon as
we can,' he said. 'But our first responsibility is to care for those people
before any more of them die.'
Allied military forces were the only ones capable of building the camps and
moving refugees from the mountains, he said. 'If we waited around for all
the niceties to be resolved we could be here for two or three months.'
In Britain Mr Tom King, the defence secretary, announced that a brigade of
the Royal Marines would form the nucleus of the British forces to be sent.
Mr King said an advance party left yesterday and other units would leave
today. The plan is for most of the 2,000 or so men from 3 Commando Brigade
to be based in Turkey, with units rotating into Iraq. They will include
engineering and communications specialists, together with medical staff.
Camps for the Kurds would probably be in the form of tented villages around
a central distribution point, with the Kurds organising themselves and the
allied forces providing security. Mr King said British troops would not
allow the camps to become bases for Kurdish guerrillas.
While Tory MPs emphasised the role of Mr John Major as author of the plan to
create havens for the Kurds, Downing Street sought to play down differences
between the UK and the US over whose idea it had been.
Britain is also using the response to the plight of the Kurds to renew its
appeal to Iran for help in securing the release of British hostages held in
the Lebanon. Mrs Lynda Chalker, the overseas development minister, will take
with her a letter from Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, requesting
the help of Iranian leaders when she visits Tehran tomorrow. She will also
discuss the question of aid for the 1m Kurdish refugees in Iran.
Yesterday the US state department said Tehran had indicated it 'would
welcome US participation' in any international relief effort to assist
Kurdish refugees in Iran. The statement, which did not make it clear what,
if anything, the US planned to do to help, comes after criticism that the
world has neglected the Iranian side of the Kurdish disaster. There are
fears that the Kurdish refugee population in Iran could rise to 1.5m.
The issue has been complicated by Iranian wariness, the hostage question and
continuing poor relations with Tehran.
Meanwhile Iraq last night met the first of the deadlines imposed by the UN
Security Council in the ceasefire resolution, submitting details about the
locations, amounts and types of the most dangerous weapons in its arsenal
that must be destroyed under international supervision.
The report made clear that Iraq still has ballistic missiles and chemical
weapons, Iraqi UN ambassador Abdul Amir Al-Anbari said yesterday that he did
not think it was in possession of any biological weapons.
The United Nations is to set up a special commission to conduct on-site
inspections and to destroy or remove all the forbidden items.
Page 4 King pledges speed for evacuation Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 24 Photograph US Marines in Turkey brace themselves as a
helicopter arrives to take aid to the Kurds Oil well firefighters angered by
criticism (Omitted).

910419

