FT911-4269

FT  20 APR 91 / Gloomy statistics underline Soviet decline


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


FURTHER evidence of the Soviet economic crisis was provided yesterday by
statistics showing an 8 per cent fall in gross national product and a 33.8
per cent fall in foreign trade for the first quarter of this year, Leyla
Boulton reports from Moscow.
Goskomstat, official statistics agency, said investment declined by 16 per
cent, while labour productivity in the state sector was down 9 per cent. All
comparisons are with the equivalent period last year.
The agency blamed the drops on disruptions to centrally planned links
between enterprises, on unspecified 'imbalances' in the economy and on
industrial unrest.
It said imports had fallen by 45.1 per cent while exports had declined 18.4
per cent. A presidential decree to confiscate enterprises' hard currency
earnings from January 1 has been a big disincentive to foreign trade. A
switch to hard currency settlements with eastern Europe has devastated
business which once accounted for half the Soviet Union's foreign trade.
The output of oil, the country's main hard-currency earner, fell 9 per cent
to 132m tonnes, continuing a persistent decline. Gas output was unchanged,
while coal production was down 11 per cent from that of the first quarter of
1990.
A Goskomstat official also rectified an earlier report, in the government
daily Izvestiya, that coal production had fallen by 82 per cent in March
alone. He said the true figure was an 18 per cent drop in March, the first
month of the miners' strike.
Such figures come as little surprise, Soviet politicians having made
extensive use of statistics in recent weeks to do battle both with the
miners and with rebellious republics. The country's finance minister and
central bank chief wrote to President Mikhail Gorbachev this month demanding
action to force budgetary contributions from independent-minded republics.
They said the budget deficit for the first quarter of this year was expected
to reach Rbs31.1bn (Pounds 10.06bn) - more than the Rbs26.7bn deficit
planned for the entire year. Goskomstat put the budget deficit in the first
quarter at Rbs26.9bn.
The agency also revealed an inflation rate of 22 per cent in the 12 months
to the end of March, before swingeing state retail price increases came into
effect on April 2.
On Monday, Mr Valentin Pavlov, Soviet prime minister, is to defend in
parliament an anti-crisis programme whose avowed aim is to stop 'economic
chaos and collapse', but this is unlikely to begin to take effect unless the
central government reaches a political settlement with republican leaders.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

910420

