FT911-4179

FT  20 APR 91 / Books: More Bergman than Byron


   By WILLIAM ST CLAIR


BYRON: A NOVEL by Sigrid Combuchen Heinemann Pounds 14.99, 518 pages
ON 15 June 1938 the tomb of Lord Byron at Hucknall in Nottinghamshire was
opened and photographed. Home Office permission to enter the vault had been
obtained by the local Member of Parliament on the pretence that a point of
mediaeval archaeology was being investigated. The Byron family also gave
their sanction - the then lord expressing his hope that a great family
treasure would be discovered and returned to him. In a book full of cant and
self-justification published in the following year, the Rev Canon Barber
reported that nothing unexpected was found. One of the other curiosity
seekers, it emerged later, noted that the poet's sexual organ showed quite
abnormal development, although whether the witness had wide enough
experience to make such an assessment is open to question.
The incident is the starting point for an ambitious novel, Byron, A Novel
written by the Swedish author Sigrid Combuchen, and now published in
English. Ms Combuchen imagines a group of Byron enthusiasts each preparing a
biographical study of some aspect of Byron's life for the 150th anniversary
celebrations. Among the themes chosen are the poet's relationship with his
half-sister Augusta, his first visit to Greece, his life as an exile in
Italy, and the final days at Missolonghi when his doctors killed him off.
The opening of the tomb is a pleasing metaphor for their attempt to
resurrect the truth about the dead man, although it does not itself feature
directly in the story.
The structure of the novel is highly episodic, jumping between 1938 and
Byron's own time. The chapters take the form of passages of narrative
interspersed with imagined contemporary documents into which the author has
woven genuine historical material. There is little or no story line, and the
episodes selected are not in chronological order. The allusive style assumes
that the reader already knows a good deal about Byron and his friends, but
the author makes no claims to literal accuracy. She imagines, for example, a
conversation between Mary Shelley and Claire Clairmont at Byron's funeral,
although Claire was in Moscow at the time.
Some of the inventions work well. Ms Combuchen has caught the characteristic
mixture of deference and liberalism which marks the diary of Byron's friend
Hobhouse. She enjoys bold phrasing. The miners' houses in Nottinghamshire
are never ending, ugly, like a queue of refugees. A diamond is yellow as
urine. But, possibly as a result of the translation, some passages are so
poetic as to be scarcely understandable, and can anyone imagine Byron
thundering at Augusta 'I am your sibling' ?
The author's imagination is more visual than literary. She offers frequent
descriptions of the scenery and portentous storms are plentiful. A favourite
device is to shift the focus from the people to their dogs and cats,
creating atmosphere rather than character. The hero emerges as all gloom and
mist, more Bergman than Byron. There is little of the charm and the fun, the
keen sense of irony and the delight in the ridiculous, which produced the
greatest comic epic ever written, and which shines through the merest of the
letters of the real man.
The novel has been awarded several literary prizes in Sweden. It is now
translated for nine European countries with the help of a grant from the
European Commission. I admire the author's knowledge, her skill, and her
courage in attempting something different. I fear, however, that her book is
more likely to be commended than enjoyed.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

910420

