FT911-4196

FT  20 APR 91 / A fellowship of gentle giants: Nigel Spivey rubs shoulders
with Britain's best hammer throwers - Hobby-horses


   By NIGEL SPIVEY


THE VILLAGE of Grendon in Northamptonshire must be near enough the
geographical heart of England. Castle Ashby, once well-known for its
collection of Classical antiquities, is nearby. Otherwise, there is little
reason why Grendon should be cherished by anyone apart from its inhabitants.
But the village has special importance to a fraternity of athletes, a
fraternity both small and sizeable in its constitution: for Grendon is where
the Hammer Circle of Great Britain stages its annual reunion.
The descent of 30 or more hammer throwers on to a village such as Grendon
can hardly go unnoticed. For two nights of the year, regulars at the pub
find their way to the bar obstructed by a mountain-range of bulky shoulders.
Some hammer-throwers stand less than 6 ft 3 in and weigh less than 16 stones
 -but not many.
Their reunion takes place towards the end of the throwing season, in late
September. The men are winding down and ready to relax with a series of
handicapped competitions and challenges - such as throwing the 25 lb railway
coupling device - together with talks from national coaches, video-shows of
international meetings, and general hob-nobbing. Fathers bring their
promising sons. Everyone is generously victualled, with sandwiches
circulating between abundant breakfasts, lunches and suppers. The talk is
shop, of course: weightlifting callouses are compared, new training
techniques vaunted. And two names keep peppering all conversations: Sedykh
and Litvinov.
Your average hammer-thrower may quiz the name of Gorbachev, or Yevtushenko:
but about Yuri Sedykh and Sergei Litvinov he will be very well informed. He
can tell you precisely when it was that Sedykh pushed the world record for
hammer-throwing beyond 87 metres; and he can probably tell you what Litvinov
(Sedykh's arch-rival from the Ukraine) has for breakfast.
One Irish international attracts reverence when he displays to his peers a
hammer handle engraved with the initials YS - a gift from the record-breaker
himself. There is a strong vein of Slavophilia at this Grendon reunion: and
glasnost will really have happened when the Russians get there in person,
like gods invited to the fellowship of a communion table.
There have been some doughty Japanese hammer-throwers, and for a while a
West German captured the world record; but Slavs have dominated the event
over the last two decades, obscuring its Celtic origins. A genealogy of
great hammer-throwers would include Henry VIII - who is pictured with the
sort of wooden sledgehammer still thrown at Highland Games in Scotland. But
the Olympic event is quite different from the display of brute strength
entailed by the Celtic (or Gaelic) tradition.
The Olympic hammer is a 16 lb metal orb attached to a thin wire, with a
handle. It is thrown from the confines of a caged concrete circle, and
mastery of the now standard four turns within this circle takes years of
practice. The centrifugal forces generated by the likes of Sedykh and
Litvinov are scientifically extraordinary - members of the Hammer Circle are
subjected to tests from physiologists fascinated by their kinetic
capacities.
This is what gives the hammer-throwing brotherhood such unusual cohesion.
You can be still ironing out the wrinkles in your technique at the age of
40. And there is another important bonding element: the sense of persecution
from the hammer-thrower's worst opponent, a finicky groundsman. As spawners
of divots, and sometimes destroyers of cages, hammer-throwers earn few
friends. There is a bronze statue of a hammer-thrower in London, but I know
of no other tribute. This is a poor show.
It was the late Ron Pickering, the television commentator, who coined the
phrase 'eighteen-stone ballerinas' to describe Olympic hammer-throwers.
Pickering tirelessly encouraged young people to channel their energy,
frustration and anger into athletics, and despite their size, whatever
aggression within the fellows who gather in the Hammer Circle is reserved to
expend upon a metal ball. They are the gentlest giants you could meet.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

910420

