FT911-4189

FT  20 APR 91 / Travel: Cut-price US holidays


   By DAVID CHURCHILL


FLORIDA is still experiencing a downturn in bookings but the good news is
that this has led to a spate of special offers. UK holidaymakers still
appear reluctant to commit themselves to long-haul American travel so soon
after the end of Gulf War hostilities.
Leading tour operator Cosmos is cutting the prices of all its Florida
holidays this summer: best deal is a 14-night fly-drive holiday to Orlando
at a cost of Pounds 299 per person, based on four people travelling, which
represents a saving of Pounds 100 against the brochure price. Other Orlando
holidays, including accommodation, between May and mid-July have also been
reduced.
Cosmos's price cuts have been caused partly by its need to stimulate
bookings following its decision to pick up much of the capacity which the
failed International Leisure Group had already secured in Florida. It is
also offering flights to Florida from Cardiff, south Wales, for the first
time.
Jetsave, which specialises in US holidays, is cutting prices to Orlando
between May and mid-July (just before the school holidays start). Return
flights to Orlando have been reduced by Pounds 100 to Pounds 279 per person.
Early birds visiting travel agents next week can book a British Airways
Poundstretcher holiday to Orlando for Pounds 375 - saving about Pounds 185
per person on the brochure price - if booked before 10am through most travel
agents.
Orlando is the single most popular long-haul destination for Britons -
nearly 1m went there last year - mainly because of the attraction of Walt
Disney World.
Closer to home, Euro Disney, outside Paris, is due to open on April 12 next
year. Disney has started selling special commemorative passes to the new
theme park at Pounds 20 for adults and Pounds 15 for children aged between
three and nine from its new store in Regent Street, London.
When the Royal Scotsman pulls out of Edinburgh's Waverley station at the end
of the month it will forsake its usual journey around the Scottish Highlands
and travel south for the first time.
The train, aimed at providing tourists with a luxury look at Britain - there
are mainly continental visitors following the dearth of US tourists to
Britain this year - is touring as far as Bath on public and private track.
Enthusiasts may baulk only at the price: Pounds 2,900 per person for the
six-day journey, although all costs are included. Further details:
071-730-9600.
While many country house hotels are feeling the chill of the recession, some
are responding to the downturn in trade with new initiatives. Historic House
hotels are three country houses which have banded together to offer short
breaks not only in up-market surroundings - they all date from the 18th
century - but also close to other stately homes or castles. Middlethorpe
Hall in York, Bodysgallen Hall in north Wales, and Hartwell House near
Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, are offering a two-day stay at Pounds 188 per
person in one of these hotels as well as a visit to a nearby historic house.
Further details: 081-747-4003.
Children are being courted by cruise companies seeking to increase
Mediterranean bookings after the Gulf war. P&O Cruises is offering free
places to children under 12 who join their parents on Canberra's 13-night
Mediterranean cruise next month. Fares for adults start at Pounds 895.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

910420

