FT911-4017

FT  22 APR 91 / The Queen's Awards For Export And Technology 1991:
Deep-seated doubts remain in industry - In spite of ERM entry and high
interest rates, the 1991 Awards follow a year of relative success for
British exporters. But change is in the air and many remain concerned at the
level of government backing for overseas sales efforts


   By PETER MONTAGNON


IT HAS become easy over the past few years of yawning deficits in the
balance of payments for Britons to assume that their once proud trading
nation has become an exporters' graveyard.
A closer look at recent statistics, however, reveals this defeatist attitude
to be wide of the mark.
In 1990, for the second year running, the volume increase of British non-oil
exports exceeded the overall growth in world trade by a wide margin.
That such an achievement was possible in a year of high real interest rates,
not to mention entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the European
Monetary System at a level regarded as high in the export industry, is
remarkable enough. It adds a general piquancy to the specific razzamatazz
surrounding this year's Queen's Awards celebrations.
Yet, even in spite of this success, there remain deep-seated doubts in
industry about whether Britain is properly organised to make an assertive
way on world markets.
The occasion of the Queen's Awards is an appropriate moment to examine these
doubts insofar as they relate to government commitment to exports.
The awards themselves are typical of the government approach, in that they
are a low cost, high profile marketing instrument. Companies which win them
say the royal imprimatur helps their sales overseas.
This year, however, the awards come at a time when the relationship between
government and the export industry is both fraught and subject to change.
The short-term business of the Export Credits Guarantee Department is being
privatised, while the Treasury has become increasingly anxious to rein in
ECGD's activities in insuring long-term credit to politically risky
developing countries.
On the promotion front, the British Overseas Trade Board has a new chairman
in the form of Sir Derek Hornby, a former chairman of Rank Xerox.
The government recently announced the creation of a joint directorate
linking the export services provided by the Department of Trade and Industry
and the Foreign Office. Henceforth all the services will be marketed under
the brand name of 'Overseas Trade Services'.
The basic philosophy behind the government's approach to trade in the 1980s
was the non-interventionist one that comes naturally to a Conservative
administration. In a recent interview, Mr Tim Sainsbury, trade minister,
described the government's role as being that of 'enabler'.
It was the job of government, he said, to try and break down barriers to
trade, for example through the Uruguay Round talks in the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade.
Government also had a part to play in drawing the attention of industry to
export opportunities, but the actual decision-making, choice of market and
sales effort had to be left to the companies themselves.
It is a point of view echoed by Sir Derek Hornby.
'We tread a very careful line', he said. 'In our relationships with
industry, we are the enabler and facilitator. I honestly don't regard it as
any part of my job to go out and arm-twist people.'
The government, he said, was particularly well-placed to provide information
support for exporters because of the store of knowledge built up by its
embassies overseas. The change a couple of years ago to a system of charging
for market intelligence had gone well. The willingness of exporters to pay
was an indication that they appreciate the services provided. It also helped
the BOTB to determine priorities.
Shortage of resources means that BOTB has to concentrate its efforts on the
most promising markets. In its current forward plan these are defined as
western Europe, Japan, North America, Asia and the Pacific Rim, but Sir
Derek stresses that this does not mean other areas are neglected.
In fact, it is in precisely such areas as Latin America that government
strengths are greatest. It has a fund of information through its diplomatic
presence that a private sector purveyor of information could not hope to
rival.
The creation of the new Overseas Trade Services directorate is intended to
give a greater impetus to this effort and promote a single sense of purpose
among the DTI staff who occupy many of the domestic positions and the
diplomats resident in posts abroad.
Officials say it is not the forerunner of an Italian-style trade promotion
effort, where commercial affairs have been taken out of the the hands of the
foreign ministry and passed to a separate, quasi-autonomous institution.
This regards itself as much more of a deal-maker than an information
provider, and has even been known to look for ways of promoting imports to
help create two-way trade with a given market.
One problem with the UK government effort is that it is almost impossible to
measure the results. Critics say the government's reluctance to be
pro-active reduces the value of its contribution. Supporters argue that the
present system is preferable to the idea of picking markets and spending a
great deal of money and effort only to discover that the wrong industry is
receiving support in the wrong place.
The recently-ended first phase of the Opportunity Japan Campaign saw exports
to that country fail to meet their target of doubling to Pounds 3bn in three
years, although they did come within a respectable distance, having ended up
at Pounds 2.6bn last year.
The increase in exports recorded during the period was roughly in line with
that recorded by the UK's competitors.
On the one hand, this suggests that the campaign achieved little. On the
other, one has to wonder what would have happened if no action had been
taken to boost trade at a time when the business world was awash with
stories (some of them completely false) that Japanese trade barriers made
the market not worth tackling.
Significantly, the second phase will pay greater attention to the need for
investment flows to follow trade, so that the UK may end up promoting inward
investment to Japan.
This broader view reflects the reality of the marketplace better than a
system whose bottom line is simply the total of exports from the UK.
Great hopes are also being pinned on Kuwait, where, after a somewhat
hesitant start during which the field was left open to the US, export
collaboration between industry and government has reached an unprecedented
pitch.
According to seasoned businessmen such as Lord Limerick, former head of
British Invisibles, the co-operation has been remarkable. 'This is something
that very much makes its mark on the Kuwaitis', he says.
Trade was one aspect of the visit to Kuwait by Mr John Major, the first head
of government to visit the emirate following the ceasefire in the Gulf.
Business missions have also been led by Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign
secretary, and by Mr Peter Lilley, the trade and industry secretary.
Exporters to Kuwait are uniquely dependent on the government, not just for
contacts with the Kuwaiti officials responsible for reconstruction, but even
for getting to Kuwait at a time when air services have not resumed and the
best approach is a bumpy ride in a military Hercules transport.
For the government, the attraction is clearly that the additional cost of
supporting businessmen is small and the political profile high.
There is a typically British danger, however, that the exercise will
degenerate into an orgy of self-congratulation in which less attention will
be paid to the level of business won at the end of the day.
For the time being, the Kuwaiti effort offers the government a publicity
distraction from one of the exporting industry's biggest worries - namely
what many see as the single-minded way in which the Treasury is seeking to
undermine the activities of the ECGD.
The well-publicised troubles of ECGD almost certainly constitute exporters'
biggest concern.
For all the pleasure they take in last year's successes, for all the
richly-deserved satisfaction of the Queen's award winners, for all the help
they receive from the BOTB and the new directorate, many exporters believe
that without ECGD, they will be fighting on world markets 'with their right
arms chopped off', as one succinctly puts it.
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
VOLUME CHANGE (%)
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
              UK         World
          on-oil         goods
         exports       exports
1981       -1.45           0.5
1982        0.71          -3.0
1983        0.54           2.5
1984        8.64           8.0
1985        6.61           2.5
1986        2.42           4.5
1987        7.57           5.5
1988        4.39           8.5
1989        9.21           7.0
1990        7.32           5.0
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Datastream, CSO, GATT
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 9 Illustration (Omitted). Illustration (Omitted). Illustration
(Omitted).

910422

