FT911-4176

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: Henry VIII, five hundred years on


   By RICHARD NEWBURY


THE ANNIVERSARY of the birth of Henry VIII 500 years ago offers a valuable
opportunity for scholarship and reassessment: happily the National Maritime
Museum at Greenwich has taken the initiative, and is to hold a major Henry
VIII exhibition between May 1 and August 31.
Henry VIII was born in Placentia Palace, which stood by the Thames on the
land now occupied by the Royal Naval Hospital, next to the Maritime Museum.
It was the stage for many momentous events, including the births of his
daughters, the future Queens Mary and Elizabeth, his marriages to Catherine
of Aragon and Anne of Cleves, and later the death of his son Edward VI. The
first section of the exhibition will show contemporary drawings of the
palace by the Dutch artist Wyngaerde.
Three well documented events at Greenwich are the primary focus of the
exhibition: the jousts of July 1517, the reception of the French ambassadors
on May 5 1527 and the presentation of New Year's gifts to the King on
January 1 1538. Relevant manuscripts, paintings and artefacts are to be
combined with elements of reconstruction to evoke these events. It will be
an impressive display, and include a number of Holbein's portraits.
Whilst the exhibition is wisely rooted in time and place, it has ambitions
to explore the wider cultural, political and religious context. Indeed, most
aspects of the reign are only intelligible in a European perspective. Such
an approach will at last sweep away the folklore concerning Henry's appetite
for wives and the wickedness of the dissolution of the monasteries.
The popular perception of Henry VIII's reign has long needed a corrective
dose of modern scholarship, and Dr David Starkey, the historian who has
masterminded this exhibition, is well qualified for the task. His book,
Henry VIII, has helped correct the notion that Henry ruled with despotic
capriciousness. Instead, it emerges that the struggle within Henry's court
between representatives of the old and the new religion, and between the
influence of the old nobility and the bright 'new men', meant that the king
was frequently and decisively manipulated by rival factions.
At the centre of the exhibition is a reconstruction of the temporary
banqueting house, originally designed by Nicolas Kratzer, the Astronomer
Royal, and decorated by Holbein, for the reception of the French ambassadors
at Greenwich in May 1527. This lavish event highlights an important theme of
Henry's foreign policy. In terms of population and wealth England was ranked
fourth in Europe, but Henry wished to cut a figure on the European stage: to
win back, against the rising tide of French power, territories across the
Channel, and to revive the chivalric adventures of the English kings.
Although hindered by lack of money, he was greatly assisted by Wolsey's
genius and, against all the odds, saw himself as the arbiter of European
politics. This plan actually worked, first with the Treaty of London in
1518, in which Wolsey concluded a European treaty; next came the Field of
the Cloth of Gold in 1520, an extravaganza outside Paris in which all
parties promised undying mutual amity. Wars and betrayals followed, but this
was hardly the point: England had achieved disproportionate prestige through
ostentation.
The diplomatic reception at Greenwich in May 1527 was the occasion of a
peace treaty with France, but it was cast as a grandiose design for Europe
formulated by the middling power of England. In the event it was just a
treaty with France, but the gorgeous pageantry and the sumptuous exchange of
manuscripts and jewellery (all to be exhibited) are an indication that
ostentation and grand design bring political rewards.
The fertilisation of English culture by continental, especially French,
influences is another major theme of the exhibition. Many of Henry's
projects were intended to rival those of Francois I; for example the massive
palace of Nonsuch (demolished in the 18th century) was built in reply to
Francois' chateau at Chambord. Although the artistic influence of the
renaissance still lay largely in the future, the spirit of magnificence had
caught the English imagination.
The final section of the exhibition is perhaps the most far-reaching. Henry
was indeed 'the father of the British navy', establishing dockyards in the
Thames and on the south coast. The foundation of the British navy and the
broad acceptance of Anglicanism ensured that, in Dr Starkey's words, 'the
16th century was the last age before our own when England was simply a
European power.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

910420

