FT911-4096

FT  20 APR 91 / Markets: Forward with footsie - London


   By PETER MARTIN


Robert Maxwell planned to write the prospectus for his Mirror Group
Newspapers flotation in tabloid English, but the lawyers said no. The idea
has its merits, however:
B*O*R*I*N*G] That's the six-letter outlook for the stock market say top
share pickers:
'IN A RUT' says bearded Scottish tipster Bob Semple of London megabrokers
County NatWest Woodmac.
'DON'T JUST DO SOMETHING, STAND THERE' ing of stumbling research powerhouse
James Capel.
'LETHARGIC' says omniscient FT man-about-the-markets Terry Byland.
In fact, three months into Stormin' Norman Schwartzkopf's soaraway stock
market, apathy abounds. In the past month or so, the market has risen from
2,500 on the FT-SE 100 (on March 14) to close this Friday at 2520.1, down 6
on the week. Averaged over a month, the FT-SE's rise works out at less than
a point a trading session.
Even the most energetic analyst can't get excited about that, though some
try. Roger Palmer, Kleinwort Benson's market guru, believes the FT-SE is on
track for 3,000 by December, which would be a rise of 40 per cent on the
year. Even he, however, thinks the market is likely to pause for breath
first.
Wall Street's passage through the 3,000 mark on the Dow-Jones Industrial
Average, successfully accomplished on Thursday, reinforces the sense that a
phase of marking time is beginning.
Under such circumstances, the market searches for stories with as much
vigour (and sometimes as much regard for accuracy) as any tabloid editor.
'FOREIGN THREAT TO ERNIE TWINS' has been one of the week's running tales,
centering round speculation of a bid for Sir Ernest Harrison's Racal
Electronics. This hypothetical bid - involving any or all of Cable &
Wireless, Germany's Mannesmann, Hutchison clutch of US telephone companies -
would be primarily a way of getting hold of the company's 80 per cent stake
in Racal Telecom, the Vodafone cellular telephone network.
Cable and Wireless has wanted to get its hands on Vodafone in the past, of
course. Mannesmann, which is building a cellular network in Germany, was
reported this week to be looking for a big foreign acquisition (though it
hurriedly added that it had nothing particular in mind and no sense of
urgency). Hutchison Whampoa, like the Baby Bells, has big cellular
ambitions.
In tabloid terms, such circumstantial evidence is enough to justify the
story. And so it proved in the stock market. Since the year's low of 166 in
early January, Racal Electronics' share price has risen in Alpine leaps,
with particularly heavy volume in early April. This week's volume, though
smaller, was still significant, and the share closed the week at 238p, up 8
since the previous Friday.
Other stories, though less juicy, still moved stocks. There were the usual
round of 'BRITISH BOFFINS PATENT WONDER DRUG' stories, closely followed by
an equally familiar tale: 'UK WONDER DRUG UNDER THREAT'.
Fisons and SmithKline Beecham benefited from stories of the first sort,
their shares ending the week at 486p, up 7 and 836p, up 30 respectively.
Wellcome suffered from stories in the second category, but ended the week at
535p, up 8. Glaxo - which closed on Friday at 1077p, down 11 on the week -
got both versions. Some investors were still reacting to a patent threat to
Zantac, Glaxo's best-selling ulcer drug, that had emerged the previous week;
others had moved on and were now in a mood best summarised as 'DOCS: UK
WONDER DRUG STILL TOPS]'.
Some stories emerge, of course, only after the share price has moved. J A
Devenish, the West Country regional brewer, has risen spectacularly from the
150p at which it began the month. It closed on Wednesday at 220p, up 47 per
cent in 17 days. The untold story was obviously 'BEER BID BECKONS', because
on Thursday the pub-owner (and former brewer) Boddington offered to buy the
company in a seven for ten share swap that valued Devenish shares at 233p.
One favourite theme re-emerged: 'MR MONEYBAGS] LORD HANSON ADDS Pounds 500m
TO BID WARCHEST' sums up the market's reaction to a Pounds 500m bond issue
from Hanson. The attractions of 9 1/2 per cent finance were brushed aside by
those traders determined to see the bond issue as a prelude to a bid for any
number of tired old favourites, including Pilkington and Allied-Lyons.
In the background, economic news was casting a shadow. 'SOARING JOBLESS
THREATEN TORY HOPES' was one interpretation the market put on Thursday's
rise in unemployment to over 2m, the biggest monthly rise on record. With
local elections now less than two weeks away, the economic news had
political implications as well.
Just as worrying, perhaps, were figures that showed a 1.6 per cent drop in
manufacturing output between January and February, with a steepening rate of
decline and no sign of a trough. Average earnings in the year to February
showed a rise of 9 1/4 per cent, slightly below January's figures, but not
enough to give much hope on inflation.
These numbers all appeared on Thursday; on Friday ('INTEREST RATE CUTS OVER
FOR NOW - OFFICIAL') the Bank of England indicated through the money market
that it had no intention of easing rates in the near future. Since the
Federal Reserve and the Bundesbank had also apparently reached the same
conclusion, UK equities seemed unlikely to receive help from lower interest
rates any time soon.
That thought - and sterling's uncomfortable position caught between a
strengthening dollar and a weakening D-Mark - left the market to close the
week in a sombre mood. You could put it another way: 'THE FUN'S OVER, SAY
STOCK MARKET GLOOMSTERS'. On reflection, though, perhaps Maxwell's lawyers
were right after all.

The Financial Times


London Page II Chart (Omitted). Table (Omitted).

910420

