FT911-4225

FT  20 APR 91 / London Stock Exchange: Water stocks upset


THE WATER sector, particularly the Water Package and the smaller,
lesser-traded stocks, had a rough passage after the London Stock Exchange
confirmed yesterday that trading in the Package will cease at the close of
trading on July 12.
Institutions were said to have been aggressive sellers of the Package on the
basis that they did not want to be left holding large lines of stock in the
smaller water stocks which are difficult to trade in the market. Specialists
said that around 21 per cent of the shares in the ten water companies -
around 460m shares - are still held in the form of the Water Package Units,
They suggested that big funds would sell more Package units and reinvest in
the easily-traded Footsie water stocks: Anglian, North West, Severn Trent
and Thames. But it was also pointed out that the funds may not reinvest all
the proceeds in the water stocks, where the final call of 70p a share falls
due in July.
The Water Package dropped 110 to Pounds 3010. The sharpest declines in the
individual stocks came from Wessex, down 17 to 367p, and Northumbrian, 14
lower at 322p. Thames, the largest of the waters by market capitalisation,
slipped 8 to 306p, while North West, the second-largest, fell 9 to 296p,
Severn-Trent, third largest, 11 to 287p and Anglian 10 to 296p.
Whitbread wanted
Whitbread was the second best performer in the FT-SE 100 index after two
securities houses threw their weight behind the stock.
Both Smith New Court and Nomura had met the company in the previous two
days. Mr Derek Brock at Nomura said that although beer volumes were down on
the previous year, profit margins were growing. The stock had been oversold,
he said, adding that 'it was a good recovery play being heavily into the
consumer end of the sector.'
Mr Mike McCarthy at Smith said he was confident that the company was 'very
well placed' to meet the Monopolies and Mergers Commission directives on
reducing the number of public houses it controls.
Attention had also been drawn to the stock because of its direct and
indirect holdings in a number of second line brewers, especially Boddington,
which bid for Devenish on Thursday. Whitbread rose 8 to 494p.
P&O leasing deal
P & O rose after it announced that it had arranged a leasing deal on 34
ships with a market value of Pounds 400m. At one stage the shares were up 31
at 629p as dealers initially believed it would lead to a significant
reduction in gearing.
But as it became clear that the deal was merely a reshuffling of its debt
rather than a refinancing package the shares fell and by the close they were
up just 5 at 603p.
'The market still liked it because they got a good deal. It also shows they
have financial flair and have muscle in its dealings with the banks,' one
transport specialist said. Analyst believed it may make a rights issue less
likely.
Ever-volatile ADT, the Bermuda-based conglomerate climbed 4 1/2 to 89p on
hopes of progress in its legal dispute with its 29 per cent stakeholder
Laidlaw, the Canadian transport and waste disposal group.
A small profits upgrading from BZW helped Hanson buck the market's downward
trend. The shares added a penny at 226p, after 228p.
Merchant banks stole the limelight in the financial sector. Hambros closed a
further 4 cheaper at 275p with dealers now convinced that the placing of
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya's 5.6 per cent stake in the company would take place
soon. Vizcaya's representative on the Hambros board resigned this week. Last
week Baltica, the Danish group, sold its 14 per cent holding in Hambros.
S G Warburg maintained its recent good progress, closing 4 better at 453p, a
week's rise of 20. It was boosted by success in gaining the lead brokership
for the sale of the Government's remaining British Telecom holding. Analysts
pointed to the strong performance of the stock which has put the bank's
market capitalisation in sight of the Pounds 1bn-mark, the level at which
the shares would become a serious contender for inclusion in the Footsie
100.
Suggestions that a large securities house had downgraded both Land
Securities and Great Portland Estates left the shares 6 down at 536p and 3
lower at 228p respectively.
Annual profits of Pounds 70.7m, against Pounds 75.3m the previous year, from
Hammerson were at the lower end of the range of analysts' expectations. The
shares duly underperformed the market with a fall of 9 to 615p. The company
will be briefing brokers individually next week.
Smith New Court was responsible for clipping 2 1/2 off Amstrad which settled
at 74 1/2 p on keen turnover of 6.2m. Smith lowered its current and next
year profit forecasts by Pounds 5m each - to Pounds 35m and Pounds 50m - and
said Amstrad was suffering along with the likes of computer manufacturers
IBM, Apple and Compaq. Amstrad's satellite dish sales in Germany have
suffered and the company is facing a difficult second half, said Smith,
which emphasised that its view was its own and not that of Amstrad.
A visit by Kleinwort Benson to Cellnet, owned 60-40 by British Telecom and
Securicor/Security Services, left the broker impressed. 'They've put in a
lot of hard work and the results are coming through with Cellnet's market
share rising,' said Mr James Dodd. He said the cellular market 'has
bottomed.' Securicor 'A' rose 8 to 563p and Security Services 18 to 457p. BT
eased 2 1/2 to 361 1/2 p.
Saatchi and Saatchi eased  1/2 to 19 3/4 p after it confirmed that its
Pounds 55m rights issue had been 89.5 per cent taken up. Most of the rump of
the issue had been placed the night before, and another 20.1m was recorded
on the overnight ticker at 19 1/4 p.
Annual results from advertising agency Geers Gross left the shares 3 1/2
lower at 34 1/2 p. The company made Pounds 747,000, a 5.8 per cent
improvement over the previous year's number.
The proposed disposal by United Newspapers of its Scottish regional
newspapers helped the shares continue their recent good performance with a
gain of 3 to 379p.
Johnston Press the Edinburgh-based company which publishes 56 newspapers
across the UK, advanced after a positive trading statement at the company's
annual meeting. The shares added 11 at 214p.
Trading volume in the fully paid version of Bass swelled to 15m as the
residue of the company's rights issue was placed at an average of 938.1p a
share. The rights price was Pounds 8. After the market closed, the company
said that the issue had been 89.6 per cent taken up by institutions. The
remaining 7 1/2 m shares were placed by Cazenove and Panmure Gordon as Bass
slipped 9 to 969p.
Asda fell 6 to 121p as 11m traded on speculation that bad news may be
announced when the company meets institutions and brokers next week. Asda
was under pressure this week after a broker forecast lower profits in
1992/93. The suggestion yesterday was that forecasts for the current year
might be cut after next week's meetings.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1991
NEW HIGHS (195).
BRITISH FUNDS (4) Treas. 8pc 1991, Treas. 3pc 1992, Treas. 2pc IL 1992, Do.
1994, INT. BANK & O'SEAS GOVT. STLG. ISSUES (1) Utd. Mexican States 16 1/2
pc 2008, AMERICANS (25) Abbott Labs., Amdahl, Bankers NY, CPC, California
Energy, Chase Manhattan, Citicorp, Colgate-Palm., Dana, Ford, Gen. Elect.,
Greyhound Dial, Hasbro, Honeywell, Ingersoll-Rand, Lowe's, Manuf. Hanover,
Merrill Lynch, Morgan (JP), Morris (Ph), Pall, Republic NY, Sears Roebuck,
Sun Co., Texaco, CANADIANS (7) Bk. of Montreal, Bk. of Nova Scotia, Brascan,
Central Capital, Derlan, Hudson's Bay, Inco, BANKS (6) ANZ, Espirito Santo,
Mitsui Tst. & Bk., Natl. Australian, Secure Tst., Westpac, BREWERS (2)
Fuller STA, Seagram, BUILDINGS (7) Amco, Blockleys, Breedon, Conder, EBC,
Roskel, Ward, CHEMICALS (3) Caird 7pc Prf. 2009, Engelhard, Yorkshire,
STORES (6) Cantors A, Coles Myer, Fine Art, Helene, Ritz Design, Scholl,
ELECTRICALS (12) Acal, Domino Printing, Forward Tech., Hewlett-Packard,
Kewill Sys., Learmonth & Burchett, Magnetic Matls., Misys, Motorola, Peek,
Pifco, Do. A, ENGINEERING (3) ASW, Johnson & Firth, Victaulic, FOODS (5)
Brake Bros., Low (Wm), Nichols (Vimto), Nurdin Peacock, Sutherland,
INDUSTRIALS (33) AAF Invs., Am. Business Sys., BH Props., BTR Nylex, Baxter
Inc., Bluebird Toys, Bowater, Boxmore, Brierley Invs., CSR, China Light,
Dauphin, Elga, Fletcher Chlnge., Huntleigh Tech., ML Labs., MY, Nobo, Novo
Nordisk B, Pentland, Portmeirion Potts., Powell Duffryn, Russell (A),
Securicor A, Security Servs., SmithKline Bchm A, Do. Equity Units, Stora B
Free, Swallowfield, Walker Greenbank, Whatman, Wills, Young (H), INSURANCE
(8) Alex. & Alex., Aon, Britannic, FBD, Lincoln Natl., Marsh & Mclennan,
Travelers, Utd. Friendly B, LEISURE (12) Boosey & Hawkes, Border TV,
Campari, Capital Radio, Central ITV, Ex-Lands, First Leis., Invicta Sound,
Radio Clyde, Scot. TV, Ulster TV, Wembley, MOTORS (4) Appleyard, Dagenham,
General Mtrs., Mid-States, NEWSPAPERS (4) EW Fact, Johnston Press, News
Corp., Thomson Corp., PAPERS (3) Gold Greenlees, Lawson Mardon, Stat-Plus,
PROPERTY (5) Daejan, Lend Lease, Marylebone Ests., Shaftesbury, Sinclair
Goldsmith, SHOES (1) FII, SOUTH AFRICANS (1) OK Bazaars, TEXTILES (7)
Dawsongroup, Gaskell, Lamont, Leeds, Lyles (S), Yorklyde, Youghal, TRANSPORT
(3) CSX, Hays, Mayne Nickless, TRUSTS (23) Aberforth Smllr. Co's, Acorn,
Derby, Fidelity Japan, GT Chile Fd. Units, Genesis Malaysia Maju, Genesis
Chile Ptg., Grahams Rintoul Stppd. Prf., Intrum Justitia, Invesco MIM 9pc
'95-2000, Korea Europe, Latin Amer., Lon. Amer. Venture, Malaysia Cap.
Select, Malaysian Emrg., Mexico Fd., Moorgate, Scot. & Merc. A, Scot. Cities
A, Siam Fd. (Cayman), Singapore SESDAQ, Sth. East Asian Wrrnts., Thai Euro
Ptg., OILS (6) Exxon, Gulfstream Res. Canada, Mobil, Occidental Pet., Texaco
8pc Cnv., Woodside, PLANTATIONS (1) Highlands, MINES (10) Anglo Amer. Coal,
Anglovaal, Beatrix, De Beers Linked Units, Impala Plat., Normandy Res.,
Northham Platinum, Pasminco, Rustenburg, Western Areas.
NEW LOWS (25).
BRITISH FUNDS (1) Treas. 9pc 2008, BREWERS (1) Merrydown Wine, STORES (2)
Gent (SR), Usher (F), ELECTRICALS (3) Denistron, Sema, TGI, INDUSTRIALS (8)
Assoc. Farmers, Brompton, Courtney Pope, Hartons, Do. 7pc Prf., Scot.
Heritable, Spear (JW), Worthington (AJ), NEWSPAPERS (1) Gardner (DC),
PROPERTY (3) Barlows, Cussins, Wates City of Lon., TRUSTS (1) Afex, OILS (2)
Cairn Energy, Sovereign, PLANTATIONS (1) Rowe Evans, MINES (2) Blyvoor,
Harmony.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

910420

