FT911-4030

FT  22 APR 91 / International Company News: Spanish oil refiner buys rival
from Elf Aquitaine for Pta38bn


   By PETER BRUCE


   MADRID


CEPSA, Spain's second largest oil refiner, has bought its smallest domestic
rival, Ertoil, from Elf Aquitaine for Pta38bn (Dollars 355m).
As part of the deal, Elf is to raise its stake in Cepsa from 25 per cent to
33 per cent.
This will make it the second largest shareholder after the big Spanish
commercial bank, Banco Central, which has 35 per cent of Cepsa and controls
its management.
Ertoil was sold in January to a secretive Elf intermediary for Pta46bn by
its former owners, Ercros, the chemicals group ultimately controlled by the
Kuwait Investment Office.
In addition to the Pta38bn Cepsa has agreed to pay, the company could also
pay an extra Pta9bn if current due diligence procedures revalue Ertoil and
demonstrate as yet undeclared profits.
The purchase gives Cepsa about 25 per cent of Spanish refining capacity,
although it still remains well behind the sector leader, Repsol.
The agreement marks just the latest in a spate of large French investments
in Spanish industry and finance and is the first big stake taken in a
Spanish refiner by one of the big Western oil multinationals. The Abu Dhabi
oil producer, IPIC, owns 10 per cent of Cepsa.
Meanwhile, it was being strongly suggested last week that the country's
other main refiner, Petromed, might be sold off to a foreign oil group by
its owner, Banco Espanol de Credito (Banesto).
The bank's reserves have fallen close to their permitted level of 8 per cent
of assets after taking a large charge on last year's results.
The resale of the Ertoil assets to Cepsa was not unexpected, as each Spanish
refiner is being given a large string of service outlets, in proportion to
refining capacity, owned by the state-controlled monopoly distributor,
Campsa, which is being broken up.
The move will mean Elf products will have unfettered access to at least a
quarter of Spanish service stations.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

910422

