FT911-4136

FT  20 APR 91 / Israelis play for time on Baker plan


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   JERUSALEM


MR JAMES BAKER, the US secretary of state, proposed ways of overcoming
obstacles to an Arab-Israeli peace conference in intensive talks in
Jerusalem yesterday. Israeli leaders, clearly wary of the approach, asked
for time to consider his suggestions.
After winning conditional approval for a regional conference that would
launch bilateral negotiations on two previous Middle East shuttles in the
past six weeks, Mr Baker yesterday began the difficult task of reconciling
important differences between Israel and the Arab side on how the conference
should be structured.
Although both sides declined to give details, it was clear Mr Baker's talks,
first with Mr David Levy, the foreign minister, and later with Mr Yitzhak
Shamir, the prime minister, had been tough. An Israeli spokesman described
them as 'very intense'.
A State Department statement said Mr Baker had put suggestions to Mr Shamir
and Mr Levy on how to bridge the gap between them and the Arab side on a
number of issues. Israel has so far rejected Arab insistence that the
conference should be based on UN resolutions 242 and 338, which call for it
to give up occupied Arab territory, that it should have some umbrella
function in the subsequent bilateral negotiations, and that it should
include a role for the European Community.
Israel also wants the Palestine Liberation Organisation excluded from even
an indirect part in the talks.
Washington has all along favoured a 'land for peace' settlement and is
prepared to give the EC some 'association' with the negotiating process. Mr
Baker is likely to have pressed the Israelis to accept a formula including
some reference to the UN resolutions and to stop recent moves to expand
Jewish settlement in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, which have enraged the
Arab side.
He will meet a Palestinian delegation in Jerusalem today before moving on to
Jordan, Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. He returns next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Photograph Mr Shamir (right) has a few quiet words with Mr
Baker in Jerusalem yesterday (Omitted).

910420

