FT911-4328

FT  19 APR 91 / Parliament and Politics: King pledges a speedy evacuation -
Kurdish Refugees


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


WITH HUNDREDS of thousands of people 'on the very edge of their lives'
Britain was determined to act with the utmost speed to get the Kurdish
refugees to safe havens in northern Iraq, Mr Tom King, the defence
secretary, assured the Commons yesterday.
He told Labour backbenchers who warned the commitment of British troops
might prove no more 'temporary' than that which they undertook in Northern
Ireland more than 20 years ago that the humanitarian considerations were
overwhelming.
Mr King acknowledged: 'It would have been much safer to stay out of this
altogether.'
The disclosure by Mr David Mellor, chief secretary to the Treasury, that
contributions from other nations would largely cover the Pounds 2.5bn cost
of Britain's participation in the Gulf war fuelled further criticism from
the Labour backbenches that more resources should have been devoted to
relieving the plight of the Kurds.
He said total cash contributions made or promised by other governments,
including the most recent Dollars 1bn (Pounds 564m) pledged by Saudi Arabia,
totalled Pounds 2bn.
Mr King, who revealed that some helicopter crews who had served in the Gulf
war had returned early from leave to assist the Kurdish refugees, said it
was imperative to rescue them from the appalling climatic conditions on the
mountains on the Iraq-Turkey border.
The initial purpose was to give those close near death a chance to survive
in the havens being created as a result of the prime minister's initiative.
Mr King warned: 'There is no guarantee yet it will succeed'. He assured MPs
that the British forces protecting the Kurds in the camps to be established
for them in northern Iraq would be able to defend themselves against any
attack by the forces of President Saddam Hussein.
He said any interference would be 'very severely dealt with indeed'.
Mr King described the operation to get the Kurdish refugees down from the
mountains and into the camps as 'phase one'.
The second phase, he said, would be to secure the return of the Kurds to
their homes 'in safety and confidence'.
When urged from the Labour benches to ensure that the Kurds were given the
right of self-determination Mr King stressed that this would become an
'academic' issue unless phase one of the operation was successfully
completed.
He welcomed the memorandum of understanding signed by the Iraqi Government
earlier in the day which allowed the operation of United Nations agencies in
Iraq.
Mr Robert Cryer (Lab Bradford South) alleged that British troops about to
leave the Gulf had destroyed thousands of pounds worth of medical equipment
which could have been used for treating the Kurdish refugees.
Mr King angrily attacked Mr Cryer for not bringing the matter to his notice
earlier instead of appearing to be more interested in engaging in a
'publicity stunt'.
Mr Cryer said that he had photographic evidence to substantiate his charge,
and promised to submit it to Mr King.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

910419

