FT911-4341

FT  19 APR 91 / Wakeham's energy policy is criticised


   By JULIET SYCHRAVA


THE GOVERNMENT'S energy policy is fiercely criticised in a report on energy
efficiency issued by the Commons energy committee yesterday.
The MPs condemn the view of Mr John Wakeham, energy secretary, that energy
efficiency can be left to market forces. They urge the government to set out
a comprehensive policy on energy efficiency.
Among the report's key recommendations are: Early publication of plans for a
carbon or energy tax.
A transport tax on fuel or vehicles and a scheme to minimise private
transport and improve public transport - the committee was 'particularly
disturbed' by the government's lack of clear objectives in this sector.
Speedy introduction of tighter building regulations. Obligatory introduction
of trained energy managers at local authorities and large companies.
Intensive publicity for high-efficiency lighting and the energy-labelling of
home appliances.
The report says EC targets for cutting carbon dioxide (CO) emissions due
shortly will give the UK an important goal for energy efficiency, as cutting
energy consumption is one important way of reducing CO.
It says the government has failed to assess the cost-effectiveness of
different energy-efficiency measures.
Dismissing the energy sec-retary's objection that cost-effectiveness is an
inaccurate science, the committee insists that there is no alternative.
The government must intervene to promote energy efficiency, the MPs
continue. More important, it should not impose costs on the economy in
pursuit of cuts in CO emissions unless it has explored fully energy
efficiency alternatives.
This would rule out, for example, investing in nuclear power to reduce CO
while neglecting options such as home insulation.
Mr Simon Roberts, Friends of the Earth energy campaigner, said: 'There were
27 explicit criticisms of the government and 20 implicit criticisms. The
government will not be able to dodge this report.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

910419

