FT911-4166

FT  20 APR 91 / Despatches: All leaders Great and Dear


   By JOHN RIDDING


A KHAKI-CLAD woman whirls around the roof of the auditorium hanging by one
arm from a Buck Rodgers vintage space scooter.
At the top of her spiralling climb she lets fall a red and white banner.
'Let's model our society on the Juche ideal,' it reads. The gathered
congregation breaks into applause, in time with the military band at the
side of the stage.
Welcome to a night at the theatre, Pyongyang style. Entertainment plays a
supporting role to propaganda. The deification of Kim Il Sung, North Korea's
'Great leader', adoration of his son and heir Kim Jong Il, and the promotion
of 'Juche', the elder Kim's political creed, take centre stage.
As in all totalitarian states, art and entertainment in North Korea are a
serious business. Just how serious is etched on to the strained face of one
male acrobat as he drops vertically from a 30 ft beam to unfurl the slogan
'A match for a hundred' - a tribute to the military prowess of his navy
colleagues.
The dancers, acrobats, musicians and comedians are trained to levels of
technical perfection. Discipline, commitment and ceremony are some of the
few things that North Korea does well. But precisely because showbusiness is
so serious, an evening of entertainment at the Kyoe Kukjang Theatre
Pyongyang is unusually revealing of the society in which it is performed.
Many of the messages are obvious, and deliberately so. A slapstick comedy
duo ridicule South Korea's army in a sketch about the Team Spirit military
exercises which are held every year with US forces stationed in South Korea
and which Pyongyang cites as one of the principal obstacles to easing
tensions on the divided peninsula.
In the sketch, South Korean soldiers are portrayed as foolish puppets,
manipulated by sinister Americans. By contrast, the South Korean peasant who
is angered by the debris of a crashed US jet is depicted as a decent, honest
type.
The message is clear. Ordinary South Koreans are just like their
hard-working socialist brethren in the north. They are separated only by US
imperialists and their puppet government in Seoul.
Equally clear from the evening's programme is the importance of the cult of
personality to the North Korean regime. Stalin, Mao and Ceausescu would have
blushed at the adoration showered on the leaders Great and Dear.
There was a dance, not just in honour of the Dear Leader, but in honour of
the Kimjongilia - a flower developed by a Japanese horticulturalist and
named after the younger Kim. Seven beautiful North Korean women produced the
most privileged of plants from behind white veils. A
The role of the military in North Korean society was also evident. The show
opened to the silhouette of a soldier, standing on one arm, absolutely
still, and clutching a rifle with his free hand. In the background, the sun
rises over the peak of Mount Paektu, birthplace of Tangun, Korea's mythical
founder.
Other acts show backdrops of Mig fighter jets lined up and ready to repel
the imminent US invasion. Smiling pilots raise their arms as they climb into
the cockpits.
But while most of the messages were clear to even the least perceptive
members of the audience, the more important signals were, perhaps, more
subtle.
Like Kremlin-watching of old, it was what was missing from the evening's
line-up as much as what was featured that was of interest. In this case,
whereas the younger Kim was lauded by virtually every juggler, singer and
dancer, his father was conspicuous by his absence.
What this doesn't mean, and could never mean, is that the 'Great Leader' has
become a non-person, shortly to be edited from the history of his Juche
revolution. What it does mean, is that efforts are being made to promote his
son as the legitimate heir and the first hereditary successor to a communist
regime.
Of particular importance in this respect is that the acclaim for the Dear
Leader hailed from a military troupe. It is the military which will likely
prove the kingmaker or breaker after the 79-year-old Kim Il Sung moves down
to heaven, and which has been regarded as a potential source of opposition
to his first-born.
The fact that the army, navy and airforce are publicly applauding Kim Jong
Il's virtues, no less than the fact that he is now referred to, like his
father, as commander in chief, could mean the succession process is moving
steadily forward. On the other hand, it may equally signal that his position
needs buttressing.
Such thoughts are unlikely to be flitting through the minds of the
captivated cadres in the circus theatre. They cheer the acts and clap in
time to the regimental music.
It seems that everything in North Korea's tightly controlled society is done
in time. But for the stagnating country itself, time seems to be standing
still.

The Financial Times


London Page XX Photograph Graven idol, Kim Il Sung's personality cult
touches all (Omitted).

910420

