FT911-4240

FT  20 APR 91 / Economic Diary


TODAY: International conference in Stockholm on global security. The
Federation of Economic Organisations (Keidanren) send a mission to South
Africa to study investment conditions.
TOMORROW: United Kingdom 1991 Census day. Amalgamated Engineering Union
conference in Eastbourne.
MONDAY: CBI/FT survey of distributive trades (March). Retail sales (March -
provisional). Start of two-day Financial Times conferences on 'European
securities markets in the 90s' and 'Managing financial risks' in London.
Start of two-day meeting of the European Community agriculture council in
Luxembourg. Mr FW de Klerk, South African president, starts two-day visit to
Britain. US and Japanese officials will meet in Washington for construction
talks, less than two weeks before the deadline for the US to determine if
sanctions should be imposed on Japan for closing its market.
TUESDAY: Finished steel consumption and stock changes (fourth quarter
final). Balance of payments current account and overseas trade figures
(March). US durable goods (March). Institute of Directors annual convention
at Royal Albert Hall. Mr Asil Nadir to appear at Bow Street magistrates
court.
WEDNESDAY: Index of production and construction for Wales (fourth quarter).
New construction orders (February-provisional). Conference in Prague on
future of the European security system, organised by Mr Jiri Dienstbier,
Czechoslovak foreign minister, and Mr Manfred Woerner, Nato secretary
general.
THURSDAY: Building societies monthly figures (April). Energy trends
(February). US import and export prices for March. International Monetary
Fund holds meeting in Washington.
FRIDAY: Engineering sales and orders at current and constant prices
(February). Quarterly house purchase finance statistics (first quarter). US
gross national product for first quarter (preliminary); corporate profits in
the fourth quarter (revised). Anglo-Irish inter-governmental conference
meets in London.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

910420

