FT911-4180

FT  20 APR 91 / Books: High jinks at the Gargoyle - A gossipy book about the
club's owner and founder, David Tennant


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


DAVID TENNANT AND THE GARGOYLE YEARS by Michael Luke Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Pounds 20, 211 pages
MEARD STREET is one of those insignificant little streets hidden in the maze
of Soho. If you approach it from Shaftesbury Avenue up Dean Street it is the
one on your left after Old Compton Street. It was here, from 1925 to 1982,
that the Gargoyle Club - a kind of English counterpart to the smart bohemian
cafes of pre-war Montparnasse - stood firm. The Gargoyle was founded, owned
and run by the Hon. David Tennant. He relinquished control in 1979. It
lingered on for a few sad years, becoming a disco hosted by David Ogilvy
before it shut up shop.
From the start the Gargoyle was a hit with the artistically gifted, the
well-connected, and all their groupies. It had not one but at least three
heydays. The first was throughout the 1920s and 1930s, its poshest period.
The members would all wear evening-dress and the principal rooms were
adorned with two of Matisse's finest paintings, 'The Red Studio' (now in the
Museum of Modern Art in New York) and 'The Studio, Quai St. Michel' (now in
the Phillips Collection in Washington DC).
It was through Matisse that the Gargoyle acquired what anyone who visited it
at any time remembers about it, the design of the ballroom-restaurant.
Tennant explained to Matisse that he planned to give that principal room a
coffered Moorish ceiling painted in 22-carat gold-leaf. Matisse said he knew
of an 18th century chateau whose contents, then being sold, included some
tall looking-glasses which could be cut into thousands of small-squares and
set into the walls. The effect was, as Matisse had calculated, eclatant.
More like a Klimt than a Matisse in the event, but stunning.
The second heyday was during the Second World War. Like the nearby Windmill
Theatre, the Gargoyle never closed. Its survival, in pristine form (in spite
of a Nazi bomb or two nearby) meant that the club could serve as a chic
up-market refuge for war-weary members. Those still working in London or on
leave were able to step back into a world where the pre-war dream could
still be recovered for an oblivious few hours.
As the title to this readable, gossipy book suggests, Michael Luke weaves
the story of Tennant's private life around the chronicle of the club. When
it began, he was married to the actress Hermione Baddeley, a star of
intimate revue, whose vital presence in the Gargoyle after the show was as
regular as his. Tennant's own dream was shattered by the war. He found life
in the officers' mess boring and suburban after the high-jinks of the
Gargoyle. He only discovered his true wartime niche when he became a cook in
the Small Vessels Pool of the Merchant Navy.
After the war the Club entered upon its third heyday with an influx of new
members from the art-world, Lucian Freud (once described as the Agony in the
Gargoyle), Francis Bacon, Colquhoun & MacBryde. A regular nightly floor-show
was a marital row conducted across the dance-floor by the actor Robert
Newton and his wife Natalie.
The club was where the Fitzrovians went to continue drinking after closing
time: not J. Maclaren-Ross - his territory was strictly circumscribed by the
Wheatsheaf in Rathbone Place - but other writers, Dylan Thomas, Ivan Moffat,
George Barker, Elizabeth Smart, would make their unsteady way across Oxford
Street to Meard. Smart defined the Club's peculiar appeal for her and many
others: 'There were all those passions: people falling in love with each
other and somebody's wife was there with somebody else and things of that
kind getting out of hand which made it lovely. There was nobody sitting
there just munching.'
Luke reminds us that David Tennant's mother (born Pamela Wyndham) was one of
the luminaries of the Souls, the high-minded Edwardian coterie. Some of its
spirit he finds transmitted to the Gargoyle, which however, he rightly
insists, was not an elite. Anyone with a contribution to make to the
perpetual party could join the Gargoyle. It was a place where people talked,
danced, drank excessively, behaved badly and no one minded, least of all the
proprietor.
An exhibition of paintings 'The Artists of David Tennant's Gargoyle Club
1925-1952' opens at the Michael Parkin Gallery, Motcomb Street, London, on
April 24 and runs until May 10.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI Photograph Tennant on holiday with his second wife, Virginia
(Omitted).

910420

