FT911-4278

FT  20 APR 91 / Low bank lending growth fuels credit crunch fears


   By RACHEL JOHNSON, Economics Staff


GROWTH IN bank lending is at a record low, according to figures released
yesterday, arousing fears of a credit crunch in a protracted UK recession.
The Bank of England announced that bank and building society lending rose by
Pounds 700m in March, against the City forecast of about Pounds 4bn. Lending
rose by just 0.1 per cent on the month to take the annual rate to 11.1 per
cent, the weakest since records began 15 years ago.
This sharp contraction in credit growth after February's Pounds 5.9bn rise
severely reduced hopes of an early consumer-led recovery to take Britain out
of recession in the second half of the year.
Mr Neil Mackinnon, economist at Yamaichi, the Japanese bank, said: 'When
bank lending collapses, economic recovery remains depressed.'
The monetary data underscored Thursday's bleak un-employment and factory
output figures, which suggested that the UK recession had yet to touch its
trough.
This sparked hopes of lower interest rates on London's money markets - which
the Bank of England extinguished by offering to lend yesterday afternoon at
the prevailing bank base rate of 12 per cent for seven days.
This firm signal that the authorities deemed current monetary conditions
appropriate for the next week led to the important three-month interbank
rate closing just  1/32 down at 11 25/32 -11 21/32 per cent.
The evidence of such tight monetary conditions caused amazement among City
economists and traders.
'Bank lending is extremely low. The markets regarded the figure as nothing
short of amazing,' said Mr John Shepperd, of Warburg Securities.
Economists offered two explanations for standstill in credit growth.
They suggested banks were restricting availability of credit because of weak
balance sheets and a dearth of quality borrowers. Demand for new finance had
dried to a trickle as the recession deepened in the early months of this
year.
Figures from the Committee of London and Scottish Bankers painted a
similarly depressed picture. Total group lending to the UK private sector
fell by Pounds 600m, after a large seasonal rise had been expected.
The Treasury played down fears of a credit crunch, pointing to a recent
industrial survey which showed that just 4 per cent of companies were having
difficulty obtaining external finance.
In a recent paper, however, the Bank of England concluded that borrowers did
seem less willing to add to debt and that lenders had tightened lending
criteria.
However, the Bank said there was 'little evidence of credit crunch in the
original sense of lenders being unable to lend because they are unable to
raise funds'.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

910420

