FT911-4177

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: The greening of artists - The pros and cons of charity
auctions


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


ROLL UP, roll up for the great charity art auction. Buy a masterpiece by a
contemporary artist at a knock down price while helping a good cause. Well,
that's the theory and the practice will be tested in the next couple of
weeks, with the Green Contemporary Art Sale taking place at Phillips next
Thursday with the aim of raising around Pounds 200,000 for the Green Fund, a
charity which finances environmental research, and Amnesty International
benefiting on April 30 from an auction at Bonhams.
You can recognise the tender hearted artists by the frequency with which
their names feature in the catalogues - Maggi Hambling, Elizabeth Frink,
Susan Hiller, Sir Hugh Casson can usually be relied upon to give something
and appear in both sales, as do Paula Rego, Tom Philips and Richard Long.
Some artists always refuse, in particular big names like Francis Bacon and
Lucian Freud whose work would bring in serious money. In the main artists
rally round, offering some small sketch, or a drawing, or a print, or a
scrap from the studio, or even producing an etching which can be handed out
every time the begging call comes. The dread spectre of 'auction art' is
starting to stalk the land.
Charity auctions became big business in 1987 when director Nick Serota left
the Whitechapel Gallery well funded by raising over Pounds 1.3m from a
charity auction. He was able to call in favours from all the artists he had
backed over the years, and the prices raised were sensational - records of
Pounds 300,000 for Anselm Kiefer; Pounds 155,000 for Howard Hodgkin; Pounds
32,000 for Sean Scully.
Nothing since has matched this, although Lighthouse, the AIDS charity,
raised Pounds 460,000, thanks to an important Hockney. Auction houses will
still give their services (in the hope of meeting potential customers);
artists are still generous; 'personalities' will still attend - and seldom
bid; but the slump in the art market and the outright opposition of some
dealers has made the work of the organisers much more difficult.
In the main dealers hate charity auctions. They fear that the work of their
artists will sell for less than the market price and undermine their
livelihood. They also see sales escape them. Gilbert & George had to
threaten their dealer Anthony D'Offay with desertion to gain his
acquiescence to give work to AIDS charities. You can understand the feelings
of dealers like Nigel Greenwood when a large gouache by the popular Scottish
artist Adrian Wiszniekwski appears at the Green Sale with a Pounds 14,500
estimate when it would otherwise hang on his gallery walls. Often dealers
feel impelled to attend the charity auction and bid up their artists to
reasonable, or even exotic, heights.
Artists have learned to exploit charity auctions. Some give their work
freely, for the cause, or the hope of being spotted by rich patrons. But
increasingly they split any successful bid with the charity, usually on a
fifty-fifty basis. Since they often get no better deal from their galleries
they are not out of profit and have done some good.
The problem with charity art auctions is that no one is quite sure of their
status. Much of the art given is not of the highest quality and bidding can
be pathetic: Sotheby's most recent auction, for the Worcester Cathedral
Appeal, did not take off. But good stuff can also pass cheaply.
This month's auctions are better than average, especially the Green Sale
which includes an original design by Richard Long, of 97 turf bricks shaped
into a circle; a Christo collage and works by Sean Scully and Glyn Williams.
It could be that a charity auction will restore confidence to the battered
market in contemporary art.
London's 6th International Contemporary Art Fair is open for business this
weekend at Olympia. It is not very international - hardly anything from the
US, France, Italy and Germany, the power houses of modern art; nor
particularly contemporary, with dealers like Peter Nahum showing work which
was hardly fresh 50 or more years ago.
This is because at a time of recession in the art market the organisers
could not be too choosy. Stands were going cheap and there is a warm welcome
for art colleges and charities, small magazines and unrepresented artists,
and for dealers from Brazil and Yugoslavia, Alicante and Tel Aviv.
It actually makes for a jollier spread than usual: not over poweringly large
and very eclectic. The pretension has largely evaporated with the boom and
there are hundreds of modestly priced works on offer which would interest
conservative collectors looking for a tasteful nude, or a flower painting,
or a decorative landscape.
Many of the big London dealers are absent, but Bernard Jacobson holds the
line with works by Spencer, Bomberg, Hitchens and Ben Nicholson (including a
Pounds 650,000 'museum' piece), surrounded by other dealers, like David
Messum, who have reacted to the depression by going down market with lesser
known contemporary artists.
At the opening party 2000 closet art lovers admired each other rather than
the art and red spots were rare, but the RAAB Galley was selling Ken Currie
and Waddington disposed of a Patrick Heron. With so much that is commonplace
on show the more challenging work of the youthful avant-garde made a greater
impact than in the past - especially the squashed daffodils by Anya
Gallaccio, the rolls of piping stacked in a corner by Marie-Jane Opie, and
the light boxes of Catherine Yass, all London Young Artists.
Trade is still very slow, although at least passers-by sometimes stop to ask
the price these days. There must be great bargains at Olympia this weekend.
Five years ago the Contemporary Art Society acquired there a work by the
youthful John Kirby for Pounds 650. This week Angela Flowers sold a recent
Kirby for over Pounds 30,000. Given the current plight of debt ridden
dealers this should be a Fair for buyers rather than browsers.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

910420

