FT911-4277

FT  20 APR 91 / Exam questions stump Major and Kinnock


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


WESTMINSTER'S most compelling political mystery took another bewildering
turn yesterday when Mr Neil Kinnock admitted for the second time in a week
that he had inadvertently misled the voters about his O-levels.
As the Labour leader broke cover with a formal statement from his House of
Commons office, Downing Street kept its nerve. Mr John Major apparently
could still not remember how many of the precious certificates he had
stashed away with his boyhood train sets. If he did, he was not saying.
The view in No 10 is that the prime minister has rather more important
things to do than scrabble round in his Huntingdon attic looking for
dog-eared school records. There has, after all, been the Kurdish crisis, the
replacement for the poll tax, and the state of the economy to occupy him.
With some at Westminster beginning to take the issue seriously, however,
there was a suggestion that he might spare an hour or so this weekend to
unearth them.
Mr Kinnock's carefully-crafted statement said his schoolboy achievements had
included passes in eight O-levels, which mark the first
nationally-recognised educational hurdle for adolescents. He had,
incidentally, also clocked up three A-levels (two grade Cs and a D) and a
degree in industrial relations.
The admission followed his assertion on Tuesday that 'everyone remembers how
many O-levels they have'. In his case, he declared, the number was six. Five
minutes later that had risen to seven.
Unforgiving political journalists wondered cynically whether the syllabus
for the pass in 'special arithmetic' he had chalked up 30 years ago had
included simple addition.
The slip prompted the London Evening Standard newspaper to launch its own
intensive probe into what Westminster's investigative reporters have dubbed
'Schoolgate'.
The result was yesterday's statement and a terse warning to others not to
overstep the mark. Mr Kinnock has put the Standard's report in the hands of
his solicitors.
Mr Major is not off the hook. He recently told a television interviewer that
he thought he had picked up 'six, seven, eight' O-level passes from his
correspondence course studies after leaving Rutlish Grammar, aged 16. But
'to tell you the truth I can't remember'.
That was not good enough for Mr Eric Illsley. The Labour MP for Barnsley (10
O-levels, three A-levels) demanded that Mr Major lift the veil on his
academic record.
'I think we should be told,' Mr Illsley said in a phrase which clearly
reflected his O-level pass in English Literature.
Major defended, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

910420

