FT911-4171

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: Nat's hard bop


   By GARRY BOOTH


NAT ADDERLEY is rarely mentioned without reference to his older brother,
altoist Cannonball. When jazz was getting cool on the West Coast, they were
a part of the East Coast force that stayed with the tougher bop sound: thus
hard bop or post bop. Since Cannonball's death in 1975, cornettist Nat has
kept the faith as well the old line-up of alto, piano, bass and drums. We
should be glad, because at a time when a great deal of diverse music is
grouped under the jazz banner, it is useful to be reminded of how a tough
quintet armed with classic material sounds.
This hard but flexible style flows easily from the Adderley cornet and
altoist Vincent Herring, with his own furious soloing, is the perfect foil.
It's not terribly fashionable but the combination is a hard one to beat in
the swinging stakes.
Neither Adderley nor Herring would have quite such spring and vitality
without the unerring time and accents of drummer Jimmy Cobb and seemingly
haphazard bass strumming of Walter Booker. They appeared to be strange
bedfellows at the Jazz Cafe on Monday: implacable Jimmy Cobb, coiffed and
tidy, has a determined, unexcitable technique which concentrates on the
hi-hat. Booker, a large shambolic man, plucks, strums, bows and gropes his
instrument with abandon. They work together wonderfully. Add in the
insistent piano accompaniment of young Rob Bargad for the perfect
cornet/alto solo launch pad in standards like 'Autumn Leaves' and
'Loverman'.
Adderley is an entertaining performer who likes (and writes) strong
melodies: his style fits somewhere between Lee Morgan and Miles Davis. He
enjoys a tale - it's hard to imagine someone from the ascetic German ECM
stable, say, bragging unashamedly about problems with the Internal Revenue
Service: 'This is my favourite song. I adore it. The royalties have been
tremendous.' He was talking about Work Song, a hooky jazz hit which has been
borrowed by everyone from Nina Simone to Conway Twitty. Nat sold 10,000
copies, his brother 250,000 and Herb Alpert two and a half million. 'I'm
still trying to figure out what I did wrong with it,' says Adderley. Nothing
so far as I can see.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

910420

