FT911-4168

FT  20 APR 91 / Hawks and Handsaws: A sporting chance


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


ON THURSDAY I was chatting to the sports minister in his crimson-flocked
office near St Pancras. I am afraid I didn't catch his name but I am sure it
was the sports minister because of his demeanour and apparel.
His vestments and accessories included: a purple cricket cap, a golf club
blazer, a tie emblazoned with duck-shooting scenes, a stop-watch, three
different whistles, a green swimming towel and a starter's pistol which he
fired in the air now and then, much to my distress.
With him was his political secretary, a fresh-faced youth with a gymnast's
build whom I took, initially, to be a member of the Bruges group but who
proved, subsequently, to be a sensitive soul with special skills in archery,
canoeing, equestrianism and handball.
'Jolly decent of you to have traipsed over here,' said the sports minister
briskly, stirring his coffee and firing his starter's pistol.
'Thing is, my department would like to employ your services as a consultant
to help steer us through the minefield of a British bid to stage the Olympic
Games in 2000.
'As you know, Britain's national Olympic committee meets in London next
Wednesday to discuss whether Manchester or London should bid for the 2000
Games. This is a major opportunity for us all. Good for infrastructure. Get
the country moving. Rally round the flag. But the problems are legion and
mega. Clapped-out infrastructure. Low national morale. Savage political and
regional in-fighting. London or Manchester? Have we got the stadiums? Have
we got the money? Can't afford a cock-up.
'It is because of these imponderables that we have turned to you, Michael.
We'll pay you Pounds 300 per day from now until 2000, plus generous
expenses, so long as you keep us out of trouble and strive with every sinew
to help us stage the most successful Games since Nero visited Olympia and
clean-swept the golds. Now, then, down to basics. How many Olympics have you
attended?'
'Four,' I said. 'Mexico. Montreal. Los Angeles. Seoul.'
'Will you be jetting to Barcelona for next year's Games?'
'Not on your life,' I said. 'Trying to write vivaciously about 28 Olympic
sports, as well as the drugs and politics, takes years off your life. It's
someone else's turn.'
'Good,' said the sports minister. 'That means you can concentrate your
energies on a UK bid for the millennial Games. So which is it to be - London
or Manchester?'
'London,' I said. 'Manchester had its turn when bidding for the 1996
Olympics, but lost out to Atlanta. Anyway, I've never been to Manchester. It
sounds quite dire. Also provincial. No-one's going to want to go to
Manchester in the year 2000.'
'So London it is. What's London's biggest problem?'
'You are,' I said, 'or rather, the government. If London is to stand an
earthly it has got to want the Games badly, has got to do its homework,
prepare a watertight bid - and market it confidently. London's main rivals
are likely to be Paris, Berlin, Sydney and Peking. They won't muck around.
The stakes will be enormous.
'As my friends at Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte said last December after
carrying out a preliminary study of London's challenge: 'Realising a London
Olympics will be far from easy but not impossible. London could win but it
requires a level of unity and co-operation which has not been seen in recent
years.''
'My sentiments entirely,' said the sports minister. He turned to his
political secretary. 'Julian, get me Downing Street. I'll talk to the prime
minister.'
'No can do,' said Julian. 'I tried earlier, but they're all in a dither  -
wavering and wobbling all over the place. John Major is choosing a colour
scheme for his new kitchen but is dithering between citron and vanilla.'
'All right,' said the sports minister. 'Michael, how much money will we
need?'
I said: 'Without getting technical, rather a lot of it. One of the keys to
London's bid will be whether it can promise a surplus on the Games of
approximately Dollars 200m in 1991 dollars which it is prepared to hand over
to the International Olympic Committee. The IOC will want its pound of
flesh.
'On the other hand, there will be plenty of benefits. Talking ballpark,
London will have to spend about Dollars 1bn in present-day money but ought
to engineer a gross income of about Dollars 1.2bn - serious money.'
'Julian,' said the minister, 'get me Norman Lamont. It is essential that the
Treasury backs us every inch of the way.'
'No can do,' said Julian amiably. 'They are going through their books today
and are wavering rather badly. With an election in October there is a lot
they must fudge. They're not answering calls.'
'Michael,' said the minister, 'in which part of London should we stage the
Games?'
I said: 'Forget Wembley stadium. That would be awful. Hold them in Docklands
and the East Thames corridor. Major development is afoot there already, and
you could use the river to link competition sites. But you will have to get
a move on with the planning consents.'
'Julian, get me Michael Heseltine at the environment department.'
'No can do,' said the secretary. 'Even Heseltine is wobbling dreadfully
today. The department has ripped out its switchboard and changed all its fax
numbers. Neither can I get transport, nor any department. They've all gone
to ground.'
The sports minister straightened his cricket cap, blew all his whistles and
fired his starter's gun.
'That leaves us three,' he said. 'It's us against the world. Michael, here
is a Coutts cheque for Pounds 300. Tomorrow, Julian will give you another
one. He will keep that up until 2000. London will stage the Games. Nero
would be proud of us.'
Keith Wheatley and Peter Berlin: Page XI.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

910420

