FT911-4026

FT  22 APR 91 / Swedish Bonds: Heavy supply of paper pushes up yields


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


A HEAVY supply of paper in the Swedish government bond market pushed yields
up about 15 basis points last week, ahead of another large debt auction
today.
A SKr5bn issue of 11-year government bonds will be sold at the monthly
auction, marking a further increase in the level of government debt sales.
Recent auctions have been for around SKr4bn, compared with only
SKr2bn-SKr3bn last year. Dealers are now speculating that the monthly
auctions will soon total SKr6bn.
In addition, the Swedish debt office announced issues of six and 12-month
T-bills totalling SKr7bn, which added to the surplus of paper.
The Swedish bond market, with outstandings of SKr367bn (including T-bills),
is open to foreign investors, but bonds must be held by designated Swedish
institutions.
Ten-year government bond yields rose from 11.48 per cent to 11.64 per cent
last week. However, the market's weakness follows a sustained rally during
recent months, which pushed yields down from a high of 13 1/2 per cent.
Lower than expected tax revenues, as a result of economic recession, account
for the increased level of debt issuance, according to Mr William Ledward,
European economist at Nomura Research.
In addition, the government has been adjusting the profile of its debt by
using foreign exchange reserves to buy back foreign currency debt, then
issuing domestic bonds. For example, last week Sweden announced a tender
offer to buy back over Dollars 1bn in Eurodollar bonds and Yankee bonds.
On Tuesday, the Swedish government will present its revised budget for the
financial year 1991-1992. The deficit for 1990-1991 is now estimated to run
to SKr18.5bn, a sizeable jump from the government's January estimate of
SKr2bn.
Bond traders are concerned that the ruling Social Democratic party may move
to increase public spending to counter its current political unpopularity.
With the September election now on the horizon, recent polls give the Social
Democrats only 30 per cent of the votes. Any such expansionary policy could
spell further weakness for the bond market.
In the longer term, however, there are positive signs for the market.
There is widespread speculation that, either before the election but more
likely later in the year, the Swedish kronor will be linked to the European
currency unit within a narrow band.
Currently, the kronor is linked to a basket of currencies, in which the
dollar has a 25 per cent weighting.
Such a change would push bond yields down, dealers say, and encourage
investment by European institutions. The relatively high level of yields in
Sweden currently includes a risk premium, because the currency has often
been devalued in the past, according to Mr Karim Basta, senior analyst at
Merrill Lynch.
Linkage to the Ecu would be considered a stabilising factor, as well as
representing a positive step in the development of Sweden's relationship
with the European Economic Community, which the country has announced plans
to join.
In addition, favourable balance of payments data and expectations of 4 per
cent to 5 per cent inflation in 1992 are likely to support the bond market.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

910422

