FT911-4194

FT  20 APR 91 / A Duckburg hall-of-famer: The birthday of a comic book
artist of genius


   By JOHN WESTBROOKE


ONE OF the greatest 20th century writers for children was 90 last month, and
nobody even knows his name. His work appeared in a medium seldom taken
seriously, and the only signature to appear on it was that of another man -
Walt Disney - but for a quarter of a century Carl Barks wrote and drew tales
of Donald Duck and his Uncle Scrooge McDuck, the wittiest of all comic
books.
Anonymous he may have been, but children who read Walt Disney's Comics and
Stories from 1942 on were soon able to tell his style from that of the other
unsigned contributors. When his name finally became known to outsiders after
his retirement, fans who compared notes (I was one) found that many of them
had known him by the same description: the good artist.
In his company we explored the Andes for Inca treasure, the Caribbean for
buried pirate loot (it turned out to be a potato), the labyrinth for the
minotaur, Colchis for the golden fleece, the South Seas for the Flying
Dutchman.
The man whose visions took us so far abroad had a workaday background
similar to Disney's own. He was a Midwest farm-boy who tried various manual
jobs before deciding that drawing was an easier way to make a living and
joining the Disney Studios as an in-betweener (the ones who draw the dull
bits) on Donald Duck cartoons.
Disney's original star, Mickey Mouse, was a rural scapegrace, smart and
sassy; but his success brought him respectability and Disney needed a new
rapscallion character to take on his antisocial characteristics. Donald,
introduced in the early 1930s, earned the job, soon surpassing Mickey's
popularity. He acquired, on permanent loan from his sister Dumbella, three
nephews, Huey, Dewey and Louie, and with them went through various short,
hot-tempered, slapstick battles. A full-length film, Pirate's Gold, was
planned but never completed. Barks and a colleague adapted it into a comic
book, which you can now buy for Dollars 1,000 or so.
In 1942 Barks quit and began instead to work for Western Publishing, which
produced 32-page Disney comic books under licence. Soon he was writing, and
drawing, a 10-page story every month - at eight frames, and Dollars 12.50, a
page. Donald was shown at war with his nephews, his neighbours, and his own
vainglorious bungling; and Barks became adept at providing more gags,
funnier and better drawn, than other comic books.
Gradually, he learned to tone down the slapstick violence he inherited from
the films, to polish his story-telling skills (providing, for instance, a
little punchline at the end of each page), and to write dialogue: the film
Donald managed only incomprehensible angry squawks, but on paper he had to
talk.
Barks tucked a stream of sight gags away in the backgrounds to his stories,
and he extended the duck family: vapid girlfriend Daisy, Grandma Duck,
super-lucky Gladstone Gander, inventor Gyro Gearloose. He also provided
Donald with his Uncle Scrooge, mean, grouchy and acquisitive.
He had already started featuring Donald in longer adventure stories of 30
pages or so and Scrooge, with his wealth and his greed, initially proved an
excellent narrative device; but with a little judicious softening of his
personality he became popular in his own right and in 1952 started to appear
in his own comic book.
As a study of wealth, Scrooge McDuck has few rivals in American fiction. The
'skinflintillionaire' duck keeps three cubic acres of money in his money
bin, a vast, cubic, safe-like building on a hill overlooking Duckburg, a
potent symbol - if you like that sort of thing  - of the way money looms
over American life. Inside, in one of Barks's happiest inventions, he
wallows in it: 'I like to dive in it like a porpoise, burrow through it like
a gopher, and toss it up and let it hit me on the head.'
Barks never actually thought of himself as writing for children, just for
himself. Like Beatrix Potter, he saw no reason to avoid long words. The
result is some quirky language that sticks in my mind after 30 years.
'Gladstone may be a dope six days of the week, but this is Monday,' reads
one helpful marginal comment. 'We'll have the old fashioned ceremony, where
the bride does handsprings and the groom is carried in on a tray,' orders a
Persian king planning his daughter's wedding.
His plots were as inventive as his dialogue. Underground, the ducks
encounter the Terries and Fermies, globular creatures who create earthquakes
for fun. In the Andes, they visit the town of Plain Awful, where everything,
even hens' eggs, is square and everyone talks with an Alabama accent.
In the Himalayas, they find a land called Tralla La, the inhabitants of
which have never known money, or greed. Unfortunately, Scrooge brings a few
bottle tops which, by reason of their scarcity, soon become currency and
corrupt the entire country; many a reader must have been introduced to the
laws of supply and demand by this tart, funny fable.
And to the romance of history and myth, of far-off times and lands too.
Barks never travelled and took some of his most arresting images from back
copies of the National Geographic: Himalayan valleys, Central American
jungles, dirty weather on the Labrador coast.
Throughout it all he kept his cast's personalities lively and consistent:
brave, practical kids; single-minded, stingy Scrooge; and Donald, a little
bit courageous, a little bit lazy, a little bit competent, the epitome no
longer of a barnyard animal but of a suburban man with dreams of adventure.
Even Barks's greatest fans acknowledge that his later stories were sometimes
curmudgeonly and weary. He knew it, and retired in 1967.
But about the same time, public recognition of Carl Barks, and of the
quality of his work, started to grow. Prices of original editions soared,
and hardback reprints were published; magazines dedicated to discussion of
his oeuvre appeared; a full biography has appeared in print.
All that for a man who drew comics? Yes, and worth it too; nothing's too
much for the work of the Good Artist.

The Financial Times


London Page VII Picture Uncle Scrooge McDuck, a timeless character
(Omitted).

910420

