FT911-4103

FT  20 APR 91 / The BBC at bay: Does quality come first, or should the BBC
submit to market forces?


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


WHAT IS to become of the BBC? With its two television channels, five radio
networks, 25,000 staff, and annual budget of Pounds 1.4bn it is arguably the
biggest broadcasting organisation in the world. When the tumult over
satellite television and the franchise auctions for Channel 3 has died away,
the BBC's role in a more diverse and competitive broadcasting environment,
even its very survival, will inevitably return to the centre of discussion.
The re-appointment this week of Marmaduke Hussey as chairman indicates that
pressures for a radical upheaval during the Thatcher years have given way to
a more evolutionary spirit. However, a large and influential body of
opinion, not all of it Tory, continues to question the need for a public
service broadcasting organisation of this size. The most radical objectors
suggest that the need for public service broadcasting is disappearing
altogether. They point to the high quality drama produced by the commercial
sector, such as Central's Inspector Morse and Granada's Casebook Of Sherlock
Holmes, to the arts coverage in London Weekend's South Bank Show and the
impressive work of Channel 4 News and suggest that all but a few odds and
ends (education and religion, perhaps, public access and children's
programmes) can be profitably supplied by commercial broadcasters.
Even the least radical objectors tend to ask 'Why do we need the BBC to
import mindless Australian soap operas such as Neighbours or to run a pop
music channel such as Radio 1?' Since commercial broadcasters are only too
happy to provide that sort of thing, why should viewers pay bigger and
bigger licence fees - up from Pounds 71 to Pounds 77 from April 1 - to the
BBC? After a decade when bodies as disparate as the coal industry and the
civil service have been shedding manpower, and when ITV companies are
cutting staff by as much as 40 per cent it seems odd, even scandalous, to
some that the BBC continues to support a bureaucracy which looks to them
like a leftover from the British Empire.
Sir John Harvey Jones, former chairman of ICI, who gave a vivid
demonstration of his uncompromising views on business efficiency in the BBC2
Troubleshooter series, has described the scheme of director-general Michael
Checkland to save Pounds 75m a year by 1993 by shedding 1,400 jobs as
'rather like sharpening a pencil: nonsense]' Although not everybody accepts
Sir John's assertion that the wage bill can be cut by a third and top
management by a half, most people, even inside the BBC, agree that large
cuts need to be made.
Greg Dyke, managing director of London Weekend, who is regarded as one of
the tougher and more pragmatic management thinkers among ITV's younger
generation, says recent experience in ITV companies suggests that large
savings could be made at the BBC, partly by cutting top management and
improving cost disciplines. 'I charge everyone in our building Pounds 57 a
square foot for where they sit and it concentrates the mind amazingly,' he
said.
But behind these practical considerations lies a philosophical debate about
whether the size and status of the BBC is necessary to guarantee the quality
of British broadcasting as a whole. This debate has been given fresh urgency
by the development of new technologies which could usher in greater
diversity. Because of the possibility of many new channels, some ask whether
it is dangerous to have one fish in the broadcasting pool so much bigger
than all the others. And should it be involved in every part of broadcasting
from the tiniest local radio systems to the World Service, from regional
television to national networks? Some politicians argue that this may
produce arrogance as well as a worrying degree of influence.
However, David Attenborough, former manging director of BBC television,
interviewed recently on Face To Face, argued that although the BBC had to
change, its continued existence was justified by the high quality and
relatively low costs of its programmes.
It has been said that if British commercial television is better than
commercial television elsewhere (as showings at international festivals
suggest) the reason is that Britain's commercial broadcasters have had to
compete with the BBC for audiences and prestige. In the words of Greg Dyke:
'The BBC has always set the standard.'
It is true that the 26-part history of World War Two, The World At War, one
of the greatest documentary series ever made anywhere, was an ITV
production. Would it have been produced, though, but for the
programme-making ethos created in Britain by the BBC, makers of the earlier
documentary series Civilisation, and The Ascent Of Man? It was these, the
first about the arts, presented by Kenneth Clark, the second about the
sciences, presented by Jacob Brownowski, which showed that a serious and
informative television series could attract large audiences, albeit not of
soap opera dimensions. As often as not, when an international jury awards
another prize to a British programme it is this knack of combining the
serious with the popular which they are recognising. Even if British
independent programme makers have mastered the art, it was the BBC - in this
as in so many areas - which showed the way.
Would ITV continue to produce material of world-beating quality if the BBC
were not standing alongside setting the standards with Life On Earth, The
Singing Detective, Alan Bennett's superb monologue dramas Talking Heads or a
string of ground-breaking comedy successes from Till Death Us Do Part, with
its monstrous working class Tory Alf Garnett, to Fawlty Towers? with the
manic Basil and infuriating Sybil? It seems unlikely. Life On Earth stands
at the pinnacle of natural history programme making, put there by the
expertise of the BBC's specialist unit at Bristol, and by the corporation's
willingness and ability to commit huge funds to such programmes. Would the
standard elsewhere be so high without this example? Highly unlikely.
Would a purely commercial business risk the funds necessary to make
something which looked as odd on the drawing board as The Singing Detective,
a story combining biography, film noir pastiche, and 1930s songs, told from
a hospital bed by a man with an appalling skin disease? Most unlikely, yet
some would argue it is the greatest drama serial ever. Would any commercial
broadcaster give slow-starting comedies the months, even years, that the BBC
gives to establish a success? Not at all likely.
This argument may seem to imply that, even if they ceased to do so once
competition was removed, commercial broadcasters could always match anything
produced in the public service sector if they wanted to. But the staunchest
champions of the BBC have long argued that the Corporation is peculiarly
adept in one skill which has always eluded ITV: combining quality and mass
popularity in a single programme. Bill Cotton, who rose from Head of Variety
at the BBC in the 1960s to Managing Director of Television in the early
1980s, has always maintained that this unusual flair can be traced straight
back to the experience gained in the heyday of BBC radio, from a host of
popular high quality series such as The Brains Trust, Children's Hour, Dick
Barton, Special Agent and Hancock's Half Hour.
Many examples support his thesis. ITV's On The Buses and the BBC's Steptoe
And Son were both situation comedies set in working class milieux and both
achieved high ratings. But while the ITV series followed in the thick-ear
tradition of the Carry On films, the BBC series aspired to something far
more ambitious and subtle and, in the view of many admirers, achieved it.
With a format as seemingly limited and hackneyed as the studio quiz the BBC
has proved that there is no requirement for mindlessness, flashing lights,
and dirty innuendo from a comedian/presenter: Mastermind rejects all that
and yet achieves huge ratings. Even a subject as dry and unpromising as
antiques has been turned by the BBC into an extraordinary popular attraction
in Antiques Roadshow.
As for the assertion that we do not need the BBC to bring us Australian soap
operas or Radio 1's pop music, the irony is that these - particularly if you
reckon the costs per capita - are the cheapest known forms of broadcasting.
The Corporation would save only a tiny fraction of its budget by giving them
up, but it would seriously weaken the argument used to persuade politicians
to maintain the licence fee: that the BBC continues to win half the audience
(a share which will, of course, fall as television continues to diversify).
Distressing as it may seem to highbrows, importing Neighbours is almost
certainly the BBC's most cost-effective way of achieving the ratings it
needs to sustain the licence fee which pays for the Bristol Natural History
Unit and the Singing Detective. In any case recent research suggests that
most viewers would willingly pay a higher licence fee.*
From the standpoint of the viewer, chiefly concerned with the quality of
programmes, the advantages of Britain's mixed system, and in particular the
benefits stemming from the BBC, seem pretty clear. Having sustained its
claim on the licence fee with Radio 1 and Neighbours the BBC uses a big
slice of its income to provide the sort of services usually absent from
commercial broadcasting, for example, BBC2, a network which succeeds where
Channel 4 has so far been less than triumphant.
Told to serve minority interests and 'be different' Channel 4 set itself the
target of winning 10 per cent of the audience, about the same as BBC2. It
has finally started doing so, but research figures for a recent week show it
is achieving this with productions such as the entirely conventional
American comedy Roseanne, the American rock 'n' roll movie Hairspray, the
catatonically tedious game show Countdown, the unremarkable soap opera
Brookside, and another American comedy called The Wonder Years: not a single
programme which could be described as 'different', nor one designed to serve
minorities. In the same week the BBC2 top ten was led by Food And Drink, and
included the excellent science series Horizon, Gardens By Design and The
Natural World, precisely the sort of sectional interests, presumably,
envisaged by those who gave Channel 4 its original marching orders. So the
in-house subsidies possible with a public service licence system seem to
achieve more programme diversity.
Even so, do we really want this vast organisation with its supercilious
liberal ideas spreading its tentacles across the country at every level of
broadcasting? Now that the trade unions have been emasculated and local
government brought to heel, would it not be better if the BBC, too, were
whipped into line by the forces of market enterprise along with the rest of
the mass media - ITV, newspapers, magazines and commercial radio? Do we
really want the public service ideas, fairness and balance of this huge
organisation left free of commercial constraints? Is it not time to do away
with the licence fee and press the entire edifice into the Rupert Murdoch
mould?
But even Dyke, who works at the heart of the commercial system, is forced to
admit: 'Of course, if you talk to people anywhere else in the world they
think you're mad to risk damaging the BBC.'
Viewers' Willingness To Pay by Andrew Ehrenberg and Pam Mills, London
Business School.

The Financial Times


London Page I Illustration (Omitted).

910420

