FT911-4308

FT  19 APR 91 / Blue Circle declines 16%: Construction market collapse hits
sales


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


BLUE CIRCLE, the world's third-largest cement manufacturer, saw pre-tax
profits fall 16.6 per cent last year from Pounds 231.8m to Pounds 195m.
The fall was almost entirely due to the collapse of the UK construction
market where cement sales last year fell about 12 per cent.
Mr Jim McColgan, Blue Circle's chief executive, warned that group profits
were likely to fall further this year with UK cement sales forecast to
decline another 12 per cent. Rises of between 6 per cent to 7.5 per cent in
UK cement prices had been applied to all customers since March 1 and so far
had held, he said.
Cement profits in the UK last year fell 38.5 per cent to Pounds 68.1m. By
contrast, profits for cement, aggregate and ready-mix concrete in the US,
Blue Circle's second largest market, remained virtually static at Pounds
18.4m, despite a fall of a fifth in sales to Pounds 254.1m. Mr McColgan said
the group's new US management had significantly cut costs. US employee
numbers fell more than a third. Profits held up despite the recession in
many US construction markets.
'Residential permits last year declined by 21 per cent in Georgia, where
Blue Circle has its US headquarters. Cement sales in New England had fallen
by 10 per cent and were 30 per cent below levels in 1988,' said Mr McColgan.
He warned that recovery in the UK and US construction markets could be
delayed until next year although lower transatlantic interest rates would
help housing markets.
The group announced extraordinary provisions of Pounds 17.4m to cover
potential losses at its garden-products division put up for sale last year.
It also included gains and losses from the sale of the Wrighton and
Elizabeth Ann kitchen appliance business and the Birmid foundry business.
Mr McColgan said the group had received several approaches for the
garden-products division but had yet to be offered 'an acceptable price'.
The group announced on Wednesday it was closing its Derby lawnmower
manufacturing plant employing about 370 workers.
Last year profits at the home-products division, which formerly housed the
garden-products business, rose from Pounds 26.5m to Pounds 42.9m due only to
first-time contributions from the Myson heating products business and from
Ceramica Dolomite, the Italian sanitaryware manufacturer.
Elsewhere cement profits rose sharply in the Far East; remained strong in
Chile and Africa but were disappointing at Aalborg, the group's 50 per
cent-owned Danish company.
The group is proposing a final dividend of 7.5p making a total of 11.25p for
the year compared with a total of 11p in 1989.
Lex, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 25 Photograph Jim McColgan, Blue Circle's chief executive,
warned of further falls in profits (Omitted).

910419

