FT911-4090

FT  20 APR 91 / Property: House-hunters who chase the market down - Country
homes are attracting plenty of viewers but few hard bids and asking prices
have had to be slashed


   By MICHAEL HANSON


REMEMBER THE case of the vanishing lady, Dorothea Allen, the mistress of
Sutton Brailes Manor in Warwickshire, who died intestate in January 1989,
having systematically destroyed every clue to her background? The media had
a field day producing features on her, which helped Sotheby's sell the
contents of her house for an astonishing Pounds 577,797 - more than twice
their estimate.
But her lovely Cotswold house, near Shipston-on-Stour, has not yet found a
buyer. Last August, the Chipping Campden office of Jackson-Stops & Staff
(tel: 0386-840224) was looking for offers over Pounds 700,000 for the
seven-bedroom 17th-century house in 25 acres of overgrown gardens and
grounds.
More than three dozen people have viewed the property, and several have made
offers, but these have all fallen through. Now the house is being remarketed
at Pounds 550,000 - considerably lower than previous offers, and a poignant
illustration of the way in which sellers have been chasing the market down.
'The Treasury Solicitor's duty is to sell the property for the best price he
can get in the current market,' explains Peter Britton, of Jackson-Stops &
Staff. 'But it will only make what it will make.'
Still, it looks as though the Exchequer will eventually benefit by more than
Pounds 1m from the sale of the house and its contents because Dorothea Allen
never made a will. She was the widow (or, as some think, the sister) of
Robert Allen, who made his fortune out of Spencer Corsets, a public company
in Banbury which was taken over after his death in 1965. If she has any
living relations, they have not yet appeared.
Someone else who has been chasing the market down is John Barratt, the only
son of Eileen Joyce, the concert pianist. At one time he hoped to get Pounds
3m for Newington House, near Wallingford, Oxfordshire. It was uninhabitable
when he bought it in 1987 and he spent six months restoring it while living
with his wife in a Sussex rented cottage.
Last September, having brought the price of Newington House down to Pounds
2.5m, he had an offer of Pounds 2.25m, which he rejected. Now he has
instructed Savills (tel: 071-730-0822) to invite offers of Pounds 1.8m for
the seven-bedroom Grade II* listed 17th-century mansion, which stands in 43
acres beside the River Thame - a tributary of the Thames.
Perhaps the biggest reduction in price over the course of the property
recession is that of King's Beeches, which was priced at Pounds 5m by its
former joint agents and advertised as being at Ascot. But the new agents,
Strutt & Parker (tel: 071-629-7282), admit that it is actually in
Sunningdale.
King's Beeches is now priced at Pounds 1.75m, a 65 per cent reduction. This
is a reflection of several factors, one of which is that in 1988 the
property was being offered for sale at a highly speculative price by a
Middle Eastern client whose bankers have since obtained possession of the
property.
When the house was advertised at Pounds 5m in 1988, the agents said: 'The
buyer must have a large cheque book and great imagination.'
Imagination was required because the house was last occupied more than 20
years ago by the last Maharajah of Jaipur, Sir Sawai Man Singh II (1911-70).
Since then it has become derelict and its 45 acres of gardens and grounds
are overgrown. Even so, it was thought that someone willing to spend a
further Pounds 2m to Pounds 3m on its restoration could create a magnificent
mansion of 18,000 sq feet with room for several staff, an indoor swimming
pool and extensive stables.
The Maharajah was a great polo player. He bought King's Beeches in order to
be near Smith's Lawn at Windsor. He had first brought his polo team to play
in England in 1933, when it established a record by winning all the open
tournaments.
It was on his last visit to England in 1970 that Jai (as he was known to his
friends ) had a bad fall at Smith's Lawn, but he and his wife Ayesha gave
their usual cocktail party at King's Beeches after the Queen's Cup, to which
the Queen and Prince Philip came. He next played polo at Cirencester on June
24, where he suddenly fell from his pony and was dead on arrival at
hospital.
Jai's biographer, Quentin Crewe, says his body was taken to King's Beeches
and laid out in the drawing-room in a sandalwood coffin for his friends to
pay their respects. The next day his body was flown to Jaipur, where his
mile-long funeral procession was watched by at least half a million people.
A year later, Mrs Gandhi amended the Constitution of India, abolishing the
hereditary princes.
In 1975, tax officials raided Jai's palaces to search for the legendary
treasure of the maharajahs. They found millions of pounds worth of gold and
jewels, but wealth tax had not been paid on the gold. Jai's widow, the
Maharani, and his eldest son, Lt Col Bhawani Singh (known as 'Bubbles') who
would have been maharajah if the title had not been abolished, were
arrested. They were never charged: Bubbles was released after 2 1/2 months,
but Ayesha was imprisoned for nearly two years, even though she was ill.
The legendary treasure was never found. If it had been, it would now take a
sizeable part of it to restore King's Beeches. Not only has the property
decayed after being empty for 20 years, but it was invaded by Peace
campaigners during the Gulf War. Now the house is a gaunt shell: its roof
has been stripped, its fireplaces have gone, floors have been ripped up, and
certain parts of the building are now deemed structurally unsound. The house
will probably be demolished.
Not far away, Coworth Park House, Ascot, has just been placed on the market
on behalf of the receivers, Buchler Phillips & Co. This Palladian Mansion,
which stands in 36 acres of parkland, has been run as an international
business centre, and offers of Pounds 5.5m are being sought by the agents,
John D Wood & Co (tel: 071-493-4106).
Although there are 35 properties in London currently for sale at more than
Pounds 5m, the last country property to come on to the market at that sort
of price was Chandlings Manor, in 60 acres at Bagley Wood, near Oxford. The
modest Cotswold house was transformed beyond recognition at an estimated
cost of Pounds 10m, regardless of taste (except for its modern sports
centre, new stables and garages) or planning permission (since granted
retrospectively) by a Middle Eastern gentleman who then died penniless.
His receivers, KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock, put the property on the market
at Pounds 5.5m in December 1988, and it was finally sold for Pounds 5.4m by
Leisure Investments on April 30 last year - the day the company went into
receivership. Security Pacific, the bank that had financed LI's acquisition,
instructed KPMG Peat Marwick McLintock to re-offer the property for sale at
Pounds 3.5m through Savills (tel: 071-730- 0822). Although more than 800
enquiries have since been received, the property is still unsold.
And, in case you are wondering, former chancellor Nigel Lawson has been
unable to sell the Old Rectory at Stoney Stanton in Leicestershire. After
more than six months on the market at Pounds 325,000, his joint agents,
Savills (071-730-0822) and Howkins & Harrison of Atherstone (0827-718021),
say the price is still the same. But then,that is what you would expect a
politician to tell them to say.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII Photograph King's Beeches, in 45 acres at Sunningdale,
Berkshire, has been unoccupied since the death of the Maharaja of Jaipur in
1970. Now derelict, its price has fallen in the past two years from Pounds
5m to Pounds 1.75m (Omitted).

910420

