FT911-4116

FT  20 APR 91 / West takes up the burden: The implications of the aid effort
being conducted on behalf of the Kurds


   By EDWARD MORTIMER


Announcing his decision to send US troops into northern Iraq last Tuesday,
President George Bush insisted that this was a 'purely humanitarian'
intervention. There was no question, he added, of encouraging the creation
of an independent Kurdistan. Nor, said his spokesman Mr Marlin Fitzwater,
would US forces be 'involved as combatants in the civil war or anything in
that sense'. Rather, they would 'move in and out for short periods of time,
hours, to help with camps or moving people around, or food, water, those
kind of things'.
Thus did the US administration struggle to reconcile its response to the
Kurdish tragedy with its previous, constantly reiterated pledges of respect
for Iraqi sovereignty, non-intervention in Iraq's internal affairs, and
determination to 'bring the boys home' rather than risk an open-ended,
Vietnam-style commitment.
President Francois Mitterrand has been more lucid, or perhaps more candid,
about the implications of what the west is doing in Iraq. Congratulating
himself on France's success in obtaining the passage of UN Security Council
Resolution 688 he said last week: 'For the first time, non-interference has
stopped at the point where it was becoming failure to assist a people in
danger.'
Hitherto national governments have behaved as if they were members of a
trade union (called the UN), whose rules required them to take no notice of
each other's behaviour unless one member directly attacked another. Now it
turns out that there is a limit, so far ill defined, beyond which a
government cannot go without forfeiting its right to benefit from that rule.
Ironically enough it is France, in the past one of the strongest upholders
of the notion of national sovereignty, that has taken the lead in
articulating this new doctrine; whereas the US, which in its own
neighbourhood (Grenada, Panama etc) has often been ready to grant itself
exemption from the old rule, has been most reluctant to break it in the
Middle East, and even now is trying to pretend that it has not been broken.
The reason is obvious enough. When dealing with small countries in the
western hemisphere the US is confident that it can keep matters under
control. The Middle East is a different matter. It is so much further away,
culturally as well as geographically, that few US policy-makers believe they
can seriously hope to control events in that region. Those who did so
imagine received a painful lesson in Lebanon in the early 1980s.
The marines went into Beirut in 1982, on what was seen as a short, simple
humanitarian mission: first to supervise the departure of the PLO fighters,
then (after the Sabra-Chatila massacre) to protect Palestinian civilians.
Yet somehow it seemed impossible to do that without restoring peace and
order in the country under the authority of the 'legitimate' government. By
the time they had finished trying to do that they had lost 241 US servicemen
to a suicide bomber, soon after which they ignominiously withdrew, leaving
behind them an even less safe, and much more anti-western, country than they
had found.
The odd thing is that France also took part in that Lebanese fiasco, and
lost 58 paratroopers to another suicide bomber on that same morning in
October 1983. But France is also closer to the Middle East, historically as
well as geographically. For France it is not simply a region you can bomb
and walk away from. It is inhabited by peoples, some of which are in danger.
How many people make 'a people'? That is just one of many questions to which
the new doctrine will require an answer. It does not have one yet. But
'failure to assist a person in danger' is an offence in French law. Mr
Bernard Kouchner, founder of the charity Medecins Sans Frontieres and now
minister for humanitarian affairs, has extended this concept into
international law and persuaded President Mitterrand to adopt it - helped by
the president's wife Danielle, who has publicly befriended oppressed peoples
in general and the Kurds in particular. Mr Kouchner has even spoken of a
'duty to interfere'.
How far will interference go? Western officials admit they do not know.
'This whole business has been incremental,' a British diplomat said
yesterday. 'What looks impossible one week becomes possible the next.'
Clearly it makes no sense for the US to pretend its troops are in Iraq
simply to provide transport and supplies.
The key issue is security. Kurds will not go down into the new camps unless
they feel safe there. They will not feel safe there unless they are
confident that the camps are outside the control of the Iraqi government.
And if they are outside the control of the Iraqi government one can be quite
sure that they will be under the control of the two main Kurdish political
parties - the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of
Kurdistan.
So there will be an area of Iraq, populated at least by some hundreds of
thousands of people, in which the writ of the Baghdad government will not
run and the writ of Kurdish political parties will run. It is going to look
very like the embryo of that independent Kurdistan which Mr Bush says he is
determined not to encourage.
It is bitterly ironic, because the Iraqi Kurds were never asking for that.
When they were fighting for a democratic Iraq alongside other Iraqis, and
with some apparent chance of success, the US refused to intervene. Now,
thousands of deaths and over two million refugees later, it is in the
process of carving them out a de facto separate state. It has even drawn
them a frontier, the 36th parallel - an entirely arbitrary line which awards
them the Arab city of Mosul, yet denies them the whole southern Kurdish
region round Sulaimaniya.
No one in any western capital is suggesting that this should be a permanent
solution. It is being improvised, partly in response to western guilt
feelings, about a tragedy that is not only horribly visible on television
but also manifestly a by-product of the western victory in the Gulf war; and
partly in response to urgent pleas and warnings from Turkey, which could not
handle the refugee problem on its own soil and was hinting that it might
intervene militarily on its own if others did not come to its rescue.
Now Iran, which faces an even larger refugee problem and is even less well
equipped to cope with it, is uttering similar pleas and hints. Iran also
points out, quite correctly, that the humanitarian problem of the Shia in
southern Iraq is every bit as bad as that of the Kurds in the north.
The truth is that when you are dealing with a regime like that of Saddam
Hussein the distinction between 'humanitarian' and 'political' becomes
untenable. There is no solution to Iraq's humanitarian problems while that
regime remains in power. Its record is such that, even if it tries to
introduce genuine reforms, no Iraqi will trust it.
The west is in danger of being landed with a permanent Kurdish protectorate,
while the rest of Iraq is being left to Saddam Hussein's mercy. The only
hope is that the presence of western forces in the north will put some
pressure on him to respect the UN's mandate (under Resolution 688) to
protect Iraqi civilians throughout the country, and that the loss of Iraqi
sovereignty will provide an additional motive for the army officers on whom
his power depends to get rid of him.

The Financial Times


London Page 7 Photograph Kurds surround a US helicopter to get supplies at a
Turkish refugee camp (Omitted).

910420

