FT911-4169

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: Geneva laps up Strauss


   By ANDREW CLARK


IT WOULD be wrong to assume that because Richard Strauss wrote some of his
finest late works in western Switzerland, his music has a special place
here. This season at Geneva's Grand Theatre has nevertheless brought a rich
crop of Strauss performances, including an unforgettable 'Four Last Songs'
from Julia Varady, Daphne with Lucia Popp and now Intermezzo with Inga
Nielsen as Christine. The Suisse Romande Orchestra, like most of its French
counterparts, seems to relish playing the late Romantic German repertoire,
and far from being put off by a quick succession of rare Strauss operas, the
Geneva public has lapped it up.
Performing Daphne in concert solved all the opera's problems: no visual
distractions, no clumsy attempts to make theatrical sense of its awkward
material - the drama seemed perfectly self-contained in the music, briskly
conducted by Christian Thielemann and sung by a first-rate cast. Intermezzo,
on the other hand, falls easily onto the stage and actually needs it. The
dialogue alone paints a shrew, but Christine has to be more than that. Like
most marriages, what goes unsaid in the Storch household - an unsuppressed
tear, a long embrace, a fond glance - says as much if not more than the
everyday banalities of domestic conversation.
Inga Nielsen made much of these unspoken moments, but her Christine showed
only intermittent flashes of the rounded, human personality on which the
opera depends for a successful performance. She boasts a perfectly tuned
swallow-like voice, which soars easily and evenly, without an ugly or
misplaced note. But none of her lines was delivered with much feeling for
words or emotion.
What we were left with was a woman in her prime, who would make the perfect
shrew 15 years later: moody, snobbish, self-absorbed, impulsive, insecure
the moment her husband neglects or ignores her - but just a trifle bland.
Her only redeeming features were an occasional show of tenderness and a
shapely figure (seen to advantage in Silvia Strahammer's elegant, unshowy
period costumes). But that was not enough.
Oskar Hillebrandt's Storch, in contrast, was a three-dimensional
personality. The character, like his dull grey suit, was sincere and lived
in, and the voice sounded crisp and weighty, with all his lines vigorously
pointed. There was first-rate support from Herbert Lippert's large and lazy
Baron Lummer, from Ulrike Steinsky's spirited Anna and from Storch's smoky
quartet of cronies, led by Ernst Gutstein and Dietmar Grimm.
Kurt Wilhelm's production, originally staged for the Munich Strauss cycle in
1988 and since seen in Bologna, has kept its fluency and freshness. The
decor - a cross between a colourful pop-up book and a set of Bavarian Alpine
picture-postcards - copes admirably with the swiftly-changing settings for
each scene, though the Storch household itself could do with more domestic
clutter. Wilhelm sketches in some telling vignettes without ever breaking
the bounds of good taste and judgment. The music, conducted by Jeffrey Tate,
never sounded sluggish, sentimental or inconsequential, but the orchestral
playing suffered from thin, wiry string tone and occasional lapses of
ensemble.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII Photograph Oskar Hillebrandt and Inga Nielsen in Straus's
'Intermezzo' (Omitted).

910420

