FT911-4172

FT  20 APR 91 / Arts: Sinfonietta goes Soviet


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


GENNADY Rozhdestvensky is in London to conduct Boris Godunov at Covent
Garden, but his stay has also given him the opportunity to work for the
first time with the London Sinfonietta. It was an intriguing combination,
and one that seemed to have flourished; the Sinfonietta played at their best
for him at the Queen Elizabeth Hall, while Rozhdestvensky injected his
familiar urgency into the performances. Their concert on Wednesday was part
of the South Bank's 'Russian Spring': a programme of four works by living
Soviets that included a first performance and a British premiere as well a
revival of Elena Firsova's thin Chamber Concerto No. 4 from 1989 and an
almost new Concerto for piano four hands by Shnitke.
The brand new piece, Dmitry Smirnov's Jacob's Ladder, was the first
commission from the Michael Vyner Trust, set up to commemorate the
Sinfonietta's much missed artistic director. One might wished, though, for a
more impressive score to set alongside the many great achievements that
Vyner himself commissioned for the orchestra. Smirnov's simplistic brand of
pictorialism - this, like a number of his recent works, was inspired by
William Blake - contains the occasional striking idea but otherwise seems
strictly two-dimensional, a cartoon-like sequence without any of the
surrealism or surprise such a description might imply.
Shnitke's Concerto, written for his wife Irina and Viktoria Postnikova, who
played it together here, was first heard at the Huddersfield Festival last
year. It is a strong, single-movement piece, sombre and introspective; the
keyboard writing is intricate and nervily wrought, and only in the closing
stages is the orchestra allowed to do anything more than comment and
punctuate. There is the familiar kind of Shnitke obsessiveness when the
soloists and then the other instruments seize upon a repeated-note figure
and hammer it into the ground, but otherwise the music seems mysteriously
beautiful and remote.
Shnitke's contemporary, Boris Tishchenko, born in 1939, is scarcely known
here at all; the British premiere of his Third Symphony made a hefty,
50-minute, opening to the programme. It was written in 1966, a year after
Tishchenko completed his studies with Shostakovich, and the ellipses and
bare textures (scored for just single winds and strings) owe much to his
teacher's late style. The lessons were well learnt: the work is compelling
in the skein of pungent, angular themes that make up its first part, and
raptly sustained in the lingering, slowly ebbing contemplation of a single
melody that makes up the second. It was ravishingly played by the
Sinfonietta; 20 years ago Tishchenko was a distinctive, substantial voice of
whom we ought to have heard much more.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

910420

