FT924-6478

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (14): Boom town snags - Profile of
Aguascalientes


   By DAMIAN FRASER


WHEN Xerox Corporation decided to move its manufacturing plant from Mexico
City 10 years ago, the company judged prospective sites by four criteria.
Was the new site centrally located - close enough both to Mexico City and
the US border?
Was there harmony between management and unions?
Were there qualified people nearby?
Did the state government promote industrial development?
Top of the list in answer to practically all these came Aguascalientes, in
the tiny state of the same name. This commercial, industrialised town of
500,000 people is in the very centre of Mexico, almost equidistant from the
northern and southern borders, and the Pacific and Atlantic coasts.
Labour relations are the best in Mexico, and there has not been a major
strike in 40 years. The city is home to two universities, two technological
institutes, and several American and Japanese schools, providing prospective
companies with a local skilled workforce. The state government has practised
(for Mexico) an enlightened industrial policy, building homes for new
workers, industrial parks for businesses, roads for better communication.
The result is that while most of Mexico stagnated in the 1980s,
Aguascalientes boomed. From 1986 to 1991 the state's economy grew by 6.8 per
cent a year, against just 2.8 per cent for the country. Industrial
production rose by 8 per cent a year. Social indicators - such as literacy,
access to potable water and electricity, improved far more rapidly than in
the rest of the country.
The boom was fuelled by foreign investment, which increased by an average of
40 per cent a year. Xerox, Nissan, Texas Instruments, Dupont and
Hewlett-Packard, among others, moved into the state, and helped exports
increase six times from 1986 to 1991.
Nissan has invested around Dollars 1bn in adding to its engine plant an
assembly plant with capacity for 120,000 cars that will be inaugurated in
December. Next year, Nissan Mexico expects to export 40,000 of these cars to
Japan, the first time the company will import foreign-made cars into Japan.
While Nissan has had terrible labour relations in its Cuernevaca assembly
plant, its engine plant in Aguascalientes has been trouble-free.
Aguascalientes' growth has brought its problems. Compared with poorer
neighbours such as Zacatecas or Guanajuato, the town is polluted, noisy and
unsafe. The huge demand for labour means the turnover of workers is high,
and salaries are higher than elsewhere. There is still a shortage of housing
and water. Says the state's new governor, Mr Otto Granados: 'We have
resolved the primary problems of employment and growth: now we have to
tackle the secondary ones.'
Mexico's centralised political system makes this difficult. States have
little power to raise money directly. Mr Granados would like to put
computers in the state's primary schools, but the federal education budget
does not permit it.
While there is some decentralisation - in education, for example - Mexico's
finance ministry shows no inclination to allow local government to raise
money, or decide how it should be spent. Richer states, such as
Aguascalientes, inevitably become constrained in their ability to grow.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921120

