FT924-6077

FT  24 NOV 92 / People: Bodies politic


Helena Wiesner, a former leading light in the Consumers Association, has
been appointed to the government-backed Policyholders Protection Board which
looks after the interests of small insurance policy-holders in the event of
an insurance company not being able to meet its obligations.
Wiesner, who replaces Rosemary McRobert, will serve for one year and
represent the interests of policyholders of authorised insurance companies.
The board was established under the Policyholders Protection Act 1975 and is
financed by statutory levies on the insurance industry as required.
Wiesner, 47, has spent most of her career in the financial services sector.
Before setting up on her own as an independent financial consultant, she had
worked for the Consumers Association for 18 years, most recently as head of
its Economic and Social Group. She is currently a director of LAUTRO and a
member of the Insurance Brokers Registration Council.
The government has also re-appointed Michael Hall, a financial consultant,
as the alternate member who will stand in for Wiesner when necessary. He is
a former member of the Council of the Insurance Ombudsman Bureau.
*****
Keith Humphreys, chairman and managing director of the UK arm of
Rhone-Poulenc, has been made president of the CIA. The appointment is less
unlikely than it sounds given that this CIA is the UK's Chemical Industries
Association. He replaces the widely-admired Ray Knowland, former chairman of
BP Chemicals, whose speeches at recent CIA dinners have enlivened
proceedings considerably.
*****
Lord Wyatt of Weeford, 74, has been re-appointed as chairman of the
Horserace Totalisator Board for a further period from May 1 1993 to April 30
1995; he has been chairman of the Tote since May 1976.
*****
Peter Smith, joint managing partner of City and Corporate Counsel, a
vice-president of the Royal Commonwealth Society, founder chairman of the
Focus Group, chairman of the government affairs group of the Institute of
Public Relations, has been elected chairman of WORLDAWARE, a development
education organisation, for a three-year term.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921124

