FT923-9625

FT  04 AUG 92 / The Week in Luxembourg: EC law extends UK Social Security
obligations - European Law


IN TWO recent judgments, the European Court of Justice has clarified the
application of community and UK social security rules in the contexts of
family credit and income support.
In the first case, the ECJ ruled that family credit was a social security
benefit which could be claimed by a worker from the national authority of
the member country in which he worked even when resident in another EC
state.
The court said that this also meant that the spouse of the worker who had
never been resident or employed in the country in which the worker was
employed could claim the worker's rights to family benefits for the members
of his family to which he would otherwise be entitled.
The case concerned a civil servant who worked in Northern Ireland but lived
with his wife and family in the Republic of Ireland. The wife claimed family
credit to bring the family's income up to the minimum level of entitlement
because her husband's earnings were at the time in question below the
relevant threshold.
As a result of the court's ruling she should be paid family credit by the UK
authorities rather than be left to claim any benefits available in the
Republic of Ireland.
This decision may be short- lived. A recent EC regulation will require
benefits in these circumstances to be paid by the authorities of the country
of residence. However, the situation could remain uncertain until any
challenge to the validity of the new regulation has been made through the
national courts.
Case C-78/91, Hughes v Chief Adjudication Officer, Belfast, ECJ FC, July 16
1992.
IN THE second case, the ECJ held that EC rules on equal treatment of men and
women in matters of social security and regarding access to employment and
vocational training did not apply to UK supplementary allowance or income
support. Income support was previously known as supplementary allowance.
The court said, first, these benefits were not directly and effectively
linked to protection against the social security risks covered by the equal
treatment rules.
Second, the fact that entitlement to income support may depend on conditions
which may affect access to part-time employment or vocational training by
single parents was insufficient to bring the benefits within the scope of
the EC rules.
The subject matter of the UK benefit scheme is the provision of income
support for persons of insufficient means to meet their needs, not access to
employment etc.
Joined Cases C-63/91 and C-64/91, Jackson and Cresswell v Chief Adjudication
Officer, ECJ FC, July 16 1992.
French overseas departments import charges unlawful
THE ECJ has condemned the charges imposed on imports into the French
overseas department ('DOM'), Reunion, which were not imposed on domestic
Reunion products.
The question of interpretation of EC law on the free movement of goods arose
in refund proceedings before the Saint-Denis Court of Appeal (Reunion)
brought by importers of cars from Germany and Sweden.
The court held the charges infringed the Rome Treaty rules which prohibit
charges equivalent to customs duties and a similar rule in the EC Trade
Co-operation Agreement with Sweden.
However, it limited the retrospective effect of its ruling to prevent
financial difficulties for the Reunion co-operatives which had previously
benefitted from the revenue. No refunds need be made by the Reunion
authorities to parties who have not already filed their claims.
Case C-163/90, Administration des douanes et droits indirect v Legros and
others, ECJ FC, July 16 1992.
Conditions for late collection of import levies
THE COURT interpreted various EC rules applicable to the collection of
unpaid import levies on agricultural products in circumstances where the
national authority responsible had made an error regarding the import
certificate.
The Belgian authorities claimed unpaid import levies on eggs which the
importer had declared at a lower amount in accordance with pre-fixed
certificates which turned out to be issued unlawfully.
While pointing out to the Belgian Court of Neufchateau that the regulation
whose interpretation it had sought was irrelevant, the court said the
regulation did not prevent later claims by the importer for repayment of
sums wrongly paid to the authority.
However, under the applicable EC rules, it was for the national court to
assess whether the tests for preventing national authorities from claiming
extra payments, resulting from their own error, were satisfied.
In the absence of fraud or a mistake by the importer, factors such as the
obviousness of the error and the importer's size and experience had to be
examined by the national court before deciding that it was reasonable for a
national authority to claim payment.
Case C-187/91, Belgium v Societe Co-operative Belovo, ECJ 6CH, July 16 1992.
National cheese additives rules upheld
THE ECJ dismissed cases brought by the European Commission against rules
banning imports of cheese with nitrate additives in Greece, Italy and Spain.
The court ruled that the commission had ignored the tests of legality for
national food additive laws established in previous cases.
According to relevant EC rules, the member states' obligations were merely
to establish an authorisation procedure for food additives and ensure there
was a right of appeal in the event of refusal.
The commission had not suggested there was any infringement of these rules.
As a result, the court was not in a position to rule whether national rules
on additives infringed Rome Treaty rules on free movement of goods.
Cases C-95/89, C-293/89, C-344/90, Commission v Italy, Greece and Spain, ECJ
FC, July 16 1992.
THIS report completes the coverage of the vacation judgments given by the
European Court on July 16 1992, after the formal end of its summer sittings.
The next report will cover the first week of the new sittings starting on
September 14 1992.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920804

