FT924-7987

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement: Treasury says PSBR will reach Pounds
37bn this year - The main points of the chancellor's Autumn Statement to The
House of Commons


   By EMMA TUCKER


Base rates: The chancellor announced a 1 point cut in base rates to 7 per
cent, the lowest level since 1978.
Fiscal stance: The Treasury expects the public sector borrowing requirement
to rise to Pounds 37bn this financial year, a significant increase on the
Budget forecast of Pounds 28bn and higher than most independent forecasts.
In 1993-94 the PSBR is expected to rise to 7 per cent of GDP, about Pounds
44bn.
No change in government spending levels: There will be no effective change
in the level of public spending planned for this year and next year. This
implies a planning total of Pounds 226.1bn this financial year in line with
figures set out in last year's Autumn Statement. (The figure allows for
classification changes and a new Pounds 750m package to boost the housing
market).
New planning totals: The new control total - which takes over from the
planning total in the next financial year - has been set at Pounds 243.8bn
for 1993-94, Pounds 253.6bn for 1994-95 and Pounds 263.3bn for 1995-96. This
represents average growth of 1.4 per cent in public sector spending over the
next three years, half the average growth rate of the past three years.
General government expenditure is likely to rise to 44.75 per cent as a
share of national income this year 'mainly as a result of the recession'. It
is projected to rise to 45.5 per cent in 1993-94, before dropping to 45 per
cent the following year and 44.25 per cent in 1995-96.
Privatisation proceeds and the reserves: The new control totals include
reserves of Pounds 4bn in the next financial year, rising to Pounds 7bn in
1994-95, and Pounds 10bn in 1995-96. Privatisation proceeds will not be part
of the new control total and will therefore not affect expenditure. They are
anyway projected at Pounds 5.5bn in both 1993-94 and 1994-95.
Package of temporary fiscal measures designed to give immediate boost to
confidence:
Motor industry: Car tax abolished from midnight last night. This should
provide a saving of about Pounds 400 on a Pounds 10,000 car.
Capital allowances: First year capital allowances for plant and machinery
increased from 25 per cent to 40 per cent for one year. Initial tax
allowance of 20 per cent for new industrial and agricultural buildings
introduced for a year.
Local authorities: Temporary relaxation of local authority receipts realised
between today and the end of next year, including receipts from council
house sales. The measure is expected to stimulate extra capital spending of
Pounds 1.8bn.
Housing: The government will use an extra Pounds 750m this year mainly to
buy empty properties for use as low rent housing.
Exporters: The government will provide a further Pounds 700m of ECGD cover
to 'ease some of the constraints on cover for individual countries'.
Private finance for infrastructure projects:
The statement included a new initiative on private finance to enable public
and private sectors to work more effectively together, particularly on
infrastructure projects. Privately financed projects which can be operated
profitably will be allowed to proceed. No comparison with a theoretical
public sector alternative will be required.
Departmental spending: New public spending plans give priority to capital
programmes.
Roads: The overall transport budget has been cut but cash plans for the
national roads programme will be maintained. Because of the fall in
construction prices, the number of new schemes next year should be double
this year's
levels.
Public transport: British Rail will be allowed to lease about Pounds 150m of
new rolling stock orders over the next three years.
Jubilee Line extension: Funds for completion - Pounds 1.2bn over three years
 -will be available, provided negotiations are completed.
Public sector: Pay settlements in the public sector will be restricted this
year to a maximum increase of 1.5 per cent.
National insurance: Contributions will not be raised. Upper and lower
earnings limits will be indexed as usual.
Education: Spending on education will be Pounds 9.5bn next year - a real
rise of 3 per cent. This is designed to fund an 8 per cent increase in the
number of students expected to enroll at further education and sixth form
colleges next year.
Social security: The real value of unemployment benefits and pensions will
be maintained. Most social security benefits will increase by 3.6 per cent
in April.
Local Government: Central government support for local government spending
will rise by 3.7 per cent in England next year.
Defence: Spending will fall sharply in real terms.
Health Spending in real terms will increase by 1 per cent next year.
Employment: A real spending growth of 1 per cent next year,
will allow for 500,000 new places on government employment schemes.
Cautious economic forecast: The chancellor offered a muted view of the
economy expressing particular concern over the lack of confidence among
consumers and businesses.
GDP: The economy is forecast to contract by 1 per cent this year, followed
by growth of around 1 per cent next year.
Inflation: Retail price inflation, excluding mortgage interest payments, is
forecast to drop to 3.75 per cent by the end of this year and to rise at the
same average rate next year. The chancellor said he would use the M4 broad
measure of the money supply to monitor the money growth. The target range
for the second half of this financial year will be 4-8 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921113

