FT921-520

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: The right side of the tracks - The
importance of neighbourhood


   By TREVOR PHILLIPS


LIKE THE Prime Minister, I am part of London's most significant ethnic
minority - those who were born and brought up in the capital - and maybe
even still live there. We are the sort of people who can remember horses at
Alexandra Palace, dogs at Harringay, and success for Chelsea Football Club.
It is an increasingly rare distinction.
Like many Londoners, I live close to where I grew up - just a mile from
where my parents' three-storey terraced house stood, off Wood Green High
Road. The dominant feature of the area is north London's most distinctive
land mark, Alexandra Palace, surrounded by 1100 acres of parkland. From here
you can see the best and most complete view of London anywhere in the
capital. And the view that is offered from the top of the long winding hill
to the palace is not just a pretty skyline. It is a revelation of what is
happening to the city.
From the top of Ally Pally you can see two completely different Londons.
Ironically the line of division is the railway track that takes City
commuters to and from Hertfordshire's dormitory suburbs. Crossing the tracks
by the narrow railway footbridge is literally a transition from one social
and economic world to another.
To the north and west, on the right side of the tracks lies the place I now
live - civilised, comfortable, affluent Muswell Hill, a suburb of
irreproachable solid Edwardian semis, only occasionally afflicted by
subsidence. The people who live at the top of the hill are mostly white
families with au pairs, second homes and terminal angst over the tax breaks
they enjoy under the Tories.
Its major celebrity is the actress Maureen Lipmann, now famous for her
portrayal of Beattie, the Jewish housewife in BT commercials; its bard is
Ray Davies of the Kinks - and the nearest thing to a scandal is catching
sight of local girl Mandy Smith, former teenage wife of the ageing rocker
Bill Wyman of the Rolling Stones. Muswell Hill has been a model to all
suburbia for decades.
To the south and east is a different world, the place I came from: Wood
Green and Tottenham. Up to 40 per cent here are non-white. The area is poor
and crime-ridden. This is home to the underclass. Up to a fifth are lone
parents, poverty is rife, in some parts a half of the residents are on state
benefits. Among young black men unemployment rates are above one in three.
Tottenham's best known feature is the bleak concrete structure called
Broadwater Farm. First famous in the 1960s as a design triumph in public
housing, it became notorious in the mid-1980s as the site of the decade's
most vicious and prolonged riot on the British mainland, during which a
London police constable died, in full view of his colleagues, virtually
decapitated by a mob.
The celebrities here are fewer and far more obscure. Sam Fox, the raunchy
singer and sometime Page Three girl came from that side of the tracks, as do
several black rappers with names like Rebel MC and Ranking Errol. I would
explain what these names mean, except that they are meant to be
indecipherable to a non-black audience - this is a world with its own
private language designed to exclude those such as FT readers.
The west fears the east. We 'know' this is where the people who steal our
expensive car stereos and burgle our homes are from. The local police tell
us that drugs are on the streets of Muswell Hill, and hint that they come
from the other side of the park.
The east envies and despises the west, which it thinks of as soft,
privileged and out of touch with the 'real' world. My burglar friends say
that the 'fat' houses on my side of the park deserve everything they get.
Social division is not peculiar to this city or this area. But what is
disturbing is that the traditional valve for tension - social mobility  -
has disappeared for many Londoners.
If they have any advantage, cities offer the poor the chance to better their
station in life - to find work, promotion, to escape the condition into
which you were born. To many young men and women in London, crossing the
railroad tracks now seems to have become an impossibility.
One reason is the state of London's education system. Few would pine for the
old grammar school system now, but for the poor a good school was a way up
and out. The primary school which served me well is just ten minutes walk
from my present home, and 200 yards from my childhood house. I have no
reason to suppose that the teachers are any less dedicated than the
outstanding women who taught me to read.
However, like most schools in the borough, it was unable to guarantee my
elder daughter uninterrupted schooling, because of teacher shortages and, at
the time, industrial action. As a result both of my children attend school
elsewhere, on the right side of the tracks. The proportion of children in
private education has doubled in the past 10 years - and in north London a
good primary can take its pick of children from literally hundreds of
applicants.
The children who have no choice will be under-educated and unable to
compete. They will also contribute to London's lamentable skill shortage.
A second is that the traditional vitality which immigrants bring to cities
is increasingly vitiated by recession and by prejudice. The city itself
exists side by side with Spitalfields, a largely Bangladeshi quarter. A
survey by the South Bank Polytechnic revealed that not a single Bangladeshi
from Spitalfields worked in the City.
My local baker, a Moroccan, is popular and does a roaring trade at weekends
among the people from the top of the hill. Yet his bank is less than
forthcoming with support - a complaint shared by many minority businessmen.
He finds it hard to attract the kind of young low-paid shop assistants he
needs. He is too nice to say it, but white-run businesses seem to have
little difficulty in these times of high unemployment.
But there is always the park itself. In a great city's public spaces no-one
asks where you come from. Children meet on the slides and swings as equals.
Alexandra Palace, like Wandsworth Common, Clapham Common and the capital's
other great parks are great levellers and buffers.
But, characteristically for London, this too is under threat. In 1980, after
much of the Palace burnt down, it received a huge insurance windfall of more
than Pounds 40m which could have transformed it into a major regional
leisure attraction. A combination of poor management and profligacy by the
local council, Haringey, has resulted in the windfall being squandered and a
debt of Pounds 35m.
Many fear that in order to pay the debt the Palace will have to do what it
did in 1905 - sell off valuable acreage for housing development.
If it does so, the distance between the two sides of the tracks will in one
sense become smaller; but there is no sign that the gulf between the
communities will be any closer to being bridged.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920328

