FT922-7148

FT  20 MAY 92 / International Company News: Saudi Arabian bank closes London
branch


   By MARK NICHOLSON, Middle East Correspondent


NATIONAL Commercial Bank, Saudi Arabia's biggest in terms of assets, said
yesterday it was closing its London branch as part of a rationalisation and
to cut costs.
The bank said its London branch, one of eight branches or representative
offices overseas, had not been profitable since it was set up six years ago.
Mr Jinx Grafftey Smith, the Jeddah-based bank's London representative, said
the branch, which has a staff of 53, would be scaled down to representative
status.
'One is not leaving London - one is cutting costs though,' he said.
However, bankers close to the Saudi banking market expressed surprise at the
move yesterday, suggesting that even if it made financial sense, it
represented some loss of face for one of the most established and
best-connected banks in the Kingdom.
Bankers in Riyadh also speculated that behind the move may have lain some
discomfort within the Bank of England over the fact that NCB has not
produced any financial figures since 1989 - a result, according to some
Saudi bankers, of an internal dispute among the bank's Saudi owners.
The bank, owned by Sheikh Khaled bin Mafouz, showed assets in 1989 of SR84bn
(Dollars 22.4bn), and, although it has not produced any figures since 1989,
it is widely viewed as profitable and liquid by bankers in Riyadh and
Jeddah.
However, its accounts were qualified in Saudi Arabia in 1987, 1988 and 1989
under articles of the Saudi banking control law banning lending to a client
in excess of a quarter of reserves and prohibiting some types of credit
without security.
Mr Grafftey Smith yesterday firmly denied the closure was the result of any
pressure from the Bank of England. The Bank itself declined to comment.
However, the Bank is understood to have communicated its concern over NCB's
lack of published figures directly to the bank's owners last year.
Mr Grafftey Smith said the branch, which undertook trade, treasury and
corporate lending operations out of London, with a total book of some
Dollars 1bn, had returned modest profits on the former two, but had made
substantial losses on its lending.
Bankers close to the Saudi market in London suggested the branch closure was
not entirely surprising in that light.
'It's a loss of face, but they'll be better off without it,' said one.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920520

