FT922-492

FT  27 JUN 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar still weak


PRESSURE on the dollar eased a little in European trading yesterday morning
but the US currency slipped back towards the close as the early support
evaporated.
'It took nearly all day for the dollar to get to DM1.5460 but only minutes
for the bears to trash it,' said one trader.
The US currency opened at DM1.5400 after recovering from DM1.5370 in New
York, but closed at DM1.5390. Traders said the outlook for the US currency
remained grim. Thursday's run of bad economic data - a big jump in weekly
jobless claims and slow M2 growth - continued to fan speculation of a
further rate cut.
'The dollar doesn't seem to have any desire to recover at the moment,' said
one trader.
'You would have to be very clever to buy the dollar and make any money out
of it.'
Yesterday's US data elicited little reaction on the foreign exchanges.
Personal income last month rose 0.3 per cent on the previous month while
spending rose by 0.5 per cent. Economists had expected a 0.4 per cent rise
in both categories.
The dollar remained steady against the yen, This was partly due to heavy
selling of the Japanese currency for D-Marks and Swiss francs. The Swiss
currency was one of yesterday's biggest beneficiaries, retaining gains made
overnight on the back of a comment from Mr Markus Lusser, the Swiss National
Bank governor, that Swiss rates were likely to remain high.
The peseta failed to benefit from the D-Mark's gentle drift downwards from
the highs it reached earlier this month. This was because of the news on
Thursday that Spain's central government budget deficit had risen sharply.
In the first five months of 1992 the budget deficit rose to 1.1 trillion
(million million) pesetas from 0.7 trillion in the same period last year. A
promise from the government to introduce emergency measures to control the
deficit helped the Spanish currency hold its ground.
The French franc firmed to its best levels against the D-Mark in almost a
month as the political tensions surrounding European monetary union that had
boosted the German currency faded, if only temporarily.
Dealers said some operators were banking on EC politicians sending out
positive signals on monetary union from the summit in Lisbon, and had pushed
to the back of their minds the panic that greeted the Danes' rejection of
union earlier this month.
The franc ended two per cent above its Ecu central rate - the first time for
a month that it has been in positive territory.
The D-mark remained firm agains the enfeebled dollar and gained marginally
against EMS currencies, excluding the French franc.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920627

