FT924-6579

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: Downturn of 8% at Daimler-Benz


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


THE SUDDEN reversal of fortunes at Daimler-Benz, Germany's biggest company,
showed up yesterday in an 8 per cent fall in net profits to DM1.27bn
(Dollars 795m) for the first nine months of this year.
The downturn followed increases of 14 per cent in the first quarter and 16
per cent at the halfway mark and was attributed by the company to
'unexpected difficulties' in the key vehicles divisions during the third
quarter.
Although profits fell by half in the three months to the end of September,
markets had been prepared for the bad news after an informal announcement
last weekend that net earnings for the full year were likely to fall by
almost a quarter to DM1.5bn.
Sales in the nine months rose less than 2 per cent to DM70.18bn, with the US
showing a relatively strong 11 per cent increase. The company reacted
cautiously, saying further developments in the US would depend largely on
economic recovery and currency factors.
Mercedes-Benz, the vehicles business which produces more than two-thirds of
group earnings, also reported a 9 per cent increase in US car sales even
though the market was stagnant. However, home market deliveries tumbled 15
per cent, and in the rest of western Europe, only Britain, Spain and
Portugal showed improvements.
The German market for commercial vehicles also nose-dived in the three
months to the end of September.
Domestic sales of trucks, vans and buses, which had improved by 8 per cent
after the first six months, were down 4 per cent at the end of the period
under review.
AEG, the electrical and electronics division, was helped by a 60 per cent
boost in rail systems business to an overall 8 per cent sales gain. Deutsche
Aerospace (Dasa) reported a slight fall in sales to DM11bn during the review
period, but expects the full-year figure to reach DM18bn.
Even so, 'the prospect of a substantial deterioration' is emerging because
of falling orders for aircraft and defence systems, the group said.
Mercedes US plans, Page 26
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921120

