FT922-590

FT  26 JUN 92 / Nadir may face only 16 charges


   By RAYMOND HUGHES, Law Courts Correspondent


MR ASIL NADIR, former chairman of Polly Peck International, may have to
answer only 16 of the more than 60 criminal charges brought against him. The
trial is due to start next March.
Mr Robert Owen QC, counsel for the Serious Fraud Office, told the High Court
yesterday that the provisional indictment contained 16 specimen charges of
theft against Mr Nadir and three of false accounting against his
co-defendant, Mr John Turner, PPI group chief accountant.
Mr Owen said: 'At present it is a provisional selection but we expect the
indictment to be of that order.'
He referred to the indictment when applying successfully for leave to seek
judicial review of the decision of the trial judge, Mr Justice Tucker, on
June 8 to throw out 46 charges against Mr Nadir alleging the theft of Pounds
119.5m from PPI.
Mr Owen said the judge had made an error of law which, if allowed to stand,
would amount to 'a fraudsters' charter'. If Mr Justice Tucker was right, a
company director could transfer funds to an overseas subsidiary, within the
terms of his ostensible authority to act on behalf of the company, without
committing a criminal offence, even if he subsequently moved funds on from
that subsidiary without authority.
He said that on Monday the judge had allowed the SFO to substitute 44 other
charges, alleging thefts from Unipac, PPI's Turkish-Cypriot subsidiary, for
the dismissed charges.
Ten of the present proposed specimen charges came from the substitutes.
Mr Owen said if the SFO won on judicial review and had the dismissed charges
restored, the specimen charges at trial would all relate to alleged thefts
from PPI.
The dismissed charges alleged theft by transfer of funds from PPI's bank
accounts to accounts of Unipac or Industrial Bank of Kibris, a Northern
Cyprus bank owned by Mr Nadir. Mr Justice Tucker, who said there was no
doubt Mr Nadir was authorised by PPI to make transfers, decided that the
transfers had been merely preparatory acts not involving misappropriation.
However, he said, there was evidence that the subsequent withdrawal of the
funds from Unipac and IBK accounts had been unauthorised.
The SFO contends that the judge erred in holding that Mr Nadir was
authorised to make the transfers, in circumstances where they were made, not
for PPI's purposes but for the dishonest purpose of then transferring funds
to himself or his private interests.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920626

