FT924-5931

FT  24 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Emap turns in 50% advance to Pounds 14.8m


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


EMAP, the media group, yesterday announced a 50 per cent increase in pre-tax
profits to Pounds 14.8m for the six months to the beginning of October.
Profits of the group, which publishes magazines and regional newspapers,
runs exhibitions and has expanded into commercial radio, were boosted by
disposal profits of Pounds 1m.
Turnover rose to Pounds 146.9m (Pounds 124.2m).
Despite June's Pounds 78m rights issue, Emap's net interest payable rose to
Pounds 1.33m (Pounds 1.04m). It spent Pounds 26m on acquisitions and new
launches during the half year.
Emap is raising its interim dividend from 2p to 2.075p, payable from
earnings per share of 6.1p (4.3p).
Mr Graham Ross-Russell, the chairman who is retiring after 20 years on the
board, said yesterday that investments made over three years were now
showing useful profits.
'With a strong balance sheet, there will be many more opportunities to grow
our business both through acquisitions and launches,' Mr Ross-Russell said.
By far the largest slice of profits came from consumer magazines with
operating profits up 13 per cent to Pounds 10.7m.
The circulation of established titles rose by 4.3 per cent compared with a
market that fell by 3.6 per cent. Cover prices increased by more than 10 per
cent.
Mr Derek Terrington, media analyst at stockbrokers Kleinwort Benson, said
Emap was 'a very successful magazine publisher. That's where the pleasant
surprises keep coming from.'
The other divisions, Mr Terrington said, were not so strong which meant that
the group's profits were very dependent on magazines. Operating profit for
newspapers and printing increased, however, from Pounds 3.9m to Pounds 4.5m.
Kleinwort expects pre-tax profits of Pounds 42m for Emap for the full year.
The results were achieved in spite of static advertising levels and flowed
from cost reduction and tight cash control. The company said, however, that
advertising now accounted for less than 50 per cent of total revenue.
'A recovery in consumer and business confidence will have a substantial
impact on our revenue, but we are not expecting any improvement this
financial year,' Mr Ross-Russell added.
Mr Robin Miller, group chief executive, said yesterday the joint venture
with Hachette to produce Elle in the UK was 'a quantum leap' for Emap in
terms of its visibility in the womens' magazine market.
The Pounds 4.55m acquisition of Local Government Chronicle in August could
be one of Emap's best ever, Mr Miller said.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921124

