FT921-14258

FT  16 JAN 92 / Gibraltar to re-elect nationalist leader


   By TOM BURNS


   GIBRALTAR


GIBRALTAR'S 14,000 voters are today expected to overwhelmingly re-elect as
chief minister Mr Joe Bossano, the nationalist politician who has
steadfastly boycotted negotiations between Madrid and London over the future
of Britain's disputed crown colony.
Opinion polls indicate that Mr Bossano's Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party
(GSLP) could win more than 70 per cent of the votes, up from 58 per cent in
1988. The GSLP is certain to retain its eight seats in the 15-member House
of Assembly, the maximum allowed under Gibraltar's electoral rules.
Mr Bossano's popularity reflects both the marked improvement in Gibraltar's
infrastructure, particularly in housing and essential public services,
during his four year term and his uncompromising opposition to any deal with
Spain that would threaten Gibraltar's constitutional arrangements.
Mr Bossano blocked a 1987 agreement between Spain and the UK on the dual use
of Gibraltar's airport, a move that subsequently excluded Gibraltar from the
EC's air liberalisation process. Mr Bossano has also refused to attend
bilateral talks between Spain and Britain.
His stand has tested the patience of London and Madrid and has delayed
agreement on the EC's External Frontiers Convention, which governs entry
points into the Community. Spain refuses to consider Gibraltar as an EC
entry point unless there is agreement on the use of its airport and the UK
has signalled it will not ratify the convention if Gibraltar is excluded
from it.
Gibraltar has markedly reduced its dependency on the UK over the past four
years. Britain's Defence Ministry, which used to account for 45 per cent of
Gibraltar's revenues, now contributes around 15 per cent, and Gibraltar is
busy marketing itself as a financial centre.
In an ill-tempered campaign, the main opposition party, the Gibraltar Social
Democrats (GSD), accused the GSLP of a 'secretive and dictatorial' style of
government and claimed the population was 'gagged by fear of reprisal and
intimidation'. Mr Bossano in turn has accused the GSD of being 'soft on
Spain' because it is prepared to attend talks on the future of the colony.
Opinion polls suggest that the GSD, which is identified with the colony's
financial sector, looks unlikely to gain more than 25 per cent of the vote.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920116

