FT924-12152

FT  22 OCT 92 / People: More turnover in small business


Lloyds Bank has appointed new directors of its small business services
division more frequently in recent years than most of its customers change
their PIN numbers.
The newest appointee to the small firms' job is Mike Shaw, at present
Lloyds' area director in charge of 17 branches in Birmingham.
Aged 45, Shaw will shortly be moving to Bristol to lead a team of a dozen
head office staff and some 800-900 staff in the bank's 355 business centres.
Shaw will become head of business services within UK retail banking and is a
couple of rungs further up the banking ladder than his predecessor who was
in the job for about a year. Shaw's greater seniority reflects the increased
importance Lloyds attaches to the small business sector, the bank says.
Shaw believes one of the main problems the banks face in dealing with
customers is poor communications rather than any basic flaw in the service
provided. The publication today of a 'contract' with small business
customers to replace the rather anaemic customers' charter produced by the
bank a year ago may do something to improve that relationship.
Shaw joined the bank in 1968 and after a spell in London had postings with
four different branches of the Bank of London and South America (BOLSA) in
Brazil followed by 12 years in North America.
He has most recently been occupied in defending from demolition the Rotunda
building in Birmingham's unloved Bull Ring which houses one of Lloyds'
busiest branches. He led the bank's fight against a compulsory purchase
order earlier this year though the government has yet to give a final
ruling.
Appropriately enough for a banker, Shaw is a keen numismatist - he has an
almost complete collection of British crowns - though he took up the hobby
before joining Lloyds.
*****
John Condon has been appointed a director of HARMAN WICKS & SWAYNE; he moves
from River Thames Insurance Co.
*****
Shaun Astley, formerly marketing director of General Portfolio, has been
appointed BUPA's director of personal markets.
*****
Laurie Edmans, formerly assistant general manager, has been appointed an
executive director of NATIONAL PROVIDENT INSTITUTION.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921022

