FT922-4043

FT  08 JUN 92 / US Money and Credit: Jobs data bring muted response


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


THE US Treasury bond market offered only a muted response on Friday to
worse-than-expected jobs data for May.
The US unemployment rate in May rose from 7.2 per cent to 7.5 per cent, its
highest level since 1984. But the jittery market, uncertain about the path
of US monetary policy, did not stage the kind of rally that would normally
be expected.
Instead it managed to mark the price of the benchmark 30-year Treasury bond
less than  1/2 point higher, to yield 7.84 per cent.
The lack of enthusiasm for data that would normally stir traders to chalk
bond prices higher - in the hope that more stimulation of the economy may be
needed - was widely perceived as a signal that many investors have now given
up hope of a further easing of interest rates by the Federal Reserve in the
near future.
The latest data are likely to have far more of an impact on the political
arena, where opponents of President Bush should benefit from the lacklustre
economic outlook. The May figures showed that 68,000 non-farm payroll jobs
were added, but this was well below the expected 125,000 increase. In
manufacturing, the number of jobs declined by 10,000.
According to Ms Maria Ramirez, the bond market analyst, traders were too
discouraged by recent reports that the Fed's policy was on hold 'to price in
a Fed easing'. Ms Cheryl Katz, economist at Lehman Brothers, the New York
investment bank, noted the jobs data was 'definitely not weak enough for a
Fed easing'.
With the long end of the Treasury market trading in a narrow yield range of
7.5 per cent to 8.0 per cent, Ms Ramirez reckons that those economists who
have been divining a 'traditional' post-war recovery are simply wrong.
Rather, she notes that the US economy is experiencing structural problems
that will take years, not months, to resolve. Among these are the oversupply
of property in the US commercial real estate market, the bad debt provisions
banks will have to make as a result of their property loan exposure and the
continuing liquidation of the property portfolio held by the Resolution
Trust Corporation, the US agency that auctions property seized from failed
savings and loans.
Taken together with the May jobs data, this scenario appears to indicate a
fragile US recovery and the prospect of a 1992 economic growth rate closer
to 2 per cent than 3 per cent.
The question facing the Fed, as Salomon Brothers noted on Friday, is whether
a slow and steady firming of the US recovery will be sufficient.
Opinions differ. Mr Philip Braverman, chief economist at DKB Securities,
calls the present economic environment a 'growth recession recovery' and
says it will remain fragile. However, he argues that such a recovery will
eventually force the Fed to ease further, perhaps with a 50-basis point cut
in Federal funds and the discount rate after the next meeting of G7 leaders
in July.
Looking ahead, the new data expected are still unlikely to prove conclusive.
Tomorrow sees the release of consumer credit figures for April, which may
have risen by Dollars 500m. On Thursday, May producer price data should show
a 0.2 per cent increase. Then on Friday consumer price numbers for May
should show a 0.3 per cent rise.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920608

