FT923-9860

FT  03 AUG 92 / Management: Time for a change when energy drains - Avoid
those tasks which get you down


   By JEAN-LOUIS BARSOUX and ROSEMARY STEWART


Time management is about using time effectively and efficiently. Its
theorists believe the way to achieve more is by better organisation.
Contrary to what time management experts would have you believe, the secret
is not about squeezing more work into less time, but about having a vision
of what is possible, and having the stamina to see it through.
Considering how to use time effectively is where 'energy management' comes
in.
There are times when we abound with energy and other times when we have very
little. Some activities and some people enhance one's energy while others
deplete it.
When we are interested, we participate enthusiastically and even feel
revived at the end. When we are bored or frustrated our energy is sapped.
Most managers recognise the feeling that their energy reserves have sprung a
leak. For some it is the rigmarole of meetings which has that effect. For
others it is administrative work or strategic matters.
Some managers find particular types of people wearisome - customers,
salesmen, journalists, foreign counterparts.
Certain types of work have a disproportionate drain on managers - though
managers each differ in what they regard as debilitating. Ideally,
energy-depleting activities need to be minimised - either by limiting one's
involvement or by delegating them to someone who does not mind so much.
But there is another way of making one's energy supply go further, and that
is by increasing the initial stock. Unlike the expenditure of time, our
levels of energy can be replenished.
Some activities leave you 'on a high' afterwards. Some managers thrive on
the pressure of deadlines, others get a buzz from empowering others -
leaving them 'on a roll', ready to take on greater challenges.
But even the most stimulating activities are short-lived. Either the manager
reaches saturation point, or else the activity itself changes form.
There is often a symmetry in what managers like and dislike about their
jobs. They may like the variety of their work but dislike its episodic
nature; or relish the action but be frustrated by the lack of time for
reflection; likes and dislikes are often two sides of the same coin.
So, even where managers can identify something as 'energising', they will
also, at times, seek refuge from that activity. They tend to switch between
tasks to try to top up their energy levels. The sedate and familiar nature
of administrative work might provide welcome relief from the hurly-burly of
strictly managerial work. Technical work - a sales manager selling, a
production manager manufacturing - can be used like a revitalising hobby.
Engaging people in conversation is pleasurable and can provide relaxation in
anticipation of a heavy workload. Each type of work has its regenerative
benefits at different times.
Managers should be sensitive to their energy levels and take heed of the
diminishing return signals which are the cue to withdraw from a particular
activity. When managers can feel themselves drawing upon their energies just
to maintain their efforts at concentration it is time for a change.
Overall, the aim should be to find a balance between excitement and relief,
between exception and routine.
For example, an open door policy throws up varied and unexpected challenges.
But over a whole day, constant interruptions are distracting and exhausting.
The balance might come through setting aside fixed slots when the door will
be open. Grouping activities in this way, can reduce the unpredictability of
management work and with it the mental wear and tear of continually
switching attention.
More often than not, managers have too much to do. They can use their time
much more fruitfully if they keep up their energy level. But consciousness
of when to switch activities and how to boost energy levels would enable
managers to reduce the gap between what they think they should be doing and
what they have time to do. And while ultimate victory will always elude
them, managers will be able to claim that they are winning a bit more often.
Jean-Louis Barsoux is a research associate and Dr Rosemary Stewart is a
research fellow at Templeton College, Oxford.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920803

