FT922-4243

FT  06 JUN 92 / Markets: Sheriff Warren rides into the sunset - Wall Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


LIFE IS rarely dull on Wall Street, but this week managed to pack in a
little more excitement than usual.
The chapter on one financial scandal was closed when Warren Buffett stepped
down as chairman of Salomon on Wednesday, only for the first pages of a
fresh scandal elsewhere on Wall Street to be turned 24 hours later when
seven leading businessmen were charged by the Securities and Exchange
Commission with running an insider trading ring during the late 1980s.
On top of that, on Monday we had the Dow Jones index finally breaking
through the much-touted 'psychological' barrier of 3,400, and on Friday the
markets got a shock in the shape of an unexpectedly disappointing May
employment report, which made President Bush's comments on television the
night before about an 'anaemic' recovery disturbingly prescient for a
rattled Republican party.
The employment numbers were well outside market forecasts. No one predicted
any change in the all-important unemployment rate, but it actually rose in
May from 7.2 per cent to 7.5 per cent.
Although analysts were quick to point out that the increase reflected a rise
in the number of people signing on to look for work (and, therefore, a
revival of confidence in the outlook for job prospects), and that
manufacturers were responding to strengthening demand by boosting working
hours rather than payrolls, the report must have made grim reading at the
White House breakfast table.
In simple terms, the headline-grabbing jump in the unemployment rate, and
the modest 68,000 rise in non-farm jobs, indicate that the economic recovery
is advancing at a snail's pace.
The jobs figures took their toll of stock prices, sending the Dow 20 points
lower by midday yesterday, and taking the index even further away from the
heralded 3,400 level it had managed to breach just four days earlier.
That triumph provoked little celebration on the Street. The initial spark
for Monday's record-breaking 16.33 leap in the Dow to 3,413.21 was a bullish
national purchasing managers' report, but there was not much enthusiasm
behind the market's rise, evidenced by the low trading volume that day of
only 180m shares.
Since then volume has picked up nicely - breaking 200m shares for three days
in a row - but prices have not, with the daily total of falling stocks
consistently outnumbering the total of rising stocks. Moreover, much of the
buying has been restricted to a few cyclical sectors, most notably auto
manufacturers.
Thus, (it has been said before, but is worth saying again) the fact that
other indices have languished while the Dow has edged to record highs
suggests investor confidence in the outlook for equities is thinly spread.
The Standard & Poor's 500, the best measure of the broader market, started
the year at 417, yet was closing out this week around 413 - hardly an
inspiring performance. Likewise the Nasdaq composite index of
over-the-counter stocks, which opened 1992 at 586 and has advanced since
then by no less than one point.
An awareness of how the rest of the market is faring helps put the
performance of the Dow in context. Wall Street tags the word 'psychological'
on nice round numbers like 3,400 because it is believed that once a market
has made it past a notable point, investors say: 'Wow, that was easy, let's
keep going.'
Such thinking is flawed. The evidence of the past month, when the Dow has
flirted with 3,400, broken it, then dropped smartly back, suggests 3,400 is
no more important than 3,399, or 3,401.
At least Salomon and a new insider trading scandal provided a nice diversion
from number-watching. Although sheriff Warren Buffett has now ridden off
into the sunset, he left his deputy behind, top trouble-shooting lawyer
Robert Denham, to make sure Salomon stays on the right side of the law this
time.
The law, meanwhile, was busy concluding a long investigation by charging a
few notables with insider trading. Allegedly involved in the scheme were a
member of the family that founded the cosmetics giant Revlon and a former
director of Wall Street broking house Bear Stearns who married a Ford
heiress and starred prominently in the New York social scene.
The lawsuit against the men, which includes allegations that inside
information was swapped on luxury yachts in the Caribbean and at parties in
Long Island mansions, will be heard later this year.
Monday       3413.21  + 16.33
Tuesday      3396.10  - 17.11
Wednesday    3406.99  + 10.89
Thursday     3399.73  -  7.26
Friday       3398.69  -  1.04

The Financial Times


London Page II

920606

