FT924-6332

FT  21 NOV 92 / Markets: An elusive glimpse of a silver lining - London
Markets


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


ON Friday morning, this newspaper's headlines were as gloomy as any in
recent memory. 'Industry sheds 10,000 jobs'; 'Recession maintains its grip
for ninth quarter'; 'Sweden floats krona after outflow threatens reserves'.
And so on
Yet on Friday afternoon, the FT-SE 100 index was racing ahead, closing at
2,732.4, up 26 points on the day and within six points of its record close
of 2,737.8, reached in May.
Such a contrast is not unusual, of course. Looking out into the future for
anything up to 18 months, the market has traditionally been able to peer
through the cloud to find the silver lining.
This time, however, the contrast seems particularly marked. The long-lasting
nature of the recession has made it hard to see an end; and the experience
of the US has been that even after interest rates are cut sharply, a healthy
recovery cannot be guaranteed.
Britain's own woes are compounded by the growing sense that continental
Europe - especially Germany - is running into more serious economic problems
than seemed likely even two months ago. The long-drawn out crisis over the
Gatt and oilseeds issues, raising the possibility of a world trade war, have
added to the sense of unease.
It was the news, on Thursday afternoon, that a Gatt deal had been clinched
that led to the market's surge. The market had earlier shown a marked
ability to shrug off the worst of the trade fears, however: by Thursday's
close it had already recovered all but five points of its loss since the
Gatt talks between the EC and the US broke down in early November.
Behind the week's stock market optimism, another force was at work: signs
that, even though the international outlook seemed bleaker and job losses
continued to mount, the British economy is - at worst - avoiding a further
downward slide. The volume of retail sales for October, published on
Wednesday, showed a seasonally adjusted rise of 0.1 per cent; perhaps more
significant, in the three months to the end of October, retail volumes rose
by 0.9 per cent compared with the previous three months.
One factor behind those rises has undoubtedly been the steady gain in
effective earnings of those who have managed to keep their jobs. Robin
Aspinall of Panmure Gordon drew attention to the numbers shown in the chart:
average earnings deflated by the tax and price index, a measure of inflation
which adds in the impact of income tax changes.
In the last recession, it was a truism that those people who stayed in jobs
did well. In this recession, though the air of gloom is shared a lot more
evenly between north and south, and between service sector and
manufacturing, the steady upward path of effective earnings has been more
marked than a decade ago. Against that background, the upturn in the trend
of retail sales since the summer appears less surprising.
Though the stock market was cheerful this week, the gilt and money markets
were more apprehensive. Three month money stayed resolutely above the 7 per
cent level of base rates for most of the week, closing around 7 1/4 per cent
on Friday. The market clearly felt that the latest cut in base rates, a week
ago, is the last for some time - a view reinforced by the latest edition of
the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, which emphasised the government's
commitment to low inflation.
That commitment is still much in doubt, if the gilt market is to be
believed. The drop in short-term rates as a result of last week's base-rate
cuts has not been reflected in bond yields, which are up to a quarter of a
percentage point higher than their pre-Autumn Statement levels. The
announcement of another gilt auction for December 2 did not please the
market, which is still jumpy about the level of issuance likely next year.
One step to ease that burden was Wednesday's announcement that the
government plans to sell more of its remaining stake in British Telecom,
currently worth something over Pounds 5bn. Details of the sale, to take
place in the financial year starting in April 1993, are not yet available.
BT's shares were trading at 403p before the announcement; they closed on
Friday at 395 1/2 p, up 5 1/2 p on the week.
Two other privatised companies, National Power and PowerGen, were among the
week's most active shares. On Tuesday, National Power company reported a 10
per cent increase in pre-tax profits, and a 10 per cent increase in the
dividend - despite a slight fall in total electricity demand, the first for
over a decade. PowerGen's figures, published the next day, were not quite so
rosy.
The difference between the two generators is still more cosmetic than real,
however: timing of investment and slightly different accounting policies
explain the gap between the results. Both rose on the week: National Power
closed at 287 1/2 p, up 17p; PowerGen at 287, up 14 1/2 p.
For two company chairmen, the week brought some unwelcome comments. Sir
Denys Henderson, the chairman of ICI, found little enthusiasm for his
announcement that the group's bio-sciences division, once demerged, would
bear the name of Zeneca. 'Sounds like a foot infection, not a company,' said
one City wit. Analysts have also started to question just how much
shareholders will benefit from the spin-off.
The other man on the end of unfavourable comment was Alan Sugar, chairman of
Amstrad, the computer and consumer electronics business. The offer document
detailing his plan to take the company private again, at 30p per share, was
greeted with marked lack of enthusiasm by City commentators. Some idea of
the mood of shareholders will be given by next Tuesday's AGM, which may give
some pointers to the outcome of the vote on the bid on December 10. In the
meantime, Amstrad shares closed the week at 28, unchanged.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921121

