FT922-4537

FT  05 JUN 92 / The Property Market: A price on its high-rise head


   By VANESSA HOULDER


The issue,' said a banker wearily, 'is what is Canary Wharf worth? We have
no real idea.'
It was a frank admission for someone whose decisions had helped create - and
then bring down - the Pounds 1.3bn development in the London Docklands which
last month was put into administration. The complex number-crunching that
led to the appointment of administrators had produced just one conclusion:
it was not worth throwing good money after bad.
'We made some assumptions and concluded that we couldn't make Canary Wharf
viable,' the banker said. The main problem in arriving at a value on the
project was the uncertainty surrounding the recovery in the London property
market. 'None of us know where the market is going,' he said.
For all the uncertainties, the question of what Canary Wharf is worth cannot
be ducked by the bankers, administrators and potential investors considering
its future. While the range of estimates vary hugely, one thing is clear:
Canary Wharf is worth very little to an investor in its present state.
'The economics of the project require a hugely charitable act from the banks
to make the scheme stack up for any incoming investor,' commented County
NatWest, a broker.
The project can only support a modest amount of debt. On the optimistic
assumption that Canary Wharf is fully let at an average rent of Pounds 15
per sq ft (an additional Pounds 300m would need to be spent first to
complete the project), the development would support debt of just Pounds
500m, assuming an interest rate of 10 per cent. As matters stand, with only
11 per cent of the 4.5m sq ft project occupied, albeit on a rent estimated
at about Pounds 25 per sq ft, Canary Wharf can only service Pounds 94m of
debt.
The picture improves if the project's enterprise zone tax breaks, which
could total Pounds 400m, can be used. Even then, the shortfall in Canary
Wharf's ability to service its debt suggests that the banks' write-downs
could exceed Pounds 700m.
The scale of the immediate provisions might be reduced if an incoming
investor pumped fresh funds into the project and improved its long term
prospects by completing the current phase of construction.
Any new backer would receive no income from its investment; the investor
would have to take a long term view. A backer would have to gamble on what
Canary Wharf would be worth when firmly established in, say, 15 years. Given
the riskiness of the investment and the lack of an income in the short term,
any potential investor would demand a high rate of return - probably
comparable to that on venture capital investments.
Mr Richard Mully, a director of County NatWest, estimates that assuming the
project is fully let on rents similar to current levels of Pounds 15 per sq
ft, the maximum an investor should be prepared to pay for Canary Wharf is
between Pounds 150m and Pounds 200m.
Given the scale of the potential write-downs and the limited sums that are
likely to be provided by an outside investor, it might be in some banks'
interests to swap debt for equity.
The banks' long-standing aversion to converting debt to equity - which
damages their balance sheets and does not offer the tax advantages of
provisions - may be softening, according to Mr Mully. 'There is no short
term solution,' he says. 'Selling out today involves huge write-offs (and
getting back nothing at all). If banks can recoup something it would be
worth persisting.'
The losses incurred by Canary Wharf's developers, Olympia & York, raise the
question of why the project was thought viable in the first place: how did
O&Y persuade its bankers to fund the scheme?
The answer is illustrated by a slide used by O&Y in a presentation to
bankers in 1990. Entitled 1990 comparable development economics, the slide
shows that the potential profit of building at Canary Wharf was Pounds 73
per 'buildable' foot, compared with a Pounds 232 profit in the West End and
a Pounds 91 loss in the City.
The developers based their argument on the fact that land prices at Canary
Wharf were cheaper than elsewhere in London, leading to total construction
costs of Pounds 355 per sq ft, compared with Pounds 805 in the City and
Pounds 685 in the West End. Construction costs, they added, would fall for
subsequent phases of the development as the burden of the infrastructure
costs were spread more widely.
Rents per square foot were expected to be Pounds 30 at Canary Wharf compared
with Pounds 50 in the City and Pounds 55 in the West End. Yields at Canary
Wharf would be comparable with the City, after taking account of the
enterprise zone's tax allowances. That gives a capital value of Pounds 428
per sq ft for Canary Wharf and thus a potential profit of Pounds 73 per sq
ft.
As late as February O&Y was optimistic that the numbers would add up.
Indeed, in February it launched a Pounds 215m enterprise zone trust based on
a 600,000 sq ft building at 10 Cabot Square. The building was valued at
Pounds 215m, which covered the construction costs.
But the Cabot Square valuation was made on a special assumption - namely,
that the rent on the entire building at Pounds 25.61 per sq ft, had a
cast-iron guarantee from the developers. That, together with the
exploitation of the tax breaks, allowed the valuers to use a yield close to
7 per cent.
The reason why O&Y's original assumptions and the Cabot Square valuation are
now irrelevant is that they vastly overestimated the project's rental income
and its ability to use the tax breaks. O&Y thought that it would be able to
sustain rents of Pounds 30 per sq ft - and even push them up towards levels
in the City and West End. Now, the project would do well to achieve rents of
half that level.
Given the uncertain state of the Dockland's property market, even that
assumption may overstate Canary Wharf's value. Unless a building has a
prospect of being let, it is a liability, not an asset.
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
RENTAL GROWTH (%)
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Retail  Office  Industrial  All Properties
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Year to April 92         -1.5    -12.6     -3.1         -6.2
Quarter to April 92      -0.6     -4.9     -1.8         -2.5
Month to April 92        -0.2     -1.1     -0.5         -0.6
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Investment Property Databank
 -------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920605

