FT923-15650

FT  01 JUL 92 / International Bonds: Austrian issue finds overwhelming
demand


   By SIMON LONDON


OKB, the Austrian state-backed financial institution, yesterday proved that
international demand for Eurosterling bonds remains strong, launching a
Pounds 125m issue to overwhelming demand.
Many analysts expected overseas buying of sterling bonds to diminish
following Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht Treaty on European monetary
union. As a relatively high-yielding market, sterling was seen as having
most to gain from economic convergence in the run-up to monetary union.
However, both UK and continental European fund managers snapped up the
available paper against the background of a rising gilts market.
Participants in the deal reported no signs of hesitancy. The top triple-A
credit rating of the borrower and the backing of the Austrian government
were additional attractions.
The deal, lead-managed by Warburg Securities, was initially regarded as very
tightly priced by syndicate officials at other firms. The yield spread over
government paper is among the lowest on a new Eurosterling issue.
The 10-year 9 1/4 per cent bonds were re-offered to investors at a fixed
price of 98.20, for a yield of just 12 basis points more than gilts.
Only bonds issued by borrowers such as the European Investment Bank - which
are exempt from withholding tax in Italy and invariably attract strong
buying from this quarter - have been launched at lower yield spreads.
By the close of trading, OKB bonds were quoted at 98.65 bid, for a yield
spread of 9 basis points.
Although demand for sterling paper remained firm, syndicate officials were
not predicting a rush of Eurosterling issues. One barrier is the lack of
interest rate and currency swap opportunities for potential issuers.
OKB swapped the proceeds of yesterday's issue into floating rate D-Marks via
a complex package which involved a dollar swap component. Few borrowers are
willing to engage in such complex arbitrage.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920701

