FT923-15620

FT  01 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Hopes fade for quick end to Uruguay Round


   By DAVID DODWELL, World Trade Editor


HOPES that the Uruguay Round of world trade liberalisation talks would be
settled before US elections in November appeared to fade yesterday as
European Commission officials conceded they had given up hope of presenting
a compromise on farm trade to the US this week.
To break a long-standing dispute with the US on farm protection measures,
the EC needed to present its compromise to Washington before next week's
Group of Seven summit in Munich.
An EC official predicted that no settlement would be possible until after
the US elections, warning that trade disputes between the EC and the US
could escalate into trade war.
There were hopes that the trade talks impasse could be broken in May when
the EC agreed sweeping reforms of its Common Agriculture Policy. This
appeared to pave the way for EC cuts in subsidised farm trade that the US,
and other farm exporters, had been calling for since the end of 1990.
EC officials insist that differences between the US and the EC are now
infinitesimal, but complain that conflicts inside the EC secretariat, and
crises elsewhere, have made it impossible to agree an EC position that could
be offered to the US. Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, has been ready
to meet EC officials at short notice.
At the same time, however, staff inside the EC Agriculture Commission have
argued that there is no urgency to reach a settlement with the US. This
position has been endorsed by France, which is Europe's leading food
exporter and is concerned by Uruguay Round proposals to cut subsidised food
exports by 36 per cent in value terms, and by 24 per cent in terms of
volume.
An official in the EC's External Affairs Commission said yesterday that the
Maastricht crisis, and conflict in Yugoslavia, had diverted the attention of
Europe's leaders: 'I don't think anything can now happen (on the Uruguay
Round) until after the US election.
'The main failure here is with the Commission itself,' he added. 'Unhappily,
because of internal divisions, we have not been able to agree a position
that we are ready to fight for, and to sell to member states.'
Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, has in turn been unwilling or
unable to create the necessary consensus.
The official warned that US-EC disputes over Airbus, steel, oilseeds and
shipbuilding - which have been held in check while Uruguay Round
negotiations have continued in earnest - also threaten to escalate.
'There will have to be a lot of goodwill or this could slip into a trade
war.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920701

