FT922-4397

FT  05 JUN 92 / Polish cabinet falls amid 'police spies' row


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


   WARSAW


POLAND'S politicians last night prepared to re-open their perennial search
for stable government, after the fall of the centre-right cabinet headed by
Mr Jan Olszewski who had been in power for just six months.
The government, the third in the three years since the demise of communism,
fell after a motion for its dismissal was put to parliament yesterday by
President Lech Walesa and was carried by 273 votes to 119 with 33
abstentions.
The vote came after a tense day in parliament as rumours spread about the
contents of a list of some 60 former secret police informers delivered to
leaders of parliamentary commissions and political parties.
The list, which was not made public, contains the names of around one tenth
of those vetted. The list of deputies, members of the government and the
President's office came after a vote last week in parliament demanding that
such names be revealed.
Mr Olszewski implied in a short speech on television last night that the
sudden motion by Mr Walesa to dismiss the government had been provoked by
the fact that the lists had been delivered to parliament. Parliament had
been due to vote on a no-confidence motion against the government todasy,
but the vote was brought forward under pressure from Mr Walesa.
Mr Olszewski said: 'An independent country cannot be ruled by people who are
enslaved by their own past,' referring to the former agents who now hold
public office.
Later he told parliament that he thought that 'the issue of who Poland
belonged to had still not been resolved', referring to the continuing
influence of former communist officials.
The government lost last night's vote because it failed to secure the
support of the populist KPN party and lost the backing of the PSL farmers'
group. The PSL leader, the 32-year-old Mr Waldemar Pawlak is expected to be
nominated by President Walesa as the next prime minister.
Mr Walesa evidently hopes that Mr Pawlak will be able to construct a
majority coalition bringing in the free market reform parties which opposed
Mr Olszewski's government from its inception.
It seems clear that Mr Walesa will play a dominant role in the new
government.
Yesterday Mr Walesa looked determined and angry as he observed debate,
during which a deputy, Mr Kazmierz Switon, accused him of having been a
police agent.
Earlier in the day Mr Walesa issued a statement in which he implictly
admitted that he had signed a document promising to work with the
authorities in 1970 which he later withdrew.
He said, however, that he had never betrayed colleagues or his ideals.
Mr Walesa attacked the disclosures, saying they could 'completely
destabilise state and party political structures'.
He alleged that the interior ministry's files 'were to a large extent
false', and implied that some of the documents were fabricated by the secret
services of other countries.
He also sought to forestall charges of collaboration. 'I have been arrested
many times. The first time was in December 1970 when I signed three or four
documents . . . I never betrayed my ideals or my colleagues,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920605

