FT921-1218

FT  25 MAR 92 / Survey of North Wales (1): Depression bites deep - The
recession in North Wales has intensified in recent months. But there are
bright spots amid the gloom, such as the impending completion of the A55
coastal expressway which will strengthen the area's attractiveness to
outside investors


   By ANTHONY MORETON


TWO months ago Austin Taylor Communications, a manufacturer of
telecommunicaions equipment employing 145 people in Bethesda, Snowdonia, was
rescued from almost certain closure when Communications Systems of the US
bought the Welsh company.
The decline and rescue of Austin Taylor was a microcosm of the highs and
lows which face the economy of north Wales. Like the rest of the UK, north
Wales is now deeply depressed. Hotpoint and Brother are just two of several
companies that have had to lay off workers. Hotpoint has also given its
1,500 employees at Llandudno Junction and Bodelwyddan paid holidays as it
seeks to run down large stocks.
'The recession did not really arrive in north Wales until the end of last
year,' says Mr Huw Thomas, chief executive of Gwynedd county council, 'but
now it is here with a vengeance.'
Mr Thomas's timing is probably an optimistic reading of events. Further
east, in Clwyd, the recession arrived considerably earlier: in the past 18
months unemployment has jumped from 5.8 per cent to over 10 per cent. In
Gwynedd it has also been rising steadily in the past 12 months: from January
1991 it went up by almost a quarter to 12,200.
Nevertheless, north Wales, as Austin Taylor has shown, can still boast
success stories. The new American owners intend to use Austin Taylor not
just as a base to supply the British market, but also as a point from which
to attack the whole of Europe.
They will have fellow countrymen not far away. Euro DPC, the European arm of
Diagnostic Products Corporation, of Los Angeles, is to move its British
centre for the production of diagnostic kits from Witney, in Oxfordshire, to
Llanberis, this summer, employing 80 at first but 300 eventually.
The importance of Austin Taylor and Euro DPC is that they have shown it is
possible to trade in a largely rural area and also bring high-income
employees to a part of the country which has traditionally been around the
bottom of most pay leagues. A third of Euro DPC's employees are graduates on
salaries not often seen in north Wales in concentrated numbers.
North Wales has over the past 20 years won a considerable share of foreign
inward investment. Most of that, from companies like Brother, Shotton Paper,
Continental Can, Kimberly-Clark, Sharp, Kelloggs and most recently the
Pounds 140m Toyota engine plant, has gone to Clwyd. The rescue of Austin
Taylor and the arrival of Euro DPC shows that inward investment is slowly
being sucked further west.
The way in which industry is clearly looking further into Wales is welcomed
by all the development authorities. Less welcome is the appreciable decline
in the level of inquiries. 'There is a distinct lack of confidence among
potential incomers at the moment', says Mr Paul Roberts, head of economic
development at Clwyd County Council.
'There always seems to be another reason for decisions to be deferred. We
are still getting inquiries but the number is a fraction of what it once
was. And businesses are taking much longer to reach a decision.'
Like Gwynedd's Huw Thomas, he believes the serious investors will not return
in strength until they can see an end to the recession. In the middle of a
general election campaign they agree a further period of waiting is
inevitable.
They, and almost everyone else concerned with the economic health of the
region, are placing great faith in the ability of the A55 expressway across
the top of north Wales to generate new opportunities.
The almost-completed dual-carriageway road links the English motorway system
at Chester to the west of the region as far as Bangor. The government has
already announced plans to extend dual carriageways across Anglesey to
Holyhead, and the Welsh Development Agency, in conjunction with the local
authorities and the port authorities, is helping to upgrade Holyhead to make
it the main 'gateway' to Britain for Irish trade.
There are tangible signs that the improved A55, which makes most parts of
north Wales no further than an hour's drive from Manchester airport - an
important consideration for companies like Euro DPC - has already started to
attract investment.
A business park at Bangor, another to be built at St Asaph, motorway service
stations, and hotels by Forte and Rank, are springing up along its length.
With the opening of the Conwy tunnel by the Queen last October, a notorious
bottleneck has been removed - an hour to negotiate the river and get around
Henry III's magnificent castle was not uncommon at peak times - offering the
prospect of more visitors.
Caernarfon, with its equally magnificent castle and history, is to be given
a long-needed face-lift and other centres such as Porthmadog, Bettws-y-Coed,
and even Harlech hope to benefit from a combination of more businesses and
more visitors.
The main concern now, though, is to ensure that the ever-present conflict
between needs of the environment and of the economy does not lead to the one
destroying the other.
In Snowdonia, north Wales has one of the most magnificent areas of natural
beauty in Britain, a home to walkers, climbers, lonely farms, peace and
solitude. Enormous pressures already exist on Snowdon itself, the sort of
pressures that are threatening to destroy the Lake District in Cumbria.
Snowdon can barely handle more visitors without its very nature being
eroded.
Tourism cannot simply be turned off, like a tap, however. It contributes far
too much to the economy generally. But if more industry arrives as a result
of the opening of the expressway there is a potential danger that the area
will simply not be able to cope with the traffic, let alone the needs of the
newcomers.
On top of these economic pressures this part of north Wales faces a further
danger. It is the last real bastion of the Welsh language. Most people in
Gwynedd not only speak Welsh but also use it as their everyday language;
fewer do so in Clwyd but the number there is not inconsiderable. Monoglot
incomers not only put pressure on housing, forcing prices far beyond what
lowly-paid locals can afford, but threaten to undermine the culture not just
of the area but also of the wider Wales.
These fears have led extremists among the nationalists to pursue a vendetta
against incomers - and not solely English newcomers - by burning their
holiday homes. Some 200 have been destroyed over the last two decades and
the ability of the extremists to continue with acts of arson have been
considerably aided by the inability of the police to bring charges against
anyone.
Few Welshmen publicly defend the burnings. While they continue those
concerned with the economic health of the area will have an even harder job
convincing business of the attractions of the area.
The issue of jobs versus the environment is also surfacing further east
between Prestatyn and Holywell where Hamilton Brothers Oil and Gas wants to
build a gas-oil terminal next to the Point of Ayr colliery, the only one
left in north Wales. National Power also has plans for a Pounds 1bn
gas-fired power station.
The project, which is to go to public inquiry, would not generate a large
number of jobs, perhaps 50 in the terminal and 50 in the power station, with
another 200 in associated industries, but Clwyd's Mr Roberts says 'it would
help to bring in new industry to the area and give the economy a boost'.
North Wales has been remarkably successful in attracting new industries, as
the old staples of farming, steel, slate and tourism have taken heavy
knocks. Medicare, optoelectronics, motor components, electronics and
financial services have all found a home in Clwyd.
In Gwynedd telecommunications and television have grown strongly; Caernarfon
and the surrounding area have become one of the most important centres in
Britain outside London for television production, and the county is about to
launch a drive to attract more production companies to use its unrivalled
scenery for shooting film.
The area already has a strong arts base, with Oriel Eryri, an outstation of
the National Museum of Wales, in Snowdonia, and Llangollen, home of the
world-famous folk festival, in Clwyd. This is being complemented by new
theatre building: one in Llandudno seating up to 1,500 that could act as
north Wales's home for the equally world-famous Welsh National Opera Company
and a permanent setting, incorporating a theatre and conference facilities,
on the Llangollen site.
There remain gaps. 'The most important is to upgrade skills,' according to
Ms Enid Rowlands, chief executive of Targed, the training and enterprise
council in Gwynedd. 'We have the people, we have the motivation, we have the
initiative, but we must improve our skills.'
That initiative is exemplified by Clwyd which last Saturday led a team of
council officials and local businessmen to a technology-transfer conference
in Brastislava, Czechoslovakia. 'We have had a man in Russia several times
in the past year,' says Mr Roberts, 'and now we want to see what we can do
in Czechoslovakia. If inward investment is harder to get then perhaps we can
get into some form of joint ventures in eastern Europe.'
It's the sort of approach that does not admit of defeat.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920325

