FT922-580

FT  26 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Ambitious backbenchers chase
committee places


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


THE BIRTH of a National Heritage select committee, the reincarnation of a
Scottish affairs committee and the much-predicted demise of energy were key
events for ambitious backbenchers in the Commons yesterday.
Tory MPs passed over for office will also have noted the splitting of
education and science into two, with a new science and technology committee
to shadow the eponymous office, controlled by Mr William Waldegrave, the
public services minister.
The changes, announced by Mr Tony Newton, the leader of the Commons, are the
fruit of behind-the-scenes talks with the Opposition and look certain to be
approved when they are debated next Tuesday.
Even before the go-ahead is formally given, backbenchers anxious to
participate in the scrutiny of government departments have been lobbying the
whips and the influential committee of selection for a seat on a favourite
committee.
Most of the committees, now increased by one from 15 to 16, have 11 places,
a quorum of three and the political balance tipped 6-5 in favour of the
government. Whips agree which party should chair which committee and largely
fix the membership. But within that framework the chairmen are selected by
the members themselves.
In the last parliament, Labour held social security under Mr Frank Field,
employment under Mr Ron Leighton, public accounts under Mr Robert Sheldon,
Wales under Mr Gareth Wardell and transport under Mr David Marshall.
The return of Scottish Affairs - shelved by the last government amid fierce
controversy due to the lack of Conservative MPs north of the border - is an
olive branch to the Caledonian fringe.
While its membership has been reduced from 13 to 11, most assume that a
Labour majority will be allowed. Last night both Labour and the Scottish
Nationalists offered heavily qualified welcomes to the committee's return.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920626

