FT924-1050

FT  19 DEC 92 / Private View: The general recants - General Dmitri
Volkogonov is the ex-Stalinist who advises Yeltsin and is in charge of the
Communist party, state and KGB archives


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


THE GENERAL remembers it very well. 'I was eight or nine years old. I
remember how my mother took me and my sister to this place; we had just a
couple of bundles of clothes. It was a terrible time and we saw these camps
 -wherever we looked, there were concentration camps.'
The year was 1937, the height of Stalin's purges, and the general's father
had been executed in the small Pacific town of Nakhodka. The rules dictated
that the family be exiled - which usually meant to the east.
'Since for us that would have meant the Pacific Ocean' - he laughed drily -
'and since it was not Stalin's custom to exile people to the Hawaiian
islands, we were sent to the Krasnoyarsk region in western Siberia.'
Colonel General Dmitri Antonovich Volkogonov has inherited, almost
literally, the legacy of his Communist past. For, in addition to his role as
senior military adviser to President Boris Yeltsin of Russia, he is chairman
of the commission which is declassifying the state, party and KGB archives.
Paradoxically, part of his own story remains hidden.
'Even though I have total access to all the most secret papers,' he said, 'I
have been unable to discover exactly when and where my father was shot and
where he is buried.' All he knows is that Stalin, after signing his father's
death warrant, went off to the theatre.
Ideologically, Volkogonov has travelled further - though not faster - than
most of his bewildered countrymen. In spite of his father's execution and
his mother's early death in exile, he became a zealous Stalinist, a
hardliner who rose rapidly through the ranks to emerge a leading commissar:
deputy chief of the political indoctrination bureau for the armed forces.
Gradually, he began to live a sort of double life, using his privileged
access in order to research Stalin's purges. He had to quit his commissar
post. Editorship of a history of the second world war cost him his job as
director of the Institute of Military History.
He was the first general to leave the Communist Party and join Yeltsin,
before the failed coup in August, 1991. He is a deputy of the Russian
parliament (from the same region as Viktor Chernomyrdin, the new prime
minister) where he leads a small liberal grouping.
What Volkogonov calls his 'agonising, long process of reappraisal' includes
a blockbuster biography, Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy, begun in the late
1970s when he was still writing socialist utopian tracts, and published
three years ago under glasnost. (It is now available in English).
A study of Trotsky followed and he is working on Lenin, a book which he says
'will be my most liberated'. The man he once revered as a genius he now
describes as 'a great revolutionary but not a great character. Lenin's ideas
flew very high but in the wrong direction'.
We discussed the explosive potential of the archives in his charge, some of
which have already been opened to foreign researchers but some of which,
especially the later KGB material, may be held back under a 30-year rule due
to be enacted next year.
There are 600,000 dossiers on people Stalin threw into the meatgrinder.
Many, under torture, invented terrible lies to incriminate others.
'Thousands of people worked as undercover agents. We can not predict the
outcome if we were to publish these lists. It is very difficult to know how
far to go.' It was like taking organs from the dead without the family's
consent.
There are gaps in the record. One concerns Krushchev's celebrated
closed-session speech to the 20th Party Congress in 1956. 'It was an
extremely brave step,' the general said, 'because Krushchev was part of the
process he was de-Stalinising.
'He asked for every document to be brought to him that had his signature on
it. The former head of the KGB, Shelepin, told me he took Krushchev a huge
pile of papers. I asked Shelepin: 'Well, where have the papers got to?'
Shelepin paused for a moment and then he said: 'I suspect he burned them all
on a bonfire at his dacha.''
I pointed out to the general that he, too, is part of his own de-Stalinising
process. He was unruffled.
'Without any doubt. I've never hidden the fact that I was part of the
process and I would accept that I was one of those who did a lot to
strengthen the totalitarian system . When I was a lieutenant, I was a
zealous Stalinist. When Stalin died, I thought the sky was going to fall in.
For many years, I was an orthodox Marxist.
'On the other hand, for many years I also felt we were going up a blind
alley. And I was one of the first to say, in 1986 at the very beginning of
perestroika, that political officers in the army should be abolished.'
Why did you say nothing before?
'Well, I knew that there was a lot wrong but, like Gorbachev, I thought the
system had the ability to reform itself and that it would be reformed from
within. My excuse is that if you look at any of the books I wrote when I
was, as it were, a hardline Stalinist, you will not find any references to
Krushchev or Brezhnev or Stalin. I did not pay lip-service in the way that
an orthodox Marxist-Leninist would have done. It is my only excuse.'
He described his speech to the 1990 party congress, when he warned that the
party would die unless it dropped marxism-leninism. 'There was an incredible
uproar in the hall. They stamped and shouted and would not let me speak. How
could it be that a three-star colonel-general could get up and speak against
the party?
'I regard my own past as part of the evolution of the Russian
intelligentsia. But I have never denied my responsibility for things I was
party to.'
But how on earth did you explain to yourself the death of your own father?
'You have to remember that my mother also died in exile. I explained it to
myself as a terrible, tragic mistake of history. Many people had the same
attitude to similar tragedies. The whole system, somehow, was making these
errors. Nobody blamed Stalin. Forty years ago, one had no conception of the
real essence of the system. One lived in it.
'When I later discovered just how many of my family and close relatives had
been liquidated - and many of them had - I felt we had all been held in the
bloody claws of the most tyrannical regime that the world had ever known.'
But would not the natural reaction of a child in your circumstances be to
grow up hating the system?
'The fact is we were brought up to believe this was the perfect system.
Since infancy, I was taught that the world was only waiting to destroy the
Soviet Union. We believed there were enemies. We believed that Stalin was
the wisest of men.'
The general's voice rose. 'We believed that in ten or 15 years, we would
live in Paradise. Everyone was somehow shackled by the ideas of primitive
dogmatism. The worst crime that you can commit against a people is the
spiritual crime, a crime against thought. And I have finally managed after
25 years to drop this terrible burden of ideology and dogmatism.'
The deeper the intellect, the more dramatic the conversion. This renegade
general has doctorates in both philosophy and history and it is easy to
conclude that the philosophy (which in the USSR meant Marxism-Leninism
though he has read British and German thinkers, too) was overturned by the
history.
I asked about the future. Volkogonov thinks the danger of civil war is real,
but avoidable by means of compromise and coalition. He is now convinced that
the socialist system must be destroyed before Russia can become what he
calls 'a civilised society', a process that he says will take a decade.
Russia had to be eclectic, and distinctions between 'socialism' and
'capitalism' were fruitless. 'I do not think there has ever been an ideal
society on earth. There is not and there will not be.'
Are you still, in any sense, a socialist?
'Socialism has the same right to exist, as an idea, as other philosophies.
One idea of socialism I do believe can survive, one it took from
Christianity, and that is the idea of social justice.'
You are like a man who has lost his religion, I said finally. What do you
put in its place?
'It is wrong for a man to believe in corporate values. We are people who
live all on the same planet and mankind has to devise universal principles,
truths and values.
'Therefore, in place of Marxist ideology, we have to put universal human
values. We do not have to invent them. They have always existed.
'We merely have to affirm them, the eternal values such as those espoused by
Cromwell, Kemal Ataturk and Peter the Great: nobility, bravery, honesty,
decency, conscience.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

921219

