FT921-533

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Considering the pursestrings - How to
. . . cope with the end of the tax year


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


WITH five working days left before the end of the tax year, there is still
time to act on financial matters, particularly if you are worried that there
might be a tougher regime after the general election on April 9. The areas
to think about are: Pensions. Additional voluntary contributions are a
tax-efficient way of increasing pension benefits. If you can afford it,
top-up AVCs to the maximum limit for the year: 15 per cent of your total pay
(subject to a cap of Pounds 71,400 this year).
Tax relief can be claimed on AVCs and also on premiums paid into a personal
pension plan. The maximum contribution varies with your age: from 17.5 per
cent of your earnings until the age of 35, up to 40 per cent if you are
between 61-74.
These contributions can be carried back one year for tax purposes, and
accountant Price Waterhouse says it is worth doing this if your tax rate was
higher in 1990/91. You must pay the contributions by April 5 and make a
formal carry-back election by July 5.
Deposit accounts. If you receive interest gross, it might be to your
advantage to claim interest in the present tax year, when it will be taxed
at a maximum of 40 per cent. To do this, you will have to close your account
before April 5 and reopen it on April 6, which is the beginning of the next
tax year. Check that the bank or building society does not impose penalties
for immediate closure. Also, remember to transfer investments which produce
income to a lower-income spouse if you can make use of the latter's 25 per
cent band.
Capital Gains Tax: To use up the full allowance of Pounds 5,500 for the
current tax year, you may need to 'bed-and-breakfast' shares by selling them
on the market and repurchasing them to bring gains up to the tax-free
allowance. Your taxable gain next time you sell will be lessened, since you
will be starting from a higher base.
An allowance is made for the effect of inflation on asset prices between
April 1982 and the present. This indexation allowance varies, depending on
the month in which you bought your shares (page VI).
If you have reached your CGT threshold but your spouse has not, you can
transfer assets to them so that they can use their Pounds 5,500 allowance.
Share options: If you think tax rates are going to rise in the next tax year
and you are entitled to exercise share options, you may wish to do so before
April 6, since CGT is payable on their disposal.
Inheritance Tax: You can make 'potentially exempt transfers' free of IHT
provided you survive for seven years after making the gift. In addition,
husband and wife each has an annual exemption of Pounds 3,000 which can be
given as a lump sum or split between beneficiaries in any tax year.
Accountants Binder Hamlyn point out that those who did not use up last
year's gift allowance, can still do so by the end of this tax year, although
they must have used up this year's Pounds 3,000 first. Only one year's
exemption can be carried forward - after that it is lost. So husband and
wife can transfer Pounds 12,000, potentially free of IHT, if they have made
no transfers in the 1990/1 tax year or after.
You can also give small gifts of Pounds 250 to as many people as you like
free of IHT in any tax year.
Joint mortgage: Interest relief on a joint mortgage is now allocated equally
between husband and wife. Higher rate tax relief has been abolished for the
year 1991-92. However, Price Waterhouse says it is still possible to claim
mortgage relief in respect of the tax year 1990-91 so long as this is done
by April 5. If either of you is a higher rate taxpayer and the other is not,
you can elect to have the interest paid in 1990/91 to be allocated against
the higher rate payer's income.
Charities: Gift Aid scheme will allow you to give Pounds 600 or more to
charity tax-efficiently by the end of the tax year. If you are a 40 per cent
taxpayer, you can claim relief of Pounds 120 on Pounds 600. So it will only
cost you Pounds 480 net to give Pounds 800 because the charity can claim a
further Pounds 200 of tax.
Personal Equity Plans: The normal seven day cooling off period means that
you now cannot receive advice and get a PEP for this tax year. However, you
can use an execution-only service to obtain a Pep until April 2, or at a
push, by midday April 3. Those offering execution-only services include
Chamberlain de Broe (tel: 071-235-5999) for a flat fee of Pounds 50 and
Boyton Financial Services (0787-61919) charges Pounds 60.
Trusts: Income from a discretionary trust or an accumulation and maintenance
trust suffers tax at a flat rate of 35 per cent. However, Barry Stillerman,
of Stoy Hayward, says that if payments are made to a child who is over 18
years old and does not pay tax, the child can use his or her personal
allowance to reclaim tax, so long as the settlor of the trust is a parent.
The trustees should make out a cheque to the child by April 5 and a
repayment claim can be made after that date.
If you are a settlor and beneficiary of an overseas trust (and are a UK
resident), you are liable for CGT when payments are made. Trustees often
defer payment, allowing income to accumulate in the trust instead. However,
from April 5, the government is imposing a 10 per cent surcharge for each
year between the realisation of CGT and the beneficiary receiving income
from the trust for a period of six years.
Caroline Garnham, of solicitors Simmons and Simmons, says if your trust has
made a gain and you are thinking of having income paid out to you within the
next six years, it would be cheaper to do so before the end of this tax
year. Business Expansion Scheme: There are still some schemes open until
April 5 so it is not too late to invest a maximum of Pounds 40,000 in this
tax year to receive a rebate of 40 per cent of the amount invested. To keep
the tax relief you will need to maintain the investment for five years.
Enterprise Zone Trust: After the collapse of Cabot Square scheme over a week
ago, virtually all the available EZT schemes are oversubscribed.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920328

