FT923-11031

FT  27 JUL 92 / Letter: MMC must find solution to gas pipeline returns


   From Mr IAN POWE


Sir, Your report 'British Gas to separate top jobs' (July 23) quotes the
chief executive (designate) as not ruling out a referral to the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission if no agreement is reached about rate of return on
pipeline assets.
From the customers' point of view, a referral is overdue. Only the MMC can
adjudicate between recent conflicting judgments by OFT, Ofgas and
government.
The effect on an integrated industry of these piecemeal decisions, and of
British Gas's meek acceptance of all of them, is likely to be higher gas
prices for industry, commerce and households. The two main reasons are
these:
British Gas accepted Ofgas's setting of a tough value of X, in the (RPI  -
X) domestic price cap formula, on a basis of planned cost-saving programmes
and of earnings from a large market share. That share has been sharply
reduced by OFT edict, in the industrial market, and by a government decision
to lower the volume threshold of household supply monopoly. The case for
price cap review, in British Gas's favour and against the consumer interest,
is worryingly strong while British Gas also faces additional costs in a
separate pipeline and storage unit.
About 50 per cent of gas sales to industry are by interruptible contract. It
is popular with customers, because it is cheap, and it is valuable but not
essential to British Gas as a means of meeting peak domestic demand. But it
is of no present interest to competitors; British Gas cannot substantially
reduce its share of the industrial market except by putting up the price of
interruptible gas.
Paradoxically, the government's headlong rush to introduce competition is
accompanied by risk of higher prices. Sir James McKinnon, director-general
of Ofgas, cannot allow a high rate of return if, in consequence, British
Gas's marketing arm faces extra costs for carrying gas along the pipelines
of the separate transportation unit, created by OFT, which it will be
entitled to pass on to consumers. The MMC must look at the apparently
different objectives of the three regulatory players to find a solution that
is in the public interest.
Ian Powe,
director,
Gas Consumers Council,
6th Floor,
Abford House,
15 Wilton Road,
London SW1V 1LT

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920727

