FT922-3978

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (11): The Swiss face up to
Europe - Trade


   By PETER MONTAGNON


SWITZERLAND AND THE EUROPEAN COMMON MARKET by Rene Schwok Praeger Publishers
Pounds 34.50, 131 pages
THERE IS NO disguising the chauvinism which underlies this examination of
Switzerland's relations with the EC. Mr Schwok not only appears perplexed
about the lack of interest in the subject shown by the media in Community
countries, he is also clear that Switzerland's situation is different from
that of its neighbour, Austria.
Austrian membership of the EC would, he says, 'finally redeem all the
failures' of its history: loss of empire, failure of the union with Germany,
Soviet dominance following World War Two. Switzerland, he adds smugly, can
take pride in having eschewed war and fanaticism and in having turned a
country without resources into one of the world's most prosperous.
With this tone established at an early stage, one would expect that the book
would argue forcibly against the contamination that would follow from
Community membership. That the contrary is the case helps explain why Berne
is now actively in favour of membership. The book is a voyage of discovery
in which the nationalist Swiss finally has to accept that his country cannot
stand aside from the rest of Europe.
Admittedly, the conclusion is forced partly by a belief that EFTA would have
no future with Austria inside the EC. Mr Schwok clearly would not like his
country left to the mercy of a group of Nordic nations preoccupied by
irrelevancies such as cod-fishing. Mr Schwok seems scarcely to have noticed
that these countries, too, have shifted towards membership of the Community.
He perceives rightly, though, that EFTA has always had difficulty
approaching the EC as a group and that the relationship between its members
and Brussels is principally a bilateral one.
Switzerland cannot afford the marginalisation that would follow from staying
out of the EC, but in the end the middle way is not satisfactory. An attempt
to integrate Swiss law with that of the Community, ,effectively what the
European Economic Area requires, would involve a surreptitious loss of
sovereignty.
It is difficult to fault the argument, even though the book has two serious
drawbacks. The first is the wooden translation from the French. The second
is a feeling that this book has been rather long in translation. One wonders
why there is no detailed evaluation of the negotiations for the European
Economic Area, though there is some compensation in its coverage of the
Swiss/EC agreement on non-life insurance.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920609

