FT924-8310

FT  11 NOV 92 / Devon and Cornwall set up body to boost growth


   By ANTHONY MORETON


PUBLIC AND private-sector bodies have joined forces to set up the
Westcountry Development Corporation to assist growth in Devon and Cornwall,
among the most depressed counties in Britain.
Mr Eric Dancer, chairman of the Devon and Cornwall Training and Enterprise
Council and managing director of Dartington Crystal, a leading force in the
project, said yesterday: 'We need to create 70,000 new jobs in the area by
the end of the century just to keep up with demographic change. Then we need
more jobs to overcome the present level of joblessness.'
The area's tourism, agriculture, mining and defence industries have been
eroded by the recession and defence cuts, and there are unemployment
blackspots in Torbay, Redruth, Camborne and along the north Devon coast
between Barnstaple and Bideford.
The two counties are at the bottom of the British league table of wage rates
and only just above the bottom in terms of gross domestic product.
The corporation aims to develop an economic strategy for the region and is
looking to the Welsh Development Agency and Scottish Enterprise as role
models. Applications close this morning for its Pounds 50,000-a-year post of
chief executive.
Among those supporting the project are South West Water, South West
Electricity, British Telecommunications, British Gas and South West
Enterprise, a consortium of companies. Both county councils and Plymouth are
involved, as well as the universities and the Tec, which has committed
Pounds 1m to it.
The corporation's launch follows the collapse earlier this year of the Devon
and Cornwall Development Company, whose aim had been to raise money from the
private sector to encourage growth.
The inward investment work of the Devon and Cornwall Development Bureau will
not be affected by the corporation. Mr Dancer said the intention was to give
increased support to the bureau so that it could promote inward investment
from other parts of Britain as well as from overseas.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921111

