FT924-11392

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (21): Boost for Berlin opera houses


   By LESLIE COLLITT


SOME SMALL less-developed countries have budgets not much larger than the
DM1.2bn annual subsidy which will be showered next year on Berlin's opera
houses, symphony orchestras, theatres and museums, writes Leslie Collitt.
Next year's cultural budget will rise by a heady 19 per cent to hit a record
2.7 per cent of total city expenditures.
Even Berlin's cultural balance sheet this year does not exactly reflect
hard-strapped budgets in Berlin and Bonn: revenues consist of a paltry
DM107m while expenditures are a whopping DM986m. The difference is made up
by DM668.4m in subsidies from the Berlin budget and DM210m from the German
government.
Although Berlin supports no less than three leading opera houses - two in
the east and one in the west - any suggestion that this might be a luxury at
a time of strict budget constraints is regarded as heresy. A flourishing
operatic, musical and theatrical establishment - itself a not insignificant
economic entity employing 45,000 people - is also seen by the business
community as an important element in attracting top-flight executives to
Berlin and enhancing Berlin's appeal for visitors.
All three Berlin opera houses have top directors to match the more than
DM177m they receive in subsidies. Opera buffs can choose between the
Deutsche Oper (DM78.4m) under Gotz Friedrich, the Komische Oper (DM41.2m)
led by Harry Kupfer and the Staatsoper (DM58m) under its new artistic
director, Daniel Barenboim.
Despite the subsidies, the blood-letting in personnel of the two east Berlin
operas has been heavy. Nearly a third of the singers at the Staatsoper were
sacked and Georg Quander, the Intendant, said tartly that if artistic
criteria had been the sole yardstick - and not job security regulations -
then only one-third would have survived. Gotz Friedrich, whose Deutsche Oper
has bred top-flight singers such as Jessye Norman and Cheryl Sweet, and
Harry Kupfer are both in the 'realistic music theatre' tradition of the late
Walter Felsenstein. Thus, even a lyrical performance of Verdi's La Boheme by
Friedrichs at the Deutsche Oper manages to portray the sharp social
divisions of the time.
Berlin's other cultural jewel, the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra which gets
DM23.4m in subsidies, is under the baton of its new artistic director,
Claudio Abbado, who is having few problems filling the shoes of the late
Herbert von Karajan. Radio-Symphonie-Orchestra (DM7.4m), conducted by
Vladimir Ashkenazy, has gained greatly in stature in recent years. Berliner
Sinfonieorchester (DM11.6m) was East Berlin's leading orchestra and has a
strong following in the east. But it has the drawback of playing in the
opulently-restored Schauspielhaus whose accoustics are far from ideal.
Deutsches Theater in east Berlin (DM23m), one of the German-speaking world's
leading theatres, has becoming the leading 'state theatre' of Berlin,
eclipsing west Berlin's Schiller Theater and Schlosspark-Theater which get
(DM40.7m).
Berliner Ensemble, also in east Berlin, was founded by Bertolt Brecht and
suffered from arteriosclerosis long before the collapse of Communist rule.
It gets DM14.7m in subsidies and is to be jointly run by several leading
east German directors.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921026

