FT921-11894

FT  29 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Wrists slapped after accused found guilty
as charged - The first actions of a new City watchdog


   By ANDREW JACK


THE DIRECTORS of Ultramar and Williams Holdings were rubbing their reddened
wrists yesterday as the recipients of the first publicly administered slaps
from the Financial Reporting Review Panel, the policing arm of the Financial
Reporting Council.
Both companies had been found guilty of breaches of accounting standards,
exposed in statements released to the Stock Exchange in the morning.
Each accepted the charges - albeit somewhat grudgingly - and promised not to
transgress again.
Ultramar, the oil and gas group, and Williams Holdings, the industrial
conglomerate, suffered a little negative publicity as a result. In addition,
Williams suffered the indignity of its share price dropping 20p in the
morning after the announcement was released to the stock market, before
recovering slightly to close down 11p at 312p.
Ultramar contravened SSAP 8, a UK accounting standard dealing with taxation,
in its treatment of advance corporation tax (ACT).
By treating ACT as a cost of dividends rather than a tax charge on operating
profits (as the standard lays down), it reduced the tax charge by Pounds
12.3m. That had the effect of increasing earnings per share to 32.2p. Under
the advised SSAP treatment, the eps figure would have been 28.9p.
The approach adopted, which the company has practised over many years, was
highlighted in the notes to the accounts. The alternative earnings figures
were also given, printed on the same page as the consolidated profit and
loss account.
Ultramar argues that since most of its income comes from overseas, there is
very little UK tax charge against which to offset ACT, and adding it into
the tax charge therefore unfairly distorts the earnings figure.
'We're all in favour of improving financial reporting, but the only problem
is that standardisation doesn't always work,' said a senior executive in the
company who was involved in negotiations with the review panel.
Williams Holdings broke with the guidance given under SSAP 3, which deals in
part with earnings per share. It treated a series of exceptional items on
asset disposals and reorganisations as post-tax - a treatment permissible
under the standard only for extraordinary items.
As a result, the company's earnings per share stood at 22.3p, compared with
21.2p using the SSAP treatment. Again, the alternative treatment was flagged
in the accounts, and the recalculated earnings per share figures were
published.
Ultramar is no longer in a position to make amends directly. It was subsumed
by Lasmo, the UK oil exploration company, in a close-run Pounds 1.2bn
takeover bid concluded in December. As a result, it will not be publishing
1991 accounts as a separate entity.
The directors of Williams Holdings, the industrial conglomerate, have
already given a written undertaking to the panel that its practices in the
forthcoming 1991 report will comply fully with accounting regulations.
Beyond the two companies, the spotlight is now likely to be trained on the
auditors to both companies. Ernst & Young, auditor to Ultramar, covered
themselves with a 'qualified' audit report in the 1990 accounts. The letter
signing off the accounts explicitly highlights the treatment of ACT and
stresses that it does not comply with SSAP 8.
However, in the case of Pannell Kerr Forster (PKF), auditor to Williams
Holdings, there is no such statement. The letter in the 1990 accounts
resembles the typical standard one issued to unqualified accounts. It
states: 'In our opinion the accounts give a true and fair view . . . and
have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies Act 1985'.
Mr Richard Pearson, chairman of PKF, said last night: 'In view of the
disclosures made by Williams in last year's accounts we did not consider
that these particular circumstances warranted further mention in our audit
report.'
However, two parties have emerged contented from yesterday's events. The
Accounting Standards Board, can take comfort from a minor victory in its
campaign to boost the quality of financial reporting.
Its sister body, the review panel, can breathe a sigh of relief that its
first reprimands have worked well. The companies have accepted its edicts,
and have not threatened to challenge its decisions in the courts.

The Financial Times


London Page 23 Photograph John Darby (left), chairman of Ultramar for the
period in question, and Nigel Rudd, the Williams chairman (Omitted).

920129

