FT922-13371

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Ashdown blames fear of Labour for Tory swing


   By RALPH ATKINS


WAVERING TORY voters' fears of a Labour government were blamed yesterday by
Mr Paddy Ashdown for turning what could have been a remarkable lift-off for
his Liberal Democrat party into a damage limitation exercise.
The Liberal Democrats, as much as Labour, were victims of a late swing back
to the Tories - apparently only hours before polling began  - and a false
air of optimism they allowed to build among campaign workers.
With opinion polls last weekend putting their support as high as 21 per
cent, strategists had talked of winning up to eight extra seats.
When the last results arrived yesterday, that uplift had evaporated. They
have 20 seats in the new parliament, two fewer than before. The Liberal
Democrats won 18 per cent of the vote, down five percentage points on 1987.
The sense of disappointment, exacerbated by exhaustion, was palpable when Mr
Ashdown addressed party workers in London before heading for his Yeovil
constituency.
'Our vote would have been very substantially higher had it not been for the
fear, the concern, that people had for the prospect of a Labour government,'
Mr Ashdown said.
He also attacked Britain's 'first past the post' system, claiming that the
Liberal Democrats would hold more than 100 seats under proportional
representation and predicted that Labour would have to back electoral reform
before the next election.
Mr Ashdown was initially dismissive of forming an 'anti-Tory' coalition with
Labour but appeared not to rule it out completely.
'It is time for the parties to reflect. I don't think you should go any
further than that,' he said.
Mr Ashdown's private ambition had been to build the Liberal Democrat party
so that it could challenge Labour's claim to be the main alternative to the
Tories. To that extent, Thursday's results were helpful. A question-mark had
been raised over whether Labour could ever be re-elected, Mr Ashdown said
yesterday. But the swing from Liberal Democrat to Labour on Thursday may
dash his hopes.
The Liberal Democrats had a right to feel robbed - at least by the polling
organisations. Their energetic, low-budget campaign, engineered by Mr Des
Wilson, the former director of Shelter, the charity for the homeless, was
regarded as better than both the Labour and Tory campaigns. Mr Ashdown's
frantic dashes across the UK and populist slogans boosted his leadership
ratings.
The Liberal Democrat pledge to increase education spending by putting a
penny on income tax was backed by 78 per cent of voters, according to an NOP
poll.
However, the Liberal Democrats were perhaps more vulnerable than Labour to
voters telling one story to pollsters and then, in the privacy of the
polling booth, voting for the benefit of their pockets.
The Liberal Democrats also lost seats by failing to protect their rear
flank. While good targeting won seats like Devon North, Cornwall North,
Cheltenham and Bath, they lost their celebrated by-election wins of the last
parliament - Eastbourne, Ribble Valley and Kincardine and Deeside.
Ceredigion and Pembroke North and Southport, lost by the Liberal Democrat
incumbents, did not even feature on lists of vulnerable seats.
Nor was there evidence of widespread tactical voting in the swathe of seats
in southern England where the former Alliance parties were the main
challengers in 1987.
Yet Mr Ashdown was able yesterday to argue that the party had established
useful foundations on which to build. Two years ago, as Mr Wilson began to
plan the party's election strategy, support for the Liberal Democrats stood
at single figures in opinion polls. In the 1989 European elections the party
trailed behind the Greens.
Amid the continuing anger and confusion over the merger of the former
Alliance parties, the Liberal Democrats were in danger of political
extinction. Only recently have party officials admitted how close the party
came to bankruptcy. It has finished the 1992 election with a relatively
healthy balance sheet.
Against that backdrop, 20 seats is a solid performance, a reminder to Labour
and the Tories that Britain has not reverted to two-party politics. It looks
poorer largely because of the deliberate expectation-building by Liberal
Democrat strategists, in the last few days of the campaign, in the hope of
starting a bandwagon effect.
Where does the campaign leave Mr Ashdown? Unlike Mr Kinnock there is no
question-mark over his future. He enjoyed the campaign and would probably
like to lead his party into another election. 'It has been tremendous fun,'
he told party workers yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920411

