FT921-3766

FT  12 MAR 92 / Arts: Measure for Measure - RSC, Young Vic


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Trevor Nunn's riveting RSC staging of this great, imperfect, ambiguous and
infinitely rewarding play has now reached London after a national tour. On
this page Andrew St George praised its premiere at Stratford's The Other
Place in September; here I add my voice to his. The RSC has done this play
proud before, and this production does not surpass some of the versions we
saw in the 1980s. Shakespeare's vague Vienna here becomes fin de siecle
Vienna, and Nunn has gone overboard on realism. The play begins with
waltzing to Strauss; tramlines mark the floor.
Where this account scores is in tension and intimacy. The audience, seated
close on three sides, follows excitedly the moment-by-moment development of
the big scenes: in particular, the dilemmas and conflict raised by
Isabella's staunch adherence to chastity and Angelo's hypocritical and
blackmailing siege of her virtue.
The production's most daring stroke is in casting young Claire Skinner as
Isabella. I have never heard a Shakespearian heroine spoken less musically.
Her bright teenage voice, spanning no more than a half-octave, shakes and
breaks the text into short half-phrases. Yet all of this flies fresh like a
dart from her heart. This is the most artless of Isabellas, with both the
fervour and the nervousness of the young; she has a streak of St Joan in
her.
Most brilliant is the psychological acuity - especially in terms of
body-language - of her scenes with Angelo (David Haig). His first special
attention to her is that of a schoolmaster with a keen pupil; he sits her
down and explains how things must be. But then she, with unthinking
precocity, tells of authority's medicine. 'Go to your bosom, Knock there,
and ask your heart . . .' she says, and she listens to his heart, half like
a doctor. So, unintentionally, she thaws this stiff-bodied ruler to guilty
sexual arousal.
Nunn has elsewhere tinkered with the text. Lucio's 'Grace is grace, despite
of all controversy' line, often cut, is back, but some scenes are
re-ordered, some words altered and the Duke's big central rhyming-couplet
speech has been chopped into three and redistributed around the play.
This production avoids the grand scale whereby Nicholas Hytner's 1987-89
staging showed so movingly the layers and connections of a complex society.
Shakespeare's abiding questions about governance and fitness to rule count
for little, and the strange and wonderful role of the observer Duke is
diminished. Philip Madoc further spoils this by adopting, for his scenes in
disguise as Friar Lodowick, a sustained Welsh kind of Mummerset accent. But
every role is sharply characterised, and the mood swings finely between
serious and comic.
Though not definitive, this staging (running until April 25) is to be
urgently recommended to anyone remotely interested in Shakespeare. (It could
even convert some who aren't) Its suspense and intensity are rare, and they
illumine some vital facets of this perennially fascinating play.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920312

