FT922-3939

FT  09 JUN 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Speaking the language of
Europe


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


The Danes have provided a temporary setback to the European Community's
plans for political and monetary union but progress towards the creation of
a single European market continues uninterrupted, writes Charles Batchelor.
Even at this late stage - the formal launch date for the single market is
January 1, 1993 - there is still time for dilatory businessmen or women to
take action. Many of the measures needed to implement the single market will
not be in place until long after the official deadline and the EC will
continue to extend its influence over the coming years.
The message of Influencing the European Community: Guidelines for a
Successful Business Strategy (Kogan Page 358 pages Pounds 35) is that
businesses are not simply obliged to respond to change: they can also affect
its course.
Cecilia Andersen provides an encyclopaedic account of the workings of the
community and detailed explanation of how companies can influence the
preparation of EC regulations.
Andersen, an academic and a consultant, urges companies to adopt a European
public affairs strategy suited to their size. Large companies should
identify policy planners and decision-makers in community institutions and
establish good communications with them, she says.
They should participate in key organisations and groups where community
initiatives which concern the business are dealt with and take part in the
technical preparation of community legislation.
Companies should gather information on community issues and disseminate it
within the organisation. They should also foster a corporate European
mentality so the business is seen as knowledgeable on European issues.
Small businesses, with more limited resources, should make use of the free
and low-cost channels of help and advice available, while consultants can be
used to solve specific problems or to lobby for the business's interests in
Brussels.
A business's public affairs campaign should not be confined to the
Commission, despite its pivotal role in the single market process. Sometimes
it may make more sense to turn to the officials of member states, or their
permanent representatives based in Brussels. Members of the European
Parliament and their specialist committees can also prove useful allies.
A company which wants to influence a specific piece of legislation should
concentrate on the early drafting work by the Commission, Andersen suggests.
Commission officials will draft a policy proposal and then hold discussions
with outside experts selected by member states.
A working party from the appropriate directorate general will then refine
the proposal taking the views of interest groups into account. Other
directorates general will be contacted for their views before the proposal
moves up for commission-level action, by which stage the contents are more
or less final. Andersen has written an essential, if somewhat wordy,
handbook for businesses of all sizes which need to take the European market
seriously.
A less discursive guide to getting your voice heard in Brussels is provided
by Effective Lobbying In The European Community (Kluwer Law and Taxation
Publishers. 162 pages. Pounds 26). James Gardner, a US lawyer, describes the
structure of the Brussels bureaucracy and the organisations which companies
are likely to encounter.
His advice is of value to small and large businesses alike. A weakness of
this otherwise helpful book is its failure to provide case histories of
successful, and more interestingly perhaps, unsuccessful lobbying campaigns.
For the businessman or woman less concerned with influencing the European
Community's decision-making process than with simply understanding the
debate, The European Community Fact Book: Second Edition (Kogan Page 256
pages Pounds 12.95) provides a handy guide.
Alex Roney, legal counsellor for the London Chamber of Commerce, provides a
concise review of European community institutions (including a chapter on
institutions not to be confused with EC institutions) and the main elements
of Brussels' policy-making.
An even more abbreviated guide to Europe and its jargon is provided by 1992
Eurospeak Explained (Rosters, 158 pages Pounds 5.95). The book starts with
the briefest of introductions to community institutions and a quick, but not
unhelpful, outline of how best to lobby Brussels.
Stephen Crampton, secretary of a UK consumer group concerned with EC issues,
then moves on to provide an A to Z of European terminology. His explanations
may prove too brief for some readers but others will find it a useful, basic
source of reference.
Kogan Page, 120 Pentonville Road, London N1 9JN. Tel 071 278 0433. Rosters,
23 Welbeck Street, London W1M 7PG. Tel 071 935 4550. Kluwer, Postbox 322,
3300 AH Dordrecht, The Netherlands. Tel 010 31 78 524400.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920609

