FT923-15523

FT  01 JUL 92 / London Stock Exchange: Firmer close after an erratic session


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


THE SECOND quarter of 1992 came to a somewhat ragged close on the stock
market last night, with both stock index futures and equity prices moving
erratically before ending on a confident note. Some comfort was drawn from
the market's success in bouncing from the FT-SE 2,500 mark, which was tested
in early dealings.
Volume improved, in terms of shares traded through the Seaq, but around 15
per cent of the day's total of 458.5m shares came from two stocks - British
Petroleum and British Steel, both driven by the market's dividend worries.
The reshuffling of portfolios and trading positions ahead of the end of the
quarter was also reflected in several trading programmes. Stock index
futures contributed to the gyrations in the underlying stocks, which saw the
Footsie decline by 13 points before rallying strongly in the afternoon. Wall
Street's gain of 37 Dow points overnight made little impact but London
responded favourably at the close to a further rise of 10 Dow points early
in the new session in New York.
The FT-SE 100 Index finished a net 5.4 ahead at 2,521.2, making a gain of
around 3.3 per cent over the second quarter. However, the Footsie is nearly
8 per cent below the peak reached in the weeks following the re-election of
the Conservative government at the UK general election in April.
The London meeting be-tween BP and the Society of Investment Analysts proved
uneventful, and brought no news on the oil group's dividend policy. Shares
in BP continued to be traded heavily, however.
Also in the spotlight again was British Steel, as the market assessed the
outlook for future dividends in the light of the board's decision to reduce
the final payment for 1992.
Outside the trading programmes, leading shares showed a mixed pattern. A
hefty fall in ICI, prompted by a downgrading from a leading UK securities
house, dragged the rest of the equity market down at first. But this was
later counter-balanced by good US demand for selected pharmaceutical stocks,
the notable exception being Glaxo, which trod water yesterday.
The underlying tone of corporate reporting was encouraged somewhat by the
interim statement from Lonrho, which pointed to an improvement in the second
half of the year. RTZ shares extended the past week's advance on hopes of a
further rise in metal prices.
At the close, the stock market appeared to be in more confident mood than
for some time. Traders were glad to see a calm finish to the second quarter
of the year which has brought its share of hopes and heartaches, culminating
in the dramatic departure of the chairman and chief executive of BP, one of
the largest British companies.
City analysts remain cautious about the outlook for the UK market. Concern
is focused around two areas: UK corporate results and the outlook for the
Japanese stock market. While few analysts expect much good news from
Britain's boardrooms just yet, many hope that by the end of the third
quarter, economic recovery will begin to show itself in company profit
accounts.

The Financial Times


London Page 46

920701

