FT923-6342

FT  25 AUG 92 / Regulator rejects Uni rescue plan


   By KAREN FOSSLI


   OSLO


A PROPOSAL by the board of Uni Storebrand, the troubled insurer, for a
solution to the holding company's short-term liquidity crisis, was rejected
last night by Norway's Banking, Insurance and Securities Commission, the
finance regulator.
Uni's board has appealed to the finance ministry to overturn the regulator's
decision. A ruling from the ministry is expected by the time the Oslo bourse
opens today at 10am.
Uni's holding company has NKr3.6bn (Pounds 325m) in short-term loans
acquired to finance a NKr4.7bn purchase of a 28.3 per cent stake in Skandia
Forsakrings AB, Sweden's biggest insurer. Some NKr1bn is due within the next
two weeks.
According to Mr Anders Echkoff, Uni chairman, the board proposed to sell on
commercial terms assets of the holding company, in the form of shares and
property, to two of the group's subsidiaries  - the international and
non-life insurance businesses.
The disposal included Skandia shares valued by Uni at between
NKr500-NKr600m. Mr Eckhoff said the Skandia shares were priced slightly over
yesterday's closing price of SKr62 on the Stockholm bourse.
The board's proposal was rejected by the BISC on the grounds that some of
the shares may be illiquid, Mr Echkoff said.
If the ministry does not back Uni's proposal, the company will be put under
the administration of the BISC  - which rejected the proposal in the first
place  - for being unable to meet its short-term debt obligations.
In this instance, the government would most certainly be forced to come up
with a solution to Uni's liquidity crisis - a move which it has sought to
avoid by leaving it to the company's board, owners and creditors.
Uni's creditors lost interest in helping the company when it became known
that there were some suggestions to break up the company and sell the life
insurance business to Den norske Bank, Norway's biggest bank, which also has
financial problems.
Mr Echkoff said late last night that the proposal is the only alternative
that the board has to end the holding company's short-term liquidity
problems.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920825

