FT921-15506

FT  09 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Banana producers seek accord on
EC access - Moves for a joint Caribbean/Latin American stance


   By CANUTE JAMES


WITH LESS than a year to go before the European banana market is
deregulated, Caribbean producers, who are seeking a continuation of trade
preferences, and Latin American exporters, who are opposed, will meet
tomorrow to discuss a common approach.
The meeting, to be held in Belize, follows discussions at a recent Central
American summit in Honduras. Mr George Price, the prime minister of Belize,
which is a member of the Caribbean Community, said the Latin American
leaders were 'sympathetic' to the concerns of the Caribbean producers, and
to their fears of losing their European market share to Latin American
fruit.
In spite of this, Mr Price said the Latin American producers 'were lined up
for a tariffication solution' in the European banana market. There was,
however, an indication from the Latin American producers that they would
support a special mechanism to protect Caribbean bananas.
'We are cautiously optimistic that with the goodwill displayed to date, a
positive signal can be sent from this meeting,' Mr Price said.
That the meeting is being convened is significant, given the degree of
hostility that Caribbean producers have displayed towards the Latin American
exporters. A recent offer by Chiquita Brands, one of the leading Latin
American producers, to co-operate with the Caribbean states in finding an
acceptable approach to the European market was immediately dismissed by Mr
John Compton, the prime minister of St Lucia.
The Caribbean states are still hoping that since they will be unable to
compete with cheaper Latin American fruit in an open European market, the
European Community will find a method, which has been promised, to guarantee
the region's market share.
The hundreds of small farmers in the Caribbean islands, working on small
plots and paying higher wages, cannot compete with the large plantations and
low labour costs of Latin American producers.
But there is still no indication from the European Community as to what
method will be used to meet Caribbean concerns. The banana protocol of the
Lome Convention, a trade and aid treaty between the EC and several
developing countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific, says that the
deregulation of the European market should not place any of the producers
'in a less favourable situation than in the past or present'.
'The challenge remains about reconciling the European Community's
obligations to the producers with the single market,' said Mr Anthony
Fairclough, a special adviser to the European Commission.
'The circle which has to be squared is how to organise the market whilst
allowing the market itself to operate as competitively as possible. How do
we ensure that banana producers from all sources benefit?'
The leaders of Caribbean banana producing countries are equally uncertain
about the method the EC will use to guarantee their access in the face of
the European shift towards deregulation. 'The Europeans must find a way in
which we can sell our bananas as we do now,' concluded Miss Eugenia Charles,
the prime minister of Dominica. 'They must find a way or we will cease to
exist.'
The Caribbean producers supply about two-thirds of the bananas consumed in
Britain, but less than 15 per cent of the 3.4m tonnes consumed each year in
the EC. More than half of Europe's imports come from Latin America.
Caribbean leaders argue that, in spite of the small size of their industry,
it represents the main economic pillar of several countries and failure to
protect the region's market share after the end of this year would cause
severe social and political damage.
The prime minister of St Lucia has attempted to soften European hearts by
criticising the morality of banana production in Latin America. 'The
Caribbean producers will employ every diplomatic device to ensure that we
maintain our position in the market and are not driven from it by unbridled
competition in a playing field which is by no means level and where we
compete at disadvantages by paying a living wage to our workers,' Mr Compton
argues.
He says trade unions and farmers' organisations are 'hallmarks of civilised
society' and suggests that 'Europe must realise that cheap bananas have a
social cost to the people of the countries in which these cheap bananas are
produced'.
Unless there is an early indication of what the EC proposes, the Caribbean
banana industry could lose out as marketing companies look elsewhere for
supplies. Mr Ray Hilbourne, a director of Geest Industries, which markets
Windward Islands bananas, said there are 'enormous' difficulties for the
marketing companies in making forward plans in the current state of
uncertainty. The implication is that the companies may be forced to look to
other sources, such as Latin America.
This Friday's meeting notwithstanding, there is underlying disagreement
between the Caribbeans and Latin Americans about the best solution to the
EC's dilemma. According to Mr Jorge Asension, an adviser to the Guatemalan
economy ministry, the Guatemalan government thinks the Community has to
abide by its commitment to create a totally free market, based on free trade
and with no preferences and subsidies.
'It is outrageous that Latin American producers are not able to sell bananas
to Spain, which is their historic colonial power,' Mr Asension said.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920109

