FT922-7199

FT  20 MAY 92 / World Trade News: Hungary - robust little exporter in heart
of Europe / Comecon's failure has been a spur, Nicholas Denton in Budapest
and Anthony Robinson in London write


   By NICHOLAS DENTON and ANTHONY ROBINSON


   BUDAPEST, LONDON


AGAINST the odds, Hungary has emerged over the past 15 months as a modest
but robust export machine in the heart of depressed central Europe.
Exports to developed western markets rose an unprecedented 31 per cent last
year with a further 13 per cent rise in total exports over the first quarter
of 1992 compared to the same period last year.
This came despite a marked economic slowdown in the European Community, an
effective revaluation of the forint and 35 per cent domestic inflation.
The export drive which saw hard currency earnings soar to Dollars 10.2bn
(Pounds 5.7bn) last year from Dollars 6.3bn in 1990 is born out of
desperation. Like other former Comecon members, Hungary has faced depressed
domestic demand and the collapse of trade with the Soviet Union. The volume
of exports to eastern Europe fell by 60 per cent last year, giving many
companies a bleak choice: find new, western customers, or go to the wall.
Even Ikarus, the lumbering volume busmaker which supplied all of Comecon
from plants in Hungary and used to sell 80 per cent of its output to Moscow
alone, has turned further afield and won major orders from Taiwan, Turkey
and Iran.
Under the old Comecon division of labour, Hungary specialised in buses,
pharmaceutical products, foodstuffs, especially fruit, wine and vegetables,
and engineering products, including consumer goods such as lightbulbs and
electronic equipment.
The collapse of Comecon has forced exporters to try to upgrade this existing
product range where possible for western markets. For some, like the
Videoton consumer electronics enterprise, the competition proved
overwhelming. But between 1989 and 1991, the share of exports going to EC
markets doubled while the share going to eastern Europe halved.
Last year, the former Comecon states took only 19 per cent of Hungary's
exports, making it the least dependent on this once-dominant market. Many
Hungarian economists caution that overstretched companies have redirected as
much production as they can and argue that the pace of export growth to the
west is unsustainable.
For the past three years, however, hard-currency exports have far exceeded
expectations, pointing to a deeper, continuing transformation. Improved
access to western markets has played a part. The free trade accord at the
heart of Hungary's association agreement with the EC began to take effect
earlier this year. But EC trade barriers will be removed most slowly in
three areas where Hungary has the strongest comparative advantage: food,
textiles and steel.
A paper presented at the recent European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development's annual meeting in Budapest even suggested that some exporting
sectors such as textiles could actually be worse off under the association
agreement than under the generalised system of preferences which previously
applied. Hungary calculates that export growth attributable to the
association agreement could be only Dollars 100m-Dollars 200m a year.
It is foreign investment and the opening of Hungary to sophisticated EC
imports which is making the real difference. Foreign machinery and
investment have flowed into the country in response to liberalisation,
rapidly improving the competitiveness of Hungarian goods.
Finex, a small locally-owned foreign trader, shows how a little investment
can go a long way. The company exported about Dollars 125,000-worth of
frozen raspberries last year to a German wholesaler, earning more than the
Dollars 100,000 spent importing the nitrogen flash freezer equipment. This
year, the company plans to more than double deliveries and is trying to
diversify into selling frozen ready-cooked meals to Sweden, all from the
same machine.
Sometimes, investment has even greater leverage on exports. One of Mr Gabor
Varszegi's innovations at Ajka Crystal, the glassmaker he took over at the
end of 1990, was to publish a catalogue, the first in 40 years.
That little project helped Mr Varszegi, Hungary's leading entrepreneur, to
double Ajka's forint sales in the first year of private ownership, with
75-80 per cent earmarked for export.
Mr Bela Kadar, minister of international economic relations, estimates that
foreign investment, which reached Dollars 3.5bn by the end of April,
produces additional exports worth half that amount annually.
Production for export remains competitive despite poor transport links and
an approximate 10 per cent effective revaluation of the forint over the past
year largely because labour costs are, according to General Motors of the
US, a tenth of west German levels.
GE, the US corporation which became the first big foreign investor when it
bought Tungsram in 1989, complains that failure to allow the forint to
devalue in line with last year's 35 per cent domestic inflation rate has
badly affected its cost structure. But that has not stopped GE basing its
worldwide production of compact fluorescent lamps in Hungary or stepping up
its research and development activity to take advantage of lower costs.
Much new investment capacity will come on stream this year, as GM begins
production of engines, Ford starts producing motor components and new model
Swift compact cars start rolling of Suzuki Motor Corporation's new assembly
lines in western Hungary.
Initially, however only 30 per cent of Suzuki's output will be local content
because of the slowness of local enterprises in adapting to rigorous
Japanese quality standards.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920520

