FT921-14334

FT  16 JAN 92 / The Lloyd's Report - Analysis: Evolutionary rather than
revolutionary overhaul - Proposals for reforming an antiquated business
structure


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S of London yesterday presented plans to reform its antiquated
business structure.
The changes advocated by a 14-man task force advised by McKinsey, the
management consultants, entail a series of piecemeal reforms to support a
restructuring already under way as a result of the market's recent heavy
trading losses.
The emphasis is on evolutionary change rather than revolutionary overhaul.
Mr David Rowland, the Sedgwick insurance broker who chaired the task force,
said: 'All our recommendations seek to preserve and build on Lloyd's truly
distinctive strengths, and in most cases seek to improve structures that
exist today, rather than sweep them away and look for completely new
structures.'
Faced with the dilemma of reconciling the potential conflict between the
need for strong central leadership and 'the preservation of the
entrepreneurial character of the market', the task force opted for the
piecemeal approach.
At the same time, the task force says more radical changes may well be
necessary in the long term. As the market moves towards realising the vision
of its future sketched out in the task force's 240-page report, radical
changes in the way business is conducted are inevitable.
The club-like atmosphere that has dominated trading at Lloyd's for much of
its history seems finally set to disappear as professionals adapt to a more
hard-headed, business-like approach.
Initial indications are that the council, the market's governing body, will
carry out change and that yesterday's report will not, like one of its
predecessors, be largely ignored.
The Cromer Report of 1969 advocated radical changes but it was not published
and gathered dust, largely unread.
The council, the market's governing body, has accepted the bulk of the
report's 65 recommended reforms.
Mr David Coleridge, chairman of the market, said work on turning the report
into action would begin 'at once and forthwith'.
Most Names - the wealthy individuals whose wealth backs the market - will
have copies of the report by Saturday, and during February and March a
Lloyd's roadshow will travel to 32 international venues to present the
conclusions of the report and take soundings from meetings of Names.
Mr Coleridge hopes that plans to cap Names' liabilities - the most
controversial proposal - will be complete by April so that they can be in
operation for the beginning of the 1993 underwriting year. There are also
hopes at Lloyd's that members' agents pooling arrangements (Mapas), designed
to allow less well-off Names to spread risks more widely, will also be ready
for next year.
The capping proposal marks a watershed in Lloyd's 300-year history, during
which it has clung tenaciously to its principle of unlimited liability,
whereby the losses of its Names or underwriting members must be paid, even
if it means selling their personal possessions.
The principle, which stems from Lloyd's origins in the 17th century, when
wealthy merchants banded together to insure ships and their cargoes, has
been a mixed blessing. Many potential wealthier members of Lloyd's have been
dissuaded recently from joining by the prospect of personal bankruptcy.
The task force recommends that the tax advantages and other advantages of
unlimited liability are sufficient for its maintenance, but the introduction
of a cap - even at a relatively high level - radically alters its
significance.
The central fund that will bear all losses over the cap will be replenished
with a cash call from Names if it is needed, and only if the claims then
overwhelm the market as a whole will the Names bear liability. The task
force hopes the change will encourage Names to join Lloyd's - only 100 did
so last year - and help to stem the steady erosion in the market's capital
base.
'In effect, the principle has gone,' said the managing director of one
Lloyd's agency. 'Unlimited liability is now more of a symbol than anything
else.'
In the longer term, the task force's proposal to admit corporate capital
into the market opens the way to the possible dominance of Lloyd's by
limited-liability capital and the eventual disappearance of unlimited
liability as a guiding principle.
The task force acknowledges that the present tide of litigation involving
Lloyd's Names and the agents who manage their affairs might eventually
threaten the relationship between individual Names and their agents which is
one of the pivots of Lloyd's business structure. More than 2,000 Names -
about 10 per cent of the total - are currently involved in such legal
action.
In addition, if the market's profitability is insufficient to persuade
enough new Names to join Lloyd's, limited-liability capital might rapidly
become the 'predominant form of capital in the market'.
Beyond that, one of the biggest challenges faced by the task force is to
reduce costs in order to improve its competitiveness and win back its share
of the international market for specialised commercial insurance and
reinsurance which it has lost in recent years.
Mr Rowland says that the market's difficulties over the past two years have
already prompted a number of important changes, leading to a rationalisation
in the number of agencies and syndicates. Lloyd's reported its first global
losses for more than 20 years in June last year and will report even heavier
losses for 1989 and 1990. A number of syndicates have folded as a result and
many managing and members' agents have either closed or merged. In the
medium term, the market hopes that costs can be cut by 30 per cent.
Perhaps, though, the biggest challenges concern the troubles of the past.
The task force admits that the demands stemming from US asbestosis and
environmental liability claims are incalculable. It admits that the woes of
syndicates with open years - where liabilities are so uncertain that
accounts cannot be closed - are likely to worsen.
Lloyd's: A Route Forward. Lloyd's, 1 Lime Street, London EC3M 7HA. Pounds
25.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920116

