FT924-11495

FT  26 OCT 92 / London fares 'highest in EC'


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


THE LATEST fares rise in London will make commuter travel costs in the
capital by far the most expensive in the European Community, according to a
survey by the Association of London Authorities.
A typical week of commuting will cost Pounds 16 in London after the 8.5 per
cent increase in bus, Tube and rail fares in January. The Labour-controlled
ALA says that is 36 per cent more costly than in Dublin, the next most
expensive city, where a similar pattern of journeys costs Pounds 11.77.
Other weekly fares based on similar journey patterns include Paris at Pounds
4.36 and Athens at Pounds 1.97.
When fares for single journeys are compared, London comes second to
Copenhagen as the most expensive city. But weekly commuters in the Danish
capital pay much less than their London counterparts because the Copenhagen
transport authorities give larger discounts to regular travellers.
The ALA's survey is based on the cheapest available way of making 10
commuter journeys of 6 miles or 10km. In London that counts as a three-zone
journey.
Currency conversions were carried out after the recent sharp devaluation of
sterling, which should have benefited London in the comparison. Conversely,
London's fares after next January's rises are compared with existing fares
in other capitals.
The main reason for the large gap between London's fares and those in other
EC capitals is the UK government's policy of requiring passengers not only
to cover the running costs of the transport system, but to make a
contribution towards investment in its renewal and expansion.
Other countries tend to keep fares low through government subsidies funded
by local employers, local authorities, national government or a combination
of the three.
The ALA said: 'Increasing fares all the time does nothing to encourage
people to swap their cars for public transport.'
It added: 'Fares policy should be part of a strategic transport policy for
London which encourages people to use public transport. Above-inflation
increase each year will not do this.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

921026

