FT922-13385

FT  11 APR 92 / City car bomb kills 2


   By RALPH ATKINS and KEVIN DONE


TWO people died and nearly 90 were injured in a car bomb explosion in the
heart of the City last night. One person was critically injured and 14 were
seriously hurt.
A second heavy blast followed within hours when a van bomb exploded at
Staples Corner, injuring one person. The second blast was heard more than
six miles away by emergency services clearing up in the City.
Police said the first bomb, in a car containing more than 100 pounds of high
explosive, had gone off outside the Baltic Exchange in St Mary Axe, close to
the Lloyd's and Commercial Union build-ings.
The blast, which came as City workers celebrated the Conservative election
victory, sent ceilings crashing and glass cascading into the streets as
bleeding and terrified people ran for their lives.
Cdr George Churchill-Coleman, head of the anti-terrorist squad, said early
today that the blast bore indications of being the work of the IRA.
A warning call on the City bomb included an IRA code word. Its reference to
a bomb at the Stock Exchange - half a mile from blast 20 minutes later - was
'designed to delay', he said.
The Baltic Exchange and the Commercial Union headquarters were badly damaged
and police said 'a number of structures have collapsed'.
A maintenance worker on the roof of a nearby building said the billowing
smoke and debris was 'up to the height of the NatWest tower'.
The blast blew out windows in shops and offices up to a quarter of a mile
away. Witnesses reported people injured by flying glass, and one man said
the CU building was 'in tatters'.
The injured were taken to St Bartholomew's, Guys and the Royal London
hospitals.
The explosion left a big crater in the road, reduced the fronts of buildings
to rubble, and collapsed roofs. Glass was piled two inches thick over a
widespread area, police said.
The blast, felt throughout much of central London, was heard by the prime
minster, Mr John Major, in Downing Street as he worked on his new cabinet
appointments.
One witness told Sky TV that a single-decker bus had been 'blown across the
street' by an 'almighty explosion'.
Mr Martin Verrills, an assistant underwriter at Lloyd's, who was in a nearby
public house at the time of the explosion, said there was 'a burning mass
from a car bomb in the middle of the road'.
The City bomb - thought to be one of the biggest planted on the British
mainland - came only hours after Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams lost his
West Belfast parliamentary seat in the election.
A warning about the Staples Corner bomb was received at Portadown in
Northern Ireland at 12.20am.
Additional reporting by Paul Abrahams and Andrew Slade.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920411

