FT921-1138

FT  25 MAR 92 / Worry over training funds cuts


   By LISA WOOD


ONLY 21 per cent of business executives appointed by the government to run
Britain's 82 Training and Enterprise Councils believe a Labour government
would be damaging to their efforts, according to the first large-scale
survey of its kind.
Although Tec directors in principle support the government's contention that
employers should shoulder more of the cost of training, they voiced their
concern over cuts in state funding to training programmes in 1992-93 and
said the quality of programmes could be affected.
However, most Tec directors showed broad satisfaction with the progress of
Tecs, which were launched two years ago by Mr Michael Howard, the employment
secretary, to change attitudes towards training in the UK .
In a big survey of board members of conducted by The Financial Times, 20 per
cent of the private sector respondents - who make up the majority on Tec
boards - said Labour would have a positive effect on training. Fifty-two per
cent said the effect would be neutral, 21 per cent said it would be damaging
and 7 per cent did not reply.
A minority of these private sector executives supported statutory moves to
promote training within companies, such as the return of a levy on companies
which do not train to a minimum level. This is proposed by Labour.
Directors, whose ranks include a minority representation of trade union
members and public sector executives, were satisfied with progress in a
number of areas including relationships with schools in their areas.
Most were ambitious to expand their 'enterprise' role and to take over all
the small business initiatives of the Department of Trade and Industry.
However, they were critical of their progress in promoting and improving
training within companies. One Tec director wrote: 'Tecs do not embrace, or
have the powers to involve, employers not committed to training.'
Survey reveals concern, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920325

