FT924-6431

FT  21 NOV 92 / US puts Gatt before soya beans


   By DAVID DODWELL


   WASHINGTON


OILSEED farmers in the US may have been bitterly disappointed yesterday as
details of the US-EC settlement on their five-year dispute over Europe's
oilseed subsidies trickled out.
But a possibly disastrous trade war has been averted, and important
obstacles have been removed to a Uruguay Round trade liberalisation package
that could by the end of the decade boost world trade by Dollars 200bn
(Pounds 132bn). For that, even US oilseed farmers may have cause for
celebration.
According to Mr Dale Hathaway, a former US agriculture official, President
George Bush's negotiators 'decided that the future of the Uruguay Round was
more important than the soyabean case'. A leading farm lobbyist was more
philosophical: 'The deal offers a mixed bag, but it is the first time in my
22 years dealing with European farmers that their production will have to go
down, rather than up.'
On the critical issue of the US dispute with Europe over its subsidised
oilseeds production - which if unresolved by December 5 would have triggered
trade sanctions of around Dollars 300m against Europe's white wine exports -
the EC has agreed to limit production to 5.13m hectares. Mr Ed Madigan, US
agriculture secretary, said yesterday this would result in production of
8.7m-9.5m tonnes a year.
US oilseed farmers have insisted that anything above 8m tonnes was
unacceptable. But from current production levels of more than 13m tonnes,
the EC's cuts will be significant. As important, the US has won assurances
that no more than 1m tonnes of oilseeds output can be produced for
industrial use.
The EC has also agreed to binding arbitration if its output overshoots - a
litmus issue for the US, which has been increasingly frustrated over its
inability to make the EC in any way accountable for missed production
targets.
The most significant element of a wider farm trade deal is EC agreement to
cut its volume of subsidised farm exports by 21 per cent over six years. The
US was demanding 100 per cent cuts as little as a year ago, and even
recently has been calling for a 24 per cent cut.
Of compensating comfort to the US is an agreement by the EC to make
permanent two thirds of the land taken out of production as part of its
set-aside scheme. The EC target is to set aside 15 per cent of farm land,
but the US was concerned that rotation arrangements would eliminate any
possible set-aside gains.
The so-called 'Andriessen compromise' also forbids subsidised EC beef
exports to Asia.
Negotiators insisted yesterday that the farm trade breakthrough would
provide the momentum needed to resolve other outstanding obstacles to a
Uruguay Round settlement.
They have agreed to shift negotiations immediately to Geneva, where the
other 106 contracting parties to Gatt will have the chance to endorse the
EC-US farm deal. Most critical here will be the Cairns group of farm
exporting nations, which include such countries as Australia, Canada and
Argentina. There were no immediate reactions last night, but US negotiators
have remained in close contact with Cairns group officials during their
negotiations with the EC, and it is thought unlikely it would back a deal
without Cairns group support.
Focus will turn in Geneva to the other areas vital to a Uruguay Round
settlement - most notably agreement on trade in services, and on general
tariff reductions.
US and EC negotiators have agreed a common position on the contentious area
of financial services, and will in the coming days be putting fierce
pressure on countries like Japan, South Korea and the Asean states to
liberalise their markets in this area. Difficult negotiations also lie ahead
on trade in maritime services, on trade in audio-visual services, on
telecommunications, and on public procurement.
A joint EC-US statement said yesterday negotiators had agreed 'to seek
maximum liberalisation and minimum exemptions' in the areas of services and
market access.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921121

