FT921-15481

FT  10 JAN 92 / France's mega-merger mandarin: The man to lead Thomson-CEA
Industrie group


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


FRANCE has picked an outstanding but little-known product of the public
administration to put together and manage its project for a world-beating
electronics-to-nuclear energy group.
He is Mr Jean Syrota, 54, a mining engineer who runs Cogema, the
state-controlled nuclear fuel company, based in an industrial suburb of
Paris. He has kept well out of the public eye, and likes to relax by
collecting 19th century first edition books - he is especially fond of
Balzac - or by doing a spot of handiwork around the home.
The quiet, bespectacled Mr Syrota is charged with resolving the French
electronics industry's massive problems as it struggles against Far Eastern
competition and runs into European Commission resistance at every attempt to
raise fresh capital from the state.
This rigorous intellectual is well qualified for the job, as a product of
the Ecole Polytechnique, the training ground for generations of civil
service elite and a former mandarin at the environment and
telecommunications ministries.
Mr Syrota has had little time for home handiwork since being called to Prime
Minister Edith Cresson's office on December 7 and asked, to his surprise, to
take on master building on a huge scale. His task is to prepare the merger
of the loss-making civil electronics businesses of Thomson, mainly
televisions and other consumer goods, with CEA Industrie, the parent company
for Cogema, plus Framatome, France's monopoly supplier of nuclear reactors,
and a handful of electronics and medical businesses.
He has been asked to: report on progress in February; form the group - which
he estimates will have annual sales of between FFr75bn (Pounds 7.6bn) and
FFr90bn - by the middle of the year; and become its chairman.
Mr Syrota defends the project as a legitimate attempt by the state to
re-organise its shareholdings more rationally, to enable the electronics
industry to raise more cash - though not directly from the nuclear group's
coffers - and to help the nuclear industry to continue diversifying as
France's demand for new reactors begins to run down permanently.
'These are decisions which the state has taken not as public authority but
as the owner of shares in these companies. The group will be managed like
any other, all the more so since it is present in these competitive sectors
across the world,' he says.
Mr Syrota's first task, not yet complete, is to choose a bank or banks to
value the various businesses, and to change - by government decree - the
statute of CEA-Industrie, which groups the industrial businesses of the
Commissariat a l'Energie Atomique, the atomic energy authority. This would
make it directly state-owned, rather than 100 per cent controlled by the
CEA, as at present.
The outline plan - subject to change, stresses Mr Syrota - is for CEA
Industrie to buy the state's 100 per cent direct shareholding in Thomson,
and for the electronics group to sell to the state its 60 per cent stake in
Thomson-CSF, its defence arm. The resulting group, Thomson-CEA Industrie
(TCI), will be 51 per cent state-owned and 30 per cent held by the atomic
energy authority. The new group would also issue new shares, to
privately-owned industrial partners as well as to the state, to provide the
cash its electronics activities so badly need.
His main challenge will be to stem the losses of Thomson's consumer
electronics businesses. Here Mr Syrota does not yet have a clear recipe to
offer, beyond pointing to the complementarity between Thomson and some of
CEA-Industrie's subsidiaries' interests in flat-screen technology,
electrical connectors and medical scanners.
'The nuclear side works on the long term, with a product life of say 10
years, while electronics works on the short term, with product lives of more
like a year. So there is no reason why they should both hit the bottom of a
cycle together. That allows a certain amount of risk sharing,' he adds.
The benchmark Mr Syrota says he will use to measure whether he has won or
failed is whether TCI can achieve a net profit-to-sales ratio of the same
order as Cogema itself, which made FFr1bn (Pounds 100m) from sales of
FFr21.4bn last year, a margin of nearly 5 per cent, as against the FFr2.7bn
loss at Thomson Consumer Electronics in the same period.
'The day when there is a comparable profitability ratio for Thomson CEA
Industrie, I will be content,' says Mr Syrota.

The Financial Times


London Page 2 Photograph Syrota, rigorous intellect (Omitted).

920110

