FT921-3947

FT  12 MAR 92 / Unions urged to moderate claims: IG Metall prompts employer
reaction


   By ANDREW FISHER


   FRANKFURT


GERMAN industry yesterday turned up the heat in this year's wage debate,
with the engineering and automobile sectors both calling strongly for unions
to show moderation.
The main blast came from the VDMA, the mechanical engineering association,
which painted a bleak picture of falling orders, job losses and high
short-time working, greater competition from imports, and low profits.
Mr Berthold Leibinger, the VDMA's president, said: 'In view of the present
situation in the German mechanical engineering sector, a wage settlement
like that recently agreed by the steel industry would be wholly
unacceptable.'
'It would lead to an extra cost burden of around DM5bn. (Pounds 1.7bn). That
would be more than half of the latest pre-tax profits of DM8bn.' The
industry's total profit after tax was DM4bn, a return of less than 2 per
cent on its turnover last year of DM225bn. This compared with more than 4
per cent in the 1960s and nearly 3 per cent in the mid-1980s.
Mr Leibinger said the causes of the lower returns were high German costs,
the strength of the D-Mark, and the weaker world economy which led to unused
capacity. 'The profits explosion which the unions talk of has not occurred
in German mechanical engineering.'
The IG Metall union has recommended regional negotiators to claim up to 9.5
per cent. The steel industry settlement was 6.4 per cent, comprising a
one-off payment and 5.9 per cent on the basic wage.
Mr Achim Diekmann, managing director of the motor industry association (VDA)
said: 'There must be much more moderation than last year.' Last year's wage
rises in the engineering sector, including automobiles, amounted to 6.7 per
cent.
The VDA has forecast automobile job losses as a result of high costs and
stronger competition. In mechanical engineering, employment fell by around
20,000 people last year to 1.1m.
Mr Leibinger expected, however, that engineering business would improve from
the middle of this year based on indications from European markets. Thus
production, 0.6 per cent lower in 1991, should ease by 2 or 3 per cent in
the first half and then improve to leave the industry flat or marginally
lower on the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920312

