FT922-4177

FT  06 JUN 92 / The terror of the amateur: Dominic Lawson is taught a
frightening lesson by fast bowler Courtney Walsh


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


FOR THE elegant American journalist George Plimpton, writing about sport was
not enough. He also had a passion for experiencing it - at the highest
level. Then he would describe the dreadful consequences, as professional
bone crunched into amateur flesh. Thus, he went a round with Archie Moore,
the former World light heavyweight boxing champion, and described in his
book Shadow Box the unpleasant sensation of having his nose squished by a
right he never saw being thrown. And that was Archie being gentle.
On another occasion Plimpton trained for, and then took part in, a game of
professional American football. A film was made about it. My abiding memory
is of seeing the gangly figure of Plimpton miraculously catching the ball,
but then crashing with it into his own goalpost. How the crowd laughed] I
laughed, too.
I would not be so cruel again, I have unwisely been emulating Plimpton, but,
fortunately, without the television cameras. Somehow I found myself on
Tuesday playing a cricket game at the lovely ground of Downside Abbey
against a mixed Gloucestershire and West Indian XI, captained by the demon
West Indian fast bowler Courtney Walsh, for whose benefit fund the match was
being held. My side, captained by the English rugby international Simon
Halliday, also seemed, with one exception, to be of consistently formidable
quality, with a sprinkling of former Somerset stars such as Peter Denning,
Peter Roebuck and Vic Marks.
Early on in the game I made my mark. Vic Marks (England and Somerset) was
bowling. Jimmy Adams (Jamaica and West Indies) was facing. He was their star
batsman. Marks observed me standing at orthodox mid-off. 'I think at this
stage it would be advisable,' he muttered to me, 'if you gave yourself a bit
more space'. Dutifully I trotted back 20 yards. Marks tossed the ball up,
Adams lofted his off-drive. The ball spiralled towards me. It couldn't miss.
But I could. The ball sailed through my hands and landed tamely at my feet.
How the crowd laughed]
Later Walsh himself came to the crease. Someone in the crowd explained 'Of
course, Walsh is not a batsman.' Courtney must have heard. He sent the next
two balls from marks high, straight and true into the pavilion. At this
point, farce took over. 'Let Dominic have a bowl at Walshie,' said Denning.
Captain Halliday threw me the ball. The first over Walsh treated me with
preposterous respect. The next over he launched himself at the ball . . .
and was caught. This, I felt, was a big mistake on my part.
And so it turned out. As I went in to bat at the end of the game, a
unanimous choice as No 11, Courtney grabbed the ball. I had no helmet. I had
no thigh pad. I had no chance. I recalled the words of the great E W
Swanton, writing last week about Walsh's devastating 7 for 27 against
Yorkshire, which put Walsh top of the first class bowling averages:
'Accuracy and speed comparable to a Scud missile.'
Walsh disappeared in the direction of the pavilion, pacing his run with
slow, almost exaggerated menace. At last he turned and ran in at full speed.
I never saw the ball. I heard it twice. Once as it pitched, and then, a
fraction of a second later, as it thumped into the keeper's gloves. Walsh
repeated this trick three times. Only the third time did it occur to me that
he was deliberately bowling wide of the off stump, to avoid any risk of the
ball actually meeting Lawson. 'Thank you, Courtney,' I said, as I left the
field.
I drew some conclusions from this bowel-churning experience. One is that the
BBC's habit of showing all Test match cricket from the point of view of a
camera 100 yards behind the bowler's arm gives a distorted impression of the
speed of the game: it makes it seem much slower than it is. Indeed it makes
us think we can do better than the England batsmen against the pace men of
the West Indies and Pakistan. Perhaps this is the intention. But facing four
balls from Walsh has made me swear never again to groan impatiently when an
England batsman is caught in the slips groping at an 85 mile an hour
outswinger.
Perhaps this is why George Plimpton insisted on experiencing first class
sport before writing about it. Not until you find out just how bad you are,
do you discover just how good they are.
Dominic Lawson is editor of the Spectator

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

920606

