FT924-748

FT  22 DEC 92 / International Company News: PNG pledge steadies mining
shares


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


SHARES in Australian mining companies steadied yesterday after the
government of Papua New Guinea undertook not to use expropriation to
increase its stake in mining projects.
Shares in mining groups with PNG interests have tumbled on the Australian
stock exchange since a coalition government led by Mr Paiai Wingti was
elected in July.
The government has taken a tougher line against foreign mining interests
than the previous administration of Mr Rabbie Namaliu, and has said it
intends to increase government holdings in big projects.
However, Senator Gareth Evans, the Australian foreign minister, said PNG
ministers at an Australia-PNG ministerial forum in Tasmania over the weekend
had promised to do everything possible to restore investor confidence.
'The PNG government was certainly interested in pursuing more equity in at
least some of these projects (but had undertaken that) under no
circumstances would there be any expropriation to achieve that,' he said.
Senator Evans said PNG ministers at the conference had acknowledged that
'things had got to an uncomfortably high temperature,' and were keen to
reach an accommodation with the industry.
Shares in CRA, the Australian group which owns the Panguna copper mine on
Bougainville island, rose 40 cents to ADollars 13.24 after Mr Evans'
statement. PNG ministers had suggested that CRA might not be allowed to
reopen the mine, which has been closed by secessionist violence.
The undertaking also steadied shares in the joint venture partners in the
Porgera gold mine, which fell heavily following PNG's announcement of plans
to increase its stake from 10 per cent to 30 per cent.
Placer Pacific closed three cents higher at ADollars 1.22, and Renison
Goldfields closed 12 cents higher at ADollars 2.80. Highlands Gold, a
PNG-registered subsidiary of MIM Holdings, closed one cent lower at 63
cents.
Mr John Kaputin, PNG foreign minister, indicated that the government would
tone down future comments on the mining industry. 'It is not good for
everyone to be bickering through the media,' he said. 'It will not help
anyone and it will certainly not help the value of the shares on the stock
market.'
The PNG government has claimed that officials were misled by the joint
venture partners about the profitability of the Porgera project, which is
one of the world's largest gold mines.
Mr Masket Iangalio, the mining minister, has said that PNG restricted its
holding to 10 per cent because the joint venture partners convinced the then
government that the mine would be a marginal project.
Porgera began production in September 1990. It is expected to produce about
900,000 oz of gold a year until 1996, but is likely to produce 1.4m oz in
the current year.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921222

