FT924-8363

FT  11 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Simpsons rebels consider approach to Panel


   By TIM BURT


REBEL SHAREHOLDERS at Simpsons of Cornhill, owner of the famous City chop
house, yesterday threatened to ask the Takeover Panel to examine the
proposed merger with Baldwin, the holidays, printing and properties group.
The dissidents told shareholders at Simpsons' annual meeting that they
feared Baldwin's all-paper offer could dilute the value of their holdings
because, they claimed, Baldwin was also considering a separate all-paper bid
for Leading Guides, the private publishing company in which Mr Roy Ackerman,
Simpsons chairman, has a majority stake.
Leading Guides, publishers of Egon Ronay guides, was formed earlier this
year after Alfresco Leisure Publications, of which Mr Ackerman was chairman,
went into receivership.
Mr Ackerman, who urged shareholders to support Baldwin's offer, said their
was no link between the Simpsons bid and negotiations over Leading Guides.
Although Mr Sandy Singh, Baldwin's chief executive, confirmed last week that
the company was considering an offer for Leading Guides, Mr Ackerman said
the talks were only at an early and informal stage.
The rebels, he claimed, were trying to divert attention from the Baldwin
bid, which values Simpsons at Pounds 1.68m.
Baldwin has offered one share for every two Simpsons shares; full acceptance
will involve the issue of 2.28m new shares in an enlarged group in which
Simpsons will be a wholly owned subsidiary.
The offer has been accepted by the Simpsons board and stockbrokers Raphael
Zorn Hemsley, together representing more than 54 per cent of the capital.
However, Mr Stephen Morris, speaking for the rebels, said three large
shareholders would oppose the offer. Guernsey-based Spread Trustee Company,
Mountjoy of the Turks and Caicos Islands and Capital Resources of Australia
all wanted 'more details about the Leading Guides deal,' he said.
Together the three companies control 23.8 per cent of the share capital.
'We are unlikely to accept the paper bid, and we will go to the Takeover
Panel to insist that Baldwin gives details about Leading Guides,' Mr Morris
added.
Simpsons is confident the rebels will back the Baldwin offer once the formal
bid document is published.
Dismissing concerns over Leading Guides as a 'red herring', Mr Ackerman said
Baldwin offered the best opportunity for expansion of Simpsons' restaurants
business.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921111

