FT924-8066

FT  13 NOV 92 / S Korea poll may break political mould: Industry may replace
the military as the institutional power in politics


   By JOHN BURTON


THE South Korean presidential election campaign, formally launched yesterday
with the setting of December 18 as the poll date, is the first in more than
30 years not to have a single candidate who has a military background.
Mr Kim Young-sam, the nominee of the ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP),
is leading in the polls with 30 per cent, five to 10 percentage points ahead
of Mr Kim Dae-jung of the main opposition Democratic Party.
Both men stood as opposition candidates in the 1987 election, the first
after 16 years of military dictatorship, but lost to President Mr Roh Tae
Woo, a former general who is constitutionally barred from serving again.
The candidacy of Mr Chung Ju-yung, the founder of the Hyundai business
group, is another significant departure from past practice, since it is the
first time that a businessman has stood for president.
Mr Chung formed the United People's Party (UPP) to oppose bureaucratic
controls on industry and the associated political corruption.
Mr Chung's challenge is unprecedented. Business has traditionally been
subservient to the state, receiving corporate favours in return for
political contributions to those in power.
The government initially responded harshly to Mr Chung, who threatened to
attract conservative middle-class voters from the DLP.
It launched a campaign of harassment involving credit squeezes and tax
penalties, against Hyundai and the Chung family, but declared a truce in
August. One reason is that support for the UPP has recently declined from
the 17 per cent vote share the party gained in last March's parliamentary
elections.
Mr Chung's standing is now put at 10 per cent, the same level as two other
minor parties, the Party for New Political Reform and the New Korea Party
(NPK). This reflects public distrust of the Korean conglomerates, perceived
to have benefited from their close ties with the former military rulers over
the last three decades.
Nonetheless, the presence of Mr Chung in the election has prompted
speculation that industry will eventually become the new institutional power
in Korean politics, replacing the military. That theory appeared to gain
credence last month when two other prominent industrialists considered
presidential bids.
Mr Park Tae-joon, former chairman of the country's main steelmaker Pohang
Iron and Steel (Posco), and Mr Kim Woo-choong, founder and chairman of the
Daewoo business group, were both asked to head the NPK, a conservative
breakaway faction from the DLP. Both men, political allies of Mr Roh,
refused the offer after bowing to pressure from the president, who feared
the NPK would split the DLP and deliver the election to the Democratic
Party's Mr Kim.
But Mr Park and Daewoo's Mr Kim are still believed to harbour ambitions for
the next presidential election in 1997.
Having failed to attract a candidate, the NPK is now holding merger talks
with the UPP. If it fails to conclude a joint campaign pact, the NPK is
likely to collapse.
The election will mainly be conducted on personalities since there is little
ideological difference among the three candidates, who would be considered
centre-right by European standards.
Mr Kim Young-sam is in the lead because he represents continuity in
government policy, reflecting Koreans' conservative preference for
stability.
He argues that his government would be more effective than his opponents'
because the DLP has a slim parliamentary majority with 161 seats in the
299-chamber.
There is strong regional opposition against the Democratic Party's Mr Kim,
who comes from the south-western Cholla area, traditionally the most
underdeveloped and consequently the most politically rebellious part of the
country. Many Koreans consider Mr Kim 'radical' because of his geographical
origins.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921113

