FT923-9848

FT  03 AUG 92 / Leading Article: British Gas takes the test


BRITISH GAS's decision to volunteer itself for scrutiny by the Monopolies
and Mergers Commission is an indication of the company's profound
frustration with the regulatory regime under which it operates.
It guarantees that the company's senior management will spend much of the
next nine months dealing with MMC inquiries and raises the possibility that
the process will end with the government breaking up the utility. It is
difficult to recall a precedent for such a high risk corporate gamble.
It is evident, however, that British Gas felt it had no real choice. Having
been privatised in 1986 as a single, monopolistic entity, against much
vociferous advice to the contrary, British Gas was bound either to ride
roughshod over the interests of consumers or to face a shoot-out with its
regulators. Since the powers of Ofgas, the main gas regulator, stop short of
forcing the industry into the competitive structure the government should
have sought in the first place, a good deal of friction was inevitable.
After a deceptively calm beginning, recent months have seen a series of
squabbles, which no amount of pressure of British Gas's new chief executive,
Mr Cedric Brown, has been able to resolve. In the latest conflict, over
rates of return in the pipeline business, Ofgas has pressed a pricing plan
unacceptable to the utility. Faced with an impasse, the MMC is available as
a referee, but British Gas has decided that the commission should review the
entire gas industry rather than confining itself to the matter immediately
at hand.
Desirable step
This is a bold step, but a wholly desirable one. Although British Gas can be
criticised for its shameless pursuit of a monopolistic preserve at the time
of privatisation, it has since found itself buffeted between Ofgas, which
regulates prices, and the Office of Fair Trading, which has intervened with
far-reaching criticisms of British Gas's structure. It was an OFT report in
October last year which proposed the creation of the pipeline and storage
subsidiary. But it was with Ofgas that British Gas had to negotiate over
pipeline tariffs. British Gas complains that this regulatory whipsaw has
made medium- and long-term planning very difficult.
No doubt these problems have sometimes been made more vivid by the
personalities of those involved. British Gas surveys the world, some think
haughtily, from its Thames-side headquarters and has been known to consider
Ofgas an irritating pipsqueak. Sir James McKinnon, Ofgas director general,
has sometimes perhaps savoured the scrap as much as his strategic
objectives. But it would be wrong to conclude that the system has broken
down because it has been badly administered. It has broken down because its
design was fundamentally flawed.
Privatisation successes
In conducting its inquiry, the MMC will want to acknowledge some successes
of privatisation: more dynamic management, reduced costs, somewhat greater
transparency and a reasonable deal for shareholders. British Gas claims to
have cut the price of gas to domestic consumers by 19 per cent since
privatisation, although this has been against a background of weak energy
prices.
The MMC will also not want lightly to throw away the basis of price
regulation in Britain, whereby companies receive an incentive to hold prices
at an agreed level below inflation and so to be more efficient. But the
commission will also need to explore thoroughly the central question of
appropriate rates of return for different parts of the business given the
varying degrees of competitive pressure. The MMC's findings here will be of
great importance for all the utilities.
The MMC will also ask how much more competition can be brought into the gas
industry, perhaps by breaking British Gas up into a series of regional
companies, with a centrally owned pipeline company, perhaps by encouraging
British Gas's competitors in the industrial gas market to enter the domestic
business in force. It will also need to reconsider the industry's regulatory
structure.
If the outcome is to break up British Gas, Mr Brown should not necessarily
conclude that he lost the gamble. After all, one of his Thames-side
neighbours, ICI, has just proposed precisely that.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920803

