FT923-15766

FT  01 JUL 92 / European Finance and Investment, Germany (6): Barriers are
blurred at the edges - Banking and insurance


   By DAVID WALLER


IN GERMANY, as in other European countries in the late eighties and early
nineties, there has been a gradual blurring of the barriers between
insurance and banking.
Driven on by the idea of Allfinanz - providing a range of services which
straddles the traditional divide between insurance and banking - German
banks have moved into insurance and insurance companies into banking.
The rationale for this is straightforward. Banks profit from adding
insurance to their product range, while insurance companies prosper from
getting access to the bank's distribution network and customer base.
As in other European countries, co-operation has taken a number of different
forms: one leading insurance company has bought a majority stake in a bank;
banks and insurance companies have exchanged share stakes and set up
cross-marketing agreements; a number of banks have set up their own
independent life assurance subsidiaries, including Deutsche Bank, the
largest in Germany, which set up its own operation in 1989.
In practice, a number of serious complications have arisen, highlighted
earlier this year by the Bundeskartellamt's (Federal Cartel Office) attack
on links between Dresdner Bank - Germany's second biggest bank - and
Allianz, Germany's biggest insurance company.
The Berlin-based cartel office has ordered Allianz to reduce its 22.3 per
cent stake in the bank, accusing it of exercising undue dominance over
Dresdner's management. It said that Allianz exercised enough influence over
the Dresdner board to prevent it from taking a decision to set up its own
life subsidiary, as Deutsche Bank did, thereby restricting competition in
Germany's DM60bn-plus market.
It also ordered the two institutions to cut back their marketing
co-operation in western Germany and to abandon plans to pursue further
co-operation in the southern part of eastern Germany. The cartel office
believes that - taking account of a web of shareholdings in other German
insurance companies - Allianz has an unhealthy dominance of the domestic
market.
The two parties jointly denounced the cartel office's ruling. They say that
it is nonsense to suggest that Allianz dominated decision-making on the
Dresdner Board, and dismiss the argument that Allianz is stopping Dresdner
from setting up on its own as hypothetical. They point out that as long ago
as 1987 Dresdner took a decision not to set up on its own. The bank cannot
be prevented from doing something it has never wanted to do, they argue.
Analysts suggest that there is considerably more to this imbroglio than
meets the eye. Dresdner is rumoured to have been astonished - and
disconcerted - at the size of the Allianz stake when it emerged last year.
Moreover, there is speculation that it may now regret its decision not to
set up on its own.
Deutsche Bank's own life subsidiary - DB Leben - has been a success and
Hilmar Kopper, Deutsche's chief executive, never tires of stressing how
pleased the bank is with its investment. Contrary to widespread fears at the
time DB Leben was founded in 1989, Deutsche does not appear to have
alienated the insurance industry. At the time it was thought likely that
Deutsche would lose business from its insurance clients - especially on the
securities and investment management side - but this has not happened.
Thus - conspiracy theorists argue - Wolfgang Roller, Dresdner's chief
executive, may indeed have started to entertain the idea of setting up its
own subsidiary, but is now prevented from doing so because of Allianz
breathing down its neck. The theory is lent credence by Mr Roller's decision
to retire as chief executive earlier than expected and to take up the post
of chairman of the Dresdner supervisory board. Had he not done this, the
post could have gone to Wolfgang Schieren, Allianz's recently retired chief
executive.
Of course, this interpretation of the situation is denied by the two
institutions. In public they remain committed to their marketing agreement
and they have rebuffed the cartel office's criticisms, thus opening the way
to a long drawn-out legal battle. In a recent interview with the Financial
Times, Mr Henning Schulte-Noelle, Schieren's successor as Allianz's chief
executive, said that Dresdner was quite free to take whatever strategic
steps it liked, even if they conflicted with Allianz's own interests.
'It is simply not true that we in any way dominate the management of the
bank,' he insisted. 'We are not in a position to do that, given the size of
our holding - nor do we have the ambition to do that. It would be in
conflict with our basic philosophy as an investor. The shareholding in
Dresdner is a very good long-term financial investment for us.'
The Allianz/Dresdner affair has caused a few headaches for the management of
the two institutions, but nothing on the scale of the complications caused
by the decision of Germany's second largest insurance group to buy a
controlling stake in its own bank.
Aachener und Munchner Beteiligungs (AMB), Germany's number two insurer after
Allianz, bought a majority stake in BfG Bank - a big German bank  - in 1987.
As a result of a series of disasters, the bank has cost its parent company a
colossal DM2.65bn so far. AMB itself is now on the receiving end of what it
calls a hostile takeover attempt from Assurances Generales de France, the
big French state-owned insurer which has amassed a 25 per cent plus stake in
the German company.
This was more than AMB bargained for when it acquired a stake which was
supposed to offer an opportunity for cross-selling. Nor is it a good
advertisement for the Allfinanz concept.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920701

