FT921-14093

FT  17 JAN 92 / Swiss link in MCC share deal


   By BRONWEN MADDOX, IAN RODGER and ROBERT PESTON


INVESTIGATORS believe that vital information on Mr Robert Maxwell's alleged
illegal attempts to support the Maxwell Communication Corporation share
price is held by Dr Werner Rechsteiner, a Zurich-based lawyer, who is
administrative president of Yakosa Finanzierungs, a secretive Swiss holding
company.
The Financial Times has established that Yakosa is one of two Swiss vehicles
which bought between 20m and 25m MCC shares, worth Pounds 50m, in April
1991.
Goldman Sachs, the leading US investment bank, acted as broker to a series
of transactions involving the sale of 25m MCC shares in April.
Yakosa and Servex, another Swiss company, are targets of an investigation by
the Serious Fraud Office and by accountants Arthur Andersen into the alleged
share support scheme.
Yesterday Dr Rechsteiner confirmed that Yakosa had held shares in MCC at one
point.
He also said that he had been approached by Arthur Andersen, the
accountants, which have been appointed administrators of the Maxwell private
companies under UK insolvency law.
Andersen is trying to trace around Pounds 1bn missing from the accounts and
pension funds of the late Mr Robert Maxwell's public companies, MCC and
Mirror Group Newspapers.
Andersen believes that Pounds 150m of the Pounds 1bn was channelled by Mr
Maxwell to offshore vehicles last year to buy MCC shares.
Speaking from his office in a smart residential district overlooking Zurich,
Dr Rechsteiner said that he did not think Yakosa had anything to hide but
could not answer questions or indicate if Mr Maxwell was a client without
getting approval from the client or an order from the Swiss authorities to
waive the lawyer-client privilege. He said he had told Arthur Andersen he
would co-operate fully if this happened.
Yakosa, registered in Chur, Switzerland, and Servex AG, registered in Zug,
are believed to have bought 20-25m shares in MCC in the last week of April.
During March and April the MCC share price rocketed from 150p to 240p.
Mr Maxwell needed to support the MCC share price because more than Pounds
300m of borrowings by his private companies were secured on MCC shares, and
as the MCC share price fell, banks demanded more collateral.
However, if the shares were being bought by vehicles connected to Mr
Maxwell, the trades should have been made public, under the UK Companies
Act. It is also illegal for public companies to assist in the purchase of
their own shares without obtaining shareholder approval.
Possible buy-out, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920117

