FT924-6153

FT  23 NOV 92 / NatWest Bancorp sees record profit


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent


NATWEST BANCORP, the US subsidiary of National Westminster Bank, is likely
to make a profit after tax of more than Dollars 130m (Pounds 86m) this year,
according to Mr John Tugwell, chairman of the US business. That would be the
US business's highest yearly profit after tax.
Mr Tugwell also dismissed widespread expectations that NatWest may soon sell
its US subsidiary. He said that National Westminster was unlikely to sell
NatWest Bancorp in the short-term, and would instead build it through
selected acquisitions. 'Now we are making more money than in the UK, why
would you sell your profit jewel?'
Mr Tugwell said NatWest Bancorp, which has been recovering after two years
of substantial losses due to bad debts in 1989 and 1990, was likely to
outstrip the net profits of Dollars 130m made in its most profitable year of
1987. Between 1989 and 1991, it incurred cumulative losses of Dollars 860m.
It is paying a reduced federal tax charge on its profits, because it is able
to bring forward for tax purposes Dollars 700m of losses made in earlier
years.
Although Lord Alexander, National Westminster's chairman, has made it clear
that the bank may eventually sell the US subsidiary, Mr Tugwell said a
decision on whether to sell or remain in the US market was likely only when
NatWest Bancorp had been expanded.
He said NatWest Bancorp would have to expand to exploit economies of scale
in the consolidating banking industry of the north-east American coast.
'We will acquire one or two branches to infill, and down the road we have
got to do something more because I would say we are not really at the right
size to provide the parent company with a steady level of return,' he said.
Mr Tugwell said a Dollars 130m profit would represent a 16 per cent return
on equity, which meets his earlier-stated target rate of 15 per cent.
However, the tax loss is likely to be eliminated within two to three years
and this will once against cut the return.
The bank made a total net profit of Dollars 105.5m in the first three
quarters of this year, including Dollars 39.4m in the third quarter. Its
assets have been expanding gradually as it has made a series of small
acquisitions, and they now stand at Dollars 22.3bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921123

