FT924-12134

FT  22 OCT 92 / Survey of Leman Region (7): Trouble-free diversification /
Profile of Salomon


   By IAN RODGER


THE Leman region boasts, among other things, a very large concentration of
ski equipment manufacturers.
On the Swiss side is Authier, a specialist maker of alpine skis and
snowboards based at Biere, west of Lausanne, while Haute Savoie is home to
three well-known producers, Salomon, Dynastar and Lacroix.
If the border of the region was pushed as far south as Grenoble, Rossignol,
the world's largest supplier of alpine skis and parent company of Dynastar,
could be included as well.
It was in Annecy that Mr Georges Salomon invented the safety binding for
alpine skis in 1947, and the company that he formed there has since grown
steadily to become one of the world's leading suppliers of ski equipment and
one of the three largest industrial employers in the Haute Savoie
department.
A typically conservative family company, Salomon stuck to its specialisation
 -bindings - for more than 30 years, leading the market in technical
innovation and maintaining a dominant world market share, now about 44 per
cent.
In 1980, executives recognised that the ski business was maturing and there
was little more growth to be had from bindings. So they began a programme of
diversification.
Most industrial companies have difficulties with diversifications and
acquisitions, but Salomon's efforts have been remarkably trouble free to
date. There are two themes in Salomon's diversification programme -
extensions of existing product lines and entering markets with significant
innovations.
The first move - in 1980 - was the introduction of the rear-entry ski boot.
It became very popular because of the ease with which it could be put on and
taken off. It enabled Salomon in a short time to become the world's
second-largest alpine boot maker after Nordica of Italy, with a 20 per cent
market share.
The other prominent move was the group's acquisition in 1984 of Taylor Made,
then a small US maker of innovative golf clubs, known as metalwoods. They
perform the function normally done by clubs with wooden heads, but are made
entirely of metal. They are lighter than woods and perform better, and thus
have become very popular among professionals.
When Salomon bought it in 1984, Taylor Made had sales of about FFr70m and
was virtually unknown outside the US. Now it has sales of FFr800m all over
the world.
The Taylor Made acquisition also took Salomon away from winter sports for
the first time, something many winter sports equipment makers have attempted
in order to remove the seasonal concentration from their activities.
Two years ago, Salomon again entered an already mature and crowded market -
that for alpine skis - with an innovation. It made its skis from a single
mould rather than the conventional laminate of various high performance
materials. It has positioned the skis at the top end of the market and
claims to have taken a 20 per cent share of that segment. This year, it is
aiming to sell 200,000 pairs, enough to reach break-even on the project.
Other diversifications have seen the company move into bindings and boots
for cross-country skis and, more recently, walking and hiking shoes. In
response to a market trend, it has also belatedly introduced a conventional
front-entry alpine ski boot.
The result of this programme has been to create a much more balanced
enterprise than Salomon was in the late 1970s. Of the group's total sales of
FFr3bn in the year to March 31, 1992, some 60 per cent came from alpine ski
equipment and 27 per cent from golf equipment. Sales were spread remarkably
evenly among the main geographical markets, with 27 per cent in North
America, 36 per cent in Japan, and most of the rest in Europe.
Although less than 8 per cent of group sales were in France, the group has
continued to concentrate most of its manufacturing - except for golf
equipment, hiking boots and branded accessories, such as rucksacks  - in the
Annecy area.
It has seven factories in the area, employing some 1,700 people. In
addition, most of its sub-contractors are in the Leman region. Precision
parts come from the Arve valley specialists, plastic moulds from Oyonnax in
Ain, and a score of small manufacturers in and around Annecy make finished
products for Salomon.
'The advantage of being here is that we are very close to the ski resorts,'
says Ms Anne-Marie Berrette, group secretary. 'Everyone here is a skier and
we try to keep aware of customer needs.'
Group executives tend to use Geneva's Cointrin airport for their
international travel, finding it more convenient and with more connections
than Lyon's airport.
Salomon became a quoted company in 1983 but the Salomon family still holds
40 per cent of the shares and a majority of the voting power. The group's
financial performance was strong until 1989 when a combination of a paucity
of snow in Europe and a depressed golf equipment market hurt sales and sent
the group into its first losses, totalling FFr91m.
The following year, the loss increased to FFr257m as the weakening of the
yen and the US dollar added to the group's problems.
A rationalisation programme was carried out in 1990, eliminating 380 jobs in
France and 600 abroad. One of the seven factories in the Annecy area - which
made golf clubs - was shut down.
Last year, thanks to good skiing conditions around the world, sales bounced
back, rising 13 per cent, and a net income of SFr66m was recorded.
Salomon expects the consolidation trend in the winter sports industry, which
has been apparent for the past three or four years, will continue. The group
has a strong balance sheet, and is open to the possibility of making
acquisitions, although none are planned at the moment.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

921022

