FT922-7092

FT  20 MAY 92 / Defiant Kurds flock to vote


   By GARETH SMYTH


   ARBIL, NORTHERN IRAQ


SOUTH of the city of Arbil on a rolling plain that leads to Baghdad lies a
scattering of settlements known as Qushtapa. Yesterday its school became a
polling station for elections organised by the Kurdistan Front, the
guerrilla coalition administering 50,000 sq km of northern Iraq.
First in the queue of 400 women was Mrs Sherve Abdullah, who had arrived at
7am, an hour before the polls opened. She wore the abaa, the traditional
black veil. Nine years ago her husband and seven sons, aged from 14 to 25,
were taken in a dawn raid by soldiers of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.
They, and 8,000 other men from this area, have not been seen since.
Part of the sprawl of Qushtapa is Qadisia, an attractive village built
around 1978 by members of the Barzani clan after their forced relocation
from tribal lands further north after Baghdad crushed a Kurdish revolt led
by the head of the clan, Mullah Mostafa Barzani. The adult inhabitants are
almost all women.
Mrs Aisha Otman, who said she was around 40 years old, sat huddled in a
shawl as she spoke through an interpreter in one of the two rooms she shares
with five children and two grandchildren. She explained how in 1983 soldiers
came at dawn and rounded up all the men, including her husband. 'They took
blind men, old men and handicapped men.' Mrs Otman now works in the fields
all day 'like a man' for 10 dinars (70p), enough to buy a kilo of rice.
In another house Mrs Hergaz Mullah, aged about 50, keeps a picture of two
sons in pride of place on the wall. Both were seized in 1983. Two other
sons, then aged seven and 15, escaped because they hid in a shelter built
against Iranian air raids: she said they are now bodyguards to Mr Massoud
Barzani, son of Mullah Mustafa and leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party
(KDP).
The Barzani women of Qushtapa voted for the KDP yesterday, not because they
prefer the party's policy of 'autonomy' over the 'self-determination'
advocated by Mr Jalal Talabani's Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK). Mrs
Otman said she didn't mind if Mr Barzani did not win - 'we just want to be
Kurdish'.
When the polling stations closed at midnight there were still queues. Mr
Hoshyar Zebari, a leading member of the KDP, said last night that 'the high
turnout is a challenge to the Iraqi government'. But he went on: 'We do not
think an independent state is possible in north Iraq. We are the victims of
the theory that we are undermining the sovereignty of Iraq. The Kurds can
play an important role in removing Saddam Hussein, but we are not going to
be pitted against Saddam's army without support.'
As polling ended Mr Zebari said two people had been hurt in a 'shoot-out in
Arbil' in which police opened fire on the voters trying to assault a judge.
'We don't say this election is exemplary,' he said.
Qushtapa school is one of 174 polling stations. Over 1m Kurds were expected
to have voted for national lists drawn up by seven parties. A second ballot,
for president, was contested by Mr Barzani and Mr Talabani, along with Mr
Mahmood Osman of the Socialist Party and Mullah Othman Abdul Aziz of the
Islamic Movement. If no-one gains 50 per cent there will be a second ballot
in two weeks.
The result of the elections will be known today or tomorrow. The new Iraqi
Kurd administration will have to face tensions between attempting to satisfy
the aspirations of Kurdish nationalism and allaying the fears of Iran and
Turkey that the developments may encourage Kurdish separatism there.
Barely 5km south of Qushtapa is the front line between Kurdish guerrillas
and the Iraqi army. Pashmerga guerrillas led by Mr Mosin Maullud, local
field commander, two months ago killed eight Iraqi soldiers who tried to
capture a telecommunications tower behind Kurdish lines. Yesterday, in
contrast to the hubbub at Qushtapa polling station as the Barzani women
voted, it was, for the time being at least, all quiet on the front.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920520

