FT922-13324

FT  13 APR 92 / Yugoslavia devalues by 57% to fight inflation


   By LAURA SILBER


THE Yugoslav federal government is to devalue the dinar by 57.5 per cent
today, in an attempt to combat soaring inflation.
It follows the announcement on Friday by the National Bank of Yugoslavia
that it would seek rescheduling from the International Monetary Fund, World
Bank and commercial creditors of its Dollars 15bn (Pounds 8.7bn) debt.
'Despite our intention to go on paying our foreign obligations in the second
quarter, we shall have to talk to our creditors on reprogramming our debts,'
said Mr Dusan Vlatkovic, the governor of the NBY.
He said Dollars 2.4bn of currency reserves would be 'wiped out after paying
an estimated Dollars 300m which has been allotted for the IMF and World Bank
and the most basic needs of the Yugoslav federation'.
About a third of the debt is owed to western commercial banks, but the
question of how to divide the debt among the former Yugoslav republics has
not been resolved.
'It is currently impossible to negotiate this question while the war is
going on,' a western diplomat said.
The economic situation in the rump Yugoslav federation - comprising Serbia,
Montenegro and the southern republic of Macedonia - has rapidly
deteriorated.
Exports of Dollars 1.625bn in the first quarter this year were down by at
least 26 per cent on the year before. March exports fell 22 per cent on
February. Prices have soared. Agricultural products and foodstuff prices
this year were 567.2 per cent higher than in 1991.
The Yugoslav dinar is still the official currency in Serbia, Montenegro,
Bosnia-Hercegovina and Macedonia. Croatia and Slovenia, the former Yugoslav
republics which in January were recognised as independent states, have
introduced their own currency.
Economists yesterday doubted the devaluation would shore up the national
currency. The official rate is now 200 dinars to DM1, down from 85 dinars.
'The official rate is still far below the black market rate of one D-Mark to
500 dinars,' economist Ivan Vujacic said. 'We can expect it to fall even
further.' The move to curb inflation, which economist say could reach an
annual rate of 100,000 per cent, follows a 26 per cent devaluation in March.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920413

