FT921-3951

FT  12 MAR 92 / Hopes high for big nuclear arms cuts


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER


   BRUSSELS


THE US and Russia yesterday expressed cautious optimism that they could
reach agreement on further sweeping cuts in their nuclear arsenals in time
for their next summit in June in Washington.
After nearly five hours of talks on US-Russian bilateral problems with Mr
Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian foreign minister, Mr James Baker, the US
secretary of state, said they had not been able to reach a 'definitive
agreement' on arms control.
However, he hoped progress could be made at further meetings before the
summit. It was important that the new era of partnership and co-operation
between the US and Russia should be reflected in 'further significant
movement' in the reduction of nuclear weapons.
Hopes of progress in the new negotiations, launched by Mr Baker and Mr
Kozyrev in Moscow three weeks ago, were raised by the Russian minister's
statement on Tuesday that Moscow was ready to move towards the US position.
Mr Kozyrev publicly indicated for the first time that Russia was prepared to
negotiate a ban on land-based multiple independently-targeted warhead
missiles (MIRVs), of which Russia has a far greater number than the US.
But Mr Baker yesterday stressed that, while both sides wanted to move beyond
the reductions already agreed on in last year's Strategic Arms Reduction
Treaty (Start), differences still remained over the timetable of the new
cuts and the weapons to be covered.
One of the main areas of disagreement is the number of warheads on
submarine-launched missiles which the US would be allowed to retain. The US
strategic arsenal concentrates on submarine-based missiles, while Russia
relies on land-based ones.
In January, President George Bush proposed the elimination of all land-based
multiple warhead missiles. But his plan to reduce the overall ceiling for US
warheads to 4,700 would still allow Washington to keep 2,300 warheads on
submarine-based missiles.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin subsequently suggested the number of
warheads of each side be reduced to 2,500, which would entail a substantial
reduction of Washington's submarine-launched missiles. Under Start the US
has been allowed to keep 9,000 warheads and Russia 7,000.
Iran, vying with Turkey for influence in the former Soviet Moslem republics,
yesterday suggested a multinational observer force to monitor a truce
between Azerbaijan and Armenia. Mr Ali Akbar Velayati, the foreign minister,
who is trying to broker a ceasefire in the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh,
said Azerbaijan had agreed to the idea.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920312

