FT921-11988

FT  29 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Switzerland suffers setback
over financial proposals - Fresh controversy over plans for a national
electronic stock exchange


   By IAN RODGER


EFFORTS to strengthen Switzerland's financial centre have received a fresh
setback with the decision this week to redraft a plan to create a national
electronic stock exchange.
The decision, by leaders of the three main Swiss stock exchanges, comes only
days after the canton of Zurich, which hosts the country's largest exchange
and most other financial markets, confirmed its strong opposition to a
Finance Ministry plan to create a federal securities law.
Both projects could cut into Zurich's approximately SFr50m (Dollars 35.7m)
in annual revenues from securities business related taxes.
However, there is growing anxiety in Swiss financial circles that unless the
exchanges are consolidated and a clear federal law established, the strength
of Switzerland's financial centre will continue to deteriorate. Already,
about one-fifth of Swiss share transactions are made on London's Seaq.
The project to create a national electronic stock exchange has been dogged
by controversy since its 1989 launch. The initial plan was to set up a
system for bond trading only, with the capacity to add on share trading at a
later time. But the continuing slump in share trading volume highlighted the
need to consolidate the then seven stock exchanges operating in the country.
At the end of 1990, four closed, leaving Zurich, Geneva and Basle, Everyone
knew only Zurich had a future.
The project was then redefined, bringing the share trading element forward,
thus offering Geneva and Basle a face-saving way of fading from the picture.
The projected cost of about SFr30m, became higher, not least because the
exchanges were specifying the system match their efficient and reliable
manual settlement procedures.
Geneva and Basle exchange officials became embittered, sniping at their
Zurich cousins for investing in a new building with trading floors that
would be obsolete from the day they opened.
In December, Andersen Consultants, which had been hired to carry out the
project, submitted a definitive plan. After examining it, the exchanges
decided the risk was too high.
'We have decided to stop for the time being the approach we have been
taking,' Mr Gian Pietro Rossetti, president of the Association of Tripartite
Bourses (ATB), said, adding that the ATB was considering two ways forward,
either to buy and adapt a system already developed for Australia's stock
exchanges or to continue on the basis already started.
In either case, it would try to make better use of the substantial in-house
knowledge built up when developing the software for the Swiss futures and
options exchange (Soffex).
He denied claims the change of course was due to the reluctance of Zurich
brokers to invest in the electronic market at this time.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920129

