FT922-4129

FT  06 JUN 92 / Thatcher generation dominates honours


   By ALISON SMITH


MRS Margaret Thatcher's generation dominates today's dissolution honours
list as it dominated the political landscape in the 1980s.
Those who contributed both to her political survival (such as Mr Cecil
Parkinson and Mr Norman Tebbit) and to her downfall (such as Sir Geoffrey
Howe and Mr Nigel Lawson) are among the 21 new life peers. Sir Ian Gilmour
and Mr Peter Walker, longstanding members of the 'wet' wing of the Tory
party, are also honoured.
With many of the new peers expected to have taken their seats before the
summer recess, the House of Lords is set to become the scene for as vigorous
a debate on the future of the European Community as the Commons has been.
Mr Denis Healey, a former chancellor and often regarded as the best leader
Labour never had, leads the six Labour nominees, who also include Mr Merlyn
Rees, a former home secretary, and Mr Jack Ashley, a former health secretary
and a staunch campaigner on behalf of the disabled.
The notable absentee from Labour's list is Mr Michael Foot, the former
cabinet minister and leader of the party, who stood down as an MP at the
election.
Although Downing Street refuses to comment on such matters, Mr Foot is
assumed to have refused a life peerage, rather than not to have been offered
one.
Mr Geraint Howells, the former MP for Ceredigion and Pembroke North, is the
Liberal Democrat life peer.
There had been speculation that in spite of her expressed view against it,
Mrs Thatcher might be offered a hereditary peerage, as Mr Harold Macmillan
was. She herself brought hereditary peerages back into practice, offering
them to a former Speaker, Mr George Thomas (now Viscount Tonypandy) and to
Mr William (now Viscount) Whitelaw, formerly a deputy prime minister.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, is said not to have any objection to
hereditary peerages. Mr Bernard Weatherill, the former Speaker, might have
been offered such a peerage if Mrs Thatcher had received one. Instead he
gains a life peerage and,although a Tory, is likely to follow his
predecessor and sit on the cross-benches as an independent.
The dissolution honours list can often seem almost a matter of form, but
that was not the case for Dr David Owen, the former leader of the former
Social Democratic party, for whom - lacking a party to put forward his name
 -a peerage was not inevitable. He will sit on the cross-benches as an
independent social democrat.
An unexpected baron is Dr Dafydd Elis Thomas, former MP for Meirionnedd Nant
Conwy, who will become the first Plaid Cymru life peer. When he announced
his decision to stand down at the election, he told S4C, the Welsh-language
television channel, that he had become disillusioned with the House of
Commons as 'an ineffectual body tied to outdated traditions and almost
beyond reform'.
Also notable is the inclusion of Mr Harry Ewing, the former Labour MP for
Falkirk East, who entered the Commons in 1971. Mr Ewing was a junior
Scottish Office minister from 1974 to 1979, but may have received his
peerage as much for seniority within the Scottish party as for having held
office. He was among the MPs who last year backed a bill to abolish
political honours.
There are two new privy counsellors: Mr Francis Maude, whose election defeat
in Warwickshire North prevented his probable appointment to the cabinet; and
Mr Robert Boscawen, who retired as MP for Somerton and Frome.
Mr Harold Walker, who stood down as chairman of ways and means and first
deputy Speaker at the beginning of the new parliament, is the only Labour MP
to receive a knighthood - an honour he shares with three defeated Tories,
including Mr David Trippier, a former minister, and Mr Anthony
Beaumont-Dark, a widely quoted backbencher.
In his pursuit of a 'classless society', Mr Major has made clear his desire
to reform the honours system, and today's list is expected to be almost the
last under the old rules.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920606

