FT924-813

FT  22 DEC 92 / Arts: 'Alcina' without the magic - Opera


   By MAX LOPPERT


Handel based three of his Italian operas on Ariosto's Orlando furioso -
Orlando, Ariodante and Alcina. For many Handelians they form the pinnacle of
his operatic art. All three are works of intense erotic charge whose
principals are lashed by tides and cross currents of sensual intrigue and
emotional conflict; and all three are works in which the apparatus of magic
and the supernatural directly carries that charge.
For all the supposed difficulties and antique formalities of the opera seria
convention in which they are framed, all three can speak to us with as much
directness and 'modernity' as Mozart's Figaro or Cos about the emotional
frailties of human nature, the deceptions that people in love or lust can
enact upon each other, the heights of ecstasy and depths of despair to which
passion can lead. And all three operas are works of almost overwhelming
musical abundance.
For me Alcina is the supreme Handel masterpiece, the Desert Island Handel
opera. The prospect of a new Covent Garden production - the first since
Zeffirelli mounted the opera for Sutherland in 1962 - was therefore almost
as enticing as the verdant meadows and bosky woods of Alcina's magic terrain
and the enchantments she practises on her captive knights.
How, then, to convey temperately my disappointment at the dullness of
Friday's opening performance? It was not a disaster, not one of those
enraging 'interventionist' misrepresentations by producer or designer. The
principals parts were not inadequately taken: the cast contains several of
the day's prominent Handelians. The score was more fully and respectfully
given than is often the case (although it is a pity that the boy Oberto
should have been excised).
What it was, a lot of the time, was just plain, plumb boring: a musical
plod, and a dramatic reduction of the spectacle - which should include dance
sequences as well as elaborate scene changes - to virtually a concert in
costume.
Handelians are a hardy breed. They know that the great operas, performed
with rhythmic vivacity, alertness to textural colour and pointedness of
melodic shaping, can 'come across' in defiance of any number of infelicities
in the staging. But equally, they know that such irredeemably flabby musical
direction as John Fisher offered on Friday - letting the life ebb out of
moderate-paced arias, giving no 'lift' to the allegros - is almost always
the coup de grace to any hope of Handel opera-as-drama.
In a country where good Handel conductors abound, it is astonishing that
someone so manifestly incapable of conveying the musical delights of Alcina
should have been invited to conduct it at Covent Garden. The choice of
production team - producer Stephen Wadsworth and designers Thomas P. Lynch
and Dunya Ramicova - proves hardly more successful. Theirs is a
poverty-ridden show, to the eye but even more to the imagination.
On a basic set - a hedge, a desiccated-looking tree, an urn, a blue sky at
the back - the principals go through a set of polite motions. Occasionally
the lighting changes; occasionally fancy little conceits of aria-production
are essayed. Most of the time the design construction keeps the singers
behind the proscenium arch; almost everything in the show seems geared to
muting forwardness of vocal address.
One's heart goes out to the singers: this is no way to help them shine. Ann
Murray, currently Britain's leading female exponent of the great Handel
castrato roles, comes nearest to doing so. Even if sometimes her mezzo
timbre seems to lack a strong 'personal' stamp, the unflustered elegance and
unforced distinction of her musical command compensate greatly. Her Alcina
is Yvonne Kenny (the two were previously partnered in the Covent Garden
Mitridate and ENO Xerxes). The failure of this wonderfully graceful soprano
to sound the role's depths, to catch its glitter no less than its pathos, is
the production's doing; in spite of this she offers much lovely singing.
Other fine performers who do themselves less than proper justice are Judith
Howarth (an excessively pert Morgana), Anthony Rolfe Johnson (almost too
weightily distinguished for the second-string role of Oronte) and Stafford
Dean (Melisso); Kathleen Kuhlmann's Bradamante is on the right lines, and in
fresh voice. So once again in modern times the Royal Opera has failed to
honour fully its Handelian birthright.
In repertory until January 22

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921222

