FT922-4563

FT  05 JUN 92 / Blue Circle makes Pounds 241m cash call


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


BLUE CIRCLE, Britain's biggest cement manufacturer, yesterday launched a
Pounds 241.6m rights issue to help pay for an acquisition to make it one of
Europe's largest manufacturers of domestic heating products.
In the latest of a series of cross-border mergers involving European heating
companies, it announced it had acquired for Pounds 124.9m Compagnie
Internationale du Chauffage, a subsidiary of industrial holding company Nord
Est.
Blue Circle proposes a one-for-five rights issue at 200p. Its shares rose 3p
to 247p following announcement of the issue.
The total purchase cost, including net debt of Pounds 81.2m owed by the
French company, better known as Celsius, is Pounds 206.1m. The remaining
Pounds 35m of the rights issue will fund expansion of the business. Celsius
is France's largest radiator manufacturer, a big producer of floor-standing
boilers, and large supplier of domestic heating products to Germany.
Operating profits of Celsius, which supplies 56 per cent of steel panel
radiators and 25 per cent of floor standing boilers in France last year were
FFr227m (Pounds 23.4m) on sales of FFr3.51bn. (Pounds 361m). Blue Circle
supplies heating products to the UK through its Potterton and Myson
interests.
Last November, the British group acquired Thermopanel, Sweden's largest
radiator producer, for Pounds 18.7m.
Mr Charles Young, chief executive of Blue Circle's home products division,
said the purchases of Celsius and Thermopanel would make the group the
second-largest European supplier of radiators behind Stelrad.
Mr Young said: 'There has been a gradual harmonisation of European standards
in the manufacture of domestic heating products. This has been reflected in
the consolidation taking place in the European market.'
Last month Germany's Robert Bosch conglomerate successfully bid Pounds
71.8m for control of Worcester Group, the British central heating boiler
maker. Earlier this year Wolseley, the Midlands-based engineering group,
paid FFr931m (Pounds 95m) for Brossette, a large French heating and
plumbing supplier. In 1990 Hepworth, the UK building materials and home
products group, paid Pounds 155m for Saunier Duval, the French boiler
manufacturer.
The rights issue has been fully underwritten by Baring Brothers. Brokers are
Cazenove and Hoare Govett Corporate Finance.
Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920605

