FT921-15190

FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: Guaranteed a Good Death - The Grim Reaper treated with
respect


   By PATRICIA MORISON


THESE DAYS we are pretty hot on the subject of the Good Birth, whereas the
subject of the Good Death is guaranteed to cast a pall over the
dinner-table. Ante-natal classes and retirement courses are an expected part
of the learning curve of your average late-20th-century individual. But as
for the death business, the potential market has yet to be tapped.
Universities have been slow to diversify into Pre-Mortem courses and Weekend
FT's plans for a new column called 'Memento Mori' have found little favour
with the advertisers.
Our ancestors, it is well known, took a robust view of death. The Art of
Death at the Victoria & Albert Museum (until March 22: 071-938-8500)
examines how, from 1500 to 1800, our Protestant forefathers treated the Grim
Reaper. A varied range of objects such as prints and paintings, jewellery,
mourning apparel, death-masks, and coffin-furniture, shows how up front they
were about death in the England of Shakespeare and Dr Johnson.
One of the great virtues of this exhibition is that it constantly invites us
to contrast then and now. Imagine your feelings on finding your seven
year-old daughter stitching this verse in her sewing-lesson:
'The righteous fear
not at their death
but calmly yield
their latest breath.'
To us it seems morbid in the extreme, but the little girl who stitched this
sampler in 1710 might have found it perfectly natural to reflect on the Good
Deaths she would probably already have witnessed in her young life. Was
death less frightening to William Evans, who had his funeral effigy carved
at the same time as his late wife's, and put where he could see it in his
church?
This is an exhibition crammed with objects which tend to be curious rather
than beautiful. However, Van Dyck's haunting portrait of Lady Venetia Digby
on her deathbed in 1633 should not be missed - although if you do, it hangs
normally in the Dulwich Picture Gallery. Before matrimony Venetia had been
something of a good-time girl, and her sudden death left Sir Kenelm, her
spouse, devastated: he became a scholar-hermit. In pre-Reformation England,
he would have had the comfort of paying for masses to be said for Venetia's
soul. But death was now a chillier affair: all the more important, if you
had the money, to have artists, sculptors, and craftsmen, to memorialise the
departed.
My favourite thing in the whole exhibition is an astonishing 17th-century
posthumous portrait from Abbots Ann Hall in Kendal, called 'Sir Thomas
Braithwaite of Ambleside'. It could usefully hang in every solicitor's
office in the land. The anonymous early 17th-century artist has painted a
memorable image of the Good Death of one 'of gentry stock'. Poor Thomas was
only in his thirties when he died, and we see him hollow-eyed in his
nightshirt, leaning against pillows covered in pious texts in English,
Latin, and French - to show he had been no bumpkin.
The point of the picture was also to commend Thomas as one who had made the
proper move in the face of Death: he had made his Will. No one seems to know
who the gentleman is shown proferring the document, but it would be nice to
think it was the chief beneficiary.
There are many quaint and poignant things in this exhibition. I was much
taken by the virgin's paper crown from Hampshire, where it hangs in a church
full of these memorials to girls who kept their chastity. Theatre-lovers
should look out for the mezzotint of Garrick's deathmask, looking amazingly
vigorous, and the invitation to his funeral which shows a weeping willow, a
weeping lady, and the legend 'Ireland. Undertaker' inscribed on a pyramid.
Apparently so many fashionable people attended the great actor's funeral
that the carriages jammed all the way from the Strand to Westminster Abbey.
This information comes from what ought to be a catalogue, but does not
really fit the bill: Nigel Llewellyn's book, The Art of Death (Reaktion
Books, Dollars 9.95: 160pp.) As I said in my FT review last year, this is a
good book, clever and informative. At that time it was something of a
posthumous child because the exhibition, of which Llewellyn is the curator,
had been postponed; it had been billed to open during the Gulf War, but the
museum's trustees decided that was a bad moment to confront the public with
coffins and death's heads.
Unfortunately, the months since publication did not prompt Llewellyn to
think again about how to make his thesis the skeleton of the exhibition. The
text which goes with the show is therefore perfectly dire, with Llewellyn's
interesting ideas squashed into horrid pellets of academic-speak which
spatter the exhibition.
Try this: 'Commemorative art confirmed the image of the 'social body', in
itself unstable and prone to disappear from the collective memory.' I
imagine a translation might be, 'people commissioned works of art to help
them remember the dead.' You might think the point of funeral ritual is easy
enough to grasp. But evidently not: 'The burial service was conducted
according to a rigid code in an attempt to preserve the social structure
undermined by the loss of a member of the community.' So what happened if
someone giggled, or the vicar lost his place in the service-book? Did the
fragile social structure really start to totter like a badly-built
catafalque?
For years I have wanted to see a good death show. Sadly, I find The Art of
Death rather dreary, too limited in scope and squeezed by its scholarly
corset. For all that, it is an interesting show: and someone, one day, will
give this richest of subjects a really good outing.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII Picture 'Thomas Braithwaite of Ambleside Making His Will'
by an the Victoria and Albert Museum (Omitted).

920111

