FT921-478

FT  28 MAR 92 / Bosnia government warns of collapse as fighting kills 19


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


NINETEEN people were reported killed yesterday in fighting between Serbs and
Croats in Bosnia-Hercegovina, after its government warned that law and order
was on the verge of collapse throughout the central Yugoslav republic.
A three-member commission from Bosnia's collective presidency comprising
Moslems, Serbs and Croats - the main national groups - yesterday arrived in
Bosanski Brod, northern Bosnia, in an attempt to secure a ceasefire.
The fresh fighting could jeopardise the resumption of European
Community-brokered peace talks on Monday in Brussels, where the national
leaders will try to hammer out a plan for an independent republic divided
into three ethnic units.
Tanjug, the Belgrade-based news agency, said 14 Serbs were 'massacred' in
Sijekovac, near Bosanski Brod. The report could not be independently
confirmed. Croatian radio said an unknown number of people were killed in
artillery and mortar battles around the town of mostly Croats and Serbs. A
spokesman for the emergency council of Bosanski Brod, which is made up of
Croats and Moslems, said three Croats died in the fighting.
The council said the attacks were being launched by Serb irregulars backed
by the Serb-controlled Yugoslav army, which has ignored the Bosnian
presidency's order to withdraw from the town.
General Milutin Kukanjac, commander of the second federal army district
based in Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, in a televised interview accused
Croat paramilitary units of massing in the northern Bosnian town. His
statement follows claims by Bosnia's Serb leaders that Croats are occupying
the town, which is reminiscent of Serb accusations before the war in
Croatia.
The situation in Bosnia has sharply deteriorated since March 1, when Moslems
backed by Croats voted for an independent Bosnia. Serb leaders, who say
Bosnia's Serbs want to stay with Serbia in a Yugoslav federation, yesterday
promulgated a constitution for the 'Serb republic of Bosnia'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920328

