FT923-6383

FT  25 AUG 92 / Arts: Breakfast, a little bed, but not bored - An Edinburgh
Day / Alastair Macaulay describes a typical (long) day in the life of a
dedicated festival-goer


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


10.15am. Breakfast as usual at the Queen's Hall. Gossip partly about
Edinburgh Festival's three triumphs so far  - Moses and Aaron, Mark Morris
and, in last night's Oprichnik, Galina Gorchakova (a Russian Ponselle)
11am. Queen's Hall. Peter Donohoe: Tchaikovsky and Chopin. (Official) After
the virtuosity of his starter, Tchaikovsky's Scherzo a la Russe (Op. 1 No.
1), Donohoe tells us that, when planning this programme, no one had realised
how short the first half would be. So, 'to give the bar staff time to wash
the glasses,' he is adding now Tchaikovsky's late Dumka. ('This was going to
be my encore, so don't clap too loud at the end.')
The selection proves a good sampler of Tchaikovsky's range: you hear his
folk facet, his dance facet, his Lisztian stormy-virtuoso facet, his
charming salon facet. The bridge to Chopin is his late 'Un poco di Chopin'
piece, best known (though not in musical circles) in Drigo's beautiful
orchestral arrangement (and at about half the speed) in the the 1895 St
Petersburg text of Swan Lake, for which Tchaikovsky himself designated it.
Donohoe, always a modernist, proves an unconventional Chopinian. No
lingering, no attention to superficial beauties. Instead, he homes in on the
music's structural daring, its fragmentation and Romantic wildness.
2pm. Assembly Rooms. Jenny Eclair: Mummy's Little Girl. (Fringe). Another
one-person show. Sally Darling, former child star, has descended to crime.
In a tissue of bile and gleeful venom, she blames her ruinous decline on her
ruthlessly ambitious mother  - who is still trying to make her audition for
'the Eldorado tragic waterskiing accident victim'. The show, a hysterical
mixture of Mommie Dearest and Whatever Happened to Baby Jane?, has its funny
and sad sides, but in general works too hard at either.
4pm. Assembly Rooms. Tom Hickey: Misogynist. (Fringe). Another one-person
show. One daily-paper critic is said to have thought this the worst thing he
has ever seen, another the best. It is, of course, neither. But Hickey is an
astonishing performer. His circuitous, repetitious, Irish ramblings, with
peculiar changes of subject and/or persona, gradually unfold a horrifying
psychopathological study: the helpless and murderous misogyny of this
Catholic devotee. The text is overblown, but Hickey's delivery is an
unflinching tour de force. Stroke by stroke, a non-person looms into vivid
3-D detail.
5.40pm. Assembly Rooms. Compagnie Philippe Gaulier: The End of the Tunnel.
(Fringe). This mime show (with speech), a spoof on the building of the
Channel Tunnel from both English and French sides, relies on exaggeration,
repetition and stereotype. It makes one adequate joke every 10 minutes.
Otherwise, much 'Hello, audience' mugging and adolescent humour.
7.30pm. King's Theatre. Edith Clever, director Hans Jurgen Syberberg. Ein
Traum, Was Sonst? (Official). Yet another one-person show. Syberberg has
been the theme director of this year's Edinburgh Film Festival. (A
retrospective of his movies follows in London, at the ICA, September 4-12.)
I have always wanted to catch his Parsifal  - but, ironically, it is only
showing here this evening, clashing with the local premiere of Ein Traum,
Was Sonst?, his stage vehicle for Edith Clever, his favourite actress.
Alone onstage, she spends the first 40 minutes without speaking. Gravel and
rubble are all around (the ruins of old Europe.) Simply, she listens: to a
lecture on Wagner, to Hitler, to the bombs falling  - and then to the
renewing strains of the Pastoral Symphony. It is fascinating how Syberberg,
like so many German artists, shies away from no part of German history. In
spite of the Scylla and Charybdis of Hitler and the war, he suggests that
German culture has enduring vitality enough to bring comfort and new life.
The first 30 minutes are transporting; Clever looks half like Peggy
Ashcroft, half like Glenda Jackson, and has better bones than either. Every
slight move is economical and eloquent. But then the show starts to
celebrate her skills  - in particular her talent for slowness. When she sits
down, it is virtuoso Alexander technique. When she recites, it is preciously
elegiac. The curtain falls after 105 minutes, we applaud - and, leaving,
realise that this is only the interval. But we do not return.
10.30pm. Royal Lyceum Theatre. Dennis O'Neill: Neapolitan Songs. (Official)
If it were not for Ingrid the glittering accompanist, this would be the
fifth one-person show of the day. O'Neill has worked so hard to become an
Italian tenor  - he even looks like Caruso's cartoons of himself  - that
there is nothing individual left. Half his repertory turns out not to be
Neapolitan, and most of it is stuff familiarised by the 'Three Tenors in
Rome' gala. (Yes  - 'Nessun dorma,' 'Recondita armonia,' and 'E la solita
storia')
As the recital proceeds, O'Neill finds his form. He is at his best, and
least clone-like, in the encores: 'O sole mio,' whose refrain he decorates
handsomely with a slow trill and whose second verse he sings softly; and
'Santa Lucia,' which he belts out fortissimo but with ardent phrasing.
12 midnight. My tally for Week One comes to 26 shows. The taxi-driver tells
me that last year he picked up a little old lady who had just done her 147th
show and who hoped to tot up 200 before the festival was over.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920825

