FT922-13456

FT  11 APR 92 / The Long View: It's recession as usual


   By BARRY RILEY


THERE WILL be no rise in interest rates to defend sterling, no attack on the
water companies and other privatised utilities and no 59 per cent personal
taxes to disturb City of London lifestyles. What a relief. But if the stock
market had not taken the public opinion polls so seriously there would not
have been anything to worry about in the first place.
Now back to business. Out there beyond politics the recession goes on,
although perhaps the housing market will show flickers of life as
uncertainty is removed. The same could be true in a modest way of the
corporate expansion.
Internationally, things have been happening that may even turn out to be
more important than the British election result. There is, for example, the
other election campaign in the United States where recession could prove to
be a more potent threat to George Bush than it was to John Major. At any
rate, the US authorities moved to push dollar short-term interest rates down
another quarter-point this week, which is a sign that they are determined to
stoke up the economy almost regardless of the inflationary risks.
The Americans may, of course, have one eye on the dramatic events in Tokyo.
There was an overdue stock market rally there yesterday, but even so the
Nikkei Average is down 2 1/2 per cent on the week and 22 per cent on the
year so far. The dangerous game long played by the leading Japanese banks in
relying for much of their capital base on holdings of vastly overvalued
equities is at last leading them into deep trouble. Maybe the Japanese
authorities will be able to prevent this from leading to a calamitous crisis
of confidence, but at the very least the Japanese banks are going to have to
shrink a long way, and that may mean withdrawal from most of their overseas
business.
Two or three years ago Japanese stocks represented 45 per cent of the global
stock market, but the proportion has now collapsed to less than 25 per cent.
It has been a salutary experience for global investors who have tried to
copy the world index rather than look at the value for money being offered
in different markets. On standard yardsticks Tokyo is still significantly
overvalued. But what may be very bad news for investors in Japanese equities
could turn out to be good news for shareholders in companies elsewhere, at
least after an awkward transition period.
The Japanese asset price bubble of the 1980s spilled overseas in the second
half of the decade. The cost of capital to Japanese companies shrank almost
to zero, culminating in the torrent of equity issues and bond-plus-warrant
issues at the very end of the bull market. The warrants are now all
worthless, and the share prices have halved or worse, but the cheap capital
financed a huge investment boom in Japan and a massive expansion drive by
Japanese industrial companies and banks in much of the rest of the world.
Inevitably the result of the over-investment has been a collapse in the
return on capital in Japan, where profits are under serious pressure in many
sectors. Internationally, too, profitability has been destroyed in those
industries which the Japanese penetrated. This week Fortune magazine
published its annual list of the 500 biggest American corporations in terms
of sales. Three of the top four suffered substantial losses in 1991, these
being General Motors, Ford and IBM, all in industries exposed to the
Japanese steamroller. The fourth, Exxon, remained profitable, and indeed
industries such as oil, food, pharmaceuticals and chemicals, which have not
been attacked by Japanese companies to the same degree, have generally
remained healthy.
Banking is, of course, another of the global industries which has been
undermined by Japanese competition. This is not to say that Western bankers
were not themselves guilty of imprudence in the 1980s lending spree, but at
least the playing-field will be more level in the future. The risk now,
however, is that the Japanese will withdraw too fast, leaving a credit
crunch as their legacy.
Industrial bosses in Europe and the US will now view the pricking of the
Japanese financial bubble with some satisfaction. At last Japanese companies
face the task of paying the going international rate to their providers of
capital. There is nervous talk that Japanese companies will even have to
start paying realistic dividends on their stock: the average dividend yield
is still only about 1 per cent. And some Dollars 150bn of bonds with equity
warrants attached will have to be refinanced at market rates.
John Major may have other things on his mind in the next few days, but at
some stage he - or his Trade Secretary  - ought to consider the implications
of the Japanese financial crisis for his government's industrial policy. It
may be dangerous to continue to rely on Japanese companies to revive British
manufacturing industry in sectors such as cars and electronics. We cannot be
sure that their British operations will continue to be competitive once the
supplies of cheap capital run out.
That the economic background continues to look troubled, however, will not
be a disappointment for a Tory government returned with a majority which
should last for a five-year term. John Major will not wish to repeat the
mistakes of Margaret Thatcher and Nigel Lawson in stimulating a boom too
early in the Parliament. This recovery must be slow and more securely
founded.
An early step should be a clampdown on pay growth. If the central exchange
rate in the ERM is to be taken at all seriously British pay inflation must
come crashing down from its current carefree 7 per cent-plus. As for the
economy at large, there must be less talk about a consumer spending upturn
and much more about a recovery in manufacturing output, without which
economic growth will lead to a balance of payments crisis.
What Japan really did, Page XX Investing in Japan, Page V

The Financial Times


London Page I

920411

