FT924-11518

FT  26 OCT 92 / Capital flows to Latin America trigger problems


   By STEPHEN FIDLER, Latin America Editor


A SHARP increase in capital flows last year to Latin America caused problems
for economic management in many countries, the InterAmerican Development
Bank says in a report on economic and social progress published today.
A more gradual and sustainable influx would have been preferable, the bank
adds.
Capital inflows to the region, estimated last year at Dollars 36bn (Pounds
22bn), had reached levels the IADB had assumed would not occur until the end
of the century. Such flows had repercussions, some negative, on interest
rates, money supply, inflation, interest rates and wages.
In principle, the inflows of capital were beneficial as they relieved the
decade-long constraint on investment and production caused by a lack of
foreign exchange. However, in many countries the inflows meant governments
had to either let real exchange rates appreciate and absorb the inflows
through imports, or maintain the exchange rate and allow foreign exchange
reserves to rise.
Expanding reserves threatened monetary stability and had to be offset by
restrictive monetary and fiscal policies. If monetary policies were too
stringent, however, the resultant high interest rates initiated a new round
of capital inflows.
Mexico probably struck the best balance, the report says, by running a
fiscal surplus which in 1991 allowed the government to pay back debt and
continue to lower interest rates. Colombia had the greatest difficulty in
dealing with the problem; in 1991 its foreign exchange reserves reached 16
months of imports, the highest in the region.
Attempts by, for instance, Colombia's central bank to mop up extra liquidity
have counteracted a general trend to lower real interest rates. Such rate
rises meant there had been 'no visible benefit of the inflows of capital to
the national economies in terms of increased investment or faster growth'.
The combination of real exchange rate appreciation, lower inflation and
reduced unemployment allowed for a recovery of real wages in the region in
1991.
Overall, the report presents a fairly positive outlook for continued capital
inflows, provided the region's integration into the world economy continues.
'Although there has been much talk lately of a worldwide capital shortage,
this shortage is unlikely to affect Latin America as long as profit
opportunities abound and the rate of return exceeds that in the industrial
countries.'
However, it was too early to say for sure whether the positive transfer of
resources to the region brought about by the capital inflows was a durable
or transitory phenomenon.
Economic and Social Progress in Latin America 1992. Distributed by Johns
Hopkins University Press, 701 West 40th Street, Baltimore, Md. 21211, USA.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921026

