FT921-522

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: There is more to Soho than sex - Kieran
Cooke revisits Meard Street and finds it a sadder and emptier place


   By KIERAN COOKE


THE FLAT was in Meard Street, Soho, above the Golden Girls' Club. The girls
were not so golden. They were rather beefy transvestites, mostly from
Newcastle. They would sit behind chicken netting in the window, tempting
potential clients. 'Any business, sir?' or 'Like a pleasant time, sir?' were
chants that would echo down the narrow street.
Once hooked, the clients - 'punters' to anyone in the sex business - would
get a good deal more than they bargained for. Their money would disappear
rapidly on sickly, make-believe champagne. There would often be fights. But
the 'girls' seemed a nice-enough lot. One gave me a big kiss as I came back
with the milk early one morning.
Modern Soho covers about 50 acres stretching from Leicester Square in the
south to Oxford Street in the north, Charing Cross Road in the east to
Regent Street in the west. Once, it was woodlands: the word Soho derives
from an ancient hunting call. But ever since it was settled in the 17th
century, it has had a reputation for behaviour that ranges from rather
roguish, bohemian and sometimes odd to downright lewd.
John Meard, a prominent Sohoite of the early 1700s who built the main body
of the street that bears his name, spent much of his time escaping the
clutches of his creditors. Among Meard's first tenants were an east European
harpsichord-maker, a future bishop of London, and Elizabeth Flint, who was
described as 'generally slut and drunkard and occasional whore and thief.'
One of the lease conditions of our flat was that the inhabitants should be
working on a film script of Ulysses or the Odyssey - no-one ever was quite
sure which. Soho Mary lived opposite. At 5 pm every day she would open her
ground-floor window and for 10 minutes launch a tirade of four-letter words
at people passing by, assisted by her dog which would bark beside her. Then
she would shut the window and go about her business.
We were forced out eventually. The Golden Girls went back to Newcastle or
moved to trade elsewhere. Soho Mary is no more. The man down the street who
made shoe trees and gave us offcuts of wood for the fire has gone. The sex
shop on the corner, run by an obese Maltese, has shut. Meard Street is now
thoroughly clean. Even the telephone box, always smeared with advertisements
for the most imaginative forms of bodily services, has been moved.
Soho has always been an area set apart from the rest of London. It is the
oldest immigrant sector of the city; Greek traders and the Huguenots,
victims of repression in France, were the area's first foreign settlers,
late in the 17th century. In 1739, one essayist wrote: 'Many parts of the
parish so greatly abound with French that it is an easy matter for a
stranger to imagine himself in France.'
Theodore, king of Corsica, was buried in 1756 in St Anne's church (only the
tower remains since its bombing in the second world war). Soho cast its
doubtful spell on Theodore, who had to give up his kingdom to his creditors.
More immigrants came to Soho over the years. In the 1860s and 1870s there
was an influx of Germans, Swiss and Italians. A few years later, large
numbers of Polish and Russian Jews moved in. But not until the 1960s did the
Chinese arrive in force; the south of Soho today is the capital's Chinatown
district.
In 1851, Soho had more than 17,000 inhabitants; today, there are only 4,000.
But influences from successive waves of immigration have remained.
We used to drink in either the old Dog and Duck pub on Frith Street or the
York Minster - now renamed The French House - on Dean Street. The latter was
the drinking venue for General de Gaulle and the Free French during the war.
It always had a curious clientele, ranging from puffy-faced retired boxers
to former striptease artistes.
Since the retirement of the patron, Gaston Berlemont - an imposing figure
with blue blazer and handlebar moustache - the 'French' has gone down
somewhat; it is now full, like everywhere else, of loud-talking youth who
'Yah, yah' at each other and drink American beers out of bottles. In
off-peak hours, though, the 'French' still has a certain risque atmosphere
and the restaurant upstairs is recommended.
Lust and lasciviousness started strutting down Soho's streets late in the
1950s and through the 1960s. The Windmill Theatre in Great Windmill Street
had the first British nude show. The girls had to stand completely still, in
poses like Roman statues. One attendant had the job of tightening the seats
worked loose as keen theatre-goers leap-frogged over the rows to gain a
closer view. Another attendant recalled that binoculars were not allowed.
'One old man came in wearing the thickest glasses you've ever seen. Fell
down in the foyer and broke his arm.'
Raymond's Revuebar in Soho has been offering 'the world's most erotic
striptease entertainment' for 35 years. Paul Raymond, the Revuebar's
founder, started his theatrical career with a mind-reading act; he now has a
considerable business empire based in Soho. As well as his clubs, he is one
of Soho's biggest landlords, and claims he publishes 70 per cent of what he
describes as the 'acceptable men's magazines' in Britain.
'They'll never make me Lord Raymond of Soho,' he says. 'But I do find
attitudes to sex in this country very strange.'
Soho sex is really very tame compared with that in Amsterdam or Bangkok. It
is also badly regulated.
An official clean-up operation, together with a better economic climate,
with more business enterprises moving into Soho, forced many of these
establishments out of business early in the 1980s. But with the recession,
sleaze is returning. The other day I noticed that the old fishmonger's shop
had become an 'erotic bed show' - about as exciting an act as being hit over
the head with a kipper.
With sleaze, though, there is at least life. Empty shop-fronts and office
blocks pose a greater danger to the character of old Soho. The Soho Society
is fighting to save the area's vitality but its head, Bryan Burrough, says
the lack of rent controls has caused enormous damage.
Many small restaurants have had to close. There has even been talk among the
Chinese community of moving Chinatown south of the river to Battersea, or
elsewhere. 'There have to be controls on rents and more controls on
office-building or else there will be only sterility and no life left in
Soho,' Burrough warns.
Despite this, he says that people who have lived in Soho are never quite the
same again. 'The other day, I had a letter from an old Chinese man who lived
here 30 years ago. 'Soho was where I belonged,' the letter said. 'Nowhere
has been the same since'.'
Soho still knocks the spots off anywhere else in London. But it's not quite
the same without our flat. There are no Golden Girls to watch any more.
These days, Meard Street goes to sleep early.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920328

