FT922-441

FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: On guilt, virtue and combat


   By GARY MEAD


QUARTERED SAFE OUT HERE
by George MacDonald
Fraser Harvill Pounds 16, 227 pages
ECHOES OF WAR
edited by Robert Giddings
Bloomsbury Pounds 15.99, 340 pages
WARRIORS' WORDS
edited by Peter Tsouras
Cassell (Arms and Armour Press) Pounds 19.99, 534 pages
IF GEORGE MacDonald Fraser ever admitted to being aware of the term
'politically correct' he would no doubt consign it to the mouth of one of
the more repellant villains of his highly popular Flashman novels. After
writing about many fictional battles, MacDonald Fraser has now turned to his
own, rather grimmer, military days as a squaddie fighting the Japanese in
Burma in the last days of the Second World War.
On one level it is a brilliantly entertaining read, with all the narrative
power, gift for dialogue and surprising twists and turns that would be
expected of Flashman's creator. But it is also a fine example of a crusty
old conservatism whose days must sadly be numbered. MacDonald Fraser grew to
hate the Japanese and cannot bring himself to forget or forgive.
MacDonald Fraser feels himself to be out of tune with contemporary society,
particularly in its attitudes towards war. But he may be wrong. Certainly
readers are likely to relish the warmth with which he writes of the courage
of the men in his squad - Grandarse, far too fat for jungle warfare; Nixon,
forever saying 'we'll all get killed'; Duke, ex-public schoolboy who served
in the ranks out of laziness as much as anything; Forster, always scrounging
fags and hating everyone, especially Duke, but whose furious anger over
Duke's death knew no bounds; and Corporal Little, the perfect type of
instinctive man manager without which the British army would collapse.
MacDonald Fraser is unrivalled at the story-teller's essential crafts,
characterisation, dialogue and scene-setting. By one of those typical army
cock-ups he becomes a pseudo-expert in the handling of the Piat, a portable
anti-tank weapon, without ever having fired it. At one point he is commanded
to head into the jungle with a Piat and bombs, to instruct a unit in its
handling. He discovers that the unit's leader - Captain Grief - is
completely round the bend. One of Grief's first questions is 'Are you a
lurkin' firkin or a peepin' gremlin?' After helping massacre a Japanese boat
party Grief decides what MacDonald Fraser is: 'the murder's out - evil
weevil written all over you]'
Sprinkled throughout are curmudgeonly views on the effeteness of
contemporary society and the notion that all war crimes are equal. It is a
robust book which challenges many received ideas about guilt, virtue and
combat; it is also hilariously funny and profoundly moving.
As an anthology of writings on war and battle, Echoes of War is oddly
unsatisfying, with too much not very good poetry and some peculiar
omissions. How can the section on the Napoleonic wars not have something
from War and Peace, for example?
But then, as we may read in Warriors' Words, a vast collection of thoughts
from the military mind up to and including Stormin' Norman Schwarzkopf, the
Duke of Wellington's view was, 'If you want anything done well, do it
yourself.' One for every old small boy who can comfortably agree with
Tactitus that 'the desire for glory clings to men even longer than any other
passion.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920627

