FT921-14326

FT  16 JAN 92 / The Lloyd's Report - News and Reaction: Strong action urged
to reduce costs


   By TIM DICKSON


FIRM ACTION will be needed if Lloyd's is again to deliver attractive
returns, according to the task force. The corporation lost its traditional
competitiveness in the 1980s as costs soared and productivity plummeted.
Mr David Rowland, the insurance broker who chaired the task force, wrote to
Mr David Coleridge, chairman of Lloyd's, ahead of its recommendations: 'At
almost every level, the Lloyd's system of raising and servicing capital and
transacting business has become too costly. Expense has to be reduced
dramatically.'
Some factors driving costs up were admittedly out of the market's control -
and a turn in the insurance cycle would obviously improve ratios - but the
message conveyed by the report is straightforward.
The cause appears to be the Pounds 770m of costs in 1990 covering the
corporation, the syndicates, agency fees excluding profit commissions, and
Names' contributions to the central fund.
Those represented 13 per cent of calendar-year premiums, compared with 7 per
cent in 1982.
Three structural difficulties are identified.
One is the additional cost of regulation, which led syndicates to install
more detailed record-keeping and risk-control systems in the 1980s.
The task force believes that the cost of regulation will become less
burdensome now that those are in place.
The second is that there has been a sustained decline in productivity. The
threefold increase in the Lloyd's head count since the mid 1960s compares
with a 45 per cent rise in real premiums.
The long-term decline became most marked in the late 1980s, when cost growth
continued at a high real rate and real premiums fell.
The company sector, by comparison, appears to have improved productivity,
holding expense growth below premium growth in the 1980s.
The final issue facing the market has been lack of tight cost discipline.
That can be blamed partly on the bull market in mid decade. The absence of
keen competition between agents over fee levels and poor information were
also responsible.
The task force sets a 30 per cent overall cost reduction target. That is
consistent with a pre-tax return to Names of about 5 per cent of premium
income limits. It assumes that underwriting results and investment income in
future are in line with the 10-year average between 1979 and 1988.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Photograph David Rowland, chairman of the task force, has set
Lloyd's an overall cost-reduction target of 30 per cent (Omitted).

920116

