FT921-11731

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (1): Resting on its assets - Saudi
Arabia's guardianship of Mecca and Medina, its vital but sensitive
relationship with the west and its capacity to influence neighbouring
economies through Opec are not only the kingdom's strengths but the key
issues which its opponents will try harder to exploit


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


SAUDI Arabia, protector of the two sites most holy to Islam and possessor of
25 per cent of the world's known oil reserves, emerged jubilant from the
Gulf war. With surprising ease the kingdom appears once more to be resting
comfortably on its assets, tempered by a new international assertiveness
that is being signalled but has yet to be tested.
The public face of the nation is smiling as it contemplates, ever more
distantly, the relative military and economic ease with which it escaped the
threat of Iraq's President Saddam Hussein. Friendly foreign armies were
summoned, arrived, conquered and - most important - departed, with the
majority of Saudi Arabia's estimated 8m population having known of their
presence only through the media.
Oil is being pumped at near-record levels, the banks are flush with cash and
the stock market bulls are rampant. Few optimists would have predicted such
a positive outcome in August 1990 when Kuwait had been overrun and Iraqi
tanks were at the kingdom's door.
Today there are similarly few Saudis, especially in the business community,
who are willing to voice doubts about the future. The deeply conservative
and absolute rulers of this still tribal and traditional society seem
confident that the country is back on track. In short, nothing much has
changed, although whether that is a cause for unqualified celebration is
more debatable.
The external credit side of the Saudi balance sheet rests heavily on the
assumption that the kingdom's borders are more secure than at any time in
its modern history. Iraq and Iran, the two most dangerously ambitious of
Saudi Arabia's neighbours, have in the past decade had their military teeth
drawn. Their economies have been seriously weakened and hopes of recovery
must in part depend on how Riyadh exercises its supremacy within the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Saudi Arabia still needs the scalp of President Saddam Hussein before it
will feel comfortable about closing the Gulf war chapter and its recent
improvement in relations with Iran is heavily qualified by past memories and
by Tehran's continuing support for Moslem militants elsewhere in the Middle
East, most recently in Algeria where Saudi Arabia welcomed the cancellation
of elections.
Saudi Arabia's guardianship of Mecca and Medina, its vital but sensitive
relationship with the west and its capacity to influence neighbouring
economies through Opec are not only the kingdom's strengths but the key
issues which its opponents will try harder to exploit. The American military
umbrella, which could be denied by the Saudis so long as it remained furled
and out of sight, had finally to be fully admitted last year.
The participation of other Arab and western forces in the defeat of Saddam's
army in Kuwait, however valuable politically, could not disguise the fact
that the essential protector of the House of Saud is very visibly the nation
still known best to Iranians as 'the great Satan'. Despite the heavy
investment in defence planned by Saudi Arabia during the next 10 years, its
ability to counter substantial external threats rests on the country also
viewed by many people in the region as hostile to Islam, devoted to Israel
and the source of much of their suffering.
To that extent the new world order, so enthusiastically promoted in
Washington, is very much the same old order so far as the Gulf is concerned,
but with one important amendment.
There is now little pretence that the defence of the Gulf has a wider Arab
dimension. Efforts to put together a defence pact between the six Gulf
monarchies, Egypt and Syria has made no progress primarily because Kuwait
and Saudi Arabia have shown they would rather be under direct American
protection.
If that is a gamble then Saudi Arabia's rulers would probably argue that it
was one in which they were given little choice, either by the US or by some
of their Arab allies. Jordan, the Palestine Liberation Organisation and
Yemen were all felt to have betrayed the kingdom by supporting Saddam
Hussein and have suffered financially as a result.
But such relatively minor retribution disguises a wider necessity: Saudi
Arabia's ability to use financial aid as its most important arm of foreign
policy has been severely limited by the costs incurred in helping others to
defend its sovereignty.
There is no reason to doubt Saudi Arabia's assertion that the overall cost
of the war was close to Dollars 60bn. The kingdom was forced to draw heavily
on its more liquid foreign assets and to push the budget into deeper
deficit. Foreign currency reserves available to the government may have
fallen to as low as Dollars 5bn last month compared with close to Dollars
95bn at the start of the 1980s.
The Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency manages another Dollars 50bn, compared
with an estimated Dollars 125bn in 1981, but much of it is required as
backing for the currency and to fulfil other international obligations.
No additional explanation is required for Saudi Arabia's stated
determination to sustain its current level of oil production at around 8m
barrels a day, its insistence on retaining its market share and the
resistance it will mount to growing pressure for it to revert again to its
role as Opec's swing producer. For the foreseeable future, Saudi Arabia's
aim will be to maximise its revenues while maintaining oil prices within the
Dollars 16-Dollars 23 a barrel range.
How this squares with the cuts in production by Opec members that will be
required to accommodate increased Kuwaiti production and the eventual if
limited return of Iraq to the market is not explained.
But just in case Opec members believe Saudi Arabia will eventually fall into
line they are reminded that the kingdom has embarked on a Dollars 15bn
investment programme which over the next three to four years will bring the
level of sustainable crude production to around 10m b/d.
It would be a very expensive threat if Saudi Arabia had no intention of
employing it.
Other Opec producers who are tempted to ignore the implications of Saudi
Arabia's production plans might also profitably study the domestic
background to the government's decision. Oil revenues remain the
overwhelming source of government income in a country where the ruling
family appears unwilling to rescind its cradle-to-the-grave welfare
provisions.
The private protector is making a larger contribution to the country's gross
domestic product, but is not required to match that with personal
contributions to the national exchequer.
The taxation of individuals is still not on the government's agenda. Instead
it has been forced into the novel experience of tapping international
markets for Dollars 4.5bn and borrowing more domestically.
Put another way, the government is going to need every cent of the Dollars
40bn in revenue that it has forecast from oil exports this year, a figure
that is still Dollars 8bn below expected spending levels.
The domestic financial squeeze that will emerge more clearly in the coming
years is being accompanied by a modest but discernible level of political
agitation. The ruling House of Saud earned credit among many nationals for
the way it handled the Gulf crisis, but the shock of war also jolted the
activists on the political extremes.
Western-educated liberals who argue for a more modern state, and the
religious right wing which would prefer it to retreat further into the past,
have both privately and publicly been testing the ruling family's tolerance
levels.
The response so far has been characteristically muted but the announcement
that a Consultative Council will be created suggests that beneath the bland
public exterior there may be the faintest stirrings of political reform.

The Financial Times


London Page I Photograph Riyadh, stock market bulls are rampant, the banks
are flush with cash and oil is being pumped at near-record levels (Omitted).

920130

