FT923-10961

FT  28 JUL 92 / Arts: The Kirov in New York - Ballet


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


NEW YORK may well be the world's worst place for watching the Kirov Ballet.
It only stays at the Met for three or (this year) two weeks, uses a local
orchestra, and arrives at the end of a big North American tour. London, by
contrast, had six weeks of the Kirov in 1990; and Paris, whose Palais des
Congres has presented the company for several eight-week seasons and with a
Kirov orchestra, is luckier yet. In Paris the company is also not obliged to
squeeze ballets into a three-hour time limit. This year, however, New York
is not the Kirov's only problem.
For 30 years, the Petersburg company has thrived on exalted mystique. It
used to tour far less than the Muscovite Bolshoi, and therefore had rarity
appeal. Though no one has ever been able to claim seriously that the Kirov
was a shrine of spontaneity, ingratiating manners, keen musicality or sheer
generosity of spirit, its advocates have remained hooked on its pure
classical style. But, during the ten years I have been watching it, the
Kirov has been touring more and more extensively and has shown unmistakeable
signs of decadence. And evidence suggests that some of the decadence began
long ago.
How pure is any classical dance style that is not attentive to musical
detail? Numerous Petersburg dancers - notably (by all accounts) Olga
Spessivtseva in the 1920s and 1930s and (in vivid memory) Natalia Makarova
in the 1970s - have appalled Western audiences with their indifference to a
musical phrase or beat. Watching current Kirov dancers in recent years, we
have been able to see that they have been encouraged to grow ever less
responsive to the score (and also to dictate ever slower tempi). Is this
part of the great tradition? Well, as Mahler told the Viennese: 'What you
people call tradition is mere slovenliness.'
And how truly classical is a style that leads its dancers away from true
vertical stance? In the last ten years, more and more Kirov dancers have
shown a deep, gymnast-like curve in the lower spine. The pelvis, instead of
being held vertical and fluently conjoined with the waist, is pulled back at
an angle, exaggerating the divide between 'upper' and 'lower' halves of the
body. Londoners should remember this at its most ludicrous with the
narcissistic Farouk Ruzimatov; but it is present too with most Kirov women
of a certain experience - notably the otherwise bulldog-like prima Olga
Chenchikova.
Oleg Vinogradov, the Kirov's artistic director, has given the company a new
production of Swan Lake. Perversely, it has scrapped most of the features
that distinguished the old production great (eg the Tutor in Act One), and
has kept every feature - especially the post-Imperial accretions - that
blighted it (eg the Jester). His new version of the final act, to a bizarre
mish-mash of music, has opposed corps of black and white swans. One dance
began with the whites hitting the upbeat and the blacks hitting the downbeat
 -as if 'you say potato, I say potahto' had reached Swan Lake.
Vinogradov has also staged his own recension of the original Kirov staging
of the Lavrovsky Romeo and Juliet - the version that, with the Bolshoi and
Galina Ulanova, conquered the West in the 1950s. It still shows the dramatic
point of some details of Prokoviev's score but this Romeo, even more than
others, needs thoroughly verismo acting and surging vitality of performance.
The 1950s Bolshoi (as film shows) had that; the 1992 Kirov does not. The
best feature was the ravishing original designs, recreating in scene after
scene the beauty of the Italian Renaissance.
The company's best full-length show was La Bayadere, even though it often
did not feel much like a ballet. The production's big thrill is its old
turn-of-the-century painted scenery, handsomely restored. Then there is the
absorbing oddity of Kirov mime - rigorously eliminated from the company's
Swan Lake these several decades - here deplayed with massive silent-movie
weight. But there is also the depressing spectacle of Kirov dancing at its
worst - stuffy, effortful and posey. The legendary corps de ballet, in one
of its off periods, exemplified this.
For just one performance only the company presented a triple bill of Western
choreography - a sequel to the now-famous pair of Balanchine ballets the
company presented on its Western tours of 1989 and 1990. These three
amounted to much less. Antony Tudor's The Leaves are Fading challenged the
dancers to show a brand of lyrical, light spontaneity that as yet eludes
them; Jerome Robbins's In the Night prompts them to use the kind of slow,
heavy, solemn Romanticism they already overdo.
Best was Balanchine's Apollo - flawed but alive. This Apollo, not the
shortened 'Pollo that Balanchine staged in his last years, gave New York its
first view of the old prologue and apotheosis for 17 years - a more
satisfying text of the century's most influential ballet. Igor Zelensky, the
young stone-faced tough who danced the protagonist and who gave the season's
strongest male dancing, joins New York City Ballet later this year.
The Kirov still has a number of real dancers; but just now it is not the
best place for them to be. Too many of them, like the young Yulia Makhalina
(Terpsichore in Apollo and first-cast ballerina in Swan Lake and La
Bayadere), show outstanding physical talent that has been educated away from
its truest dance instincts.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920728

