FT923-6437

FT  25 AUG 92 / Investigators highlight operation to sell favours


   By BILL HINCHBERGER and AGENCIES


A COMMITTEE of legislators investigating allegations of government
corruption in Brazil yesterday reported the establishment of an organised
operation to sell favours and rake off commissions from state contracts.
The committee's report concluded that President Fernando Collor must have
known of the operation and had received 'undue financial benefits'.
The 200-page report was read by its author, Senator Amir Lando, to a packed
and nationally televised session in a Senate committee room.
Senator Lando said the committee had evidence of a multi-million-dollar
corruption operation established by Mr Collor's election campaign treasurer,
Mr Paulo Cesar Farias.
The senator outlined a corruption scheme which, he said, was set up by Mr
Farias in the Health Ministry, and detailed numerous other tax and legal
irregularities in the running of Mr Farias' two companies, EPC and Brasil
Jet.
'Signs point to a malevolent construction of an intentional operation,
aiming to open space, in the area of the administration and public business,
for agents from inside and outside public administration, to bring about
illicit and illegal benefits,' the senator said.
In outlining the activities of EPC, which was said to provide consultancy
services for several Brazilian companies, Senator Lando said: 'It cannot be
verified that any assistance or services were provided to the companies that
paid EPC.'
The sudden wealth of Mr Farias' companies, he noted, seemed to coincide with
Mr Collor's political success, first as governor of the state of Alagoas and
then as president.
Testimony 'allowed the conclusion that illicit acts were committed by Farias
which the president must necessarily have known,' Senator Lando said.
The draft report said that Mr Collor was remiss in not carrying out his
constitutional duty to ensure high moral standards and stop his name being
used by others for financial gain.
'It has become evident that the president of the republic, on a permanent
basis and for more than two years while in office, received undue financial
benefits,' the report said in its conclusions.
The legislators' report said: 'Those who knew the rules. . . became
'merchandise' for which businessmen and others were willing to pay
incredible and unjustified prices.'
Mr Farias, acting through 'phantom' depositors who used fake names and
numbers, deposited millions of dollars in a bank account linked to the
president, the report said.
Senator Mauricio Correa, head of a sub-committee set up to examine bank
accounts, detailed evidence linking Mr Collor to Mr Farias.
Senator Correa said documents showed that Mr Farias had used false bank
accounts to funnel millions of dollars to Mr Collor via third parties. Among
the cheques he listed were:
More than Dollars 11m (Pounds 5.7m) for building work and landscaping at Mr
Collor's private residence.
Payment of a bill for one of Mr Collor's private cars.
Payment of more than Dollars 2.3m to Mr Collor's private secretary, Ana
Maria Acioli Gomes, to pay the president's household expenses.
Other payments to Mr Collor's first wife, mother, spokesman, secretary,
butler and other staff members.
Referring to payments emanating directly or indir-ectly from Mr Farias, the
committee's report said: 'Such events constitute common crimes, in relation
to which the initiative for follow-up is the prerogative of the federal
prosecutor.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920825

