FT924-756

FT  22 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Sweet smell of success from the right
product mix / A look at Thorntons' strategy for overcoming seasonal sales
variations


   By MATTHEW CURTIN


THE CHRISTMAS rush has special meaning for Thorntons because the chocolate
maker and retailer derives nearly a third of its yearly turnover from
yuletide sales.
A box of Thorntons Continental chocolates has a shelf-life of three weeks,
an indication of the disaster lurking if the group does not judge the
Christmas market accurately.
Thorntons' dependence on seasonal business is exaggerated by the fact that
another 25 per cent of turnover comes at Easter, Mothering Sunday and St
Valentine's Day.
Turnover for the year to end-June amounted to Pounds 84.3m. Seasonal factors
are aggravated by the group's susceptibility to the weather, which if bad
keeps people off the streets - and away from Thorntons' champagne truffles,
hazelnut pralines and special toffee.
Mr John Thornton, chairman, is one person who is not dreaming of a white
Christmas. Christmas sales will be strong, he says, 'as long as it doesn't
snow'.
The group earns three quarters of its revenue from Thorntons' 395 shops and
franchises on Britain's high streets. They have to woo pedestrian traffic
which has declined in recent years because of the recession and the move
away from high street retailing to superstores.
Thorntons sensitivity to these factors was amply demonstrated in the last
financial year.
Mr Thornton attributes some of the blame for a disappointing 23 per cent
fall in pre-tax profit - from Pounds 11.9m to Pounds 9.2m - to unseasonally
hot weather in May and June.
'People don't buy chocolate when it's 80 degrees,' he says.
The company was also hit by its decision not to absorb the VAT increase. It
tried to push up volume to compensate but failed. In addition to the general
recessionary climate, high street rents increased and Easter sales were
upset by the general election in April.
Thorntons' growth and profitability in the 1990s will depend on the success
of the different strategies it has undertaken to cope with the
idiosyncrasies of the UK chocolate business, not only at Christmas.
Mr Thornton says the group is striving to improve the way it manages stock
to ensure 'stock does end up in the right place at the right time'. It
recently installed a computerised stock accounting system whereby shop staff
input sales information into hand-held terminals connected to Thorntons'
main factory near Derby.
The group is also planning to introduce electronic point of sales scanning
equipment, to provide immediately accurate pricing and stock taking by
reading product bar-codes, in the near future.
Thorntons has techniques of its own for combating the Christmas sales
onslaught. It aims to sell out of its speciality Christmas products well
before December 25, relying then on seasonally packaged chocolates and
'seasonalised' products.
The latter are ordinary Thorntons ranges which can be taken out of their
Christmas wrapping for sale in the new year without losing their freshness.
Mr Thornton adds that should sales be overestimated, product can be held
back at the factory where it will last longer in cold storage.
Gauging the progress of Christmas sales is difficult but initial indications
are that response has been good to this year's Christmas advertising
campaign. The relaunch of Thornton's Continental chocolate boxes lifted
sales, and the launch of the Select collection in the autumn added 6 per
cent to turnover at the 150 shops at which it is available.
He says this recession has proved particularly difficult because of the
erosion of high street trade, which had held up well in previous downturns.
Outside of Christmas and Easter, Thorntons relies on impulse buying from
passers-by, and their numbers are falling.
The group has met this challenge in part by expanding its commercial
operations - supplying chocolates and ice-cream to supermarkets, including
Marks and Spencer, Sainsbury and Boots.
These sales are approaching a fifth of overall turnover, and increased more
than 50 per cent to Pounds 14.8m last year.
The group broadened the variety of chocolate products to suit supermarket
shelves, and stepped up its premium ice-cream business. The value of the UK
premium brand ice-cream market has doubled to about Pounds 450m in five
years, of which Thorntons had a 7 per cent share in mid-1992, after New
England (10 per cent) and Grand-Metropolitan's Haagen-Dasz (20 per cent).
However, higher ice-cream sales in the hot weather in May and June were not
enough to offset the fall in higher-value chocolate sales.
Progress has been more disappointing with regard the group's attempt to
break into the European market. Thorntons bought Gartner, a specialist
Belgian chocolate maker, in 1988 but its real push came with the purchase of
French confectioners Sogeco and La Nouvelle de Confiserie in 1989.
The appeal of the French acquisitions was the established brand names which
came with them - particularly the well-known Martial - and the different
market mix.
Mr Thornton says 80 per cent of its UK sales are chocolate and 17 per cent
toffee. In contrast, the French market is divided equally between chocolate,
ice-cream, sugared almonds - traditional fare at weddings - and sugar
confectionery, providing 'a different weather balance'.
However, he admits re-organising the French businesses and returning them to
profit has taken longer than the group expected, not least because of the
different working and sweet-eating cultures.
Thorntons (France) contributed a loss of Pounds 750,000 last year, down from
Pounds 850,000 a year earlier. But comparisons with the UK business are not
easy because French factories supply UK stores and vice-versa. Central
overheads are still too high in relation to the number of shops Thorntons
has, but it is about to accelerate the expansion of its network of 58
Martial outlets this year.
Mr Thornton says the group is investigating the establishment of a retailing
presence in a second country on the Continent, examining the options in
Belgium, Germany and the Netherlands.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921222

