FT921-3763

FT  12 MAR 92 / The man who would be king: Super Tuesday put Bill Clinton
ahead of the Democratic pack, but he is still an uncertain bet for the smart
money


   By JUREK MARTIN


The smart money, of course, was always on Bill Clinton. The smart money is
also not infallible. At various times this year it thought Bob Kerrey was
the visionary answer to the Democratic prayer and that Pat Buchanan would
fold his tent after New Hampshire and leave the Republican right-wing field
to David Duke. But at least the bet on the governor of Arkansas looks good
today.
Looking good in March, however, is not a great guide to November, as any
number of would-be presidents have discovered. Winning eight out of 11 Super
Tuesday primaries puts Mr Clinton comfortably ahead of the pack, the
incontestable front runner. But it also makes him a target for those left in
the race and for those inside the Democratic party who do not want him as
the candidate.
Over the next six weeks, he must continue to win big in big states -
Illinois and Michigan next week, New York, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania next
month. The way the Democrats apportion delegates to their convention, using
proportional representation and an allocation of votes to the uncommitted
and to party grandees, means he might have to wait until California on June
2 to wrap things up - and a lot can go wrong between then and now.
Paul Tsongas and Jerry Brown will continue to nip at his heels. The former
senator from Massachusetts must do very well next week in order to prove his
claim, still technically valid after Super Tuesday, that he, not Mr Clinton,
is the national candidate. The former governor of California will probably
endure to the end, as Mr Clinton's Pat Buchanan, unable to kill but
infinitely able to wound. Nor can it be completely ruled out that some
Washington heavyweight (Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas is occasionally
mentioned) will express profound discontent and get into the late primaries,
or make a pitch for the non-Clinton delegates, as Hubert Humphrey did
against George McGovern in 1972 and Mr Brown did against Jimmy Carter four
years later.
But, all these caveats dutifully noted, the nomination is probably now Bill
Clinton's to lose, and, therefore, a Bush-Clinton presidential contest in
the autumn the most likely outcome. Public opinion polls, not worth much in
the spring, put them about level. The question, since so much more is known
about President Bush, is whether the Democrat can stand up to the test.
Perhaps the most important thing to know about Bill Clinton is that he is a
pure politician. This is no movie actor, or lawyer, or peanut farmer turning
a hand to politics. The Clinton career has been exclusively in politics, as
perfectly illustrated by the painfully honest letter he wrote, as a
23-year-old Rhodes scholar, at Oxford, to his military draft board in 1969.
In spite of his opposition to the Vietnam war, he would, he said, 'accept
the draft . . . for one reason; to maintain my political viability within
the system'.
And thus it went after university for the man from Hope, Arkansas; to
running the 1972 McGovern campaign in Texas, to becoming, at 28, state
attorney-general, to a narrow loss in a House race, to the governor's
mansion in Little Rock at 31, (only Harold Stassen in Minnesota had been a
younger governor), to defeat after one term, to re-election after a public
apology for arrogance, and ever since (he is now the longest-serving
governor in the nation) and on to the road to the White House. This is not a
man who is deflected from his chosen path.
He is obviously a product of the 1960s. He has already faced a sex rap; it
is a fair chance someone will claim he smoked marijuana; his opposition to
the Vietnam war is on the record. But whereas so many of his generation, the
great political activists of the Vietnam protest era, eventually backed off,
went to law school or grew vegetables, Clinton relentlessly stuck at it.
And this was in Arkansas. Now this may be the state which produced J William
Fulbright and Wilbur Mills and was once governed by a Rockefeller (Winthrop)
but it is not exactly in the political major leagues. It ranks behind
Georgia, which produced Jimmy Carter, and ahead of Alabama (George Wallace).
New York or California or Texas it is not and no matter how effective a
governor of Arkansas Mr Clinton may have been - and he gets generally decent
reviews for his reforms of the state's social infrastructure - running
Arkansas is not, in itself, a prime qualification or training ground for the
White House.
But it is 'southern' and, as it is necessary to point out, over the past 40
years the Democrats have only won the presidency with a southerner somewhere
on the ticket (in 1960, 1964 and 1976.) Put another way, they have lost the
presidency because they have lost the south - and California, too. What
really worries party professionals about the Tsongas and Brown candidacies
is the conviction that both would ensure that the south stays lost without
sufficient compensation elsewhere.
Mr Clinton's southernness is worn almost as a uniform. He answers to the
nickname of Elvis (the other is Slick Willy) and the accent is southern,
though easier to understand than Jimmy Carter's. But he is not a Rhodes
Scholar and Yale Law graduate for nothing. He is, in the current jargon, a
'policy wonk', someone who loves nothing more than a complicated brief that
he can argue through to its logical conclusion.
(One small example of this: four years ago he invited himself to visit the
FT in London; we sought, cutely, to sandbag him by asking him to justify the
withdrawal, after pressure from congressmen from Arkansas and Louisiana, of
US funding to the Rice Research Institute in the Philippines; we half
expected some cornpone invocation of the need to protect local rice farmers;
what we received was an extremely well-informed lecture on the world rice
market and new rice strains.)
This sort of smartness, bordering on over-achievement, is reminiscent of
Jimmy Carter. Mr Clinton, like Mr Carter, brings no formal foreign policy
experience to his campaign and, because of the introspective nature of it so
far, has not needed to display much expertise. In order to prepare himself
for Mr Bush, he will now need to widen his horizons and the 'foreign policy
speech' is surely high on the agenda. He will now be getting the benefit of
the advice of more and more of the party's foreign policy establishment.
As it stands, the record shows only a few slogans - 'America must change so
it can become competitive in the world' - and one address to his alma mater,
Georgetown University, last December. This was a perfectly sensible,
unexceptional exposition of the US role in a changing inter-dependent world.
It naturally called for big cuts in defence spending and the use of the
proceeds to strengthen the country. It had no quarrel with the broad thrust
of US national security policy over the 1980s, but argued that the end of
the Cold War posed fresh challenges. It called for a larger role for the
United Nations (with Germany and Japan on a revamped Security Council),
urged the early recognition of former Soviet republics, and criticised the
administration for 'coddling' China. It was bare bones stuff, with no
visible hostages to fortune and easy to flesh out.
Where Mr Clinton seriously differs from Mr Carter, as a candidate and, if he
makes it, as president, is that he is very much a political insider, albeit
from a long way from Washington. He was not chosen to give the keynote
speech at the 1988 convention because he was a fresh face, but because he
had earned the respect of those who ran the party, for better or worse. (The
speech, curiously, was a disaster.) He had aligned himself very closely to
the Democratic Leadership Council, the middle-of-the-road grouping as
influential as any in the mid-1980s. The party professionals like him.
But the party at large has its reservations and, by extension, so must the
nation. The reservations are less about policies than about character. The
policies have shifted, naturally enough, during the campaign. He is now more
blue collar than white, more populist than intellectual, but not to the
irrevocable point that he cannot easily move back to the centre, which is
his home. He has yet, for example, to lapse into outright protectionism, as
the Democratic left and Republican right have, though the Michigan and
Illinois primaries, with their strong union presence, will test this
resolve.
The character issue is harder to define. His camp says his survival of
imputations about his sexual behaviour, courage and financial probity
attests to strength of character and purpose. The fear is that the
electorate has not forgotten and ultimately will find it difficult to vote
into the White House a man who seems to have 'erred' on so many fronts.
There is an unspoken assumption that more dirt will be flung at him in the
campaign proper, by better marksmen than Jerry Brown and Bob Kerrey, and
some of it might seriously stick. What the Republicans did to Michael
Dukakis in 1988, above all in its Willie Horton commercials, is a salutary
lesson.
Mr Clinton has his defences in good order. He says, fairly enough, that if
personal perfection was a necessary qualification, nobody would run for
president. His articulate wife, Hillary Clinton (she now uses her husband's
surname) is an eminent lawyer and formidable campaigner in her own right.
They seem the very model of the youngish, modern, two-career couple. Whether
America is as comfortable with this as it is with George and Barbara Bush,
whose concessions to modernity are minimal, is debateable.
Nor is there yet about Clinton that sense of arrogance, certainty even, that
usually marks out a winner. He has found it hard to distance himself from a
pretty average pack of opponents. His telegenity - the carefully styled
hair, the fleshy, babyish face - sometimes seems wafer thin. All of which
mysteriously combine to explain why as many as half the Democrats who have
voted in this year's primaries confess dissatisfaction with the choices put
before them.
And if they are still unhappy, then the discontent inside the Republican
party with President Bush's performance, registered again on Super Tuesday,
assumes a different perspective. Only the unforeseen can now stop Mr Bush
winning the nomination, and beating off Mr Buchanan in Illinois and Michigan
should do the trick. The question is only how he conducts himself in the
process and when he chooses to put Mr Clinton in his sights.
He ducked a chance to do this at his press conference yesterday, preferring
again to go after the Democrats in Congress and threatening to veto any bill
that contains a tax increase. There may be mileage in this but it is not
without risk. The nation is more than fed up with business-as-usual in
Washington and is as capable of blaming the president as the Democrats for
further impasse. And Mr Clinton can at least point out that he is not a
formal member of the Washington establishment.
So the game is now seriously joined and even the old axioms do not help.
Tall men normally beat short men in presidential races, it is said. Mr Bush
and Mr Clinton are the same height. No wonder the smart money is puzzled.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920312

