FT924-11280

FT  27 OCT 92 / Clinton thrives on nocturnal adrenalin: When the sun goes
down a different man emerges


   By JUREK MARTIN


RUNNING for president can cruelly expose character traits. In President
George Bush it lays bare a fragile command of language - he thanked a New
Jersey rally the other day for a 'wonderful recession'. In Mr Ross Perot it
strips layers off an already thin skin.
In Governor Bill Clinton it reveals the increasingly evident fact that he is
a night person. The Democratic presidential candidate at dawn often seems on
auto pilot, not necessarily helpful given the frequency this year of
breakfast television interviews. When the sun goes down a different man
emerges.
This worked to his advantage on a crisp Sunday night in Winston-Salem, North
Carolina, at the ramshackle Dixie Classic fairground. He was late arriving
from Michigan, as all politicians are from everywhere. Local entertainment
had done its best to keep a crowd of about 3,000 warm, especially a black
rock band and a folk group which sang a pleasant ditty about Mr Bush: 'Read
my lips, I'm just the driver/I don't know where we are either.'
But the rally was expecting 'something special' which, according to Mayor
Martha Wood, appears to be Winston-Salem's current slogan.
It did not quite get it from Senator Al Gore, though he tried to set up his
running mate in style to kick off the pair's latest, and probably last, bus
tour.
While Mr Gore was running through his now predictable bag of rhetorical
tricks, carefully mentioning the word 'change' every third sentence, Mr
Clinton stood at the rear, an arm around his wife Hillary, and occasionally
pointing out signs in the crowd to his daughter Chelsea.
Mrs Clinton, greeted by a chorus of 'Happy birthday to you,' which it was,
put in what is now her standard cameo performance when appearing with her
husband and when he has not lost his voice - a broad smile and three
sentences. If she is frustrated by this deferential role, she has become far
too good a political trouper to let it show.
Husband Bill, though, could hardly wait to get started. 'My mother,' he
said, about the State Department's investigations into every passport ever
held by anybody ever called Clinton, 'has handled far tougher people than
George Bush in her life'.
The crowd liked that one and it liked even more his next foray. Mr Perot, he
chuckled, had just that night accused Mr Bush of investigating his children
while earlier Mr Bush had accused Mr Perot of an identical offence. If all
they could do was pry into the lives of each other's children, then, in
contrast, 'I would like to look after 'your' children'.
He ran through his standard economic policy proposals more briskly than
usual, but all the time returned to Mr Bush (though not again to Mr Perot).
Detecting a Bush/Quayle placard in the crowd, he pointed at the offender.
'Why listen to them? They tell lies. Listen to me,' he urged.
In a well-wrought coda he said the country was facing 'an age-old conflict -
of hope versus fear. . . of new ideas versus comfortable and proven
failures'.
Always there was an explicit appeal to his audience. Looking like a first
world war recruiting sergeant, he pointed at the crowd and said: 'I want you
to be part of the bi-partisan movement sweeping the country.'
North Carolina had been 'a beacon of hope' in the US and if light was now
shining in Orange County, California, that bastion of conservatism where he
had held a successful rally last week, then surely, Mr Clinton said, it
should be blazing here in the tobacco fields - not that he mentioned the
crop by name.
It was a good speech, bog standard to be sure but lively and delivered with
some style.
It broke no new ground, but the ground Mr Clinton is trying to break here is
the 20-year-old Republican monopoly of the region, interrupted only briefly
in 1976 by another southerner, Jimmy Carter.
But this was Sunday night. Yesterday morning, before boarding the bus, it
was another television studio and another national audience and back to auto
pilot again. The answers rambled, he agreed and disagreed with his
questioners.
He hardly let Mr Gore get a word in.
But he was awake enough to remember the cost of a quart of milk, a gallon of
petrol and a pair of blue jeans.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921027

