FT924-8014

FT  13 NOV 92 / Public pay feels the squeeze: The prospects for UK wages
after the government's adoption of a more stringent approach


   By DAVID GOODHART


UK earnings are rising more slowly than at any time over the past 25 years;
average settlements in the private sector are starting to fall to less than
4 per cent; and labour militancy is virtually non-existent. So it may seem
odd that public attention is now focused on Britain's 'pay problem'.
But there are several grounds for concern, in both the public and private
sectors. For a government determined to hold down public expenditure without
hitting services or jobs too hard, the squeeze on the public sector's Pounds
80bn pay bill, announced yesterday, was probably unavoidable.
The decision to restrict all public sector pay awards to an upper limit of
1.5 per cent is not legally binding but the government can impose it
directly on 3m of the 5m public sector workers and most of the rest are
expected to follow suit.
There will, however, be serious reservations about brushing aside the
labyrinth of systems for determining pay in the public sector, and fears
that, after several years of peace, public sector pay tensions are being
stored up for the future. As one local government negotiator said yesterday:
'The problem is not going into squeezes; it's coming out of them.'
It was precisely to avoid disruptive lags and surges in public sector pay
that so many groups - including civil servants, nurses and teachers - were
granted special pay-setting arrangements which connect their wage rises to
pay trends in the private sector.
Some Whitehall officials are also worried that the government's
interventionism may be undermining its own drive to introduce more
decentralised, performance-related, methods of pay setting, similar to those
used in the private sector.
It is not clear what will now happen to pay in National Health Service trust
hospitals or opted-out schools, but it is almost certain that the
performance-related pay schemes accepted reluctantly earlier this year by
teachers and civil servants will become more difficult to apply.
Yet if the public sector squeeze does have the added effect, as the
government hopes, of further restraining private sector pay awards, it will
have achieved something important.
For, despite decentralised and performance-related pay, the private sector
has not yet delivered the wages discipline that was hoped for by the
government. Moreover, Britain's withdrawal from the European exchange rate
mechanism on September 16 has raised fears of further backsliding.
In the short term, so long as economic recovery remains sluggish and
inflation does not take off, that is unlikely. But it is vital that the
fruits of the devaluation which has occurred since Black Wednesday should
fall to profits, investment and thus job creation, and not to wage increases
for those already in jobs.
Since the pay boom of the late 1980s, led by the better paid, wage rises
have been falling. But it is difficult to identify how much of the credit
lies with ERM membership and how much with recession.
Although, crucially, the effects of ERM membership on pay bargaining were
never tested in an upturn, ERM supporters argue that, by locking in low
inflation and preventing employers being bailed out by devaluation, the
psychology of wage inflation was being broken.
But the Confederation of British Industry's excited claims over the last few
months about breaking the 'inflation-plus' mentality - in or out of the ERM
 -is premature. About three-quarters of all pay settlements in the three
months to September provided for increases above inflation - currently 3.6
per cent.
The CBI's own figures for manufacturing wage increases show a rise of 4.2
per cent for the third quarter of 1992, virtually the same as for the last
quarter of 1991. Productivity increased during that period by 2 per cent,
but this was almost entirely owing to job cuts. Moreover, the average
earnings figures for the whole economy, announced yesterday, showed a rise
of 5.5 per cent over a 12-month period in which inflation has averaged just
less than 4 per cent.
In recent years the lowest growth in real wages came in 1989 and 1990 when
inflation took off, briefly, catching many pay bargainers by surprise.
Conversely, the strongest real earnings growth came in the mid-1980s, when
inflation was relatively low. Real earnings growth in the past year was
lower than it was then, but is still nearly 50 per cent above inflation.
So, should there have been a squeeze or freeze on pay in both the public and
private sectors, as suggested by local government employers and some
speakers at this week's CBI conference?
Mr David Layton, an expert on wage bargaining and founder of Incomes Data
Services, the pay research group, suggests that, as it is easier to get
agreement on the timing of pay increases than on their size, all employers
should postpone pay increases by three months whenever they arise over the
next year. This would have the effect of implementing a pay freeze for three
months.
A government which has always set its face against repeating the incomes
policy experiments of the 1970s was unlikely to find that an attractive
option. In any case Britain no longer has the institutions to enforce such a
solution, even for the sake of investment-led growth and job creation.
Coming a week after the 20th anniversary of Sir Edward Heath's failed freeze
on pay and prices, yesterday's overt pay squeeze in the public sector is
clearly embarrassing enough for the government.
Apart from its clear need to control public sector spending, it justifies
its targeting of the public sector by arguing that job security, despite
recent shake-ups, is still far greater than in the private sector. More
important, public sector pay has recently been increasing at a much faster
rate than in the private sector.
Between April 1990 and April 1992, public sector pay rose 21 per cent, while
private sector pay rose 14 per cent and inflation rose 11 per cent.
But comparing public and private sector pay is a complex matter. As Mr Bill
Brett, general secretary of IPMS, the civil service union, says: 'Public
sector pay follows a similar cycle to that of the private sector but with a
lag. By suppressing the second part of the pay cycle where public sector
workers catch up, the government will create disparities in pay which will
require resolution at a later date.'
According to Mr Chris Trinder, of the Public Finance Foundation, pay rises
in the public and private sector have roughly matched each other over the
past 20 years. But he points out that within that span it is very easy to
'prove' that private has outstripped public, or vice-versa, by careful
selection of the year taken as the starting point.
Comparing actual pay, as opposed to pay rises, in the public and private
sectors is even more messy. According to official statistics average pay in
the public sector is again higher than that in the private sector, as it
was, surprisingly, every year from 1973 to 1986.
Pay analysts are quick to argue that adjusting for the structure of
employment - which means allowing for the fact that there are
proportionately more white-collar workers in the public sector - the private
sector does better, at least for men.
Average gross weekly pay for male manual workers in the public sector in
1991-92 was Pounds 259.70 compared with Pounds 270.50 in the private sector.
For male white-collar workers the gap is slightly greater, Pounds 388.10 in
the public sector and Pounds 405.40 in the private sector.
On the other hand women workers and the low paid generally do better in the
public sector, especially now that some of the lowest-paying jobs have been
contracted out, and particular groups like nurses have shot up the pay
league.
Whatever the overall justice of temporarily suppressing public sector pay,
the way the government proposes to do it is bound to be seen as unfair by
those in the public sector who have been doing less well. In the current
year, for example, local government manual workers received a rise of 4.1
per cent compared with 9.5 per cent for teachers.
The local government employers, worried that a two-tier public service pay
league has emerged, with their own manual workers at the bottom, will at
least be relieved that the government is excluding no special groups, like
firemen and policeman, from the squeeze.
When the squeeze begins in earnest next April, with the next public sector
pay round, local authorities are likely to follow the government's
guidelines and cut pay rises rather than services and jobs.
The greatest protests yesterday came from the de facto suspension of the pay
review bodies, especially that for the nurses, and the special pay formula
for firemen. But despite public sympathy towards nurses, it is unlikely that
the trade union movement will be able to put itself at the head of another
spasm of protest, similar to that over pit closures. As one senior union
official admitted yesterday: 'With anxiety over job security as bad as it is
I doubt we will see much protest.'
The government also emphasises with some justice, that restraint on pay
feeds directly into preserving or creating jobs, especially in local
government and the NHS. However, the IPMS argues that a shift to capital
spending, which is less labour intensive than current spending, could have a
negative effect on total employment. Assuming a saving of Pounds 1.8bn on
the public sector pay bill, it estimates that more than 200,000 jobs could
be threatened.
Pay freezes in the private sector have never covered more than about 10 per
cent of settlements but a few high-profile freezes now would certainly help
the government's cause - and they may be coming. Workers at Rover and many
GEC plants have accepted freezes with little complaint, and at Rolls-Royce
the unions agreed to extend a freeze from six to nine months in exchange for
no redundancies.
The Trades Union Congress is unlikely to make a similar offer at national
level, partly because it is formally committed to free collective bargaining
but also because it does not trust the government to deliver its side of a
bargain on jobs or helping the low paid.
Yet no formal pay squeeze has ever worked without union support, and the TUC
will certainly be doing its best to make sure that public service workers
claw back as much as they can in 1994-95. That pent-up wage pressure could
coincide with a strongly recovering economy and rising inflation to produce
a dangerous cocktail by that time.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921113

