FT921-3940

FT  12 MAR 92 / Politics holds sway over ecology at wildlife talks:
Dispassionate debate is on the endangered list at the Cites conference


   By ROBERT THOMSON


THE most photographed foreigners in Japan this week have been the Swedish
delegation to a conference on trade in endangered wildlife. Pursued by
journalists, the Swedes prompted Japanese to contemplate the demise of the
bluefin tuna, an important ingredient of their beloved sushi.
The Swedes have proposed limiting trade in bluefin tuna to the 114 member
nations of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
(Cites).
There has been no suggestion at the two-week conference, which ends
tomorrow, that western Atlantic bluefin tuna are in danger of elimination,
but the Swedes were in favour of regulating catches.
A similar argument was raised by the Netherlands over two species of
tropical timber, enraging the Malaysian government, which insisted that the
International Tropical Timber Organisation (ITTO) is the responsible
authority.
Malaysia's response also reflected the anger of developing countries at the
influence of the developed world's conservation movement, which they see as
imposing restrictions which perpetuate poverty. lt is an anger particularly
felt by former colonies, such as Malaysia and Indonesia, whose governments
argue that they have been 'exploited' in the past by foreigners and are now
under pressure to limit their own use of the same resources.
However, delegates from countries such as Sweden and the Netherlands denied
they were imposing their values on the Third World, and said they were
passing on knowledge gleaned from their own environmental mistakes. The
conservation groups in Kyoto argue that what Malaysia calls 'national
resources' are really international resources.
It was clear from the way delegates voted that political considerations
often outweighed scientific assessments of various species. For instance,
Australia, which is wary of offending Malaysia, did not publicly support the
Cites protection of tropical timber even though Canberra has serious
concerns about the rate of logging in south-east Asia.
And forthcoming elections in the US and UK encouraged their delegates to
express enthusiasm for politically-popular elephants, and in Washington's
case, to ensure that the views of trophy hunters and tuna fishermen were
well represented. The delegation from Botswana, having been heavily lobbied
over elephants, complained to the conference that 'not everyone makes points
to score points'.
Most controversy was caused by proposals to move species between Appendix 1,
which imposes a total ban on trade, and Appendix 2, requiring member
countries to issue permits and monitor trade in the species or its products.
Five southern African countries had wanted their elephants downlisted from 1
to 2, enabling them to trade in the animal's hide and meat.
Cites applies only to international trade in flora and fauna, and several
proposals rejected at the conference were designed to protect species not
traded but endangered by the destruction of natural habitat.
A separate problem was in assessing the accuracy of wildly differing
statistics presented by governments, industry groups and conservationists.
The collection of data is made more difficult in the case of
highly-publicised animals such as the elephant and rhinoceros, as their
ivory and horns are popular in Asian countries that are either not members
of Cites or have a poor record in monitoring trade in wildlife.
Of the two so-called 'charismatic megafauna', the elephant attracted far
more attention than the rhino. But Dr Simon Lyster, international treaties
officer for the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) said the latter was in more
immediate danger and that pressure should be put on Taiwan, which is not a
Cites member but is thought to be the world's largest consumer of rhino
horn.
Japan, as host nation, has survived the conference without having its
international reputation tarnished, partly because the government was not
forced to vote on the tropical timber issue and had the US, Canada and
Morocco offering support on tuna. But the ambiguity of Japan's policies
suggest that work needs to be done before the government can take the high
moral ground on environmental issues.
A ministry of international trade and industry (Miti) official explained
that Japan would support the protection of tropical timbers if their
depletion could be 'scientifically verified' and, adding a political
qualification, if Malaysia agreed. Obviously that exporting nation did not
agree.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920312

