FT921-3841

FT  12 MAR 92 / World Stock Markets: Roadshow for equities in Cyprus -
Stockbrokers have been touring the countryside


   By KERIN HOPE


Cypriot stockbrokers, together with chamber of commerce officials who
supervise the island's small over-the-counter market, have been touring the
countryside with what they call 'an educational roadshow', ahead of the
launch of an official trading floor in Nicosia.
These experimental trading sessions, interspersed with questions and
answers, 'generated a lot of public interest and a high volume of actual
trading', says Mr Nontas Metaxas, the chamber's co-ordinator of activity on
the bourse.
The chamber's ground floor offices are being converted into a trading floor
due to open next month. About 40 issues will be traded by open outcry for
the foreseeable future; plans for electronic trading are still at the
discussion stage.
The 18 Cypriot brokers currently hold brief public trading sessions in the
chamber's conference room three times a week, trading by telephone the rest
of the time. Volume has steadily increased at the public meetings, averaging
around CPounds 100,000 (Dollars 217,000) at each session this year. Last
year, share volume recorded at public meetings reached CPounds 7m out of
total trading estimated at around CPounds 30m. This compares favourably with
a total of about CPounds 25m in 1990, of which only CPounds 2m came from
chamber sessions.
In spite of an encouraging economic climate, the Cisco all-share index,
issued weekly, has climbed by only 1.6 per cent this year. After starting
the year at 278.7, it closed at 283.6 last Friday, March 6, by which time
the European index in FT-Actuaries World Index series was showing a 6.75 per
cent gain.
The island's political problem - the 17 years of de facto partition into
separate Greek and Turkish Cypriot sectors - does not often affect the
bourse. But the collapse earlier this month of a US-backed initiative to
reunite the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities is being blamed for the
market's hesitant mood.
Economic growth this year is forecast at 7 per cent, led by an unprecedented
rise in tourist bookings which should guarantee full occupancy this summer
for almost all hotels. Mr Theodore Charalambides of Popular Investment, the
investment affiliate of Popular Bank, says: 'It is going to be a record year
for tourism. This should be reflected fairly quickly in prices of hotel and
tourism investment shares.' This sector accounts for some 17 per cent of
market capitalisation.
The Cyprus market had a mixed year in 1991, with dips caused first by the
Gulf war's effects on the tourist industry, then by profit-taking after a
short post-war rally. Most available liquidity was soaked up over the summer
by several flotations in quick succession, along with a CPounds 16m
debenture issue from the Bank of Cyprus at 8 per cent, convertible into
shares after six years. However, after a late autumn recovery, the index
marked an 11 per cent overall increase for 1991, just short of the European
gain of 12.54 per cent.
Market capitalisation expanded from CPounds 472.9m in 1990 to CPounds
566.3m, with bank, insurance and investment companies accounting for 57 per
cent of the total. Bank of Cyprus and Popular Bank, the island's two largest
commercial banks, account for 47 per cent of capitalisation between them.
Each now has more than 10m warrants in the market, exercisable until
November 1993, which are traded enthusiastically by small investors hoping
for high returns.
Although foreign interest is still very limited, there are signs that it may
increase, now that the central bank is proving more willing to lift the
strict exchange control regulations on a case-by-case basis in response to
applications from investors abroad. Such decisions may now be issued within
24 hours, making the bourse more accessible to managers of emerging market
funds.
Last year, foreign institutional investors acquired a 20 per cent stake in a
CPounds 4m closed-end mutual fund launched by the Cyprus Investment and
Securities Corporation (Cisco), the investment banking arm of Bank of
Cyprus.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

920312

