FT921-1298

FT  25 MAR 92 / Letter: Aid needs a new deal, not either/or approach


   From Mr DAVID JONES


Sir, Edward Mortimer's interesting article, 'Refugees and wasted revenues'
(March 11), airs the view that refugees need more 'development' rather than
'relief' aid from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the
non-governmental organisations (NGOs). I would like to take issue with this
either/or approach.
Oxfam believes that refugees and displaced people need a new deal
altogether. Not only should more and better aid be available for both
development and relief needs, but also greater political priority and more
resources should be devoted to finding the durable political solutions
necessary to tackle conflict, repression, hunger, and economic collapse -
the main causes of mass human displacement.
When enlightened self-help development programmes for uprooted people are
possible, they are clearly of great value, as Oxfam has learned from the
wide variety of initiatives it has supported. Certainly, governments should
be encouraged and helped to provide such opportunities.
The reality, however, is that very few governments are prepared to allow
large numbers of refugees to compete with the local labour force, to take
over land, or to have unrestricted movement. Agencies like Oxfam, which are
mandated to respond to acute human need, are often faced with little option
but to help provide basic needs while a durable political solution to the
cause of displacement is sought.
Surely, informed debate should also focus on the need for all concerned  -
NGOs, UN agencies, academics, and governments - to press for improved
conflict mediation and resolution, for real resources and clout to back the
new UN Humanitarian Co-ordinator, for systems of government which are able
to resolve societal conflict peacefully, and for effective food security
strategies. We agree that a civilised international attitude towards
refugees would be an excellent starting point.
David Jones,
associate director,
Oxfam,
274 Banbury Road,
Oxford OX2 7DZ

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920325

