FT921-14114

FT  17 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Aluminium leads advance in base
metals markets


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


THE PRICE of aluminium, which usually leads metals in and out of recessions
because it is used in such a wide variety of products, rose steeply again
yesterday, recording an advance of 8 per cent in two days.
This triggered rises in other base metals prices on the London Metal
Exchange but most analysts suggested the movement was based on technical
factors and not by fundamental changes in outlook, which was still grim.
The nickel market did have some news to chew over, however, because a local
newspaper in the town of Nikel on the Kola peninsula quoted Mr Boris
Yeltsin, the Russian President, as saying the huge nickel complex in the
area should be closed because it was uneconomic.
Analysts pointed out that Mr Yeltsin said this should happen after Russia
switches to a free market economy and that that could take a very long time.
They also doubted whether Russia would easily give up such a large foreign
currency earner.
Nickel's three-month price on the LME last night closed Dollars 195 a tonne
up at Dollars 7,597.50.
Aluminium's price moved up from Dollars 1,140 a tonne early on Wednesday to
a peak of Dollars 1,230 yesterday before easing back to close at Dollars
1,211.50, up Dollars 23. Analysts suggested that commodity investment funds
were active in the aluminium market this week and this attracted some
speculators.
There was also some selling by producers. Mr Robin Bhar, analyst at Carr
Kitcat & Aitken, part of the Banque Indosuez Group, said this indicated that
'aluminium producers feel that the market will get worse before it gets
better.'
However, Mr Nick Moore, analyst at Ord Minnett, a Westpac banking group
subsidiary, said there were good reasons to believe that, for aluminium,
'from here on things don't get worse, they get better.' It was typical of
aluminium 'to recover early and powerfully' from recession.
The LME said again yesterday it would continue to monitor the zinc market
closely because of the technical tightness for metal for delivery in
February. But it lifted the Pounds 25 a tonne daily limit on the copper
backwardation imposed on December 3.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920117

