FT921-13990

FT  18 JAN 92 / Pace of global warming may be less than thought


   By JOHN HUNT, Environment Correspondent


   THE PACE of global warming


the greenhouse effect - could be 20 per cent slower than originally
estimated, according to a report agreed by an international panel of
scientists this week.
The revised figures have come from the scientific working party of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The panel was set up by
the UN to draw up climate change figures for next June's Earth Summit on
environment and development in Rio de Janeiro.
The new assessment means that the IPCC's original prediction of a 1 degree
Celsius increase in global mean temperature by the year 2025 could be
delayed until the year 2030.
The revision has largely been made in the light of new studies of the amount
of sulphur in the atmosphere which cools the Earth's surface and offsets the
greenhouse effect.
But the working party emphasises that there is still great uncertainty on
the subject and sulphur may have only a transient effect.
If the amount of sulphur in the atmosphere is reduced by cleaner industrial
methods, the pace of warming could speed up. In that event a 1 degree rise
could still take place by 2025.
The depletion of ozone in the stratosphere has also offset global warming.
Concentrations of other greenhouse gases such as methane from rice paddies
and halogens used in fire extinguishers have slowed down.
However the concentrations of other greenhouse gases have continued to grow
or remain steady. 'The anomalously high global mean temperatures of the late
1980s have continued into 1990 and 1991, which are the warmest years on
record,' the report warns.
The results do not change the main thrust of the original IPCC 1990 science
report, which was described by Mrs Thatcher as 'an authoritative early
warning which we ignore at our peril'.
Global warming, largely as a result of carbon dioxide from fossil fuels  -
including coal - is still taking place at a rate which threatens the planet
with rising sea levels and drastic changes in the weather pattern.
Over 300 scientists world-wide contributed to the latest study, which was
completed at a meeting at Guangzhou, China, this week.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920118

