FT922-7439

FT  19 MAY 92 / Opposition leader wins hearts of Bangkok people


   By VICTOR MALLET


   BANGKOK


THERE WAS no doubt yesterday that Mr Chamlong Srimuang, the devout Buddhist
opposition leader arrested by soldiers in central Bangkok, was the hero of
the day for tens of thousands of anti-government demonstrators and for an
equal number of bystanders.
Mr Chamlong has won the hearts of Bangkok residents from civil servants and
secretaries to engineers and students, first by standing aloof from the
corruption of other politicians as the city's clean-living, ascetic mayor
and now by leading the most vigorous protest against military involvement in
government since the 1970s.
'I don't know him personally, but I have followed what he's been doing for
society for a long time,' said one machinery shop owner at a Buddhist temple
overlooking yesterday's continuing skirmishes between troops and rioters.
'He's not a guy to be taken lightly. When something's wrong, nobody wants to
protest, but he speaks up.'
Bangkok's relatively wealthy voters expressed their support for their former
mayor in the general election in March, giving his Palang Dharma (Moral
Force) party 32 of the 35 parliamentary seats from the capital, but
pro-military parties bought sufficient votes in the countryside to form the
present shaky coalition government.
Mr Chamlong subsequently resigned as leader of Palang Dharma in order to
head a broad group of liberal politicians, academics and students seeking to
give civilians more weight in the constitution and oust Gen Suchinda
Kraprayoon, the prime minister, because he is not an elected member of
parliament.
Shopkeepers peered nervously from behind shutters yesterday as youths burnt
police cars and fire engines and yelled defiance at the soldiers, but it was
difficult to find anyone prepared to criticise Mr Chamlong.
Even those residents suspicious of Mr Chamlong seem prepared to drop their
objections to pursue what they see as the more important task of defeating
the military.
Youths who disobeyed Mr Chamlong's orders and started hurling missiles at
the police on Sunday night before rampaging through the streets smashing and
burning vehicles are widely dismissed as government 'agents provocateurs',
although there is no evidence to support this.
Mr Chamlong, however, does not altogether escape criticism. Some older Thais
are inclined to believe the official line that he is a troublemaker and a
Buddhist heretic. Others think he lost credibility by starting a hunger
strike to the death and then suddenly calling it off after less than a week,
while Mr Chalad Vorachad, a former MP from the Democrat Party, is still
fasting over a month later.
Among the most doubtful about Mr Chamlong are members of the educated elite
in their 30s who believe he took part in the right-wing suppression of
student demonstrations in 1976 when he was an army officer.
His decision to condone and lead Sunday's anti-government march has also
been criticised as a tactical error which allowed Gen Suchinda to declare a
state of emergency and crack down on the protestors.
But overall, Mr Chamlong's firm stand against his former army colleague Gen
Suchinda has made him the focus of the anti-government uprising. The places
where he has spoken and joined his fellow demonstrators - Democracy
Monument, the Sanam Luang park and the Phan Fa bridge - have intense
historical and emotional undertones for those who remember the successful
pro-democracy student protests of 1973.
'We just want the prime minister to resign,' said a 35-year-old engineer
trying to cross a barricade and join the demonstrators yesterday with his
wife and his mobile phone. 'If we win this time, I don't think the army will
have power again.'
See Editorial Comment

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920519

