FT921-14030

FT  17 JAN 92 / Gamsakhurdia calls for civil war: Ousted Georgian president
rallies supporters and urges march on capital


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


   MOSCOW


GEORGIA'S ousted president, Mr Zviad Gamsakhurdia, yesterday returned from
exile to the west of the republic and called on his supporters to arm
themselves and march on the capital Tbilisi.
The return of Mr Gamsakhurdia, who fled on January 6 after a bloody two-week
siege of parliament by opposition forces, poses a serious threat to the
fragile stability achieved and revives the spectre of civil war in the
republic.
Reports said the president had addressed a rally in the western city of
Zugdidi, and announced the beginning of a civil war against the military
council which seized control of the republic after his escape.
The council responded with a television appeal for a counter-demonstration
in Tbilisi. Mr Jaba Ioseliani, one of the two council leaders, dismissed the
threat to the new government and said troops had already been sent to block
any march by Gamsakhurdia supporters.
Mr Gamsakhurdia had been sheltering in Armenia, which had offered him
temporary asylum, and where he repeatedly declared he was still president of
Georgia.
He arrived in Sukhumi, on the Georgian Black Sea coast, in the early hours.
Some reports suggest he flew via Grozny, capital of the Chechen-Ingush
autonomous republic north of Georgia, which has expressed support for Mr
Gamsakhurdia and called his removal illegal.
The extent of any fresh conflict depends on how much popular support remains
for the president and on the effect of the anti-Gamsakhurdia propaganda
campaign waged by the new government. Since gaining control of republican
television, the opposition has made repeated broadcasts denouncing the
president and documenting his alleged abuses of human rights.
Mr Tengiz Sigua, acting prime minister, has accused Mr Gamsakhurdia of a
variety of excesses. The accusations range from stealing Rbs200m from state
funds before he fled the republic and embezzling more than Rbs1bn during his
presidency, to having set up a 'private zoo' for his family.
He has also claimed that documents exist showing that Mr Gamsakhurdia was
three times diagnosed mentally ill.
Such denunciations seem to have made little impression on the 1,000 or so
supporters of the president who have been demonstrating regularly in
Tbilisi. He also has a core of support in western Georgia, particularly
among his own ethnic group, the Mingrel people.
The fact that Mr Gamsakhurdia's support is concentrated in Mingrelia and
Abkhazia in western Georgia also raises the possibility of a regional/ethnic
dimension being added to the conflict. Tass reported yesterday that
Gamsakhurdia representatives were discussing the idea of uniting the two
regions into an independent Mingrel-Abkhazian republic.
But Mr Vladislav Ardzinba, chairman of Abkhazia's parliament, said he was
unaware of any such discussions.
Yeltsin vows to speed up reforms Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920117

