FT923-15378

FT  02 JUL 92 / Coopers pair get private hearing


   By ANDREW JACK


THE DISCIPLINARY hearing of two accountants accused of a conflict of
interest over their role in the administration of Polly Peck International
is to be held in private in spite of pressure to admit an observer, it
emerged yesterday.
The action raises questions about the ability of the Institute of Chartered
Accountants in England and Wales to be seen to be acting fairly in one of
the most important and prominent disciplinary hearings to be held in recent
years.
Mr Richard Stone, head of corporate finance at Coopers & Lybrand, the
accountancy firm, and Mr Michael Jordan, head of the firm's insolvency arm,
are due to defend charges on July 27 in front of a hearing of the
professional-conduct panel of the institute.
They face accusations that they breached the institute's ethical guidelines
in accepting the appointment in October 1990 when during the previous three
years there had been 'a continuing professional relationship' between
Coopers; Polly Peck, the fruit-to-electronics group; and Mr Asil Nadir, its
chairman.
Mr Douglas Llambias, a member of the Institute Council and of its
disciplinary committee, called in May for disciplinary hearings on matters
of public interest to be conducted with greater openness.
But his request to attend the Polly Peck hearing as an observer has been
turned down by the disciplinary committee, which says its bye-laws prohibit
outsiders from watching proceedings.
Mr Ian Plaistowe, president of the institute, said yesterday that he was
concerned that natural justice should be done, and that individuals should
feel free to speak out at hearings without their views being reported
out-side.
He said allowing public access to hearings might jeopardise proceedings.
However, he said the institute was now considering opening its disciplinary
procedures to public scrutiny so far as their fairness was not called into
question, and it would debate the issue at its council meeting in August.
'If we are to maintain public confidence in the effective-ness and fairness
of our disciplinary systems, then they must be made open to the public,' Mr
Llambias said yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920702

