FT921-14256

FT  16 JAN 92 / Turkey struggles to control Kurdish genie: New premier
Suleyman Demirel will need steady nerves in dealing with Ankara's rebellious
minority


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


'WHO are these Kurds? Why are they rebellious? What do they want?' These
were the questions asked by US historian William Westermann, in the
periodical Foreign Affairs, in July 1946. In today's Turkey the debate has
moved on, but Mr Suleyman Demirel, now in his seventh spell as prime
minister, still must seek a solution to bring peace to the country's Kurdish
region.
It will require a steady nerve to keep Kurdish reform at the centre of his
political programme. It will be particularly difficult to convince some
hard-line colleagues in Ankara of the need for magnanimity. But no one
doubts the urgency of the situation.
The habits of violence are deeply rooted in Turkey's impoverished south-east
provinces. More than 3,000 people have died in the seven-year conflict
between the security forces and the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), which is
fighting for a separate state. The military is conducting air and ground
operations against rebel positions in the Cudi mountains near the Iraq
border. No casualties have been given.
In separate clashes yesterday eight people died - six of them guerrillas,
the others a policeman and a soldier.
Turkey is committed, at least legally, to some form of democratic reform as
a signatory to the 1990 Paris Charter, which emerged from follow-up talks
within the context of the Helsinki accord on human rights. A key part of the
charter relates to the treatment of national minorities.
The problem has also acquired an added international dimension following the
Gulf war and the allied relief effort to help the Iraqi Kurds. Attention has
inevitably focused on the shortcomings of Turkey's treatment of its own 10m
Kurds. As one Turkish official put it at the time: 'The Kurdish genie is out
of the bottle.'
Mr Demirel is a stubborn politician and his path, will be strewn with
hazards. But he may have a personal motive to push for reform; certainly
there is little domestic electoral mileage in the issue. Having been twice
ousted by the military, he may feel he has something to prove to secure his
place in history. At 68, he will probably never get another chance.
His foreign minister, Mr Hikmet Cetin, is of Kurdish origin. So is Mr Mehmet
Kahraman, who heads the newly established Ministry for Human Rights.
Indeed, the government - a coalition between Mr Demirel's True Path Party
and the Social Democrats (SHP) - may come to find human-rights reform the
easiest policy to implement, given mounting difficulties with the economy.
Perhaps more significant, for the first time, the Turkish parliament can
provide a forum for extreme Kurdish opinion, after the election of 22
radical deputies on the SHP ticket.
Mr Demirel is aware of the danger of pressing ahead without broad party
support: his argument is that it is in the interests of all Turks to support
civil reforms, rolling back the authoritarian constitution inherited
following the military coup of 1980. He says that Kurdish reform is
inseparable from broad democratic reform.
Nevertheless, there will be fireworks in parliament. An unholy alliance
opposed to reform has already emerged between conservative and left-wing
nationalists.
On the other hand, Mr Demirel's programme will almost certainly fall short
of the demands of Kurdish intellectuals. Even official support for the study
of the language - one of the proposals of the Paris accords - remains
controversial. As for devolving administrative powers to the Kurds, which
some diplomats now believe is the only way to save the situation, this is
not even being discussed.
What Mr Demirel does offer is legal and institutional change, to stamp out
torture, cut detention periods where most police abuse occurs, and
discipline the security forces, particularly the hated special forces whose
job it is to take the fight to the PKK, but who have too often used this
mandate to terrorise local people.
The prime minister must have been greatly heartened at the warm reception
when he visited the provincial capital Diyarbakir last month, where he
publicly acknowledged what he called the 'Kurdish reality.'
His immediate task is to keep the coalition together. His SHP partner
already faces an awkward party congress this month, and the party's leader,
Mr Erdal Inonu, will have to contend with outright rebellion from radical
Kurdish deputies.
Short-term, the crisis can only deepen if the security situation
deteriorates when guerrillas, as is probable, greet any reforms with further
violence in a bid to provoke reprisals. But one thing is certain. The longer
Mr Demirel waits to implement real change, the more intractable Turkey's
Kurdish problem will become.

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Photograph Suleyman Demirel, Path strewn with hazards
(Omitted).

920116

