FT924-12181

FT  22 OCT 92 / Retail sales edge up but business stays muted


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


RETAIL SALES were slightly higher last month but business on Britain's high
streets remains restrained, official figures indicated yesterday.
A 0.2 per cent rise in sales last month compared with August took the volume
of retail sales to their highest level since March last year, when spending
jumped ahead of the rise in value added tax. Compared with a year ago, sales
were 1.5 per cent higher.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, said retail sales were now on a 'clear
upward trend', but analysts warned that it was too early to talk about a
sustained recovery on the high streets.
Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist at Salomon Brothers, said: 'The rise in
sales does not change the broad picture of a weak economy with strong
disinflationary pressures.'
Central Statistical Office figures show sales in most sectors were either
flat or marginally higher last month, compared with August.
Household goods sales fell by 1 per cent, reflecting the particularly weak
nature of the housing market in September. Sales by department stores rose a
sharp 1.3 per cent compared with August.
Over the three months to the end of September, retail sales rose by 0.6 per
cent compared with the previous quarter and were 0.8 per cent higher
compared with the same three months a year ago.
Mr Lamont said the figures confirmed the message of a recent survey by the
Confederation of British Industry that 'talk of doom and gloom in the high
streets is much overstated'.
The same CBI survey, however, pointed out that retailers fear a reversal of
September's gains this month.
Although household goods sales fell month-on-month, they rose by 3 per cent
in the three months to September compared with the previous three months,
reflecting a slight strengthening of the housing market before stamp duty
was reintroduced on August 20. Compared with the same three months a year
ago, sales of household goods rose by 5 per cent.
Clothing and footwear sales rose by 2 per cent in the three months to
September compared with the previous three months. Food sales fell by 0.5
per cent over the three months to September but were 0.2 per cent higher
than a year ago.
Economists do not expect sales to recover before the end of year because of
the damage done to confidence by 'Black Wednesday' and the ensuing
government turmoil.
In the longer run, however, the recent cut in base rates to 8 per cent
should boost consumer spending.
Mr James Barty, UK economist at Morgan Grenfell, said: 'Consumer confidence
collapsed towards the end of September, which won't act as much
encouragement to retail sales.'
He continued: 'The overall trend for consumer spending remains really quite
flat.'
Business confidence in Northern Ireland has declined dramatically, results
of a survey by the province's Chamber of Commerce and Industry indicated
yesterday.
Most of the 250 firms questioned in September before the currency crisis
believed the economic climate would remain bleak for the next 12 months.
Managers of companies employing 65,000 workers saw little chance of profits
improving and expected growth to tail off in the next year.
Confidence among manufacturing companies nose-dived to minus 4 per cent in
the third quarter from plus 54 per cent in the spring.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921022

