FT923-15489

FT  02 JUL 92 / The Future of the European Fighter: Germany will continue
development spending on EFA


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


DEVELOPMENT spending on the European fighter aircraft (EFA) in Germany will
continue regardless of the decision not to go ahead with production
preparations next year, Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, has confirmed.
He presented a draft budget for 1993 yesterday which contains DM830m (Pounds
284m) for further development of the aircraft, although it specifically
excludes DM110m (Pounds 38m) supposed to be set aside for tooling up for
production.
The apparent financial contradiction underlines the real difficulty for
Germany if it is to pull out of the production programme but maintain its
commitment to six more years of development spending.
The government is contractually committed in the EFA development programme
with Britain, Italy and Spain to spend up to DM3bn further until 1999, of
which the DM830m is the next tranche. Any decision to quit that programme
would almost certainly invite compensation claims from the partner
countries, and from Deutsche Aerospace, the principal German contractor.
On the other hand, calling a halt to the production programme will only save
far smaller amounts of money in the near future, with the heavy spending
required to take delivery of completed aircraft concentrated at the end of
the decade and after the year 2000. Germany was planning to take delivery of
only 14 fighters before 2000, out of a probable reduced total of 140.
The question now is whether Mr Volker Ruhe, the defence minister, can
persuade his British, Italian and Spanish counterparts to go along with the
idea of a cheaper, lighter aircraft, and thus use the future development
cash for that purpose; or whether he will seek to pull out of the
development programme as well, in spite of the risk of having to make
substantial compensation payments, in order to make more significant savings
in the near future.
Officials pointed out yesterday that in the current period of acute budget
stringency in Germany, pulling out of the development programme would show
immediate savings, whereas compensation payments would probably be made only
after lengthy negotiations.
After the decision of the parliamentary parties on Tuesday not to start the
EFA production programme, Mr Ruhe said he would seek to reallocate
'uncommitted development funds' to the effort to design a new slim-line
aircraft. His ministry was unable to explain yesterday what he meant by
'uncommitted funds'.
The political compromise reached by the joint parliamentary group of the
Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and Christian Social Union (CSU) was
criticised yesterday by the Free Democrat Party (FDP), third partner in the
coalition, for being deliberately unclear. In particular, it failed to
include any specific statement that the Jager-90, as the EFA is known in
Germany, will not be built.
Indeed, the CDU/CSU statement says at one point that the price of the
existing aircraft 'must be reduced', and at another that a new aircraft must
be designed. The vagueness was a deliberate effort to reconcile the opposing
viewpoints in the group. It remains in the essential decision not to go
ahead with the production of the aircraft as currently designed, but to try
to design a cheaper aircraft on the same development basis.
In spite of the compromise, the decision was interpreted almost unanimously
by the German media as the death of the Jager-90. It was also widely
interpreted as a triumph for Mr Ruhe.
'The Jager-90 is dead. . . . Ruhe's policy is not only popular, but also
quite correct,' said Bild Zeitung, the mass circulation daily newspaper. The
concept of the aircraft dated back to 1972, and 'since then much has
changed', it said. 'Young Ruhe is looking to the future, and has proved his
determination. Cheers]'
Only in Munich, headquarters of the German defence and aerospace industry,
was the opposite view apparent. 'The coalition thinks it has found the magic
solution, the 'Euro-fighter-2000', a sort of cheap version bashed together
from the parts of the Jager-90,' the Munich Merkur declared. 'It sounds
impressive. If the development partners are prepared to play, it will save
European co-operation, it will mean that countless hours of development work
will not be for the birds, and tens of thousands of jobs will be saved.' In
reality, the newspaper said, it must be doubted that any alternative
solution would be any cheaper, and the only thing Mr Ruhe would have won
would be a little more time.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920702

