FT923-10829

FT  28 JUL 92 / More building jobs under threat: Share prices fall again as
concern mounts over depth of recession


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, IVO DAWNAY and TERRY BYLAND


THE GOVERNMENT'S handling of the economy was severely criticised yesterday
as leaders of Britain's hard-hit building industry warned that a further
40,000 jobs could be lost by Christmas.
Share prices on the London stock exchange fell again as concern continued to
mount about the effect of the recession on a large number of industrial and
commercial companies.
The FT-SE 100 index of leading shares dropped 29.2 to 2,348.0. Since April
8, the day before the election, the index has fallen by 45.2. Since peaking
on May 11, it has fallen by 389.8 or 14.2 per cent. On the foreign exchanges
in London yesterday, the pound closed at DM2.8430, more than half a pfennig
below the previous close but above last week's lows. In late New York
trading it was quoted at DM2.8422.
A survey of 600 construction companies by the Building Employers
Confederation, the industry's biggest trade association, revealed that
almost a fifth of those questioned were working at less than half capacity.
Two thirds of companies expected workloads to shrink in the next 12 months.
Almost half expected to shed jobs in the next three months.
Sir Brian Hill, the federation president, said the building industry had
already lost 260,000 jobs since the middle of 1989. He added: 'We are in
favour of strong medicine to beat inflation, but it is no use if the patient
dies in the process.' He warned that recovery in the construction industry
would not occur until late next year, and probably not until 1994.
More gloomy economic news is expected today when the Confederation of
British Industry publishes its industrial trends survey. The government is
also likely to face further criticism when the Council of Mortgage Lenders
is expected to announce tomorrow that more than 30,000 homes were
repossessed during the first six months of this year.
Mr Gordon Brown, the new shadow chancellor, yesterday accused the government
of 'a fundamental neglect of duty' in failing to take steps to end the
recession.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the leader of the Liberal Democrats, reminded the prime
minister in an open letter that he had claimed in January that home
repossessions had ceased.
Downing Street brushed aside the attacks, pointing out that two large
building societies were reported to be planning mortgage rescue schemes.
Meanwhile, Mr David Kern, the chief economist at the National Westminster
Bank, forecast that unemployment in south-east England would rise by 18 per
cent to almost 1m by next June.
Markets, Page 34

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920728

