FT924-11284

FT  27 OCT 92 / Blue Jays distract Canadian voters


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


THE streets of Toronto were clear evidence yesterday that Canadians savour a
victory over their US neighbours far more than they fear the threat of their
own country falling apart.
At a polling booth on Queen's Quay, near the shores of Lake Ontario, a
steady trickle of voters arrived to cast their ballots in a landmark
referendum on a new constitution. The final result of the vote was to be
announced early this morning, but the six-week referendum campaign has been
marked by anger against politicians and a desire to move beyond the dreary
business of constitution-making.
The queue was much, much longer and the mood far more exuberant just a few
hundred yards to the north at the entrance to the SkyDome, Toronto's sports
stadium.
Braving near-zero temperatures, baseball fans began lining up before dawn
yesterday to ensure a seat for the lunchtime celebration in honour of their
beloved Blue Jays, which became the first team outside the US to win the
World Series baseball championship.
In reality, the Toronto Blue Jays are about as Canadian a team as the World
Series is an international competition. All their players are either
Americans or from the Caribbean, and few of them even live in the frozen
north.
But the Blue Jays' victory does have some tangible benefits for Canada. The
team is owned by two pillars of Canadian business; John Labatt, the brewing
group, has a 90 per cent stake and the remaining 10 per cent is held by
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce.
The Blue Jays' success on the field is a commercial bonanza for its owners -
not to mention Toronto's recession-hit T-shirt and souvenir industry. The
SkyDome has pulled in more than 4m fans in each of the past two baseball
seasons, more than any other North American ballpark.
But the team has needed every penny from the tickets they have sold. They
spent more than CDollars 46m (Pounds 23m) on salaries for players and
coaches last season, leading cynics to suggest that any team could win the
World Series if it threw enough money around.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921027

