FT924-11934

FT  23 OCT 92 / Bush urges Americans to shun Perot


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday urged Americans not to 'waste' their votes
by supporting Mr Ross Perot, the independent candidate, in the presidential
election. 'I don't think he can possibly win,' he declared, 'and I think he
knows that.'
Mr Perot promptly countered with an advanced screening of his latest
television commercial, in which he says: 'You are throwing your vote away
unless you vote your conscience' and 'don't waste your vote on traditional
politicians.'
Campaigning in the west, Mr Bill Clinton, the Democratic candidate, said he
thought a resurgent Perot could draw more votes from him than from Mr Bush,
but he declined to criticise Mr Perot directly.
Turning his fire on his fellow Texan at last, Mr Bush told a TV interviewer
that Mr Perot 'has some nutty ideas and makes some crazy statements about me
giving Saddam Hussein permission to take the northern part of Kuwait.' The
world, he said, was a bit more complicated than Mr Perot's simplistic
approach implied.
The president, who has been hammering Governor Bill Clinton with joyous
abandon all week, predicted he would win on November 3.
The latest poll evidence is mixed. Some report a contraction in Mr Clinton's
lead; others do not. All detect an increase in support for Mr Perot, but by
varying amounts.
A new NBC poll released last night gave Mr Clinton 47 per cent, Mr Bush 28
per cent and Mr Perot 19 per cent - three times as much as he was getting
two weeks ago. This was similar to an ABC poll of registered voters who
watched the trio's TV debate on Monday night, where the split was 48:29:19,
compared with 52:29:11 before the debate.
Three other 'tracking' polls, which measure sentiment daily, give Mr Clinton
a smaller lead and Mr Perot a smaller surge. The USA Today/CNN split was
45:32:15, a separate ABC survey had 44:32:16 and Battleground 46:32:17.
Mr Bush's attrack on Mr Perot yesterday not only returns the latter's TV
assault on him on Monday, but also follows the assertion by aides to the
independent candidate that Mr Bush himself is 'no longer a factor' in the
election.
'We think Bush is down so far he can never recover,' Mr Clay Mulford said.
'If you take 30 per cent of Clinton's vote and put it with ours we can win,'
he went on to claim.
Mr Orson Swindle, the campaign director reprimanded by Mr Perot for his
criticisms of Mr Clinton, repeated them and said only Mr Perot represented a
vote for change. This is being pressed in the massive new television
advertising blitz which is due to start tonight.
The Clinton campaign's concern is that the anti-Bush vote might be split too
much for comfort, particularly in the mountain states where Mr Perot has
long been popular but where the Democrats hold real hopes of breaking the
Republican monopoly.
Feature, page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921023

