FT923-9717

FT  04 AUG 92 / World Trade News: South America may go back to its trade
roots - John Barham on plans for a five-nation water corridor on the
continent's second largest river system


   By JOHN BARHAM


CONQUISTADORES, explorers and traders once used the rivers of South America
to penetrate, subdue and settle the continent's heartland. But today the
rivers which form some of the world's greatest navigable waterways are
underused and vast regions of the interior isolated and impoverished.
But there are signs that the Parana-Paraguay rivers, which together form
South America's largest river system after the Amazon, could become an
important trade corridor linking the distant, landlocked interior with
seaports at the River Plate estuary.
Developing the rivers' transport potential should be easy because there are
few physical or natural obstacles to traffic. But petty national jealousies
and suspicions have held up progress for years.
The five countries through which the rivers flow - Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay - agreed in June to sweep away bureaucratic
restrictions that blocked trade and navigation.
Next, they plan to hire consultants to study how the 3,442km waterway, known
as the Hidrovia (Waterway), can be made into a low-cost artery navigable day
and night all year round. This first stage of engineering and environmental
consulting work will be financed by the United Nations, the European
Community and the Inter-American Development Bank.
Officials say an initial studies show that a few relatively cheap and simple
engineering projects estimated at Dollars 240m (Pounds 125.6m) would ensure
the Hidrovia's navigability. These costs would be borne by governments.
A further series of investments of about Dollars 740m needed to upgrade
ports and buy barges would be made by the private sector. Officials say it
would take about 10 years to make the Hidrovia fully operational and put the
total bill at Dollars 1.5bn-Dollars 2bn.
Mr Edmundo Soria, Argentina's transport secretary, said: 'We don't want
grand Pharaonic projects. We will be very careful with the projects we carry
out and restrict the state's financing to the minimum possible.'
The Hidrovia project is part of a wider trend towards greater political
co-operation, economic integration and free markets that is sweeping Latin
America. Other privately-financed infrastructure projects being studied
include a 45km bridge across the River Plate, a motorway linking Montevideo
and Porto Alegre in southern Brazil and a Dollars 200m gas pipeline
connecting gas fields in Patagonia with Chile.
At the moment, the rivers are only partly navigable. Still, Argentina uses
river ports on the Parana to ship a quarter of its exports and Paraguay
imports most of its fuel along the Paraguay river. But the Paraguay is only
navigable on average for about six months of the year above the capital
Asuncion.
Mr Jesus Gonzalez, Argentina's director of port construction and waterways,
says the potential economic benefits are clear: 'In Brazil's centre-west
there are 6m hectares of land ready for cultivation. But to take one tonne
of soyabeans to port costs Dollars 56 now. With the Hidrovia, transport
costs would fall to about Dollars 18 a tonne.' Also, Bolivia's
under-developed eastern regions have potentially rich agricultural land and
contain promising mineral deposits that would only become economically
viable with a cheap and efficient transport system.
A preliminary feasibility study found that while 4.3m tonnes were shipped
along the river in 1987, cargoes could reach 21m tonnes a year by the turn
of the century. It estimates an internal rate of return of between 16 per
cent and 23 per cent for the Hidrovia investments.
Although the impact of the Hidrovia would be felt mainly in the heart of the
continent, ports on the River Plate estuary would also benefit. Nueva
Palmira in Uruguay is expected to become the main transhipment centre. It is
expected to handle 7m-9m tonnes of cargo a year by 2000.
Planning is the easy part. But the hard decisions on who is to pay for the
project and how the money is to be raised have yet to be taken. The
Argentines are insisting that the private sector pay for most of the work in
exchange for the right to charge tolls or build private ports.
The Brazilians, who must carry out the costliest projects, say the state
will probably have to play a leading role. For their part, the smaller,
poorer countries balk at the sums involved.
Then there is the problem of the environment. That means more than just
curbing water pollution by barges or preventing damage of riverbanks by the
vessels' wakes. Brazil's Pantanal marshes, the world's largest wetlands
which lie along the Paraguay, must also be protected.
There is also a risk that the Hidrovia would attract large populations to
barren regions and that intensive farming and mining damage ecosystems.
There is also a danger that the Hidrovia could become a smuggling corridor
for Bolivia's cocaine cartels.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920804

