FT924-6450

FT  21 NOV 92 / MMC takes a sniff at perfume prices: An investigation into
an industry that thrives on its image


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


THE OFFICE of Fair Trading this week handed perfume manufacturers an early
Christmas present of the sort every industry dreads: a searching
investigation of its affairs by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
The MMC has the task of deciding whether the retail distribution practices
of leading perfume houses are genuinely being used to enhance the image of
their brands - or whether they are used to rig the market and keep prices
high.
The investigation is likely to determine whether the recent trickle of
perfume price-cutting by high street retailers turns into a flood. It might
also have important longer-term consequences for multinational companies
such as the Anglo-Dutch Unilever group, L'Oreal and LVMH of France, which
own many top fragrance brands.
Perfume makers have long insisted on choosing the retail outlets they
supply, to ensure their products are sold in a setting consistent with the
aura of luxury cultivated by their lavish advertising and marketing
campaigns.
That principle has been accepted by the European Commission, which recently
negotiated selective distribution agreements with Givenchy and Yves Saint
Laurent which are exempt from EC competition rules.
The agreements allow manufacturers to restrict supplies to retailers who
meet their standards of display, stock-holding and customer service,
provided they do not try to fix retail prices or inhibit cross-border trade.
The application of the agreements - and the operation of the industry's
supply practices more generally - has been challenged by Superdrug, the
cosmetics and toiletries chain, which has led an energetic campaign to bring
down perfume prices.
Superdrug, part of the Kingfisher retail group, began selling a range of
perfumes at discounts of up to 30 per cent at two high street outlets last
year. It has since expanded sales to 15 more and wants eventually to extend
the range to 200 of its 670 stores.
The company, which says normal retail margins on popular perfumes are as
high as 60 per cent, has so far obtained products on the international
'grey' market.
Because such supplies are scarce and prices higher than those paid by
authorised retailers, Superdrug wants to buy direct from manufacturers.
The company says it is prepared to comply fully with manufacturers'
standards - and has invested in special perfume counters at Pounds 20,000 a
time - but the big perfume houses have given it a wide berth. Givenchy
inspected one of its stores but rejected it as unsuitable.
Superdrug complains that Givenchy's assessment system is too subjective,
relying on an apparently arbitrary allocation of 'points' to features such
as the lighting and location of sales counters and the size of nearby
windows.
After a year of tireless lobbying by Superdrug, the OFT has asked the MMC to
investigate whether manufacturers are applying supply restrictions fairly.
The MMC will also look at the refusal by magazines to carry Superdrug
advertisements for cut-price fragrances.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, the director-general of fair trading, is concerned that
supply restrictions may be being used as an indirect form of retail price
maintenance and might violate EC competition rules in ways not sanctioned by
Brussels' exemptions. If the MMC found that was the case, it could make it
much harder to restrict supplies to discounters. Existing authorised
retailers might then face pressure to cut prices, as chains such as Boots
and John Lewis have done at stores that face local discount competition.
In most markets, lower prices would be offset by increased sales. But
perfume houses have always insisted that their product is different, and
that high prices are essential to the illusion of exclusiveness on which
their appeal depends. Discounters, they maintain, simply damage their own
business by devaluing the brand.
It will not be clear how far the perfume houses should be alarmed until the
MMC reports in nine months' time. Whatever it recommends, Superdrug can at
least take quiet pleasure in the extensive free publicity generated by its
high-profile lobbying campaign.
Elusive scent, Section 3

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921121

