FT924-1063

FT  19 DEC 92 / Books: Back to the classics both ancient and modern


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


'WHENEVER someone publishes a new book' said the poet Samuel Rogers, 'I read
an old one'.
IN THESE busy days when there is far too much of every kind to read, it is a
comforting principle by which to live. If you adopt it you find, for
example, that Proust knocks most contemporary novelists into a cocked hat.
Yet it is only recently - 1989 - that French scholars have established a
truly definitive text of A La Recherche du Temps Perdu.
Remembrance of Things Past was how it was always known in English in the
translation by Scott Moncrieff. That translation was somewhat prosy and not
strictly accurate. The late Terence Kilmartin, for many years literary
editor of The Observer, did a fine job tidying it up and publishing a
revised version under the old title in 1981. Now DJ Enright has gone through
the novel again in Kilmartin's version checking it against the latest
textual scholarship and he has given us In Search of Lost Time - not a new
English version but rather a revision of a revision in six attractive
volumes from Chatto & Windus at Pounds 15.00 each. (A completely new version
starting from scratch is on the way from the American translator Richard
Howard).
Proust died before he had finished tinkering with the last volume, Time
Regained and it still contains one or two inconsistencies. It is bound
together here with the useful A Guide to Proust, compiled by Kilmartin and
has wife Joanna; this is not merely a Who's Who of all the characters, but
also provides a gazetteer of the places and an elucidation of the real
people mentioned.
The present is an opportune time for anyone aiming to build up their own
collection of the main authors of modernism. Bloomsbury's new Classics
series might be the place to start. This is a sturdy, square-cut
pocket-sized hardback series at Pounds 9.95 a volume. Judicious selections
have been made from the poetry of Emily Dickinson, Thomas Hardy, Gerard
Manley Hopkins, DH Lawrence and WB Yeats. The latter's poetry has been
selected by Ian Hamilton, who has clearly had a hard task knowing what to
leave out. A companion series of modern fiction contains Jean Rhys's Wide
Sargasso Sea, Julian Barnes's Flaubert's Parrot and titles by Michael
Ondaatje, Jeanette Wintersen, Paul Bailey, Margaret Atwood, John Irving.
We are also seeing the splendid renaissance in a completely new and most
ravishing format - 100 years after the first volumes appeared - of that
pioneering series of essential reading, Everyman's Library. A wide range of
new editions from Shakespeare to Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart (Pounds
7.99) have appeared.
It is impressive to see, for instance, the whole of Ford Madox Ford's
trilogy, Parade's End, in one volume at Pounds 10.99 with an introduction by
Malcolm Bradbury. In the same Everyman format, Yeats's poetry is reissued in
its entirety in one volume, re-printing all the individual collections in
chronological order. It occupies some 868 pages, with introduction and notes
by Daniel Albright of the University of Rochester, NY. It is excellent value
at Pounds 10.99, but, unlike Hamilton's volume on Yeats, you would have
difficulty slipping it into your pocket.
Anyone wishing to observe how Yeats's poetry and the work of his modernist
contemporaries - Pound, Eliot, Virginia Woolf - was originally greeted in
the staid columns of The Times Literary Supplement, may do so in the first
of the new TLS Companion series from Harper Collins, The Modern Movement,
edited by John Gross (Pounds 8.99). This not only prints the major reviews
in full, but also lets you into the secret of who wrote them. The companion
volume on Communism is edited by the current editor of the TLS, Ferdinand
Mount.
Martin Green's Children of the Sun, now in paperback from Pimlico at Pounds
10.00, is a fascinating long view of 'decadence' in English literature after
1918 with special reference to Evelyn Waugh, Harold Acton, Brian Howard and
others of that generation. And to make an end - back to Ireland with all the
autobiographical writings of Sean O'Casey in two volumes, Autobiographies I
and II, in Macmillan's Papermac series at Pounds 12.99 each. The great Irish
playwright was also a robust writer of memoirs.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921219

