FT923-15727

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: EC states play for high
stakes - The issues may ring a bell from UK's last time in the chair, but
more is riding on them


   By DAVID BUCHAN


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
WHEN Britain last took over the EC presidency six years ago, the issues of
the moment were the Community's internal market, squabbles about money and
uncertainties about ratifying a certain treaty.
But if the issues sound vaguely similar, the stakes riding on their outcome
are not. 1992 is a world apart from 1986.
Then, the EC was making what the Financial Times described as a
'tortoise-like' start to a barrier-flattening exercise which few took
seriously. Now, it is in the final legislative stretch towards a single
market that has attracted world-wide hopes, fears and investment.
Then, the Community was mired in a year-by-year haggle over farm spending.
Now, it is debating a 30 per cent increase, over the 1990s, to a budget
already double the 1986 level, and arguing about how much of that should go
in a further transfer of real resources from richer to poorer states.
Then, a solo court challenge by a litigious Irishman, Mr Raymond Crotty, was
threatening to delay ratification of the Single European Act, a treaty whose
import few understood or cared about. Now, the governments of 11 EC states
have desperately appealed to their parliaments and peoples to endorse the
historic step to a European union they took at Maastricht.
Meanwhile, Denmark's government even ponders whether its voters' rejection
of Maastricht leaves them any future at all in the EC.
Today's uncertainties about the future shape of the Community are as great
as the stakes are high in the EC leaders finding a degree of unity with
which all their peoples feel comfortable. Failure of Maastricht would not be
the nightmare Euro-enthusiasts fear, simply because too many people have put
so much into the Community for the entire enterprise to be allowed to fall
apart.
But the Maastricht debate is a turning point in the EC's future. Denmark may
have done the whole Community, if not itself, an enormous service by
bringing the 'subsidiarity' issue to the fore. If the EC can succeed in
passing back to national governments, and even better to regional and local
authorities, some of the powers and controls that have flowed to Brussels
over the past 35 years - without ruining the single market - then it may win
popular backing not only for Maastricht, but further integrationist moves.
Down the road lies another constitutional revision, set in the Maastricht
treaty for 1996. Among other things, it is supposed to move the Community
towards common European defence. This may not suit countries like Austria,
Sweden, Finland, maybe even Switzerland, which should be members by then,
though their neutrality has rapidly lost its relevance with the end of the
Cold War. But common European defence may be more necessary then, if the US
Congress continues to push for a speedier reduction in American troop
strength in Europe than the White House wants.
So, by the late 1990s, it might be possible to have a European union, whose
members, including new Scandinavian and Alpine ones, feel comfortable in
having big decisions (on money and defence) taken at the centre, because
more little decisions (on water purity, lawn-mower noise, food additives,
and so on) are taken locally.
If Maastricht fails, there is a risk, not of the Rome Treaty-based Community
breaking up, but of some of the Twelve deciding to pursue future ambitions
separately. The most likely form would be Germany and France making joint
monetary and defence arrangements (the latter is already under way), perhaps
with a few smaller satellites. This would not be a pleasing prospect for the
excluded - be they Britain, Italy, new members or potential EC candidates in
central Europe.
But there are also some certainties about the EC today which did not exist
six years ago. It has become the pivot around which the wider Europe now
turns. Indeed, its example may be partly responsible for creating the wider
Europe. 'The success of this great European experiment (the EC), perhaps
more than any other factor, has caused east Europeans to recognise that
people as well as nations co-operate more productively when they are free to
choose.' The tribute was made in 1989 by Mr James Baker, US secretary of
state.
Second, the Community's economic impact on the outside world, once confined
mainly to its role in Gatt, has grown enormously. This is due to its single
market, with the opportunities it bestows on non-Europeans and Europeans
alike, and the reciprocal bargaining power it gives Brussels.
The logic of EC states getting together to regulate air pollution or
deregulate air transport inside the Community is that they will end up
negotiating with the outside world on these issues together. They did not do
so at the Earth Summit in Rio, nor do they do so yet in airline agreements.
But they probably will eventually. In addition, the EC has that unique
capacity for extending its single market and for peaceful
self-aggrandisement that goes under the name of 'enlargement'.
Third, there are the ambitions for a common foreign policy. So far, this is
the most feeble aspect of the Community's impact on the world. Indeed, the
most striking or admired acts of foreign policy emanating from Europe - the
military contributions of some EC states in the Gulf war or President
Francois Mitterrand's mercy mission to Sarajevo - defy the consensus needed
for a truly common EC policy.
But the undramatic fact that the Community's foreign policy is slow to
change, as well as slow to act, gives it a predictability particularly
valued by its neighbours.
These are some of the reasons why Prime Minister John Major said this week
that he was not prepared to see Britain 'sit on the sidelines' in the
Community.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920701

