FT921-392

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (22): The
price of a good reputation - A series of big US claims have hit Lloyd's hard


   By TREVOR PETCH


WHY has Lloyd's attracted in recent months the intense scrutiny of
authorities as diverse as insurance regulators, Congressional subcommittees,
the Securities & Exchange Commission and the FBI?
Lloyd's share of the US market is modest in volume terms. Including
reinsurance, the US contributed about Dollars 3.7bn to its global premium
income in 1990, while its domestic nonlife premium income was worth Dollars
265bn in 1989, about half the total for the whole world.
In the same year, the US ceded Dollars 8.9bn worth of net reinsurance
premiums abroad, according to Department of Commerce statistics. Lloyd's
takes about 1.35 per cent of all US non-life and reinsurance business, while
the 15 largest US insurers each takes a greater share than that of the
primary non-life market alone.
The question is not one of quantity, however, but of quality. Lloyd's only
operates as if it were a local US insurer in Illinois and Kentucky, but is
authorised to insure surplus lines - cover which cannot be obtained from an
insurer authorised in the state - everywhere except Kentucky and may write
reinsurance in all states except Kansas.
Cover taken out with Lloyd's syndicates is often high profile business -
from the Golden Gate Bridge on the West Coast to New York's Verrazano
Narrows Bridge on the East. Many Fortune 500 companies have insurance links
with Lloyd's which date back to at least the 1920s, and it is a major
provider of cover for US airlines and shipping.
The flexibility of the Lloyd's market in insuring new, unusual or
specialised risks is also heavily used. Syndicates at Lloyd's cover the
thoroughbreds of Kentucky racing stables and of American Football teams such
as the Cleveland Browns. It led the cancellation cover for the Los Angeles
Olympics and the National Collegiate Basketball Championships. It insures
NASA space launches and nuclear power stations.
Lloyd's is the leading provider of the insurance cover which US banks must
have by law. Lawyers, accountants and other professionals look to Lloyd's
for their professional liability insurance, and Lloyd's is one of the few
markets still prepared to accept US medical malpractice risks on a large
scale, which most US reinsurers will not.
In addition, most major US property insurers take out some protection
against natural catastrophe at Lloyd's.
Given the publicity, most of it bad, which has surrounded Lloyd's over the
past year, concern about Lloyd's ability to meet its commitments is
understandable. Perhaps it is no longer enough for it to point out that its
underwriters have never failed to meet a legitimate claim, or that its US
and other dollar-denominated business is secured by a Trust Fund in New York
worth Dollars 8bn, or that as most of this is invested in US Treasury Bonds
Lloyd's is one of the largest private lenders to the US government.
Despite its long relationship with the US market, Lloyd's as an institution
is still not well understood outside the insurance industry, however.
Lloyd's has its own reasons to be concerned. In 1990, it drew 32 per cent of
total premium inflow to the market from the' US, the second most important
single source after the UK itself although it represents a decline from the
mid-1980s when the proportion was closer to half. In addition, US names
provide about 10 per cent of underwriting capacity.
Unfortunately, the US has also been responsible for many of the major losses
which have periodically caused the market problems. When it made an overall
loss in the mid-1960s, the trigger was Hurricane Betsy. In the 1970s, the
largest losses were caused by insuring US computer leasing companies.
This year Lloyd's will report the losses on the 1989 account, the worst in
its history. The main factor will have been Hurricane Hugo, which cost
insurers over Dollars 4bn and Lloyd's over Dollars 1.5bn. In the same year,
the San Francisco earthquake cost Dollars 1bn, with Lloyd's share close to
15 per cent, and it also met part of the bill for a Dollars 1bn explosion at
a petrochemical plant in Texas, and the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
Lloyd's overall 1988 loss - the first since Betsy - was largely due to an
extra contribution of Dollars 575m on old policy years. Asbestos- and
pollution-exposed risks also caused the losses which led to the most
high-profile legal action by names against their agents at Lloyd's, the
well-publicised Outhwaite case.
In 1906, the innovative underwriter Cuthbert Heath ordered claims from the
San Francisco Earthquake to be paid even if the paperwork was not completely
in order, and so laid the foundation of Lloyd's reputation and business
expansion in the US.
In 1981, again in pursuit of customer loyalty, leading Lloyd's underwriters
signed the so-called White Paper memorandum with leading US brokers,
agreeing to treat reinsurance policies which they had written to cover US
primary insurers of asbestos-exposed policies as if they became operative
when an overall level of loss had been reached from a series of claims
rather than a single loss.
In hindsight, it was the first step in what Lloyd's deputy chairman Richard
HazeIl now describes as 'in a way, the biggest catastrophe that has ever hit
the insurance industry'.
David Coleridge, Lloyd's chairman, said last year that the market had
'always sought to take America as we find it, whether we like what we find
or not, and adapt as we can'.
That attitude may not last forever. However difficult, Lloyd's might just
possibly find it easier to adjust to life without US business than US
business would adjust to life without Lloyd's and the deep pocket its names
have come to represent.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920330

