FT924-5947

FT  24 NOV 92 / Lamont to lead search for EC growth plan: Germany argues
against deficit-financed schemes


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


MR NORMAN Lamont will lead European Community efforts ahead of the Edinburgh
summit to reach a common position on stimulating growth.
The UK chancellor will contact his fellow finance ministers in the run-up to
the summit on December 11-12 to try to achieve a consensus on how to
proceed.
The agreement to explore proposals for a co-ordinated growth package came at
a meeting of finance ministers in Brussels chaired by Mr Lamont.
Despite general agreement on the need to break the deflationary cycle in
Europe, divisions emerged during yesterday's meeting over how to resolve the
question of financing such a package.
Germany expressed reservations about European Commission proposals for an
EC-wide effort to boost activity through lower interest rates and a 'big
bang' public works programme, part of which would be targeted at eastern
Europe.
Mr Henning Christophersen, economics commissioner, said the Community could
mobilise up to Ecu12bn (Pounds 9.7bn) using the European Investment Bank and
a new European Investment Fund. This would stimulate private borrowing and
ultimately inject an estimated Ecu50bn-Ecu60bn, the price-tag for reviving
the European economy.
Mr Horst Kohler, state secretary in the German finance ministry, called for
realism and intelligence. 'We will play a constructive part on growth
initiative, but this is not the time for deficit-financed economic
programmes,' he said.
Mr Lamont agreed that stimulus must not be at the expense of higher fiscal
deficits. But he revived his criticism of high German interest rates and
their impact on prospects for recovery. 'There are questions to be asked
about monetary and fiscal policy, not least in Germany,' he said.
British officials welcomed the debate on mobilising funds for infrastructure
investment and helping sectors such as small and medium-sized companies, but
stressed that ministers had not discussed any figures, let alone agreed any.
They pointed to the UK Autumn Statement as a model which targeted areas for
capital spending while keeping tight control on public spending.
The growth package will be further discussed on Friday at a meeting of
finance and foreign affairs ministers who hope to break the deadlock over
the so-called Delors II package to raise Community spending by almost one
third over the next five to seven years.
At yesterday's meeting, Germany, France, Britain and Italy all expressed
doubts about the spending proposals. Ministers said it was difficult to
justify the spending at a time of domestic austerity. Mr Kohler said the
latest proposal by Mr Jacques Delors, European Commission president, to
freeze spending in real terms for the next two years was 'an absolute
minimum'.
The UK also came under attack for its rebate from the Community which is
expected to amount to Pounds 2bn this year. But Sir John Cope, the British
paymaster general, remained adamant that the rebate was not negotiable,
prompting angry rejoinders from his European colleagues.
Major pours cold water on big EC projects Page 2
This could be the last time: steel support plans Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921124

