FT924-6527

FT  20 NOV 92 / The pendulum swings: The privatisation of strategic UK
industries and utilities may have its limits


   By TONY JACKSON


Italy is selling its banks, France its chemical companies, Spain its tobacco
monopoly, eastern Europe practically everything. Privatisation, from its
tentative beginnings in the UK a decade ago, seems unstoppable.
Except, that is, in the UK itself. The mooted privatisation of British Rail
is under fire from all points of the political compass. The idea of
privatising Scottish water is supported by just 4 per cent of the Scottish
population. The shambles of the pit closures has left the public asking
whether the privatisation of gas and electricity has made it impossible for
the UK to have a coherent energy policy.
The obvious question is whether the UK, having taken the lead in embracing
privatisation, is doing the same in turning against it; or indeed, whether
the UK is demonstrating to the rest of the world that privatisation has its
natural limits.
In looking for an answer, it helps to recall what kind of enterprises are
state-owned in the first place. In the UK, at any rate, the list falls into
two main categories: so-called strategic industries, and utilities. The
first has provided UK privatisation with its greatest successes. The second
is its biggest headache.
The concept of the strategic industry has changed and weakened in the years
since the second world war. Fighting a conventional war requires ships,
aircraft, land transport and raw materials such as steel and oil. Even in
peacetime, governments have tended historically to regard those industries
as centrally important to the economy. In continental Europe, many still do.
Thus, if those industries required huge capital projects such as steel
mills, North Sea rigs or petrochemical crackers, governments paid for them.
If individual companies fell on hard times, the government took them over.
In the UK, the result was an extraordinary proliferation of state-owned
enterprises: British Steel, British Leyland, British Aerospace, British
Airways, British Shipbuilders, Britoil, Rolls-Royce and Royal Ordnance. In
the end, one of the most compelling reasons for returning all these to the
private sector was that, in peacetime, their products could be obtained
perfectly easily on the world market.
The utilities are another matter. In the 1980s, the concept of rolling back
the frontiers of the state meant that the idea of centrally planning and
financing the national infrastructure became deeply unfashionable. In
ideological terms, the chief attraction of privatising gas, electricity,
water and telecommunications was that it took the provision of basic
services out of the hands of bureaucrats and subjected it to disciplines of
the market.
With hindsight, this begins to look like the outward swing of the pendulum:
an exaggerated denial of the role of central planning in response to decades
of blind faith. The question is not which approach works best in practice.
Rather it is whether the population at large feels that the provision of
certain fundamental services is a collective responsibility.
The furore over the pit closures suggests it may. When the government
privatised electricity, it must have quietly congratulated itself on the
neat way it was washing its hands of British Coal's future. When the coal
contracts came to be renewed, the generating companies were bound to cut
their consumption. But the government could argue, with perfect logic, that
it was powerless to intervene.
The trouble was that the public would not wear it. There was general
astonishment and anger at the idea that the deployment of Britain's finite
energy resources could not be discussed at governmental level. Since this
had been one of the main ideological points of the exercise, the government
was left dangling on a hook of its own devising.
The question now is whether this kind of debate will surface elsewhere.
There are one or two signs that it may. In the US, even the outgoing Bush
administration has devoted much time lately to discussing the
infrastructure. In the UK, much of the hostility to privatising British Rail
rests on the idea that it is government's job to think through the
relationship between rail and road. At this rate, even such matters as the
modernisation of the UK's telephone network could become issues of public
policy.
If so, there is trouble ahead. In particular, the industry regulators -
Oftel, Ofgas and the rest - are already looming large in the public
consciousness. Their powers are only tolerable because they are specifically
limited to questions of competition and efficiency. If responsibility for
public policy were added on top, the already vexed question of who regulates
the regulators would become clamorous.
Finding a solution would be equally difficult. From the regulatory framework
downwards, the whole structure of the privatised utilities expresses the
political dogma of a decade ago. It now seems the dogma may be changing. The
structure is not built to change with it, nor was it meant to be.
Privatisation enthusiasts everywhere, take note.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921120

