FT923-9725

FT  04 AUG 92 / Labor claims a 'gold medal' for economic policy: Australia's
government is trying to turn the spotlight from the jobless to prices and
trade figures


   By KEVIN BROWN


AUSTRALIA'S Labor government has pounced on improvements in the consumer
price index and balance of payments to divert the spotlight away from record
unemployment levels.
Mr John Dawkins, the federal treasurer, described the government's economic
policy as a 'gold medal performance'. Mr Paul Keating, the prime minister,
said Australia had 'snapped the inflation stick'.
The principal cause of the hyperbole was a reduction in the annual rate of
inflation from 1.7 per cent in the three months to March to 1.2 per cent in
the June quarter.
Success on the inflation front was followed by figures showing a 25 per cent
reduction in the current account deficit to ADollars 11.7bn (Pounds 4.5bn)
for the 12 months to the end of June, from ADollars 15.7bn in the previous
year.
From the government's point of view, the inflation and current account
figures provide a welcome diversion from its embarrassment at presiding over
record unemployment of 11.1 per cent.
While the Australian economy is clearly in better shape than a year ago,
there is plenty of evidence that the patient may have to spend longer in the
sick room than Mr Keating is prepared to admit. This could present a serious
problem for Labor, which is trailing the opposition conservatives in the
opinion polls, but must call a federal election by June next year.
The good news is that inflation is likely to remain fairly low, although the
inflation stick appears more likely to have been bent than snapped. Most
economists expect the annual rate to fall further this year before edging up
again to between 3 and 4 per cent next year.
The government accepts that the improvement in the figures is largely a
result of the deflationary effects of the 1990-91 recession, when gross
domestic product contracted or was flat for seven of eight consecutive
quarters.
But it will take some of the credit for restraining wages through its
'accord' with the trade union movement, which recently agreed to link pay
demands to inflation expectations.
The bad news is that, despite government pump-priming and a series of
interest rate cuts, the recovery has failed to gather pace since the end of
the recession late last year. In his February economic statement, Mr Keating
announced a ADollars 2.3bn (Pounds 890m) spending programme intended to help
deliver gross domestic product growth of 4.75 per cent in 1992-93, followed
by average growth of 4 per cent in the next three years.
Since February, the government has increased the forecast budget deficit for
1991-92 from ADollars 6.8bn to nearly ADollars 10bn, delivering a further
fiscal stimulus. Official interest rates have also been cut from 7.5 per
cent to 5.75 per cent.
But growth remains stubbornly low, mainly because of muted business
confidence and the preference of both the corporate sector and consumers for
debt reduction rather than consumption.
Most economists think the economy probably slowed again in the fourth
quarter of 1991-92, indicating that growth for the year will be less than Mr
Keating's forecast of 2 per cent.
Bowing to the inevitable, the government recently reduced the target for
1992-93 to 4 per cent, but most economists doubt that even that is
achievable. The National Australia Bank, the most bearish of recent
forecasters, says growth may be as low as 3 per cent.
Few observers think such an outcome would be enough to redeem the
government's promise of single-digit unemployment before the election. But
there are indications that even at the current slow pace of recovery, the
economy may run into external constraints.
At ADollars 11.7bn, the 1991-92 current account deficit is equivalent to 3.1
per cent of forecast GDP, the lowest ratio since 1979-80, and a considerable
improvement on the 6 per cent deficit two years ago.
However, the seasonally adjusted deficit has deteriorated in recent months,
culminating in a much larger than expected monthly deficit of ADollars 1.2bn
in June. Much of the increased deficit was caused by a rise in imports to
the highest level since 1989, suggesting that imports accounted for a
disproportionate share of increased retail sales.
The government has preferred to point to the surplus on merchandise trade,
which improved by 35 per cent over the year to ADollars 3.9bn. But the trend
figures indicate that growth in exports is decelerating just as import
growth improves, raising awkward questions about the sustainability of the
current account improvement.
Mr Keating's last chance to make significant changes in economic policy
before the election will come when the 1992-93 budget is delivered on August
18. However, the government may have left itself with very little room for
further pump priming.
Most economists say the financial markets would be concerned by a forecast
deficit much above ADollars 13bn, which would put pressure on the Australian
dollar and could lead to a sell-off of government bonds.
What is unfortunate for the government is that the minimum budget deficit is
also forecast at about ADollars 13bn, depending on the impact of any
recovery on tax revenues.
This means that extra spending intended to stimulate growth will have to be
offset by politically difficult cuts elsewhere in the budget, unless Mr
Keating is prepared to take on the markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920804

