FT924-8182

FT  12 NOV 92 / Arts: French singers on song - Saint-Etienne Massenet
festival - Andrew Clark on Esclarmonde, Griselidis and La Terre Promise


   By ANDREW CLARK


Anyone with the slightest acquaintance of music-making in France knows that
the provincial cities, rather than Paris, now provide the best opportunity
to hear French artists in their native repertoire. Indeed, a visit to a city
like Saint-Etienne, which has just staged its second Massenet Festival,
offers a valuable corrective to the widely-held view that France's stock of
native talent has run dry. Here was a plentiful supply of French singers -
polished and presentable if not of glamorous international renown - doing
honour to their country's musical heritage, distinguished by a linguistic
understanding and tonal authenticity that one hears only in France.
At first sight, Saint-Etienne is the most unlikely place for a festival.
Traditionally overshadowed by nearby Lyon, it is stuck on a road to nowhere
at the edge of the Massif central, and has lately become a victim of
disappearing industries and high unemployment. The Massenet Festival -
celebrating the composer who turned his back on his birthplace as soon as he
could - is just one plank in Saint-Etienne's ambitious regeneration
programme. The city (pop. 250,000) spends 12 per cent of its budget on
culture, one of the highest in Europe. The local taxpayer foots two-thirds
of the festival's FFr12m (Pounds 1.4m) costs, with much of the rest coming
in sponsorship from France Telecom and a deal with Koch-Schwann that enables
festival productions to be commercially recorded.
Perhaps mindful of the sad fate of the Berlioz Festival in Lyon in the
1980s, the organisers have settled for a biennial event. This year's
programme, marking the 150th anniversary of the composer's birth, consisted
of a staging of Esclarmonde, concert performances of Griselidis and the
oratorio La Terre Promise, a symphonic concert, a song recital and a
musicological conference. The Esclarmonde was in need of reappraisal.
Written shortly after Manon for the young American soprano Sibyl Sanderson
(by whom Massenet was apparently besotted), it tells the unlikely tale of a
veiled princess whose use of magical powers to catch the man of her fancy
nearly backfires. The work has been seldom revived, and received a critical
drubbing after the Covent Garden performances with Joan Sutherland in 1983.
At Saint-Etienne, I found myself admiring it in isolated sections: the
dainty ceremonial choruses, the delicate brilliance of Esclarmonde's
incantation 'Esprits de l'air]', the gently swelling lyricism of the love
scenes, the simple woodwind melody introducing the final act. Everything is
impeccably crafted - but the music rambles.
Saint-Etienne provided the kind of special sympathy which a non-foolproof
opera needs. On the surface, Esclarmonde is a vehicle for a prima donna, an
invitation to operatic spectacle - but to judge by this staging, it works
best in an intimate framework, with a cast of equals. Disciplined by the
needs of a touring production (to be shown at the Opera-Comique in Paris
later this month and then in Palermo and Genoa), the film director Claude
d'Anna kept the action fluent and small-scale, offering no psychological
insights but resisting the temptation to send up or blow up the far-fetched
workings of the plot. Giantito Burchiellaro's stylised Byzantine designs -
matched by Ivan Stefanutti's graceful, low-key costumes - consisted of
little more than a drop cloth and two net side-panels, with a moonlit blue
seascape for the mysterious isle of Act II.
This fidelity to the work's dramatic essentials found an echo in the pit:
Saint-Etienne's talented young music director, Patrick Fournillier, proved
once again a dextrous interpreter of Massenet's music, allowing air into the
warm choral and orchestral textures, shaping and balancing the music
faultlessly. The instrumental timbre of the Franz Liszt Symphony Orchestra
(sharing the festival workload with the Nouvel Orchestre de Saint-Etienne)
may not be authentically French, but it brought out the Wagnerian influence
in Massenet's brass writing and played with a discipline which few French
orchestras achieve.
The Italian soprano Denia Gavazzeni - Mazzola was the only non-French member
of the cast. Her slim, agile Esclarmonde looked youthful and made musical
sense of Massenet's vocal decorations. Bernard Lombardo was sweet-voiced but
androgynous in the tenor part of Roland. Jean-Philippe Courtis was a
commanding Emperor, ably supported in smaller roles by Christian Poulizac,
Guy Gabelle and Helene Perraguin (whose recital the next day, marred by her
gauche platform manner and peremptory accompanist, revealed a mezzo of
considerable potential).
Courtis turned up again as a towering, nimble-footed Devil in Griselidis
giving such a graphic, richly-nuanced performance that one momentarily
forgot this was a concert. In the regrettably short baritone and tenor
roles, Didier Henry and Jean-Luc Viala sang with the inspiration and ardour
of mature youthfulness. In the title role - one of Massenet's most bland
characters - Michele Command was elegance personified, expertly supported
again by Fournillier and a chorus imported from Lyon. In the early 1980s,
Wexford proved that Griselidis is alive with drama: it seemed a pity
Saint-Etienne's resources did not stretch to a staging.
For La Terre Promise (1900), composed in memory of Ambroise Thomas, the
festival moved from the charmless modern Maison de la Culture to the
neatly-proportioned Grand'Eglise. Here again, one was struck by the
effortless directness of Massenet's vocal writing, and the skill with which
the Saint-Etienne chorus and three young soloists - Laurent Naouri, Daniel
Galves-Vallejo and Brigitte Lafon - delivered their parts. The oratorio
describes the journey of the Israelites past Jericho, where the tumbling of
city walls is graphically described by a choral wail and a lingering crash
of percussion, to the promised land, heralded by waves of peaceful choral
polyphony. The work lasts a concise 75 minutes and would make a handsome
alternative to the endless round of Bach Passions with which north Europe's
choral societies content themselves each year. The Saint-Etienne
performance, with the local orchestra conducted by Kurt Redel, was one of
great dignity.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921112

