FT923-9614

FT  04 AUG 92 / Rifkind in fresh effort to save Eurofighter project


   By IVO DAWNAY and HAIG SIMONIAN


   LONDON, MILAN


CRUCIAL talks on the future of the troubled European Fighter Aircraft take
place in Madrid today amid growing signs that both Spain and Italy are
losing faith in the Pounds 20bn four-nation project.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the defence secretary, will fly to Madrid in the hope of
persuading Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, not to 'shut the
door' on joining the aircraft's production phase. Germany made clear in May
that it would not take part in the production of the aircraft, due to begin
next summer.
However, Mr Rifkind appears to face an uphill battle in his efforts to save
the project. UK industry officials believe the gloomy economic outlook is
now undermining the commitment of Madrid and Rome to Europe's largest
defence collaboration project.
Italy's new defence minister, Mr Salvo Ando, indicated yesterday that his
country was having second thoughts about the project, at least in its
present form. Speaking in Brindisi, he said the EFA 'needs the German
contribution (to the project)'.
Alluding to the Italian government's financial difficulties, Mr Ando said:
'If Germany has problems with costs, imagine the position of nations which
aren't adrift in gold, like Italy and Spain.'
Since Germany's announcement, the UK has fought to persuade Spain and Italy
to proceed with the aircraft as a three-nation consortium. Last month, Mr
John Major, the prime minister, wrote to Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the Spanish
prime minister, asking him to 'confirm publicly' his faith in the project
and a readiness to study the feasibility of production on a three-nation
basis.
However, Mr Gonzalez has so far failed to do so. Instead, the Spanish
government has appeared to offer tacit support to the German proposal that
the project, still in its development stage, either be adapted to build a
more modest aircraft or should be replaced altogether.
Under agreements reached last month, a team of civil servants representing
the four countries is looking at cutting costs. It is due to report in
October.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920804

