FT923-10790

FT  29 JUL 92 / Mandela strikes conciliatory note on talks


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   JOHANNESBURG


MR Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress leader, yesterday toned
down the stridency of recent ANC statements while confirming that the
organisation would not return to constitutional negotiations until the
government had met its demands.
These include a curb on political violence, an unambiguous commitment to
majority rule and an interim government of national unity.
In an appearance notable for its conciliatory tone, Mr Mandela said the ANC
was 'keen' that negotiations should resume, but this could happen only when
its demands were addressed.
Speaking on his return from a visit to the Olympic games in Barcelona, a
trip to the Middle East and last week's special United Nations debate on
South Africa, Mr Mandela said next week's general strike, called by the ANC
and its trade union ally, the Congress of South African Trade Unions
(Cosatu), as part of their mass action campaign, would go ahead.
He stressed that every effort would be made to keep it peaceful and said the
ANC was taking precautions against 'agent provocateurs' who might incite
violence. He expressed the fear that attacks would come from worker hostels
in urban townships.
Mr Mandela sharply rebuked senior ANC and Cosatu officials who have said the
purpose of mass action was to drive the government from power.
'There is no question of the object of mass action being insurrection,' he
said. 'The aim of mass action is the immediate transfer of political power
to the people of South Africa.' This would take the form of an interim
government of national unity and free and fair elections to a
constitution-making body. He defended mass action as a channel to prevent
voteless and angry people from resorting to violence.
Mr Mandela also distanced the ANC from calls by civic associations for a
black boycott of mortgage repayments. He stressed the need for houses to be
built and said such a boycott would clearly cause finance to dry up.
Church leaders were yesterday involved in efforts to break the political
deadlock, but there appeared little prospect of their heading off the
strike.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920729

