FT924-12115

FT  22 OCT 92 / Brussels urges cuts in phone charges


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


THE European Commission called yesterday for greater competition to cut the
price of cross-border telephone calls in the European Community, but said it
would have to consult industry and consumers further before introducing
legislation.
Immediate full liberalisation of international and national calls has not
been ruled out - it is one of four options listed in the Commission's
long-awaited review of the telecoms sector - but Brussels said it favoured a
'gradual approach'. Consultation could take several months.
European consumer groups, which favour liberalisation with safeguards for
users, welcomed the review paper, but said they wondered whether the present
Commission was 'running out of steam' as it ended its four-year term.
Brussels has already taken action to liberalise more specialised telecoms
services, but the voice telephony market is very sensitive politically.
Sir Leon Brittan, EC competition commissioner, denied the Commission was shy
of opening the market completely: 'We are not dragging our feet, we are
hoping to have a quick consultation on the options which have been
identified, having clearly given our preference.'
If the Commission and member states adopt the intermediate option, EC
companies could buy access to other member states' telecoms networks and
provide cross-border services.
The Commission would also hope to eliminate illogical differences between
the cost of cross-border calls: calling from Spain to Denmark, for example,
costs twice as much as calling from Denmark to Spain.
Mr Filippo Maria Pandolfi, EC telecommunications commissioner, said
yesterday that cross-border calls within the EC accounted for about 4 or 5
per cent of the overall EC telecoms market.
All voice telephony - including international and domestic calls -
represents 80 to 90 per cent of the total.
Editorial Comment, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921022

