FT921-15191

FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: Drama from the past - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


SINCE Monday, changes in Radio 2 must seem to listeners as appalling as the
changes in Radio 4 last year. I usually think of Radio 2 as the one you hear
but needn't listen to, unless you have asked for a dedicated record. Now
Brian Hayes, noted elsewhere for his abruptness with callers, takes over the
6.30 slot, Good Morning, UK], from Ken Bruce, who moves to 9.30 for a
two-hour stint including Pick of the Hits.
Jimmy Young starts later, at 11.30, but goes on longer, until two o'clock. A
fresh, if by no means unfamiliar, name enters the afternoon at 3.30, Ed
Stewart, with 'the most popular easy music', selected by Gallup. And Derek
Jameson now winds up the day from 10.30 to midnight, no longer on his own
but with his wife, Ellen Jameson. His programme will carry all sorts of
assorted goodies, brain-teasers, phone-ins and so on, but I'd rather reserve
judgment for a while.
On Sunday, Radio 3 (of which jokers say Derek Jameson would like to be
Controller) repeated its 1980 recording of Virginia Woolf's Between the
Acts, as adapted by Liane Aukin. This is set in the grounds of a country
house in the war-threatened summer of 1939. After little evident
consultation with the Olivers, who live there, a pageant is produced for
charity, its theme the sweep of English history. But this is so presented by
the producer, Miss La Trobe, as to reflect to the audience their real
nature. The action alternates what is played on the stage with the conduct
of the Olivers and their guests. The stage comes out better.
Starting with a child representing England, we have parodies of Chaucer,
Elizabethan drama, a Restoration comedy, a Victorian piece like TW
Robertson, and so on. As Miss La Trobe (Sarah Badel) believes us all to be
'orts, scraps, fragments', the reflection is not kind. On the other hand, it
is not unkind enough to anger the upper-middle-class audience. 'Do you get
her meaning?' they ask, which may explain La Trobe's conclusion that the
result was 'nothing, a failure'. The production, under David Spenser,
depended for effect on the playing of the characters, acute but not always
quite free of cliche. It sent me to the library to determine whether this
was due to Woolf or to Aukin. The book wasn't available.
A Matter of Sex (Radio 4, Thursday) was drama of a different kind. Abigail,
played as an old woman by octogenarian Patricia Hayes, as a young woman by
Diane Bull, married James, a handsome young man who spent one night with her
so modestly (and so deceptively played by Anna Savva) that she never
realised he was actually a girl. They remained long married, though he spent
much time away from her, and in the end admitted his real sex. When he died
in hospital after an accident, the truth had to come out.
The tale was largely told through Abigail's affidavit admitting that she had
long known the truth - a process she was driven to by the scandal. Author
Nick Stafford takes this public dislike for granted, though it is said that
Queen Victoria could not believe that there could be love between women,
which is why the anti-homosexual laws applied only to men. There is much old
cockney slang (the marriage was in 1807), and some mock-poetic prose and
comic names - Jimmy Giblet, Tommy Twattle, Colly Mutton - that detract from
the belief we have in the story, leaving it a somewhat empty anecdote
irrelevant to current thoughts. Claire Grove directed.
This week's File on 4 on Tuesday was subtitled Hot Pursuit. It examined how
far the code of practice laid down for police drivers in 1989 is adhered to,
and how much legal or disciplinary action is taken in cases of breach. Three
individual cases were examined, and in each of them the drivers appeared not
to be taking the orders of their controllers as they should.
The examination of such specific cases is likely to lead to wholesale
decisions against the drivers; but with reckless driving by the public so
increasingly common, it is hard to expect the police drivers always to give
in to their controllers, however strict the code of practice.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920111

