FT922-4410

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (10): Focus on
use of plastics - Recycling


   By JEFF DANIELS


ONE rarely visits a vehicle manufacturer these days without being given a
briefing on recycling. For the most part, such briefings follow a standard
pattern as least where content is concerned.
The starting point is that vehicles are already more efficiently recycled
than any other consumer durable, with up to 75 per cent of their content by
weight already reclaimed and used again. That 75 per cent, it is then
admitted, roughly corresponds to the metallic content.
The focus of attention is now the remaining 25 per cent, and in particular
that proportion of it which is plastic.
The standard presentation tends to make three points. First, plastics are
now carefully chosen with an eye to recycling. Polypropylene, which is
easily re-used, has suddenly become the material of choice for plastic
bumper covers, and the point is invariably made that far fewer different
plastics are being used in manufacture.
Second, all plastic parts above a certain weight - usually either 50g or
100g - are marked to show exactly what material they are made from. This is
to overcome a notable drawback of plastic materials: they are difficult to
identify.
Third, body designers now take care to ensure that plastic components can be
easily removed for recycling and due consideration is being given to the
best way of re-using such components.
Here, opinion is split between the 'like-for-like' approach which insists
that plastic components must be capable of re-emerging in the same form, and
the 'cascade' philosophy which suggests it is equally effective and less
expensive to use recovered plastic for successively less demanding
applications on each occasion.
The cascade system envisages taking a high quality, visible application such
as a bumper cover and turning it perhaps into invisible wheel-arch liners,
then into an sound-deadening pad and finally into a packing-piece or
container for a new production part.
Given an average car life of 12 years (and rising), this would put plastic
to good use for up to half a century.
The purists, however, argue that this is not good enough. Volkswagen, for
example, is determined to turn bumper covers into bumper covers; by no means
easily achieved, since quality of surface finish is the first quality to
suffer when plastic from such 'visible' applications is recycled.
There is, in any case, no question that concerns over recycling have caused
vehicle designers to reconsider their use of plastics. Not only has the
number of different plastics in a vehicle body been greatly reduced, but the
actual proportion of plastic is coming down for the first time in many
years.
In particular, designers are shying away from high-strength plastic
composites - mainly glass-reinforced materials - because the only way they
can currently be recycled is to shred them, at some cost, and send them
directly to the base of the 'cascade'.
This in turn has set back the cause of lightweight, rust-free plastic body
panels because only the composite materials have the mechanical strength
necessary, especially for large horizontal panels such as the roof and
bonnet.
The particular concern over plastics should not, however, be allowed to
overshadow the mechanics of vehicle recycling in general. Several
manufacturers, including BMW and VW in Germany, PSA and Renault in France
and Rover in the UK, have set up pilot projects for the recovery and
disposal of scrapped vehicles.
Such operations highlight the fact that many of the non-metallic components
of a vehicle including the tyres, glass, fluids (oil, coolant, and brake
fluid, and in some cases the chlorofluorocarbons-laden air conditioning
refrigerant) as well as the several kilograms of dirt accumulated beneath
any vehicle during its life, all pose problems from the recycling point of
view.
The recycling projects now under way all work on the principle of recovering
higher-value and 'difficult' items more or less intact before sending the
rest of the body to be granulated. The residue is sorted into various grades
of re-useable material and the inevitable remainder is incinerated at very
high temperature into a dense ash which can be used directly as hardcore or
incorporated into cement. The technology of material sorting is one of the
more closely guarded secrets of such operations; when PSA held a press
presentation at its pilot recycling plant near Lyons, that section of the
'works' was shielded from view, although samples of impressively well-sorted
debris were on display.
There is no doubt that concern over recycling has posed another constraint
on vehicle designers at a time when most of them probably thought they
already had enough to be going on with. Their choice of materials has become
more restricted and they are having to give much more thought to the
question of easy disassembly at the end of the vehicle's life.
The signs are, however, that ingenuity will overcome these constraints
without affecting the appearance of the vehicle itself.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920605

