FT923-9796

FT  03 AUG 92 / Electronics suppliers blamed for EC price distortions


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Consumer Industries Editor


LEADING suppliers of consumer electronics products are keeping prices
artificially high in some European countries by restricting cross-border
trade, according to two Europe-wide retailing associations.
One of the associations, Expert International, which represents 2,500 small
dealers in 14 European countries, plans to ask the European Commission's
competition directorate to take stronger action to ensure free movement of
products within the Community.
Mr Wim van den Toorn, Expert's managing director, says in a draft letter to
the Commission that surveys by his organisation have found that the prices
paid by its members for identical products vary by as much as 50 per cent
across Europe.
He alleges that an authorised dealer who tried to sell products to an
authorised dealer in another country 'would experience a negative attitude
from his supplier with practical consequences'.
The allegations come four months before the official deadline for the advent
of the single market, which is intended to eliminate all internal trade
barriers within the Community.
Sir Leon Brittan, the EC competition commissioner, has emphasised that
competition from unrestricted flows of unauthorised 'parallel' imports
within the Community is essential to the success of the single market. Such
imports should make wide price differentials unsustainable.
Mr van den Toorn said Expert and its members so far had not asked suppliers
to supply products for sale in other countries. However, he feared that if
dealers attempted to make parallel imports, suppliers would threaten to cut
off future supplies of products and spare parts.
Mr Marcel Vloemans, head of Euronics, another association representing 5,000
small electrical retailers in seven European countries, said his
organisation had tried to buy products in low-price countries for sale in
high-priced ones and had been unable to do so.
Mr van den Toorn said Expert had discovered wide and consistent geographic
disparities in trade prices for the consumer electronics brands stocked by
its dealers. These are Philips, Grundig, Sony and Panasonic, made by
Matsushita of Japan.
He said he had sought for more than two years to persuade these
manufacturers to narrow the price differentials, but had so far made little
progress. The companies said they were not aware of Mr van den Toorn's
approach.
Mr van den Toorn plans to ask the Commission to ensure that suppliers'
dealership agreements provide explicitly for unrestricted trade in products
between authorised dealers in different countries.
Though some agreements already contained such requirements, he said they
were not fully effective.
Several manufacturers said the differences in their trade prices were
smaller than alleged by Expert, and that they reflected local market
conditions.
Price flaws, Page 2
Pause for thought, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920803

