FT921-1191

FT  25 MAR 92 / Call for radical reforms for China


   By REUTER


   BEIJING, HONG KONG


CHINA should float its currency and open retail, transport, banking and
insurance industries to foreigners, the cabinet's top economist said in the
clearest explanation of Beijing's new reform effort so far, Reuter reports
from Beijing.
Ma Hong, research director for the state council (cabinet), was quoted by
the official press yesterday as saying the economy must be made 'more
international'.
Reforms enacted so far, which have concentrated on attracting foreign
investment to the manufacturing sector, were not allowing enough scope for
potential growth, he said, calling for bold opening of the service sector.
Ma, in charge of cabinet economic policy planning, said China should open
its doors wider, and criticised leaders who were afraid of using capitalist
methods to achieve China's goals. 'There are still people who equate reform
and opening up with the introduction of capitalism,' Shanghai's Wen Hui Bao
quoted him as saying. 'To put economic questions in overly ideological terms
has caused great losses for socialism.'
Ma said capitalist-style policies such as the introduction of securities
trading should be promoted, and suggested even more radical reform: 'Foreign
exchange rates should be adjusted so as to institute a free-exchange
system.'
Although China has allowed the yuan to depreciate slowly in a 'managed
float', as part of its efforts to re-join the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (Gatt), the currency remains tightly controlled.
Foreign banks are limited to full branches in Shanghai and the special
economic zones of the south.
China has called for talks with Britain on Hong Kong's legislature, to be
elected in 1995, two years before the British colony is to revert to Chinese
rule, Reuter reports from Hong Kong.
Analysts saw the call by Zhou Nan, head of China's de facto embassy in Hong
Kong, as another attempt by Beijing to shape the colony's affairs before
1997.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920325

