FT921-504

FT  28 MAR 92 / Arts: Murder most foul - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


MORSE, Maigret, Taggart and Wexford lead the pros and hard behind them come
the amateurs - Holmes, Poirot, Wimsey and the rest, heading the charts on TV
screens and radio, nowadays often both. Not only has TV Morse been promoted
to Chief Inspector and his films extended to two hours, here he is tonight
on Radio 4, same personality but new voice, solving (from a hospital bed)
Colin Dexter's The Wench is Dead, a case that happened a century ago.
Detective plays rely mainly on their solutions, so no more about that.
We had a real murder on Monday, Darling Peidi, the case that, as aficionados
know, ended with the hanging of Freddy Bywaters and Edith Thompson. Half
Shelagh Stephenson's treatment told of Edith's adulterous love for Freddy,
eight years her junior, and director Jeremy Mortimer kept this as
sentimental as Edith's letters. But the last half-hour covered the murder
and trial, and there was nothing sentimental about either. Rachel Joyce as
Edith made true horror of the last scenes, which included the hanging - not
in detail, I am happy to say. For the record, Edith's guts fell out on the
scaffold and Ellis, the hangman, who had had to make special body straps to
get his distressed subject to the trap, killed himself shortly after.
Radio 4 also gave us two sudden deaths in Fatal Reaction on Thursday, only
this time the police were the killers. Twice recently there has been
argument when armed police have shot men who appeared to be threatening them
with firearms: in Ian Gordon's case because he was mentally unstable; and in
Ian Bennett's because he was helplessly drunk. Both firearms proved to be
potentially harmless - one a toy, the other a reproduction.
This programme suggested that additional training for armed police might
enable them to deal less lethally with such cases. No procedure can fit
every case; but it was interesting to hear the discussion.
Official reaction is more severe in Iran, to judge from Prometheus in Evin
by the Iranian writer Iraj Jannatie Ataie, (Radio 3, Tuesday). A dissident
writer is imprisoned in the notorious gaol Evin, flogged, tortured, his wife
raped by an 'interrogator'. His ultimate punishment is publicly to renounce
all his beliefs on television. As with Prometheus, unacceptable education is
punished by permanent display of defeat, while enemies tear at the
intellectual vitals. It was a horrifying play, well done by David Rintoul as
the writer and Vivien Heilbron as his wife. Matthew Walters directed
Radio 3's Sunday production of Pinter's No Man's Land was good enough to
challenge the matchless original. Dirk Bogarde as Spooner and Michael
Hordern as Hirst were not like Gielgud and Richardson; they were simply
Spooner and Hirst. What is the play about? 'You are in No Man's Land, which
never moves, never changes, never grows older, remains for ever icy'. That
is what it is about, and to my mind Pinter has never written anything
better. Janet Whitaker directed.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920328

