FT921-11728

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (4): An era of self-confidence -
Saudi oil policy


   By MARK NICHOLSON


NOWHERE since the Gulf war has Saudi Arabia demonstrated greater
assertiveness and self confidence than in its oil policy.
Since the last pre-war meeting of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (Opec) in July 1990, the kingdom has boosted oil production by 57
per cent to 8.5 million barrels a day (b/d), raised its share of the
cartel's output from less than a quarter to more than a third and has
embarked on a five-year plan to give it sustainable capacity of 10m b/d and
surge capacity of up to 12m b/d.
Saudi Arabia, which with 259 billion barrels of oil holds a quarter of the
world's known crude reserves, now proclaims that its days as Opec's swing
producer are dead. The kingdom is determined to use its dominant position in
the organisation to enforce its long-term strategy of price moderation and
security of supply - a mix which Saudi rulers are well aware is popular with
the US and its other western protectors. In the phrase of one appreciative
western diplomat it is a policy of 'muscle and moderation'.
It is a position Saudi Arabia needed some muscle to achieve. When Iraqi
tanks in Kuwait and the world's subsequent embargo against Baghdad deprived
the world of six per cent of its oil supply in August 1990, it took Saudi
officials what they described as a 'month of political pain' to persuade
Opec members to allow the kingdom to make up 60 per cent of the shortfall
itself, almost at a stroke.
But by August 27 1990, and with the support of Venezuela and the United Arab
Emirates - the only other Opec producers with much available spare capacity
 -Saudi Arabia had won consent to lift production from its pre-war Opec
quota of 5.4m b/d to more than 8m b/d. It has maintained this level, on
average, ever since.
It also took the considerable muscle of Saudi Arabia's notoriously
over-designed oil infrastructure to enable so great a production leap so
fast. This successful leap, allied with Saudi Arabia's relief at having
escaped largely unscathed from the war, is the fountain of its present
self-confidence.
However, neither the kingdom's willingness to throw its political weight
around nor the sheer size of its oil market clout have been lost on Opec's
smaller and more oil price-conscious members. While Iraq and Kuwait have
remained off-stage, Saudi Arabia's fractious Opec colleagues have been
content to allow the kingdom unbridled production for as long as they
themselves have also been free to produce flat out - and while oil prices
have largely weathered combined Opec output of more than 23.65m b/d. But
with prices now softening and the demand for Opec crude set to make its
seasonal spring dip, Saudi Arabia may be forced to flex its moderating
muscles.
The next test will come when Opec ministers gather in Geneva next month to
decide how to adjust output for a softer market. Price hawks such as Algeria
and Iran will be at the forefront of those lobbying for a reimposed
discipline, and possibly a reimposition of quotas, to shore up prices.
Saudi Arabia, however, has made it plain that it will countenance output
cuts only if these are shared in equal proportion by all Opec members.
Moreover, it wants to see cuts made relative to production capacity. If it
wins its way, the kingdom will therefore safeguard, at least until Iraq and
Kuwait are both back at full production, its augmented share of Opec output
and sustained production of about eight million barrels a day.
There is more at stake for the kingdom than holding present market
leadership. Although Saudi Arabia raised production during the Gulf crisis
to avoid what Mr Hisham Nazer, the oil minister, described as 'spontaneous
chaos' in the oil market, Saudi Arabia was already proceeding with plans
drafted in 1988 for a long-term increase in sustainable capacity to 10m b/d.
The Gulf emergency merely accelerated this programme - at an estimated cost
of Dollars 5bn.
Since the war, Saudi Aramco, the state-owned oil company, has proceeded
apace with plans to implement the new capacity in a programme which, Saudi
officials say, will finally cost Dollars 10bn-Dollars 15bn and which they
expect to be completed by early 1995.
The first phase largely entailed dusting-off facilities unused since the
kingdom last pumped more than 8m b/d during the early 1980s. During the Gulf
air war, the kingdom revived 146 wells and 12 gas oil separation plants
(Gosps) in the southern oilfields of the Eastern Province. Aramco also
drilled 51 wells and 21 water injection wells to keep production hovering at
8.5m b/d. Eight more Gosps were brought out of mothballs elsewhere in the
kingdom.
Work on the next stage of developing new oilfields and equipping them with
pipelines, gathering stations and new Gosps, is now in train. By late last
year, Aramco had appointed five project managers to oversee this
development: Ralph M Parsons, Fluor Daniel, John Brown, Stone & Webster and
Abb Lumus Crest.
Ralph M Parsons has already pre-qualified contractors for the work at
Hawiyah in the Ghawar oilfields, Saudi Arabia's largest, where Dollars 200m
worth of construction is needed to complete a new 300,000 b/d Gosp and
expand pumping and handling facilities. Fluor Daniel has also started
co-ordinating work worth an expected Dollars 700m to upgrade plant in the
Marjan and Zuluf northern oilfields.
Perhaps the most intriguing project will be the development of the virgin
Hawtah and neighbouring oilfields south of Riyadh. John Brown Engineers, the
UK-based company, last year won the project management contract for the
fields which are known to hold substantial reserves of premium light crude.
No official reserve figure has been quoted for the Hawtah field, although
there are murmurings of five billion barrels of sweet crude in this area.
Some analysts also believe that the oil found there could be extremely
light.
The new southern fields are also close to the east-west pipeline linking
terminals on the Red Sea and Gulf coast, which the kingdom is also planning
to expand from its present capacity of 3m b/d to 5m b/d.
These expansion projects represent the base for the kingdom's ambitious
plans to expand and upgrade its refining capacity while also broadening and
deepening its already large petrochemicals industry. Moreover, along with
its planned internal oil industry integration Saudi Arabia is also pursuing
integration with its main consumer markets through joint venture refining
deals in Japan, south Korea, the US and perhaps, eventually, Europe.
With such ambitions propelling Saudi Arabia's assertive position within
Opec, the kingdom has little inclination to relinquish its new dominance in
the organisation. Saudi officials are convinced that Opec can, with a
commitment to flexible but moderate prices and to security of supply, fend
off any threat from alternative energy sources well into the next century.
It also sees Opec as a powerful lobby through which to oppose the imposition
in the west of environmental taxes on gasoline, which might in turn threaten
oil producers.
However, at least in its present post-war flush of confidence, the kingdom
seems indisposed to suffer gladly anything it perceives as Opec foolishness.
'If other producers cheat on output by so much as a barrel, the Saudis will
cheat by a million to teach them a lesson,' suggests one oil industry
analyst.

The Financial Times


London Page III Photograph Tankers off Jeddah harbour, Saudi Arabia has
raised its share of Opec's output (Omitted).

920130

