FT921-14327

FT  16 JAN 92 / The Lloyd's Report - News and Reaction: Cautious optimism
abounds in clubby atmosphere


   By NORMA COHEN, JOHN AUTHERS and ANDREW JACK


MANY insurance professionals yesterday doubted whether the task force
recommendations would help Names already in difficulties. However, the
general reaction of professionals to the proposals was positive.
In the clubby atmosphere that has survived at Lloyd's while London's other
financial exchanges have been turned upside down, business went on as usual
while one of the biggest ever reforms was announced.
Early in the day, syndicate heads and senior officials were called to a
briefing on the proposals, leaving underlings to rely on the rumour mill for
information. 'We're waiting to read it in the papers tomorrow,' said a clerk
at one underwriting syndicate.
The welcome from those who had been briefed was cautious, as brokers,
underwriters, advisers and Names - the individuals whose wealth underpins
the market - digested the 240-page report.
'I have to admit I'm only on page 52 at the moment,' said Mr Max Lehrain,
managing director of Grimston Scott, a tax and financial adviser to Lloyd's
Names, late in the afternoon. 'But what is encouraging is to see the council
responding in a positive way.'
Mr Chris Burton, joint managing director of AJ Archer, a quoted underwriting
group, said: 'It's a very comprehensive document. My immediate reaction is,
it's a breath of fresh air for the whole marketplace. The whole concept of
the report is getting back to the commerciality of Lloyd's'
He also welcomed the importance given to the Names and enhanced links to
brokers. He did not feel the new rights for Names would make managing agency
business less attractive.
Mr Ken Carter, chief executive of insurance broker Lloyd Thompson, said:
'The report is not very radical. It is what one would have expected. The
original aim was to look at Lloyd's capital base. That has moved slightly
into the background.'
The proposal to allow Names to reinsure their 'open years' with CentreWrite,
in particular, had a lukewarm reception. 'If they can afford that, they can
probably afford the losses,' said Mr Mike Voller, Lloyd's specialist with
the accountant BDO Binder Hamlyn, which advises about 1,000 Names.
Mr Mark Farrer, chairman of the Association of Lloyd's Members, which
represents 9,500 Names - 40 per cent of the total - said the proposals for
CentreWrite 'are going to be extremely useful for Names, because nobody at
present is really prepared to assess the individual risk. I don't doubt that
what is proposed is an excellent idea.'
Brokers were generally enthusiastic. 'The instantaneous applause that David
Rowland received when he made his presentation said it all,' said Mr Alan
Colls, chairman of the Lloyd's insurance brokers committee and chairman of
Nicholson Chamberlain & Colls, a Lloyd's brokerage.
Mr Tom Benyon, chairman of the Association of Lloyd's Names, was positive
but added: 'It's done nothing to help the injured Names.' He welcomed the
report's recommendations for the future. 'For the first time in its 300-year
history, it's putting the outsiders first, and not the insiders.'
Overall, there was relief that a cap was to be placed on Names' personal
liability. 'For unlimited liability they should be getting a 25 per cent
return every year,' said one underwriter. 'They've been getting 10 per cent
and you can get that out of the stock market.'
There is discomfort, though, that losses above the new cap would be spread
around the market. 'If a Name makes a 100 per cent profit, does that mean
now that he's going to share that with everybody?' said one underwriter.
'And I don't want to pay for somebody else's bad underwriting,' he added.
Mr Reg Brown, underwriter at RE Brown, said: 'We're trying to catch up on
300 years of business. Up until now, syndicates haven't regarded themselves
as businesses.'
For all its significance in the world's insurance business, the revolution
of the 1980s appears to have touched Lloyd's little. For instance, the
number of female underwriters can be counted on one hand, although a number
are brokers.
Members insist there is no sex discrimination. 'We make a special effort to
get the ladies,' said one underwriter. 'Any one that comes within a whisker
of our box on February 14 gets a chocolate heart.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Graph (Omitted).

920116

