FT921-1385

FT  24 MAR 92 / Pretoria moves to set up first multiracial councils


   By PATTI WALDMEIR and PHILIP GAWITH


   PRETORIA, JOHANNESBURG


THE South African government, buoyed by victory in a white referendum on
apartheid, expects to have the first phase of a multiracial interim
government in place by next month, ministers said yesterday.
Government proposals tabled at the Convention for Democratic South Africa,
the multi-party forum negotiating a post-apartheid constitution, called for
multi-party transitional councils to oversee key areas of government in the
run-up to elections next year for an interim legislature.
The councils would include six members chosen by Codesa and a seventh
appointed by the president in consultation with the convention.
However, under Pretoria's plans the existing all-white cabinet would remain
in place, though ministers made clear it would be bound by council
decisions.
The proposals were initially rejected by the African National Congress in
the belief the councils would play a purely advisory role. Later, however,
senior ANC officials said they thought agreement could be reached after
further talks.
But they rejected the government's hard-line insistence that the ANC disband
its military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe, before a full transitional government
was in place.
Pretoria says that joint control of the police and army will only be
conceded once the question of armed struggle has been resolved.
The transitional councils would oversee four areas of government:
preparation for elections, government finance, regional government and local
government.
Councils on education, health, housing and foreign relations would be set up
later.
Ministers said that, as the councils would take decisions by consensus - and
that as consensus could not be achieved without the agreement of all
parties, including government - the cabinet would have no reason to veto
council decisions.
Pretoria may have to make further concessions on the powers of the councils,
but it seems likely that the issue can be swiftly resolved in Codesa.
Further stumbling blocks could yet emerge, however, over who should be
appointed to the councils, and over how many parties should be represented.
The ANC wants the broadest possible representation, while the government
wants to exclude all but major parties.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920324

