FT922-13393

FT  11 APR 92 / Entertainment: Conduct a little less than becoming


   By PAUL DRIVER


ANOTHER outcome that was awaited, though with only moderate eagerness, on
election night was that of the second Donatella Flick Conducting
Competition, being concluded at the Queen Elizabeth Hall.
Ms Flick, who is a wealthy Italian patroness of the arts, has given backing
to productions at English National Opera; last year she turned her
attentions to tyro British conductors. The prize is Pounds 5,000 worth of
specialist study in Italy.
I suspect that conducting competitions, like all the other musical
competitions with which we seem to be plague-ridden, do more harm than good;
demoralising the losers, inflating the winner, and suggesting that the
spiritual art of making music is a sport like any other. Conducting
competitions are more disconcerting than other kinds: the mystique and
authority considered indispensable to the conductor are readily exposed as
sham when everyone is having a go at having them, and there is no very solid
basis for purely technical evaluation of candidates.
Of course real authority and charisma are bound to come through, even in
these artifical and gladiatorial conditions, but the two evenings of the
Flick finals yielded little in this regard. The four contestants were chosen
on their CVs and references, and each was allocated half a concert and an
afternoon rehearsal slot.
Each conducted a Mozart concert aria (soprano Tinuke Olafimihan) and a
middling length piece, and had to give an unrehearsed reading of the last
few minutes of Bartok's Dance Suite. The orchestra was Young Musicians'
Symphony - the largest I have ever heard in this hall.
I found all the Mozart arias disappointing. Each began with a spasm of bad
intonation; none quite found its stylistic way. But they are testing to
perform at the best of times, and these were the worst.
Far more successful were the Romantic items. Graham Jackson (who alone
conducted from memory) directed a well-paced, interestingly detailed account
of Sibelius's Karelia Suite; altogether he gave evidence of solid, if not
electrifying, ability. Ian Hughes did a decent job with Rimsky-Korsakov's
Spanish Capriccio, and Andrew Dunscombe offered up a fair Romeo and Juliet
fantasy-overture.
Timothy Lole instilled passion and vibrant musicianship into the performance
of Elgar's In The South. It was decidedly impressive, and he deserved his
prize.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920411

