FT921-414

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (3): A time
for disentanglement - Reform will end Lloyd's peculiar intimacy


   By PETER MARTIN


UNTIL this year, it looked as if the regulatory issues which bedevilled
Lloyd's throughout the 1970s had been finally laid to rest by the reforms of
the early 1980s.
Though Lloyd's problems were pressing, as was freely acknowledged in the
Rowland task force report on the market's future published in January 1992,
they were seen as essentially commercial. The Lloyd's Act of 1982 had
settled Lloyd's regulatory issues once and for all, it was argued, and the
seal of approval had been given to those reforms by Sir Patrick Neill's
inquiry into how they were operating later in the decade.
The Neill inquiry's verdict was quoted in the Rowland report in January. In
the few months since then, however, it has become clear that regulation is
still a live issue at Lloyd's, one which may yet decide whether the market
is permanently enfeebled by the problems of the 1990s.
It is Lloyd's commercial problems - in particular the heavy losses on
catastrophe insurance in the late 1980s - which have brought the regulatory
issues back to the forefront. The losses have revived a time-honoured debate
about the treatment afforded 'outside' Names - those who do not work in the
market, but participate solely through their commitment of capital - as
compared with the 'working' names who earn their livings as underwriters,
brokers and other active market participants. Outsiders have always grumbled
that they are excluded from the best, most profitable syndicates, which were
reserved, they alleged, for those who had good market connections, and
especially for those who were able to bring business to the syndicate
managers. These complaints would have stayed at the level of grumbling had
the scale of the losses not suddenly made the treatment of outsiders a hot
issue once again. The problem stems from a distinctive feature of the way
Lloyd's is organised: the intimately entwined nature of the relationships
between insiders at Lloyd's. For example, brokers who bring business to the
market are often also Names in their own right. Underwriters on a syndicate
are obliged, by Lloyd's regulation, to participate in the risks as Names on
that syndicate; but they may well be members of other syndicates also.
The reforms of the early 1980s, by forbidding brokers from owning managing
agents, cut one of the links binding the parts of the market together, but
many others remain: managing agents are permitted to own members' agents,
for example.
Traditionally, this intimate involvement has been seen as one of Lloyd's
strengths. And with good reason: since brokers were forced to divest their
managing agents a decade ago, their involvement in the Lloyd's market has
become notably less intimate, and a steadily rising proportion of their
business is now funnelled elsewhere, bypassing Lloyd's entirely. A market
which severed all its internal links might well be one which served its
members and its customers less well. The nature of the relationships between
working Names, however, makes them vulnerable to accusations of favouritism.
In the good years, the marked contrast between the intimately entwined world
of the working Names and the essentially passive, long-distance involvement
of the outsiders causes no more than the occasional grumble. In the bad
years, it becomes explosive. The issue has been exacerbated by what in
retrospect is generally agreed to have been a misguided campaign to promote
membership of Lloyd's to people whose finances could not stand the risks
associated with unlimited liability.
In the late 1980s, many of these undercapitalised new members were sucked
straight into the rapidly growing LMX syndicates, which insure other
syndicates against unexpectedly high losses. These had been very profitable
in the mid 1980s, and thus appeared particularly attractive to the new
joiners - but they were among the worst money-losers when a series of
disasters struck the market at the end of the decade.
Many of the Names worst affected by these losses have been campaigning for
some form of 'market settlement' - a sharing out of the burden across the
market as a whole. They had waited, with scarcely concealed impatience, for
the Rowland task force report, which they hoped might lead to such a
proposal. Instead, Rowland set its face against the retrospective
mutualisation of risk, partly on principle, and partly because such a
proposal would have split the working party - and the market leadership -
beyond repair.
Once it became clear that loss-making Names could not expect to be rescued
by the Rowland task force, the activists among them highlighted the issue of
the relationship between working and outside names. By focusing on
allegations of improper dealing, they hoped to attract the attention of
press and politicians to their cause and to strengthen the case for a market
settlement. If improper actions have taken place, their argument goes, then
the market as a whole is responsible for the failure of supervision that has
allowed some members to profit at the expense of others; and the market as a
whole must therefore shoulder the financial burden.
The issue has become so divisive that Lloyd's has asked Sir David Walker,
chairman of the Securities and Investments Board and an ex-officio member of
the Lloyd's Council, to investigate. His report, due later this spring,
should resolve the truth or falsity of the allegations.
The heat that the issue has generated, and the scale of the losses of the
worst-affected Names, mean that even if Sir David's report is an exoneration
of the market's practices, pressure for a market settlement will continue.
If there is no such settlement, the issue will continue to gnaw away at
Lloyd's, hampering the market's ability to respond to other serious
problems, draining its liquidity (because many Names will feel entitled to
delay or withhold payment needed to meet losses), harming its reputation,
and damaging credibility in the eyes of politicians.
Even if these problems can be overcome - by a market settlement or some
other solution - the hue and cry of the last few months may well ensure that
the 'entwined' nature of Lloyd's does not survive the next few years, as the
framework of regulation changes, and the market starts to admit corporate
capital. Such changes may end the complaints over the way insiders treat
outsiders - but it will ensure that much of Lloyd's distinguishing character
will disappear also.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920330

