FT923-15402

FT  02 JUL 92 / Lowering the oil flag: The Venezuelan search is on for
foreign partners in the production of crude


   By JOE MANN


VENEZUELA'S decision to allow private companies to produce oil from a series
of inactive fields is not only an important break with the past but also the
first concrete example of private capital investment in the oil production
sector since the country's petroleum industry was nationalised in 1976.
Mr Alirio Parra, energy and mines minister, announced on June 19 that Royal
Dutch/Shell and smaller companies from Japan, the US and Venezuela would
invest Dollars 720m (Pounds 390m) over the next 10 years to produce crude
from five groups of inactive fields.
The private companies are assuming the entire financial risk - no oil, no
return. How much they earn will depend solely on the volume of oil produced
because even though they are spending money on production infrastructure,
they will not own the crude. All output will be turned over to subsidiaries
of Venezuela's national oil company, PDVSA.
Shell's return to Venezuela as an investor in the oil sector is not without
irony. When all private oil companies were nationalised 16 years ago,
Shell's operation was second only to Exxon's. Both companies had to wait
more than a decade for their claims to be settled with the government.
It was President Carlos Andres Perez, waving the banner of nationalism, who
ordered the state takeover of foreign oil companies during his previous term
in office. Now, he is supporting PDVSA efforts to open petroleum sectors
such as exploration, production and refining to foreign capital.
However, while Venezuela is only encouraging foreign capital in its oil
industry, the state company has invested well over Dollars 1bn since 1983 to
purchase full or part-ownership in oil refining and distribution systems in
Europe and the US.
The agreements covering the inactive fields, due for signature this month,
are what PDVSA executives hope will be the first in a series of new
investments by international oil companies. Private concerns have invested
for many years in Venezuelan petrochemicals; large sums are flowing into the
sector. But petroleum and natural gas have been out of bounds until now.
In late 1990, PDVSA announced a large natural gas liquefaction project in
eastern Venezuela, in partnership with Exxon, Mitsubishi and Shell. Studies
of the Dollars 3bn-Dollars 4bn project are continuing, but no large
investments have yet been made, and its fate hangs on natural gas prices
worldwide. Venezuelans are keen to sell their liquefied natural gas in the
US.
Since Mr Perez took office for the second time in early 1989, PDVSA has also
been encouraging other joint ventures with international oil companies in a
variety of areas, including exploration, production and refining.
The state company has the world's largest proven reserves of heavy and
extra-heavy petroleum, and is stressing what it calls 'strategic
associations' with international companies to produce and refine heavy oil.
Despite Venezuela's strong interest in heavy oil, foreign companies consider
it uneconomical while there are abundant light and medium-grade crudes
available from the Middle East. PDVSA is in the midst of a multi-billion
dollar capital investment programme which must be funded not only by
internal cash flow, but also by export credits, loans and equity from
abroad.
Mr Perez and many other former proponents of a fully-national industry have
understood the need for foreign capital and loans if PDVSA is to grow and
remain competitive.
The company today remains well managed and profitable. The political
instability resulting from an unsuccessful military uprising last February
has not affected operations so far.
However, its capital investment needs are being squeezed by lower than
expected oil prices and a high tax bite (82 per cent of operating profits)
by a government addicted to petroleum revenues.
Last year, taxes on PDVSA provided the central government with more than 70
per cent of total revenues.
To cope with its capital shortage, PDVSA has reduced investment this year
and delayed or prolonged some large projects. The company also is seeking
funds on international capital markets.
A subsidiary, Corpoven, recently gave a mandate to CS First Boston to raise
Dollars 300m to finance the expansion of a natural gas plant. This year, two
US banks tried to raise money for PDVSA, but company officials said they
decided the placements would be too costly and the efforts were dropped.
News reports of popular protests, demands for the resignation of Mr Perez
and other symptoms of political instability have affected investors'
perceptions.
PDVSA has external debts of Dollars 2.16bn and loans from Venezuelan banks
totalling around Dollars 923m. The company will need borrowed money to
finance most of its investment programme this year and next.
Capital outlays last year were Dollars 3.7bn. Before the cuts, this year's
figure was projected at well over Dollars 4bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920702

