FT924-11416

FT  26 OCT 92 / US Money and Credit: Retail investors are caught between
politics and reality


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


INVESTORS in the US Treasury bond market, many of whom are nervous about the
impact of fiscal stimuli being promised by Governor Bill Clinton to get the
US economy moving again, appear to be coming round to the gradual
realisation that there may yet be life after election day.
Not everyone is sanguine, of course, and traditional retail buyers of
Treasury paper seem likely to remain on the sidelines until after the
presidential election a week from tomorrow.
These smaller players in the market simply may not have the stomach - or
sufficient information - to speculate about interest rates in the closing
stages of the presidential campaign.
Retail investors were reported to have sold heavily in the early part of
last week, and on Friday wariness continued as the benchmark 30-year
Treasury issue declined by  9/32 in light trading. This brought the bond's
total loss for the week to 1 5/16 , raising its yield to 7.63 per cent, the
highest since last July.
Bond market participants have instead begun to form a more jaundiced view of
the gap between Mr Clinton's political campaign rhetoric about jump-starting
the economy with federal spending programmes and the likely reality that a
Clinton administration would not translate instantly into higher budget
deficits and higher inflation.
Analysts at Salomon Brothers, for example, note the protestations from
Clinton's close advisers that - contrary to what the market thinks - their
candidate has no plans for immediate fiscal stimulus.
But Salomon also notes that these reassurances have failed to quell market
concerns and that ultimately bond prices will remain vulnerable until any
potential shift in fiscal policy is clarified by a future President Clinton.
Mr Phillip Braverman, chief economist at DKB Securities in New York, says
rather more directly that a Clinton presidency would be 'unlikely to unlease
a deluge of red ink'. In dismissing concerns that a Clinton administration
would go on a spending spree, Mr Braverman stresses Mr Clinton is focusing
on ways to increase spending without increasing the deficit.
The market is also forgetting the public service performed by Mr Ross Perot
 -he has made concern over the deficit a national issue and this will make
it more difficult for both Congress and the next president to avoid the need
to attack the deficit during the next four years.
In addition, the latest report from Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette, the
securities house, warns that the US federal budget deficit is likely to
remain relatively high for years to come no matter who is elected.
Nor will the election stop the Federal Reserve from a further easing of
monetary policy if, as expected, the next round of macro-economic statistics
shows the US economy is still extremely sluggish.
Tomorrow, for example, the commerce department will issue a report on
third-quarter growth in gross domestic product; the consensus is for a
fairly anaemic 1.4 per cent to 1.6 per cent. Then the conference board will
release the consumer confidence index for October, which could be down
further from 58 per cent in August and 56.4 per cent in September.
On Wednesday, the commerce department will release durable goods data for
September, also likely to be weak.
These statistics might be expected to boost bond prices, were it not for
political uncertainty and the weight of more Treasury paper coming to
market, with auctions of Dollars 15bn of two-year maturities and Dollars
10.75bn of five-year paper.
The most important new economic data likely to be reviewed by the Fed will,
however, come after the election when October unemployment data is released.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921026

