FT922-7223

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (6): Airlines aim for
a flying start - New opportunities are opening up in the airfreight industry


   By PHILLIP HASTINGS


RAPID international expansion during the 1980s by new-style integrators
offering express door-to-door delivery services initially left airlines and
freight forwarders struggling to produce a positive response.
Much of the latter's intra-European air freight and general international
package/small parcel business soon disappeared into the hands of companies
such as TNT, DHL and Federal Express.
'The fast development of the new integrated transportation concept,
especially in Europe, dramatically altered a part of the traditional
airfreight scene,' said Mr Peter Somaglia, general manager of airline-owned
express company Skyracer.
Now, though, the freight industry is seeing growing demand for the same fast
door-to-door delivery of heavier parcels and general freight as that
available for smaller packages.
Observers say this is opening up opportunities for the forwarders and
airlines to fight back.
They argue that many of the early advantages claimed by the integrators are
being eroded as those companies are forced to expand already costly air and
truck networks to cater for larger freight consignments as well as documents
and small packages.
'The express companies defined the product for everyone else. What they did
was bring to the market delivery - as opposed to despatch - specifications,'
said Mr Paul Jackson, chairman of express industry research and consultancy
company Triangle Management Services.
'But now most people, including the forwarders, are selling all-in prices
covering door-to-door movements. And the speciality of the integrators,
owning their own equipment, is not a sufficient plus in terms of economics.
In fact, the bottom line is that it is not economic to own all that
expensive equipment.'
Early airline efforts to combat the competition from integrators proved
largely unsuccessful. Several ambitious attempts to set up in-house
door-to-door express delivery operations failed, mainly because of
opposition from forwarders worried about losing their business.
Internal conflicts over issues such as using the services of other carriers
for carrying consignments only added to the airlines' problems.
Such failures have not deterred some carriers from continuing to try to
develop express organisations. Swissair, with fellow Swiss carrier Crossair
and Austrian Airlines, has spent the last couple of years developing
Skyracer, a door-to-door parcel/document express delivery company. Mr
Somaglia explained why Swissair had chosen to set it up as an independent
business unit: 'The decision not to incorporate these (express) services
within the airline was based on the belief that the integrated
transportation concept requires overall control and an uninterrupted
door-to-door information flow with a dedicated and qualified express-minded
staff,' he said.
'It was also believed that any 'internal' airline express operation would
lack interest in using other carriers for linehaul purposes, making it
impossible to offer customers a complete product.'
German airline Lufthansa and Japan Air Lines have adopted a rather different
approach, apparently accepting that if you cannot beat the integrators, join
them.
The two airlines have each bought a five per cent shareholding in air
express company DHL with an option to increase it to 25 per cent in June
this year.
Since agreement on that deal at the end of 1990, the companies have taken
their time establishing external operational and service co-operation. But
synergies are emerging. 'In the US, for instance, DHL aircraft are being
used to carry Lufthansa and JAL freight during the daytime,' said DHL.
Most other large airlines are now concentrating on developing wholesale
express services for forwarders - and courier/express companies - rather
than seeking to build up retail door-to-door services. In that way, they
believe, they can continue to work with their main customers rather than
competing with them.
One such is British Airways. The carrier has developed a wholesale
operation, Speedbird Courier, to provide airport-to-airport services for
courier, express and forwarding companies. More recently, it has been
developing a wholesale airport-to-door product.
Other leading airlines with owned or affiliated wholesale courier companies
include Japan Air Lines (Jupiter) and Hong Kong-based Cathay Pacific Airways
(Linehaul Express).
The latter airline, for example, offers an on-board courier service on key
routes such as London/Hong Kong; a systemwide parcel/freight express service
offering late cut-off at point of origin, fast retrieval of cargo at airport
of destination and tracking/tracing; and an enhancement of that service to
include clearance and delivery to the door.
Meanwhile, a host of smaller airlines have developed other niches in the
international express market. UK-based Channel Express and Air Bridge
Carriers provide aircraft for express service operators moving traffic
between the UK and Continental Europe/Scandinavia. The latter has also
developed its own wholesale express division, Air Bridge Express (ABX).
Among the best-known of the forwarder-run express delivery operations in
Europe are the Eurapid system run by Swiss-based Danzas and the Pandalink
operation of US-based airfreight company Air Express International.
Eurapid is road-based, offering fixed-schedule 24/48/72-hour delivery
services throughout the European Community and EFTA countries. 'We basically
promote Eurapid as a faster alternative to normal road groupage services -
the key is the guaranteed delivery aspect,' said Danzas.
AEI's Pandalink operation comprises two basic products. The air-based 'Red'
service, offers 24/48-hour door-to-door delivery and incorporates a
straightforward consignment charge and rate per kilo tariff. The 'Blue'
service uses road transport to reduce costs at the expense of longer transit
times.
Scandinavian forwarding group ASG provides an intra-European express freight
service based on nightly freighters linking the UK, Continental Europe and
Scandinavia. 'Those air links enable us to offer next day delivery of
virtually any size of parcel or freight throughout Europe and Scandinavia
and before 7am delivery in the capital cities,' said Mr Jim Shortall,
managing director of ASG (UK).
In addition to competing with integrators for heavier freight traffic within
Europe, forwarders are also looking to work with airlines in longer-haul
express markets.
Forwarders say information technology systems enable them increasingly to
match the ability of the integrators to electronically track consignments
around the world.
And, say forwarders, they have greater flexibility than the integrators when
it comes to handling larger consignments.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920520

