FT923-10864

FT  28 JUL 92 / VAT hope for small businesses


   By DIANE SUMMERS


SMALL businesses with cash flow problems may in future escape penalties for
not paying value added tax on time, if they themselves have been paid late
by customers, as a result of a Court of Appeal ruling yesterday .
Three judges ruled by a two-to-one majority that Customs and Excise had been
wrong to impose a surcharge of over Pounds 1,000 on Mr John Steptoe, an
Essex electrical contractor.
The judges accepted Mr Steptoe's argument that he could not have paid the
VAT due because he had been paid late by his principal customer, the London
Borough of Redbridge.
The Federation of Small Businesses welcomed the ruling, saying that Customs
and Excise should allow late payment of invoices as a 'reasonable excuse'
for non-payment of VAT. Thousands of small businesses could be affected, it
added.
The decision was also well received by the Association of British Chambers
of Commerce and the Confederation of British Industry, although the CBI
warned small companies 'to be very careful in delaying payment to any
statutory body'.
Mr Steptoe, who has represented himself in the case did 95 per cent of his
work during the relevant accounting periods in 1987 and 1988 for Redbridge
council.
A VAT tribunal had said it was 'one of those rare cases' where the taxpayer
might legitimately put forward as a reasonable excuse the unexpected and
continuing conduct of the person who caused his prolonged shortage of funds.
That decision was backed by the High Court.
Lord Donaldson, the Master of the Rolls, and Mr Justice Nolan dismissed an
appeal by the Customs and Excise. Lord Justice Scott said he would have
allowed it.
Customs and Excise were refused leave to appeal to the House of Lords, but
can still apply direct to the law lords for leave.
Lord Justice Nolan said Customs and Excise argued that if its appeal failed,
all reasons for insufficient funds were capable of being advanced as
'reasonable excuses' for late payment.
He added that this concern was 'exaggerated'.  As a general rule the Customs
and Excise Commissioners and the VAT Tribunal could be trusted to determine
in any given case whether a reasonable excuse for non-payment existed.
He was unable to conclude that the tribunal was wrong in law in deciding
that Mr Steptoe ha a reasonable excuse.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920728

