FT922-7114

FT  20 MAY 92 / London Stock Exchange: Footsie struggles to hold above 2,700


   By STEVE THOMPSON


A LATE burst of activity, prompted by some rather spurious takeover
speculation, enabled London's equity market to end a difficult day with only
minor damage. More importantly, it finished above the psychologically
important 2,700 level on the Footsie index. At the close the index was 3
points lower at 2,700.6.
Equity market specialists were encouraged that the market had managed to
hold above 2,700, although there were suspicions that dealers were more than
keen to see the index close above that level.
There was turmoil in the market at the outset of trading, when a fault in
the Stock Exchange computing system led to incorrect FT-SE 100 share indices
being published on the Stock Exchange TOPIC system during the first few
minutes of trading. The fault also meant that prices carried on TOPIC's
Footsie trigger page were incorrect. There were no problems, however, with
the market's Seaq trading system, enabling dealers to trade normally
throughout the session.
The problems were quickly corrected, showing that the Footsie opened some
3.6 higher at 2,707.2. The early rise in the Footsie reflected the latest
strong showing by Wall Street overnight and a positive performance by Tokyo.
However, a decline in the Footsie future and the emergence of only scattered
support for leading shares saw the market begin to drift off and dip below
2,700 to reach the day's low point of 2,693.7, or 9.9 lower.
April's Public Sector Borrowing Requirement of Pounds 3.6bn came as no
surprise to the City, nor did figures for industrial production and unit
wage costs. Thereafter, the market managed to recoup some of the lost
ground, with an early modest fall by Wall Street having little effect on
London. Dealers were quick to point out that sterling continued to perform
well against the D-Mark and the dollar and that there had been few signs of
pressure in the gilts market.
News that the Bank of England had waved through the Hongkong & Shanghai
Banking bid for Midland Bank caused a flurry in Midland shares amid rather
unconvincing stories that Hongkong Bank may well launch a market raid to
pick up a further 10 per cent of Midland shares.
Another suggestion was that Lloyds, increasingly viewed as being thwarted in
its attempts to acquire Midland, could now turn its attentions towards Royal
Bank of Scotland.
Heavy turnover in Asda also revived old bid hints in the supermarket chain.
The best showing in the Footsie came from British Airways, whose shares ran
up 5.2 per cent after more than doubled profits.
Lasmo, the oil group, took a hammering after SG Warburg Securities
downgraded its earnings and dividend projections for the stock.
Turnover in equities accelerated after a slow start, helped by a
medium-sized programme trade executed around midday, and reached 565.4m
shares. As expected, the value of customer business on Monday dropped below
Pounds 1bn, only the third time since the general election that turnover has
fallen below that level.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920520

