FT923-15684

FT  01 JUL 92 / UK Company News: SWEB surges 35% to Pounds 83m and switches
on the gas


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


SOUTH WESTERN Electricity, the Bristol-based distributor, raised profits by
35 per cent in its first full year as a privatised company.
The sharp increase for the year to March 31, which was in line with other
electricity company results, was accompanied by a 14.5 per cent increase in
the total dividend to 17.4p.
Mr William Nicol, chairman, said the 'excellent' result came from a
combination of cost cutting, better management of assets, and higher sales.
SWEB made Pounds 83m before tax, up from Pounds 61.3m, the pro forma result
produced last year for the privatisation. Turnover amounted to Pounds 847m
(Pounds 779m) and earnings per share rose by 11.6p to 50.6p.
The bulk of the increase in operating profit came in electricity
distribution, up by Pounds 24.4m to Pounds 93.7m. This reflected a 3.3 per
cent increase in tariffs, and a 1.4 per cent increase in volume.
The tariff rise was lower than the 3.6 per cent permitted by the terms of
its licence and many customers had taken advantage of the 1 per cent
reduction offered to those who paid by direct debit. The volume increase was
lower than normal due to the recession.
The retailing and contracting business saw profits drop from Pounds 1.1m to
Pounds 400,000, reflecting a difficult high street market.
In the long run, SWEB is aiming for an 8 per cent a year real increase in
dividends. Mr John Sellers, finance director, said the latest result more
than justified the increase. One reason was the Pounds 6-Pounds 7m reduction
in costs last year, part of a strategy to bring costs down by 10 per cent by
1993-94.
SWEB also announced yesterday that it had set up Western Gas, a joint
venture with UtiliCorp United of the US, to sell gas to business customers
and take advantage of the ending of the British Gas monopoly later this
year.
Mr Nicol said that the new venture would enable both partners to contribute
their special expertise.
COMMENT
SWEB made a point of being unapologetic about this sharp increase, which was
in line with market expectations. It achieved a rise in volume sales in
difficult times, made further progress in its battle against costs, and
forewent a part of the tariff increase to which it was entitled. The
dividend increase was among the highest so far. The group justified this on
the basis of a formula by which any real increase over 4 per cent has to be
backed by improvements in performance rather than just volume. The main
disappointment is the retailing side which registered a small loss. Given
SWEB's large commitment to this area, it bears watching. The shares gained
11p to 321p where they yield just over 6 per cent, slightly above the sector
average.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920701

