FT922-13409

FT  11 APR 92 / Gardening: Scots soil to suit the bonnie heather - A garden
to visit: Arthur Hellyer starts a new series with a trip to a whisky
distillery's acreage in Scotland


   By ARTHUR HELLYER


ONE OF the most remarkable gardens in Scotland today belongs to a whisky
distillery. Bell's Cherrybank Gardens is a seven-acre extension to an
existing 11-acre garden which had already created a considerable name for
itself.
It all started when new office premises for Arthur Bell and Sons were opened
on the western outskirts of Perth, overlooking the city and the Tay valley.
This was a straightforward piece of industrial landscaping, started in 1978,
involving the use of trees, shrubs, herbaceous plants and water on a
considerable scale.
Robert Matthew Johnson-Marshall-Sportswork was awarded the contract; the
firm is said to have planted 65,000 shrubs and 1,200 trees, plus an
unspecified number of hardy perennials. Informal in design, a river-like
lake at its lowest point is fed partly by a natural burn. It has a complex
pattern of curving lawns and flower beds with dense, labour-saving planting
and great attractiveness for wildlife.
A notable feature of this garden is an elaborate mosaic, made with Italian
glass, which depicts a coat-of-arms. This fine garden, which is open to the
public, was given a Civic Trust Award in 1982.
But this is not my reason for drawing attention to the Bell's garden today.
What is important nationwide is Bell's Cherrybank Gardens, started in 1984
on seven acres of land adjacent to the office garden but rising well above
it, and intended as a heather garden.
It has its own water features, and the overall design was also by Robert
Matthew Johnson-Marshall-Sportswork, but the heather collection was planned
by Hazel Huddlestone. It is extremely impressive and already occupies a
large part of the ground, although there is still scope for extension.
There are now about 40,000 heather plants in 730 varieties. Norrie
Robertson, the head gardener, told me that he does all heather planting in
March. He waters all plants thoroughly before planting - and not very much
afterwards - and he uses a lot of pit sand when planting.
The soil is naturally a little acid, and this suits all heathers well, but
there was near disaster in the early days when the M90 motorway was being
constructed above the garden. A large quantity of lime was present in the
foundation material used for the road, and some of this washed down into the
garden, raising the alkalinity. However, the excess lime was washed out and
there have been no further problems from that source.
The heathers are in superb condition, planted in large blocks,in big curving
beds spread on the open hillside which provides a spectacular site for
display. Its excellence has been recognised by its designation as one of the
two National Collections of Heathers in Britain by the National Council for
the Conservation of Plants and Gardens, the other being in the Royal
Horticultural Society's garden at Wisley, Surrey, a very different site on
flat ground with numerous small trees including conifers.
Cherrybank has its own landscaping, quite distinct from that of the office
garden. There are fewer trees and shrubs, as befits its hillside situation
and prime use for heather cultivation, and it contains several other
features, including a children's playground, a dovecot stocked with
fantails, an aviary and a trellis garden with a set of tubular bells.
There is also a stream starting high up in the garden, artificially fed. The
water flows sinuously down the hillside between clean, stone-lined banks,
feeding several ponds. One of these is said to have remarkable acoustic
properties, creating different sounds as the water plays against the
circular surrounds. There are also a number of attractive statues, some the
work of Ian MacKintosh, others by Lawrence Broderick.
A visitor centre has been built at the top of the Cherrybank Gardens, which
also contains a small restaurant. It is now the main point of entry to both
the heather and the office gardens: the two, although separate entities, are
inter-connected.
Norrie Robertson heads a team of five gardeners who keep the place in
impeccable condition. About 20,000 visitors are welcomed every year, and
money is collected for charity from collecting-boxes, and from a
wishing-well.
The gardens are open on the first weekend in May until the middle of
October. The heather garden is never without flowers throughout the year:
one of the great attractions of heathers is that the numerous species
provide a continuous succession of flowers - though some seasons,
particularly spring and late summer to autumn, are more prolific than
others.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920411

