FT921-3709

FT  13 MAR 92 / Demands grow for ex-Soviet army to leave trouble spots


   By JOHN LLOYD


PRESSURE is growing on the former Soviet army to pull all of its forces out
of the three Caucasian republics of Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan.
Demands for a pull-out followed the capture, and subsequent release on
Wednesday night, of 10 army hostages seized by Armenian militants at a base
at Artik, near the Turkish border with Armenia. The Armenians demanded Grad
rocket launchers and other military hardware, but the army would not say
yesterday if these demands had been met in exchange for the soldiers'
release.
They had been seized after fighting in which two soldiers and three Armenian
fighters were killed.
Georgian police, meanwhile, reported that they had shot dead two former army
soldiers, both Azerbaijanis, who were said to be running guns and ammunition
from Georgia to Azerbaijan for use against the Armenians in
Nagorno-Karabakh.
The mood for withdrawal was evident at a meeting yesterday of the
Co-ordinating Council of officers of the Commonwealth of Independent States
 -the successor to the Soviet Union. Colonel General Bronislav Amilichev,
deputy chief of staff, told the meeting that 'no matter how events evolve,
any withdrawal must begin with getting servicemen's families to safety, to
save them from any trouble'.
This echoed the call earlier this week by Mr Alexander Rutskoi, the Russian
vice-president, who denied that any nuclear weaponry was at risk in the
conflict and called for the army to return to Russia. 'There is sovereign
Azerbaijan, sovereign Armenia, sovereign Georgia, let them work it out among
themselves,' he said.
The Armenian side yesterday reported heavy rocket attacks on Stepanakert,
the Nagorno-Karabakh capital, and a tank assault on the Armenian-held town
of Askeran, close to the Karabakh border with Azerbaijan.
Mr Jiri Dienstbier, the Czechoslovak foreign minister who has been charged
by the Nato co-operation council with leading a mediating mission to
Stepanakert, said on Czechoslovak TV that the mission, by member countries
of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), could only
go to Karabakh after a ceasefire had been declared.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920313

