FT924-6561

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: Westpac tumbles to record loss


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


WESTPAC Banking Corpor-ation yesterday announced net losses of ADollars
1.56bn (USDollars 1.07bn) after abnormal items for the year to the end of
September, a record for Australia's four national trading banks.
The result contrasted sharply with a ADollars 675m net profit announced by
the more conservatively managed National Australia Bank. Earlier this week,
Australia and New Zealand Banking Corporation revealed a net loss of
ADollars 579m.
Westpac reported net profits of ADollars 104m for the second half, but the
return to profitability was swamped by the bank's first-half loss of
ADollars 1.66bn, which followed a ADollars 2.65bn write-off against bad
loans.
The bank said second-half net profits were ADollars 268m before abnormal
losses of ADollars 106m relating to US tax, a ADollars 51m pension fund
writedown, and a ADollars 7m writedown of its 6.2 per cent shareholding in
the ANZ bank.
The directors cut the final dividend from 12 cents to 6 cents, making a
total of 18 cents a share, compared with 24 cents. The board maintained full
franking, but said future increases in dividends would depend on
performance.
The result ends a year during which five directors resigned and the bank was
given six months to improve performance by the AMP Society, its biggest
shareholder.
Westpac strengthened its balance sheet after the first half through a
ADollars 1.2bn fully underwritten rights issue, but was embarrassed when
shareholder scepticism left the issue 72 per cent undersubscribed.
Mr Frank Conroy, managing director, acknowledged that the bank would be
vulnerable to a takeover if the federal government relaxed its ban on
mergers between Australia's big six financial institutions.
Mr Conroy said shareholders were likely to be 'not very happy' with the
result. However, he said there was 'some evidence' that the bank's
profitability was starting to improve.
Profitability before tax, bad debts and abnormal items had been stable for
18 months at an annualised level of about ADollars 1.3bn. The capital ratio,
which reflects balance sheet strength, had improved from 8.4 per cent to 9.7
per cent following the rights issue. And problem assets had fallen to
ADollars 7.6bn from ADollars 8.2bn before specific provisions.
'Taken together . . . we have the foundation from which to recover our
financial performance over time, and reposition the bank to its rightful
place in the market,' Mr Conroy said.
Westpac said it intended to reinforce the recovery in profitability by
cutting costs and increasing revenue by ADollars 300m by next September;
cutting its expense to income ratio from 70 per cent to 58 per cent over
three years; and reducing its corporate lending assets by ADollars 10bn by
1995.
Westpac shares closed 3 cents higher on the Australian Stock Exchange at
ADollars 2.65, still 35 cents below the offer price for the recent rights
issue.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

921120

