FT922-13419

FT  11 APR 92 / Euro-Disney and the mouse that soared: A corporate empire
built on rodent power opens its latest theme park near Paris this weekend.
Its triumphs and the mounting challenges it faces


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


FACED with mouse infestation, most people call the council or comb the
Yellow Pages under 'P' for pest control. But year on year, decade on decade,
ever since the Disney empire was born in the 1920s, the world has stood by
dazed as a famous American rodent plants outposts everywhere from Los
Angeles to Tokyo.
This weekend, when Euro-Disney opens its 5,000 acres of surreal estate 20
miles north-west of Paris, Mickey will unveil his most controversial
venture. He and his colleagues hope for two things from the new theme park:
that it will pull the Disney empire out of its first period of choppy
fortunes since chairman Michael Eisner took over in 1984; and that even
sceptical old-world Europe will put out a welcome mat, rather than a
mousetrap, for America's most famous cartoon animal-cum-company logo.
The proportions of Euro-Disney are dizzying: Ffr23bn paid for it; a
specially enhanced transport structure to feed it (including road/rail links
to airports and central Paris); and six themed hotels with 5,200 beds to
service it. Around 11m visitors are expected in the first year: a modest
guestimate by Tokyo Disneyland's standard, where a one-day world attendance
record of 113,000 was set recently.
No other entertainment company in the world thinks in these statistical
terms. Yet, Disney's special status has been long acknowledged. So has its
classic American rags-to-riches story, which started in a small Kansas City
advertising office in the 1920s where Mickey was a real mouse prowling the
unknown Walt Disney's floor (originally, he was named Mortimer - until a
dissenting Mrs Disney stepped in). From there grew a giant corporate
ambassador for American ideals and values.
How dear Walt Disney's first-born was to his own heart was shown by the fact
that he dubbed the mouse's voice; only in later films did a smoker's cough
lay him off. Yet, even a man who made so many early sacrifices to promote
his hero-mascot - including selling his first car, a beloved Moon Cabriolet,
and humiliating himself in front of Louis B. Mayer ('Get that mouse off the
screen]' was the movie mogul's reported response to the cartoon character) -
cannot have foreseen his company's status at the century's end. In a recent
image-power survey, the mouse outfit lined up with Coca-Cola, Sony,
Mercedes-Benz and Kodak as the world's five most highly-recognised brand
names .
To the sub-teens, the age group expected to enjoy the company product most,
the Disney name is well out in front. Sixty years of an expanding
anthropomorphic menagerie - led by a mouse, a duck and, more recently, a
rabbit named Roger - have peopled young imaginations with timeless
characters. And Walt himself, when he battled sceptics to build the first
Disneyland in Los Angeles back in 1955, had the brainwave of sending his
movie characters into the 'real' world to mix with their fans.
The theme park tradition sprang up fully-armed in a small suburb called
Anaheim. Since then, the company has created near-identical copies in
Florida and Japan, where a few concessions in design policy to local taste
and traditions are mixed in with the essentials: the Sleeping Beauty's
castle; the adventure rides, including the incomparable Pirates of the
Caribbean (Walt's favourite); the mock-up American main street; and the
rumbustious parades in which larger-than-life Mickeys and Minnies, plus
Donalds and Goofys and Plutos, drive by as if they were the president, first
lady and retinue celebrating a daily inauguration.
Walt Disney would be delighted. Or would he? One thing Eisner and his motion
pictures chief, Jeffrey Katzenberg, seem to have done since they took office
after a fierce takeover battle is to turn Walt's Midas-touch mascot from a
symbol of innocence into a tough critter who stands no nonsense. Mickey
Mouse's company today is famed for its workaholic business hours ('If you
can't come in on Saturday, don't bother coming in on Sunday' goes one
apocryphal motto), its 10-page memos, power breakfasts, penny-pinching movie
budgets and stop-at-nothing litigiousness.
Since the mid-1980s, Disney has thrown lawsuits at anyone who threatens its
wholesome image or copyrighted characters. Targets have included an
Oscar-night production number in which actor Rob Lowe danced with a 'sexy'
Snow White, and a Florida day school that painted Mickey Mouse and company
on its walls; the characters had to be washed off on Disney's orders. This
opened the way for theme-park rival Universal, which scored a public
relations coup by stepping in and painting its best-known characters, the
Flintstones, on the walls. Rubbing salt (or sugar) into Disney's wounds,
Universal also threw a party for the children.
'Innocence' is a hard act to sustain in the cut-throat business world. But a
company that trades in squeaky-clean children's fantasies cannot be seen to
go round clobbering its grown-up adversaries or playing Scrooge to its fans.
As if sensing this, the boldest initiative Eisner and Katzenberg have taken
is to widen the franchise so that there is a less merciless make-or-break
focus on the kiddy-fare.
Developing production labels like Touchstone and Hollywood Pictures, they
have opened up the Disney movie division to adult comedies and dramas. Films
like Down And Out in Beverly Hills, Blaze, and Good Morning, Vietnam - which
would have been unheard-of in Walt's day  - are encouraged vigorously. And
Disney's single biggest hit of recent years was a comedy about a prostitute,
Pretty Woman.
Whether the founding father is spinning in his grave is a moot point. But
then, the very expression 'What would Walt have done?' was banned by
Katzenberg in the early days of the Eisner regime. 'I had a rule that that
phrase was never to be spoken in my presence,' says the studio chief. 'The
reason is that I had no idea - and nor did anyone else - what Walt would
have done. We had to make up our own minds and follow our hunches.'
Eisner himself stresses that the grown-up films are not a betrayal of the
Disney heritage: they are a way of acknowledging that the company's earliest
fans are now adults themselves and deserve their own line in movie
entertainment. But these grown-up fans are less easy to second-guess for a
company which has devoted its marketing expertise for six decades to
pleasing the very young.
Disney had a year of box-office flops in 1991, culminating in the debacle of
its 'adult' gangster movie, Billy Bathgate. And although there has been a
recent bounce-back, with films like Father of the Bride (Dollars 80m) and
Hands That Rock The Cradle (Dollars 60m) pushing Disney back to the top of
the Hollywood studio charts, periods of prosperity still seem to come from
fluke hits rather than a sustained house style.
The second problem with grown-up films is that they supply nothing to the
company's most important holding, its bestiary of well-loved cartoon or
live-action characters. This bestiary in turn replenishes, or should, those
mythological game preserves known as the Disney theme parks. With a small
handful of exceptions like Roger Rabbit, the parks have not been re-supplied
in decades. It could be a measure of Disney's anxiety on this front that it
has acquired the late Jim Henson's Creature Factory (best-known for the
Muppets).
If character productivity at Disney increased, the company's stock would no
doubt soar. The best news it has had in recent months is the success of its
Christmas-released animation feature, Beauty and the Beast. Shrewdly picking
a French-origin fairy tale in the run-up to Euro-Disney, the company pulled
out all stops and created a popular masterpiece. Crammed with memorable
characters and quality animation, the film has spun block-long queues around
American cinemas and became the first cartoon feature to win a best-film
nomination at the Oscars.
Strength-in-depth - the cultivation of an expanding character menagerie - is
one challenge for Disney. Strength in breadth is the other. As well as
enriching its cast of characters, Disney must ensure that the entertainment
dividends spread as wide as possible, with both the distribution of its
films and the dissemination of its theme parks. The company's parks division
had a bad year in 1991, hit by the recession and the after-shocks of the
Gulf War, and is still under stress today.
The ever-present fear for Disney is that, one day, a temporary business
slump will turn into a lasting thumbs-down for the company; that the mouse
and his minions will simply become out-of-date, part of yesterday's culture.
It almost happened under Eisner's predecessor, Walt's son-in-law Ron Miller.
He took over in 1966 after Disney died and guided the company through an
almost catastrophic 18 years.
Attempts to carbon-copy some imaginary work-slate of the founder's resulted
in insipid live-action feature films, like the endless adventures of Herbie
the Volkswagen, and low-energy animation features. But then, Disney's
popularity as a company has been swinging up and down, albeit less
spectacularly, ever since its first movie hit (Steamboat Willie in 1928).
Mickey and company were popular in the Depression-hit 1930s, out of favour
during the Second World War, back in favour in the squeaky-clean,
family-oriented '50s, and out again in the Vietnam-and-Watergate-battered US
of the '60s and '70s. In the 1980s, they were riding high. But the 1990s are
unknown and a menacing new millennium is just around the corner.
There is no shortage of Disney detractors world-wide to assist in the
company's descent from grace if ever they see it starting. In France, where
the Sleeping Beauty's palace has risen to stamp the Disney signature on the
skyline, there is dark talk of 'cultural Chernobyls.' The Minister of
Culture says he will not attend the theme park's opening, and Eisner had
eggs and tomatoes thrown at him during a crowd-wooing visit to Paris.
But no one should one be misled into thinking that Disney factionalism is a
matter of which side of the Atlantic you live. There are Disney-haters in
America, just as there are Disney fans - tens of millions of them -
throughout Europe. In Russia last summer, the Disney television shows were
top of the charts. In eastern Germany and Czechoslovakia, Disney comics are
fast outselling their (pre-liberation) rivals. Even in France, 10m children
read Le Journal Mickey.
Disney is now straining to please French adults, too. The design of the
Euro-Disney castle was inspired by a medieval illuminated book, Les Tres
Riches Heures du Duc de Berri, and the European roots of favourite Disney
legends are being stressed in the publicity literature.
In Christopher Columbus year, there is a slapstick reverse colonialism about
all this. Five hundred years after a European explorer founded the US we
would all soon know, if not love, an American mouse has brought New World
kitsch to a deprived continent. It seems unlikely - even on the company's
darkest days - that the mouse empire will go away, especially with new
bosses whose survival instinct is more ruthless than Walt's ever was. Says
Katzenberg, through visibly-gritted teeth: 'If we in the entertainment
business are a breed on the path to extinction, there is one thing I can
absolutely guarantee to you. We at Disney are the last ones going down.'

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920411

