FT921-3674

FT  13 MAR 92 / FT Law Report: Oil rig contract is not frustrated by revised
drawings


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


MCALPINE HUMBEROAK LTD v MCDERMOTT INTERNATIONAL INC Court of Appeal (Lord
Justice Lloyd, Lord Justice Wolf and Lord Justice Russell): March 5 1992 A
CONTRACT is not frustrated by pre-signature events of which the parties are
fully aware when they sign, and which are provided for in its terms. And
where time is of the essence, delay which on the evidence is caused by the
contractor does not displace lump sum provisions for his payment so as to
entitle him to increased prices going beyond those provided for in the
contract.
The Court of Appeal so held when allowing an appeal by the defendant,
McDermott International Inc, from a decision of Judge Davies QC sitting with
two assessors that a contract between it and the plaintiff, McAlpine
Humberoak Ltd, had been frustrated. An appeal on McDermott's counterclaim
was allowed.
The appeal was the first on fact under the new procedure under Order 58 rule
4(b) of the Rules of the Supreme Court.
LORD JUSTICE LLOYD said that north of Aberdeen was an off-shore drilling
rig, known as the Hutton Tension Leg Platform.
The contract for construction of the deck structure was placed with
McDermott.
The top deck consisted of nine massive steel pallets, welded together to
form a platform. Each pallet comprised nine plate girders joined together by
tees, and covered by deck plating.
On November 18 1981 McDermott awarded the sub-contract for four of the
pallets, numbers W3, W4, W5 and W6, to McAlpine. It was not signed until
March 24 1982, but was to take effect from November 18 1981.
The total sub-contract price was Pounds 890,330. Completion dates for W3 and
W4 were February 8 and 1 1982 respectively.
W3 was not delivered until July 17, and W4 was not delivered until September
11 1982.
The costs actually incurred by McAlpine came to Pounds 2.59m. It claimed
Pounds 3.54m. It said that sum was due under the contract, or as damages for
breach of contract.
Judge Davies QC held that the contract had been frustrated.
That came as a surprise to the parties, since frustration had not been
pleaded or argued.
The judge awarded McAlpine a quantum meruit (the amount it deserved for work
done) equal to its costs, plus 10 per cent profit, less Pounds 1m already
paid by McDermott. He dismissed a counterclaim by McDermott.
On the present appeal Mr Thomas for McAlpine did not support the judge's
finding on frustration, but sought to sustain his conclusion on other
grounds.
Under the sub-contract time was of the essence. McAlpine was to complete
work by the specified dates. It was entitled to be recompensed if
acceleration was necessary due to McDermott's actions.
By clause 35 McDermott might at any time direct McAlpine to make a change in
the scope of the work. The change was not to be carried out until McAlpine
had received a change order, signed by McDermott.
McAlpine was to prepare shop drawings, and no fabrication was to be
performed until they had been completed and reviewed by McDermott. Shop
drawings were to be based on 'approved for construction' (AFC) drawings, and
should show all details required for fabrication.
McAlpine was to be paid lump sum prices for fabrication, assembly and other
work. The lump sum was to be based on quantities agreed and stated in the
sub-contract.
Performance of the sub-contract fell into three stages.
The first was the pre-production stage. It included preparation of shop
drawings based on AFC drawings issued by McDermott's employer, preparation
of steel for welding, manufacture of jigs, qualifying weld procedures for
use in fabrication, and qualifying welders.
The second stage was fabrication of the plate girders and tees. It was
planned to take 11 days. In fact it took seven weeks.
The third stage was assembly of the pallets.
The greater part of the delay, and by far the greatest part of the
additional costs, occurred during phases two and three.
McAlpine's case was that the main cause of delay was the issue of a large
number of revised AFC drawings after the contract had been placed. The first
issue, consisting of 45 drawings, was received by McAlpine on December 1
1981. The second, consisting of 17 drawings, was received on December 11.
There were 22 new issues in all. They meant that the shop drawings had to be
revised. It was said the revised AFC drawings created havoc in the drawing
office and disrupted production in phase 1, and had a knock-on effect in
phases 2 and 3.
The second cause of delay, according to McAlpine, was McDermott's failure to
answer technical queries (TQs) as promptly as it should have done. The third
cause, it said, was the issue of variation orders (VOs) under clause 35,
changing the scope of the work.
McDermott's case was that the revised drawings, and the failure to give
prompt answers to TQs, were no more than was to be expected in the North Sea
oil industry, and had no disruptive or delaying effect. It said it had paid
more than McAlpine was entitled to under clause 35 in respect of the VOs,
and that they did not disrupt production.
McDermott also said the delay in phase 1 was caused by McAlpine's failure to
qualify its weld procedures until just before fabrication started on
February 16, and to complete manufacture of jigs for fabrication of plate
girders until early February 1982. It said the main causes of delay in
phases 2 and 3 were the vast amounts of remedial work due to poor quality
welding.
The judge found it was the revised drawings which generated the excessive
number of TQs.
He said they 'transformed a contract based on 22 drawings into one based on
161 drawings . . . They distorted its substance and identity.'
He said time went out of the window with the first two issues in December
1981, and the effect was 'to put paid to the lump sum constituent of the
contract as well. From that time, time was at large'.
He concluded that the effect of the changes was to frustrate the original
venture virtually from the start.
The present court could not agree with his reasoning, nor with the
conclusion that the contract was frustrated.
The revised drawings did not 'transform' the contract into a different
contract, or 'distort its substance and identity'. It remained a contract
for the construction of four pallets until March 24 1982, when W5 and W6
were withdrawn.
The judge found the contract was frustrated as early as December 11 1981 on
receipt of the second drawing issue.
That was over three months before the sub-contract was signed.
The sub-contract when signed provided expressly that receipt of drawings
would constitute change instructions for the purposes of clause 35, and that
McAlpine should be recompensed for the additional time and work involved.
If the court were to uphold the finding of frustration, it would be the
first contract to have been frustrated by matters which occurred before the
contract was signed, and were not only well-known to the parties, but were
provided for in the contract itself.
The judge held that, since the contract was agreed to take effect from
November 18 1981, one must construe it in the light of circumstances then
existing, and what the parties then knew.
If that meant the court was to disregard the fact that the contract was
signed by the parties with their eyes open on March 24 1982, when the causes
and consequences of the alleged frustrating events were already largely in
the past, it could not agree.
The inherent probabilities, the contemporaneous documents and the
overwhelming weight of the oral evidence all pointed in one direction. The
cause of delay in starting fabrication was McAlpine's failure to qualify its
weld procedures before February 15 1982. It had nothing to do with the
causes found by the judge.
The contract was not frustrated. The lump sum price was not displaced.
The appeal was allowed. Judgment was given for McDermott on its counterclaim
for damages in respect of additional site personnel employed after the
period representing the overall impact of the extra work had expired.
For McAlpine: Christopher Thomas QC and Peter Coulson (Glovers).
For McDermott: John Uff QC and Lionel Persey (Ince & Co).

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920313

