FT921-1331

FT  25 MAR 92 / World Trade News: ABB and Marubeni set to sign Dollars 684m
Indonesia power deal


   By WILLIAM KEELING and ANDREW BAXTER


   JAKARTA


THE contract for the Dollars 684m (Pounds 395.3m) Tanjung Priok power
station is to be signed today between Perusahaan Umum Listrik Negara (PLN),
the Indonesian state electricity company, and a consortium of the
Swiss-Swedish company, Asea Brown Boveri (ABB), and Marubeni of Japan.
Construction of the 1,180MW combined cycle (gas and steam) plant is due to
begin next month, with the first of the six gas turbines operational by
mid-1993 and the project complete in the first half of 1995.
ABB and Marubeni beat off a rival consortium of Mitsui of Japan and General
Electric of the US to win the contract. Industry officials say Mitsui, in a
consortium with Mission Energy of the US, remains a leading contender to
build two 600MW units at Paiton in Java, worth about Dollars 1.2bn.
A contract worth more than Dollars 2bn for two similar units at Paiton was
awarded last year to Intercontinental Electric of the US and PT Bimantara
Bayu Nusa, an Indonesian company. Both projects are designed to be privately
financed, but bankers say international market funds are limited and only
one project is likely to proceed.
Paiton is the first attempt by Indonesia to develop a private-sector
financed and operated plant to be linked directly to the national grid. It
should mark the future direction of the industry.
Indonesian demand for electricity is projected to grow 17 per cent a year
over the next 10 years, but industry officials say PLN will only be able to
finance half the growth required.
PLN has a total installed capacity of 9,275MW, and has new plants with a
capacity of more than 7,000MW and a total value of about Dollars 6.4bn
either being built or seeking finance.
ABB said yesterday it had been awarded a letter of acceptance from India's
Ministry of Railways for delivery of 33 locomotives worth Dollars 220m,
writes Andrew Baxter.
The order will be financed by the Asian Development Bank, and comprises 11
four-axle high-speed passenger locomotives and 22 six-axle freight
locomotives.
A substantial part of the order will be supplied by ABB Germany, with
partial assembly in India, plus transfer of technology to set up local
manufacturing. Commissioning the locomotives is due to begin towards the end
of next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920325

