FT921-15217

FT  11 JAN 92 / How to Spend It: The whole world's up for sale] - Recession
is biting, customers are counting their pennies, and retailers in every
capital are slashing prices. Wherever one looks . . .


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST, NIKKI TAIT, CHRISTOPHER PARKES and EMIKO TERAZONO


The old streetwise New Yorker's motto - never, ever pay full retail price -
has gone global. From Tokyo to Frankfurt, from Paris to London and New York,
you can buy almost anything you fancy as well as lots of things you never
knew you needed at knockdown prices. FT journalists give the low-down on
what is cheapest, and where . . .
LONDON
I DO NOT need to tell Londoners that the sales are on. If it is January, it
must be sale-time. And it is. A time-honoured ritual that no store, least of
all after this most disastrous of all shopping seasons, can afford to
ignore. But this time the sales seem different.
It is not that there are not bargains - there are, and good ones - but
rather that the population at large seems curiously and most untypically
unexcited by them. What this does mean is that ardent searcher for a
specific item - whether it be a designer jacket, a new sofa or a snazzy pair
of shoes - can venture forth in the happy knowledge that they will not have
to don combat gear and scowls. Two arms can be used to search through the
racks, time can be taken to weigh up the sizes and colours, assistants may
even offer to help. Add to that the huge reductions and sales shopping could
actually turn out to be enjoyable.
The biggest reductions of all are at the more expensive end of the spectrum.
Ever fancied a really grand designer number but not felt able to justify the
price? Well, how about a Valentino wool suit reduced from Pounds 1,400 to
Pounds 600? Or an evening dress in silk with a matching jacket (also from
Valentino) for Pounds 1,300 reduced from Pounds 3,250? If that is more than
you can manage then you could get a blouse for around Pounds 150.
At Chanel there is a 30 per cent reduction across the board on all their
clothes which means that you can buy a classic Chanel suit for just under
Pounds 1,000. All those prices may seem a lot of money, but if you had been
eyeing the Chanel suit all season and found Pounds 1,800 beyond your reach,
Pounds 1,000 might just make it affordable.
This is perhaps the time to apply the old fashion editors' maxim - the real
cost of a garment is the price divided by the numbers of time it is worn,
not the price alone. On that basis the most expensive jacket I have ever
bought is also much, much the cheapest - and even that fails to take into
account that on every occasion it also looked much better than its cheaper
versions.
For several seasons now the jacket has been the mainstay of many a
fashionable wardrobe. It teams with leggings, with ski pants, with short
skirts, slips over dresses.
In Paris this week the sassiest of dressers all had similar silhouettes  -
short skirts or tapered legs (leggings or skipants) topped by parkas or
jackets (either curvy or straight and long leaving just about an inch of
skirt showing). These sales offer a first-class chance to buy a marvellous
jacket at a third and possibly 50 per cent less than it cost before
Christmas. At Browns (23-27 and 38-39 South Molton Street W1 and 6c Sloane
Street SW1) you could put the whole look together at sales prices - start
with Gigli leggings (reduced by 30 per cent to Pounds 100) and add G Gigli
(the diffusion line) parkas reduced from Pounds 395 to Pounds 295. When it
comes to jackets Jil Sander, Donna Karan and Moschino are all on sale at 30
per cent to 40 per cent less.
Other good places to get a classy designer look together are Harvey Nichols,
Joseph (who has cuts of 40 per cent),
PARIS
LA FRANCE MOROSE said the headline in Le Figaro last week. 'Remises
Exceptionelles' said the posters: or 'Liquidations de nos collections',
while at poor Louis Beaucaire, a menswear shop in the rue St. Honore, it was
'Destockage definitif avant depart - Moins 50% - 60% - et ADIEU.' If La
France is morose, it would appear to have good reason.
Some of the most esteemed names in the world of luxury goods (companies of
the stature of Morabito, Puiforcat, Chaumet, Karl Lagerfeld and others)
think things are so bad that they clubbed together to take a full page
advertisement in Le Figaro to make a rallying call to patriotic Frenchmen
and women: 'Ne laissons pas la morosite tuer le desir et l'absence de desir
tuer l'economie'.
The by-product of all this is that this season's sales seem different in
mood. Almost everybody seems to sense - or fear - that what we are
witnessing is not just a clearing of the way for another bright new season
of happy shopping, but one of those profound shifts in public attitudes that
are hard to anticipate and even harder to handle.
Paris, like most of the big cities of the world, is over-supplied with shops
and under-supplied with shoppers. The Western world spent much of the 1980s
shopping until its houses were crammed, its wardrobes full and its
cheque-books depleted. Now it seems to have taken stock and looks back on it
all as a kind of collective madness.
As my neighbour at lunch in the Bar des Theatre on the Avenue Montaigne in
the heart of chic Paris put it as she patted her modest haul - two towels at
FFr65 (Pounds 6.60) a piece - from the Christian Dior sale: 'It was like an
illness, like bulimia; it had to stop and it has. All at once people have
come to their senses.' The problem is that the coming to their senses leaves
the economic world in turmoil. If we do not shop, others do not eat.
But certainly what is true is that anybody who still has a taste for le
shopping or a few real needs or desires will find that Paris for the next
couple of weeks is something of a shoppers' paradise.
The only real problem is where to start. Whether you are a man or woman you
will find that bargains are everywhere and those who normally prefer the
Right Bank might as well start there and the Rive Gauche crowd head for the
Left Bank. Discounts and sales are everywhere.
Those who long for designer clothes but normally cannot afford them can take
their choice from almost any designer they fancy. At Nina Ricci you could
snuggle into a shimmering brocade jacket reduced from FFr7,500 to FFr3,750
or buy a striped satin fuchsia evening dress for FFr11,550, reduced from
FFr19,250. As I dropped in there seemed no takers, even with these
reductions.
At Chloe and Montana, at Balmain and Lanvin, at all the grand names, the
sales are on and you could, pick up a wonderful designer outfit at half the
usual price. As always, the richer you are, the better value you can get. A
Chloe coat at about Pounds 500 (reduced from around Pounds 1,000) will be
something to treasure for years to come and a soft wool Boss suit reduced
from FFr5,500 to FFr3,690 would do no end of good to a young chap's
corporate image.
At Chanel's headquarters in the rue Cambon the shop is packed with Japanese
already laden with bags from Hermes, Gucci and Louis Vuitton. Chanel's
famous two-tone pumps are down from Pounds 200 to Pounds 130, jewelled
evening pumps from Pounds 300 to Pounds 200 and those finely-pleated cream
silk blouses, drooled over at Pounds 800, do not seem a lot more affordable
at Pounds 400.
From the outside, Dior in the Avenue Montaigne looks its usual august self.
Once inside and you could almost be in Oxford Street on the Saturday before
Christmas. Heads down, elbows flying, you would think these people had never
seen a scarf or a silk blouse before. If you had the stamina and the time
you could come away with something - a towel or a glass, a jacket or a skirt
 -at a bargain price. It was here that I saw the one thing I really wanted
but did not feel justified in buying: a wonderful ruffled black silk organza
evening jacket reduced from about Pounds 800 to Pounds 400 that would have
looked stunning for years.
Trawling the individual couture houses and designer boutiques is an arduous
business. If you have limited time you would probably do better to head for
Galeries Lafayette, where everything in sight seemed to be En Soldes. On its
designer floor everybody from Georges Rech and Yves St. Laurent, from Commes
des Garcons, Yohji Yamamoto, Agnes B and Sonia Rykiel was marked down by at
least a third.
Alternatively, you could do what I did and regain a little sanity by going
to my favourite store, the No. 2 building of La Samaritaine, by the Pont
Neuf. Here, in a wonderful Art Nouveau interior, is a resolutely
old-fashioned department store where there are no sharp elbows and tough
expressions, just comfortable Parisian housewives from the unfashionable
arrondissements buying things they really need.
There are lovely things, such as the plain white linen union sheets from the
Vosges used by the grand hotels (FFr269 for singles, FFr369 double, reduced
by 20 per cent), plain white pure cotton fabric at FFr60 a metre, and
fast-disappearing things like ribbons and mending yarn. Who needs sales when
there is La Samaritaine?
NEW YORK
SALES IN New York are a bit like swimming pools in Hollywood: the depth
varies, but everyone has to have them.
However, whereas once they were seasonal, now they are more or less
permanent. A glut of shops and too few customers mean that there are
significant discounts all year round and the traditional 'holiday' offers
look like continuing all through January.
So where should shoppers start? Well, there are certain products that it is
always worth searching out in Manhattan.
Womens' shoes, for instance, are a perennial winner, combining imaginative -
often Continental - design with more affordable New York prices. Add on the
holiday discounts, and temptation is hard to resist. Time-pressed visitors
could start at the New York branch of Charles Jourdan. Here, plentiful sale
items are as tasteful as the marbled Trump Tower environs are brash. Leather
court shoes sell for Dollars 99 (Pounds 54.30) compared with an original
price of Dollars 225; black suede evening shoes have been slashed from
Dollars 285 to Dollars 169.
Men's shirts are another favourite. Brooks Brothers, now owned by Marks &
Spencer, has average reductions of between 25 and 35 per cent, which means
standard lines are around Dollars 50. But walk a few doors north and you
will find the Paul Stuart store - the carpet is thicker, the service more
gracious, and the discounts posted more discreetly. Prices, however, are
broadly similar.
Among the department stores, Saks Fifth Avenue - not the most useful shop in
normal times - tends to come into its own during sales. Discounts in the
menswear department average around 25 per cent - cutting Dollars 20 off a
Dollars 76 Armani tie, say, or pricing cashmere socks at around Dollars 15.
Up on the womenswear designer floors, the reductions are less predictable
but often more generous. A well-cut pair of Anna Klein evening trousers, for
example, is almost halved to Dollars 120.
True discount-hunters, of course, should concentrate their energies on the
depressingly large number of stores which are in the process of closing.
Once wholesale stock clearance is under way, prices can really crash. Take
Saint Gill, a Madison Avenue boutique, for example: beaded evening jackets,
in glorious technicolour, now sell for under Dollars 300 having once been
priced at over Dollars 1,000.
On a non-fashion note, Manhattan is often a good source of household linens
 -from tableclothes to towels. Ethnically-minded shoppers might try their
luck at Handblock, which has stores on both the Upper East and Upper West
Sides and offers good discounts on upmarket Indian printed cottons.
Hi-fi enthusiasts should simply load up. Compact discs in the US usually
sell at the dollar equivalent of their sterling price, and big retail
outlets, such as Tower Records on Broadway, are currently offering 'special
deals' on selected items as well. Anything from Dollars 10.99 to Dollars
14.99 is standard.
Those not sure of what they want but hoping the perfect purchase will
present itself at the perfect price should target a specific shopping area.
A stroll up Madison Avenue from the mid-forties to the seventies, with
occasional forays into Fifth or Lexington Avenues, is the most obvious.
A similar path can be plotted on the Upper West Side, along Columbus Avenue.
A third option is to head for SoHo, the downtown area bordered by Houston
and Canal Street. Here, designer boutiques and more conventional clothing
chains are liberally interspersed between the declining number of art
galleries.
Finally, it is worth remembering that marked prices often exclude sales tax,
currently 8 1/4 per cent in New York. When you reach the cash register, this
belated realisation may take the edge off the shopper's satisfaction. But
chances are, you have a bargain anyway.
GERMANY
GERMANY rose late from the festive table last weekend, downed an Underberg
and an aspirin, and went shopping. Heads down, elbows out, the population
took to the streets in a full dress rehearsal for the struggle to come.
This is special offer time, a phoney war interlude, when shoppers and sales
assistants perfect their techniques - close-range combat and scowling, and
middle-distance gazing and scowling respectively - to be ready for the sales
proper, which start officially on January 27.
Shopping in Germany is a testing exercise at the best of times. But in the
special offer season protective boots are de rigueur and small children who
cannot be left somewhere safe, like the middle of the autobahn, should be
well padded.
An uncommonly mild weekend in a so-far gentle winter brought out the crowds
and the bargains. On Monday retailers claimed that shoppers had come back to
town after the holiday break - pockets stuffed with cash Christmas presents
 -still spending at pre-Christmas levels.
Bargain-hunters did well in winter clothing departments, where surplus
woollies are marked down by 30 to 50 per cent. Caught out by the climate,
the stores' buyers had started the new year overstocked by as much as 20 per
cent, according to some estimates. Left-over women's party wear, heavily
reinforced with spangles, metal thread and still-obligatory shoulder pads,
offered no competition.
Buyers in the pots and pans departments also appeared to have overdone
things. Six-piece sets of stainless steel cookware, on sale at alleged
discounts of up to Pounds 100, were among the most common offerings.
Since the 'formerly X, now Y' sale-time pricing formula is not common in
Germany, identification of real cuts is tricky, but well-made leather
jackets and wool-mix overcoats at about Pounds 100 apiece would be tempting
 -if the outside daytime temperature in large tracts of the country were not
around 14`C.
Unquestionable best value for money: anything to do with Mozart, and baggy
men's suits with 'living room' trousers.
Wolfgang Amadeus, dead now 201 years and out of the commemoration stakes for
the time being, has left a legacy of special edition and repackaged
recordings, books, and pot and plaster busts littering the shelves of many
shops. Even surplus Mozart Kugeln, the enduringly popular chocolate balls,
could be had for a few pence each from sweet departments clearing the
leftovers from the Christmas and New Year eating binge.
The roomy, relaxez-vous suit, never at its best on tightly-tuned German male
bodies, was formally declared dead just before Christmas by the national
textiles federation, which announced the return of the tailored look.
Whether it was making a fashion statement or cutting its cloth more
economically in the light of forecasts of an economic slowdown this year was
unclear, but for those willing to go against the trend, handsome outfits are
already available for as little as Pounds 100 to Pounds 150 a time.
At this stage shoppers are still being tempted mainly by chain stores
offering own-label clothing, old-hat multi-coloured bedlinen, unidentifiable
frying objects and bottom-of-the range branded kitchen appliances.
Come January 27, appetites should be nicely sharpened and muscles toned for
the great struggle when all the shops join in and the real goodies, big-name
brands and designer clothing beloved of Germans, come up for grabs.
TOKYO
'IT IS 15 minutes to opening, please don't push]' shouts a sales clerk at
the crowd in front of the store. The long queue reminds one of Muscovites
waiting to buy bread, but this is prosperous Tokyo, and it is the first
business day of the year for Isetan, a prestigious Japanese department
store.
New year sales are the shopping event of the year for Japanese. People tired
of over-eating festive foods, fathers cooped up with restless children, and
families having finished their visits to the local shrine all gather in the
new year ritual of bargain hunting.
A pair of old ladies, with matching curls, were bundled up against the cold
in their overcoats and scarfs at the head of the line. They had been waiting
two hours for the 10:0 am opening. 'It's worth it,' said one, obviously
expecting to save lots of money by spending even more.
The store is opened the traditional way - a young woman opens the doors and
gives the crowd a deep and polite bow. The customers bow back, but the
minute she steps aside to allow them in, politeness is left behind and
elbows fly in a mad rush towards the escalators and the bargains.
Most customers head first for the rows of fuku-bukuro, literally 'lucky
bags', which are an important part of new year sales in Japan. They are
stuffed with knick knacks and other goods which, in Isetan's case, are said
to be worth around eight times the cost, normally Y5,000 (Pounds 21.30) or
Y10,000. Shoppers are happy to buy without knowing the exact contents of the
bag, for everybody is supposed to be 'lucky' and find at least one cherished
item.
In the late 1980s when the stock market was booming the contents of lucky
bags boomed, too. Department stores competed to sell glamorous lucky bags
containing such items as French impressionist paintings and jewellery, and
selling for Y100m (Pounds 427,300) and more. These days most retailers stuff
their lucky bags with goods that have not sold well during the year.
Even so, there are many faithful customers. 'It's really a good deal,' says
Akiyo Kitagami, lining up for his fuku-bukuro at Isetan. 'Last year we got a
silk scarf, a sweater, and this watch, all for Y10,000,' he says flashing a
gold-coloured watch.
In contrast to the frenzy in the general sales departments, the boutiques in
a separate corner of the store were calm. They do not bother with lucky bags
at Yohji Yamamoto, the Japanese clothes designer, or at Chanel, or Versace.
Some designer brands have bargain sales later in the year, some none at all,
jealously guarding their high class image among image-conscious shoppers.
But other clothing stores take the opportunity to sell heavy duty winter
clothing ahead of the spring season, and during the first weeks of January
most stores carry 30 to 40 per cent discounts.
For the methodical Japanese shopper, who usually spends hours in a single
department store combing through every floor, the new year sales require a
change of tactics. Those who have enough energy left rush off to other
retailers, while others head for home. A woman and her son walking to the
train station carried 12 bags between them: they were not untypical.

The Financial Times


London Page VII Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted). Photograph
(Omitted). Photograph (Omitted).

920111

