FT921-11966

FT  29 JAN 92 / Bush plans deep arms cuts and tax changes


   By LIONEL BARBER


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT George Bush last night unveiled sweeping plans for cuts in
long-range nuclear missiles along with a modest package aimed at restoring
public confidence in the US economy.
In his State of the Union address to Congress, which will serve as a
launch-pad for his 1992 re-election campaign, Mr Bush announced fresh cuts
in US defence spending as part of a 'peace dividend' for the American
people.
In a speech punctuated by prolonged applause from congressmen, he declared
that America had won the Cold War. 'Now we can look homeward to set right
what needs to be set right,' he said.
The White House billed the speech as one of the most important in the
president's career, and it was seen as an opportunity to reverse the recent
slump in his popularity.
Mr Bush appealed to patriotism, calling on Congress and the American people
to bring the same sense of purpose to the US economy which characterised the
US military victory against Iraq in the Gulf war last year. His message to
the voters was to stay the course. 'Let me tell you right from the heart: I
know we are in hard times, but I know something else: this will not stand,'
he said.
Mr Bush called for Dollars 50bn (Pounds 27.6bn) in defence cuts beyond the
reduction planned over the next five years. 'By 1997 we will have cut
defence by 30 per cent since I took office,' he said.
His nuclear arms offer combines unilateral cuts of strategic nuclear
programmes with an appeal to the four nuclear-armed former Soviet republics
led by Russia to respond in kind.
The proposal includes the elimination of all MX mobile multi-warhead
Peacekeeper missiles; limiting production of the B-2 bomber to 20 aircraft;
cancellation of the small, long-range ICBM missile; and reducing the
warheads on the Trident submarine force by one-third.
Mr John Major, welcoming Mr Bush's initiative, said the UK had 'always been
committed to maintaining only a minimum nuclear deterrent'. Trident was
'necessary' to guarantee the UK's future security. But the UK is expected to
follow the US lead and limit warhead numbers on its planned Trident fleet.
This would represent the first time that US-Soviet nuclear disarmament has
impinged directly on the UK's strategic deterrent.
The UK Trident, due to be deployed from the mid-1990s with US missiles
equipped with British warheads, is designed for up to 128 warheads per
submarine. Substantially fewer are now expected to be deployed.
The US has previously been loath to make concessions in submarine-launched
systems, where it has enjoyed technical superiority. Mr Bush said Russian
President Boris Yeltsin's early response to his plan had been 'very
positive'. Further talks would take place this week in New York and at Camp
David, where Mr Yeltsin is due to stay on Saturday.
Mr Bush's long-awaited economic growth package includes a proposal for a
deeper-than-expected cut in capital gains tax to 15.4 per cent, phased in
over three years; a new 15 per cent investment tax allowance; an increase in
the personal family allowance to Dollars 500 per child; and a Dollars 5,000
tax credit for first-time home buyers. The measures reflect the constraints
of the federal budget deficit which is likely to reach Dollars 360bn this
year. The sweeteners for middle-income voters do not include an
across-the-board tax cut of the kind proposed by Democratic presidential
contenders led by Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Instead, Mr Bush said he would order the US Treasury to curb 'excessive'
withholding from the pay-cheques of ordinary Americans. This measure, he
suggested, could return about Dollars 25bn to the US economy over the next
12 months.
In his speech, Mr Bush also proposed a 90-day freeze on new federal
regulations and a review of all regulations which might slow economic
growth. The proposed freeze marks a U-turn for Mr Bush, who has presided
over the greatest extension of federal regulation in more than 20 years. He
is due to follow up his address with detailed proposals today in his fiscal
1993 budget.
Plans for a smooth run-up to the State of the Union address came unstuck on
Monday after congressional Republicans rebelled over provisions for health
care reform put forward by Mr Richard Darman, the president's budget
director.
The revolt forced Mr Samuel Skinner, White House chief of staff, to order a
temporary halt to printing the 2,000 page budget document to allow Mr Darman
to remove the offending passages.
Mr Bush said that he would provide a health insurance tax credit of up to
Dollars 3,750 for each low income family, with some unspecified help for
middle-income families.
Health care fracas, Page 6
International bonds, Page 27
Wall Street, Page 35

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920129

