FT924-6128

FT  23 NOV 92 / US Money and Credit: Markets cast a wary eyeover money
supply figures


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


AFTER a long absence, the money supply is back in focus. Although it never
really went away, it did in the minds of bond market investors, who in their
eagerness to embrace the Federal Reserve's more relaxed monetary stance,
stopped worrying about the money supply earlier this year.
Now that M2 - which includes currency in circulation, bank accounts, money
market funds and certificates of deposit, and is the broadest and most
closely observed measure of money - is growing faster than anyone expected,
the market is once again casting a wary eye on the money numbers.
The latest data, showing a Dollars 6.6bn increase in M2 during the first
full week of November - well above analysts' forecasts of a Dollars 1bn
increase - and an annual rate of 2.5 per cent growth, meant that money
supply growth was back in the Fed's target range of between 2.5 per cent and
6.5 per cent for the first time since early May. Taking more recent data, M2
has grown at a healthy 5 per cent annual rate since it hit bottom in July.
What this means is that monetary policy is more likely to stay on hold.
Moreover, those who are betting on the next move in interest rates being up,
rather than down, may prove to have backed the right horse.
While no one is suggesting that money growth is getting out of hand, recent
indications of reviving consumer confidence - although it may prove to be a
short-lived post-election burst - and the likelihood of a fiscal stimulus
package in the early days of the Clinton presidency, suggests expectations
that the money supply will expand at more rapidly over the next six months
can only gather pace.
This, says Mr Mitchell Held, credit market economist at Smith Barney in New
York, could spell trouble: 'Inflation remains only a distant concern for the
market at the moment, but rising growth expectations combined with
above-target monetary growth could make for a revival of inflation fears,
and for shaky market conditions, later this year or in early 1993.'
Analysts believe rising loan demand is behind the resurgence in money
growth. Both commercial and industrial loan volume has picked up recently,
while third-quarter bank earnings reports suggest that consumer loan
activity has been on the increase. Fed surveys, meanwhile, have spotted
signs that small business loans are also up. The evidence has led some
observers to claim that the credit crunch is over.
However, before the inflation hawks get too excited, there are important
factors to consider which some economists believe will ensure that money
growth and inflation do not take off into the stratosphere over the next few
years.
According to Mr Held, some of those factors are:
The likelihood that the consumer sector of the economy, still debt-averse
and facing higher local taxes and rising health and education costs, will
not perform as strongly as in previous post-recessionary periods;
A residential housing sector that will remain subdued because of demographic
changes that will limit growth in the first-time home buying population;
Below-normal growth in the commercial property sector;
Continued corporate downsizing and restructuring;
Only a modest fiscal stimulus package from the Clinton administration; and
Continued cuts in defence spending.
Taken together, these structural forces should keep economic growth in a
non-inflationary range of between 2 and 3 per cent, says Smith Barney.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921123

