FT924-6178

FT  23 NOV 92 / Leading Article: A new policy for housing


THE PROVISION of Pounds 750m in the Autumn Statement for housing
associations to buy up 20,000 empty homes is good news for the homeless
families who will move into them. But the measure is unlikely to be enough
to resuscitate the UK housing market which has 200,000 empty homes unsold.
It is certainly not evident that house prices have yet stopped falling, a
pre-requisite for a successful market-clearing operation.
However, the nationalisation of 20,000 homes exposes an absurdity at the
heart of the government's housing policy. On the one hand, the chancellor
provides funds to increase the supply of rented housing by buying in homes
(many of which have been repossessed because their former owners could not
afford the cost of home ownership).
On the other, the government is continuing to do all that it can to increase
still further the level of owner-occupation. Local authorities are being
encouraged to sell more of their housing stock into owner-occupation, so
that they can spend the receipts on capital projects. To make it even easier
to sell council homes, the government is promoting rent-to-mortgage schemes
which allow tenants to become part-owners of their homes if they cannot
afford owner-occupation.
Downside of ownership
Boosting home ownership while spending money to buy the homes of people who
have failed to make a go of owner-occupation is not a rational housing
policy. The level of home ownership in the UK - at 67 per cent of housing -
is already higher than in most other advanced economies. The down-side of
this has become evident with the collapse in house prices. Over 200,000
homes have been repossessed in the last three years. More than 300,000
home-owners remain over six months in arrears with their mortgage payments.
And there are 1.2m owners trapped in homes worth less than their mortgages.
The growth in home ownership has been at the cost of an alarming rise in
housing insecurity.
At the same time, the privately rented sector has continued to decline. At
7.5 per cent of homes, private renting has sunk far below levels in most
other advanced economies. That leaves most people with a stark choice
between owner-occupation and the serfdom of council housing, often badly
managed, in poor condition and rationed by queueing. It is hardly surprising
that, faced with this choice, so many have become owner-occupiers.
Greater balance
The government needs a new policy for housing that would create a more
balanced market and offer real choices in tenure. Central to this would be
to deal with the tax breaks which make owner-occupation so attractive,
principally mortgage interest tax relief and the exemption from capital
gains tax for homeowners. These tax subsidies for owner-occupation make it
all but impossible for the private sector to charge rents which would give a
reasonable return on capital.
Getting rid of mortgage interest tax relief would be politically acceptable
only if it was phased out when interest rates were falling, so that - in the
short term, at least - no-one had to pay higher mortgage payments than
before. Sadly the opportunity to begin that process has been lost as
interest rates have more than halved in the last two years; but further
falls in rates should begin the phasing-out process.
Rather than eliminating the exemption on capital gains tax for homeowners,
it would be simpler to extend the same treatment to the private rented
sector. Other changes to the taxation of rent - including greater scope for
claiming allowances and setting off business losses against rental income -
might also be necessary to revive the private landlord.
Spending Pounds 750m on such incentives for private renting might not
immediately rehouse 20,000 homeless families. But by addressing the fiscal
imbalance in favour of owner-occupation, it would be a step towards
improving housing choice, the absence of which is a leading cause of the
present housing crisis.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921123

