FT921-14196

FT  17 JAN 92 / Howard rules out rescue for ex-offenders' training trust


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


THE government yesterday ruled out any financial help for Apex Trust, the
training organisation for ex-offenders, as the Labour party released figures
showing that specialist provision for offender training fell by 57 per cent
last year.
Apex Trust announced on Wednesday that it would have to call in receivers
this week unless the government stepped in.
Mr Barry Sheerman, a Labour home affairs spokesman, said yesterday that at
the beginning of las year Apex Trust and Nacro, the two main providers of
specialist training for offenders, ran 95 centres for 15,000 trainees. Since
April, cuts in the employment training budget and a revised system of fund
allocation through Training and Enterprise Councils had resulted in the
number of centres being reduced to 48 and the number of trainee places to
6,400.
Mr Sherman said Apex Trust research had shown that ex-offenders in
employment were three times less likely to re-offend than those who were
unemployed.
Mr Michael Howard, employment secretary, said on BBC Radio yesterday: 'We
can't write blank cheques, and we can't keep writing cheques for money when
an organisation keeps coming back for more.'
He added that there were other bodies providing training for ex-offenders
and that training would still be available if the trust collapsed.
Twelve companies which have sponsored Apex in recent years are meeting today
at BT's London headquarters in an effort to save the charity. Apex said:
'It's our only flicker of hope at the moment.' Several leading employers and
customers in the construction industry have expressed concern that
self-employment is leading to a decline in the number of adequately trained
people, according to a report from the National Economic Development
Council's construction group.
The report recommends that the industry should phase in a
qualifications-based operative registration scheme to be applied generally.
The report expects skill shortages to re-emerge when the recession ends and
also suggests poor training is a cause of the industry's poor safety record.
Registration in the Construction Industry, Nedo Books, Millbank Tower,
London. SW1P 4QX. Pounds 17.50

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920117

