FT922-13421

FT  11 APR 92 / Cookery: Stock answers - Make fine dishes finer


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


WRITING about high-speed soups recently, I reported on a blind tasting of
various brands of chicken stock. Quality varied considerably but none was a
patch on home-made. I was pleased about this because the home-made version
was my own. My morale would have taken a tumble if the results had been
otherwise.
I used commercial stock for the soups I devised for that feature. This, I
wrote, was done 'for the sake of speed.' That is nonsense, really, because
while stock takes considerable time to develop its flavour, the demands on
the cook's time are minimal.
Few things are easier to make than good stock, and few are more rewarding.
It makes a fine broth in its own right and it is a key ingredient in so many
soups, sauces, stews and braises. Its presence is capable of making fine
dishes finer, and of making ordinary dishes special. In fact, I can think of
no more vivid proof of the importance of good ingredients to good cooking
than preparing the same dish twice, one using commercial stock and the other
home-made. The difference is astounding.
Chicken stock is the most useful of all. My method of making it has become
simpler over the years. Gone are the celery, carrot, onion and bouquet garni
of classic stock recipes. For much of the year, celery seems all string and
crunch, too insipid to add any flavour. Carrots sometimes lend too much
sweetness, and the potency of onions is so variable. Sometimes, bouquet
garni is a wishy-washy nonentity. At others, it stings the cook's eyes and
may overpower the bird in the pot.
No - the plainer the stock, the better. If it is pure, the flavour stays
'true' in freezing; if it is concentrated, it will not take up much storage
space. In both cases, the cook's options are kept open. The stock can be
diluted as required and extra flavourings can be added.
The chicken stock I make has nothing but chicken, a little salt, and a few
peppercorns. Very occasionally, I add one extra ingredient (for cosmetic
purposes): the papery brown outer skin of an onion, which turns stock a
rich, consomme-like shade of bronze.
The Turkish-bath image of a kitchen swathed in the steam-heated
hubble-bubble of a stock-making session is pure myth. Stock is best cooked
very gently. If boiled fiercely, the fat bubbles through the liquid, making
it murky.
As for the old-fashioned practice of boiling stock every day to prevent
souring, that dates from the pre-refrigeration era Stock stored in a fridge
ought to be boiled every three days, but the most practical solution is to
put it in the freezer. There, if fat-free, well-reduced and salted only
lightly, it will months at least.
The most convenient portions for storage are from a quarter to a half pint.
As for containers, try the little plastic tubs with snap-on lids used by
delis and supermarkets for weighing and potting such things as curd cheese.
There is no need to plan ahead and thaw stock overnight before using it.
Just sit the frozen container in a bowl half-filled with hot water for a few
minutes. When the solid block of stock has been loosened, slide it out into
a saucepan and melt over a low flame.
And so to the chicken itself. The carcass left over from Sunday's roast is
perfectly adequate. Raw bones will yield more flavour, but how often do home
cooks bone-out a bird? To satisfy a household that gets through as much
chicken stock as we do, it is necessary to buy chicken specifically for
stock-making.
I use supermarket packets of chicken wings. While not cheap, they come with
a bonus. Wings are highly gelatinous, so the stock they produce is
satiny-rich in texture. This gives excellent body to sauces and soups and
sets to a solid jelly.
What is more, quite a bit of meat can be picked from the wings at the end of
stock-making and used to prepare a meal in its own right. More about that
next week.
PURE CHICKEN STOCK (makes at least five pints of very rich-flavoured stock)
The (minimal) effort involved is the same whether making a large or small
batch, so I suggest buying 6 1/2 -7lb chicken wings. Wash them, put them in
a large stock pot, add 6-7 pt cold water to cover, and bring slowly to a
bare simmer.
Add half a teaspoon of salt, a dozen black peppercorns (and, optionally, the
papery brown outer skin of an onion if you want a richly-coloured stock).
Cover and cook as gently as possible - the bottom oven of an Aga is ideal -
for at least four (and preferably six) hours. Only an occasional bubble
should wink at the brim. Fast cooking makes murky stock.
Set the pan in a cold larder for a few hours. Then, separate the liquid from
the solids, saving the chicken meat for other dishes. As soon as it is cold,
refrigerate the stock so that the liquid sets to a jelly under a blanket of
fat which can be scraped easily from the top.
Next day, scrape off the fat (the schmaltz of Jewish cuisine, which can be
used in place of beef dripping, lard or butter in cooking). Put it into a
small, covered container and store in the fridge.
Melt the jellied stock. If initial cooking was suitably gentle, and if all
trace of fat has been removed from it, the liquid should be as clear as a
classy consomme. Reduce it a little by fast boiling to concentrate the
flavour.
Add a little salt at the end to bring out the flavour, but not much as
freezing tends to heighten saltiness. It is wiser to season at the point of
using.
Cool, chill, cover and store in the fridge as much stock as will be used
within the next few days. Freeze the rest in small quantities.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920411

