FT922-4006

FT  08 JUN 92 / Councils urge pay talks shake-up


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


FUNDAMENTAL changes are to be considered for determining the pay of more
than 1.5m local-authority workers as employers respond to the challenges
presented by the creation of Britain's biggest trade union.
A confidential memorandum by the employers' lead negotiator in national pay
talks suggests single-table bargaining - which would combine negotiations
for all groups of workers - and binding arbitration to settle disputes.
It also floats the possibility of giving more leeway to councils in choosing
which parts of national agreements they wish to adhere to.
Changes to national bargaining arrangements have traditionally been strongly
resisted by unions - particularly Nalgo, which represents white-collar
workers.
Some employers see the creation next year of Unison, comprising Nalgo and
two largely blue-collar unions, Nupe and Cohse, as an opportunity for
reform. The memorandum on possible changes is being circulated to the
local-authority national associations.
In it, Mr Charles Nolda, secretary of the Local Government Management Board,
says that the unions are likely to be forced to come to terms with the case
for fundamental reform. This will be caused by pressures from compulsory
competitive tendering of services and from increasing numbers of authorities
opting out of national pay bargaining.
Mr Nolda says that the attractions of single-table bargaining for employers
include avoiding leapfrogging pressures between pay groups. He warns of the
need, however, to preserve separate pay grade structures for various groups,
at least initially.
'An integrated pay structure would lead to pressure to take a consistent
job-evaluation approach,' he says.
He adds: 'A consistent approach could be either extremely expensive and
likely to force authorities away from using the national agreement for
manual workers; or could lead to very widespread downgrading of many
(white-collar) workers, which is not likely to be deliverable in practice.'
Mr Nolda says that suggestions for a new deal - proposed by him 'just to
prompt discussion' - would be difficult to negotiate with unions and
suggests a timescale of 1994-95.
His suggestions include one negotiating body for all mainstream employees
which would determine an 'overall pay rise each year' as well as common core
conditions including leave, sickness and hours.
Social change, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920608

