FT923-6508

FT  24 AUG 92 / Town Hall 2, just when you thought it was safe. . .: The new
council tax threatens to worry taxpayers and their MPs almost as much as the
poll tax


   By JOHN WILLMAN


Like the bloodcurdling alien which returns periodically from apparent death
to terrorise filmgoers, local government taxation is threatening to rise
again as a political issue. The government may have believed that it had
killed off the monster of the poll tax, which threatened electoral defeat
and helped to topple Mrs Margaret Thatcher. But with just over seven months
until its final interment, terror stalks the Tory heartlands as the
unfamiliar features of the council tax come into focus.
Last week, Sir Rhodes Boyson, the former local government minister, warned
that the government was climbing 'out of one treacle well into another' in
its reform of local taxation. Rumblings on the backbenches can be expected
to grow in the run-up to the Conservative party conference in October,
particularly from MPs in southern constituencies which are expected to do
badly from the changeover.
Some of the alarm is misconceived - partly encouraged by the complex
structure of the council tax, which was carefully designed to stop
profligate councils from milking wealthier property-owners in the way that
some did under the old rating system. Homes will be allocated to one of
eight valuation bands, according to their capital value on April 1 1991. The
tax to be levied on property in the top band will be three times that on the
bottom band to avoid swingeing imposts on the well-to-do.
One consequence of this banding is a sizeable tax increase for a home which
just creeps into a higher tax band. As the figures prepared by the Chartered
Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (Cipfa) show, a home worth about
Pounds 120,000 is likely to face an average tax bill of Pounds 657 if it is
in band E, Pounds 776 in band F. The differences in some local authorities
will be much higher than these average figures: Cipfa estimates, for
example, that the step up could be more than Pounds 150 in the highest tax
councils.
Experts in local government finance have been warning for some time that
such jumps in bills between bands will make the valuation process much more
controversial than under the old rating system, where there was a smooth
progression in values and tax bills. The government, which originally hoped
to avoid a cumbersome appeals process, has now conceded one, recognising
that it will be essential if the tax is to be seen as fair.
However, taxpayers' evaluation of the fairness of the council tax is likely
to be influenced by the fall in house prices in many parts of the country.
The first that most will know about their council tax bill will be in March
1993, when they receive a bill from their local authority based on the value
of their home two years earlier. If the value of their home has fallen in
that period, it may be difficult to convince them that they have been
correctly assessed, especially if a more up-to-date valuation would put them
in a lower band.
The government is already redrafting parts of the official notice that will
be sent out with tax bills to make it clear that valuations are based on
1991 values. But the legitimacy of the new tax may be undermined if it fails
to get across the message that, if one house in an area has dropped in value
since 1991, the others will be in a similar position.
More misleading has been the spate of press stories suggesting that such
valuation problems will mean higher council tax bills for everyone. Figures
produced last week by the Local Government Information Unit, for example,
appeared to demonstrate that the government had overestimated the value of
property in its original calculations. The conclusion drawn was that the
average tax bill would be Pounds 61 higher than predicted.
The inference, however, is groundless. The average council tax bill in any
local authority will not depend on the value of the property within it, but
on the amount the council must raise from local taxpayers to finance its
spending. That bill must be divided *something in here (HP) *
among the taxpayers, whatever the property values, and the average will not
be affected by changes in valuations.
What may change is the distribution of the tax bill across the tax bands. If
there are fewer houses than expected in the highest bands, the council tax
level will need to be higher in every band to raise the same amount of
money. With reports suggesting that this is the case, tax bills for each
band may work out higher than the government had forecast, but with more
households in the lower bands than expected.
The misunderstandings revealed by some of the early scare stories reflect
the difficulties involved in explaining the workings of a property-based tax
 -difficulties familiar to those who remember the unpopularity of the rates.
Indeed, it was the belief that the revaluation of properties in Scotland
would of itself mean higher rates bills which eventually scuppered the rates
and led to the premature introduction of the poll tax.
There are equally worrying similarities between the funding problems now
faced by the government in introducing the council tax, and those that
dogged the launch of the poll tax. It was, after all, Treasury parsimony on
the poll tax - which Mr Nigel Lawson, the chancellor, had strongly opposed -
that denied it sufficient funds to ensure that winners outnumbered losers.
Cipfa estimates that at least an extra Pounds 2.3bn will be needed to keep
average tax levels down to the figures the government estimated in its 1991
white paper on the council tax. In the absence of additional funding, the
average figures for the first year of the council tax will be 35 per cent
higher than the government's targets.
There will also be considerable variations between regions within the
overall average figures unless there is some transitional arrangement to
even out the burden. Local taxpayers who have been told that the average
council tax bill in England is to be Pounds 400 may be surprised to find
that the average in inner London will be Pounds 714 and more than Pounds 600
throughout the south-east.
Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary, is said to be pressing for a
generous settlement in this autumn's spending round. Even if the Treasury
was prepared to be generous in the introduction of the council tax, however,
the economic circumstances make it unlikely that the support needed to
guarantee a painless transition will be forthcoming.
The result will be that the scare stories based on misunderstandings will
begin to give way to worries about the level of the new tax in the run-up to
its April introduction. The council tax is likely to enter the world in
unpropitious circumstances, with its valuations undermined by falling house
prices, inadequate understanding of its workings and insufficient funds to
ease the pain. It is not a pleasant prospect for ministers who felt that
they had vanquished the alien beast of local government taxation in the
final reel of the poll-tax saga.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
COUNCIL TAX
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Average council tax bill
                          in 1992-93 for standard
                         spending: 2 or more adults
                        ----------------------------         % of
                           Government       Likely        properties
       Property value   estimate in 1991    Outturn       falling in
Band    (Pounds)            (Pounds)        (Pounds)         band
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
A      Up to 40,000           267             361             19
B      40,000-52,000          311             419             16
C      52,000-68,000          356             479             20
D      68,000-88,000          400             539             17
E      88,000-120,000         490             657             13
F      120,000-160,000        579             776              8
G      160,000-320,000        668             900              6
H      Over 320,000           800           1,078              1
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Illustrative Council Tax Levels for 1992-93, Chartered Institute
of Public Finance and Accountancy
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920824

