FT922-567

FT  26 JUN 92 / Major challenges Tory rebels on support for Delors


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN Major openly challenged his party's Euro-sceptics yesterday as he
confirmed his backing for a two-year extension to Mr Jacques Delors' term as
president of the European Commission.
The decision, endorsed by the cabinet before Mr Major flew to Lisbon for
today's European Community summit, was followed by a pledge from the prime
minister that the government intended to ratify the Maastricht treaty. But
in an attempt to isolate the Euro-sceptics, ministers emphasised again that
the government would use its forthcoming six-month presidency of the EC to
rein back the Commission's powers.
Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, the Foreign Office minister responsible for Europe,
said that the priority of the presidency would be to give substance to the
concept of 'subsidiarity' - the devolution of authority back from Brussels
to national governments.
Mr Major's intention at the two-day Lisbon summit is to press for a
declaration giving the Commission and the presidency a mandate for that
goal. He will also seek a commitment from EC leaders to finalise over the
next six months a negotiating stance with the European Free Trade
Association countries on their applications for EC membership.
Displaying visible irritation with recent attacks on Maastricht from rebel
Tory MPs, Mr Major told the House of Commons that he had no intention of
'compromising' Maastricht on political and monetary union.
He reminded the Euro-sceptics they had been elected on a manifesto pledge to
implement the treaty: 'I have no intention of breaking the word of the
British government . . . Neither do I have any intention of compromising
what we agreed on that occasion and wrecking this country's reputation for
plain dealing, honest dealing and good faith.'
The rebels insisted that they were intent on wrecking the legislation needed
to ratify the treaty when it returned to the Commons later this year.
Mr John Smith, the prospective Labour leader, has said the opposition is
likely to back the Tory rebels' attempts to prolong indefinitely debate on
the legislation.
Downing Street said that the decision to back a two-year extension of Mr
Delors' term came after a brief cabinet discussion. Ministers agreed
opposition to Mr Delors would have been what one minister called a 'futile
gesture'.
EC enlargement, Page 2
Bill set for rough ride, Page 9
Editorial Comment, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920626

