FT921-15388

FT  10 JAN 92 / Moscow stokes trade war with Ukrainians


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE DEEPENING crisis in the former Soviet states is forcing up trade
barriers and triggering strikes by workers and resignations by officials.
Russia will ban from today the export of some 60 commodities in short supply
to those republics which have erected trade barriers against the export of
goods to Russia in the past. The principal target is Ukraine, which is
rapidly assuming the status of a hostile country in Russian eyes.
A decree, signed on December 29 by Mr Genady Burbulis, the first deputy
prime minister, includes food, alcohol, tobacco, electrical appliances,
building materials, cameras and bicycles. The move appears to reflect a
determination by the Russian government to punish enemies and reward friends
among its neighbouring states.
Mr Peter Aven, Russian minister for foreign economic relations, said in an
interview yesterday that the prices republics would be charged for Russian
goods would depend on how closely they followed Russian economic reform.
At the same time, the Council of Independent Trade Unions warned the Russian
government to pay promised social compensations for the price rises, and to
'reconsider' - and presumably extend - by next Thursday the list of goods
still sold at subsidised prices.
Miners in Kazakhstan, the third largest of the former Union's coal areas,
and producing 100m tonnes of coal a year, have struck in support of a demand
to double their pay to Rbs4,700 a month - a sum which would have been an
average yearly wage less than a year ago. Workers in industries in the
capital, Alma Ata, are also reported to have been on strike since January 6,
when prices were freed.
The Moscow City administration yesterday announced its collective
resignation, following a prolonged struggle with Mr Gavriil Popov, the
mayor, over privatisation of houses.
Mr Yuri Luzhkov, the Moscow city chief executive, said last night a new
administration must include 'special teams' addressing themselves to
economic reform, social protection, the city's economy and development and
territorial administration. The Estonian government yesterday ordered food
rationing and sacked managers of state-owned companies as shortages
threatened to cripple the capital, Tallinn.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920110

