FT921-1420

FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Major attacks move to 'industrial euthanasia'


   By ALISON SMITH, DAVID OWEN and IVO DAWNAY


MR JOHN MAJOR last night widened his assault on Labour's prospectus for the
1990s by calling the party's proposals for trade union legislation
'industrial euthanasia'.
The prime minister also used his speech at a rally in Sheffield to reiterate
the wish for a 'classless society' which he expressed when he became Tory
leader in November 1990.
Labour, Mr Major said, would allow secondary strikes, prevent employers from
obtaining immediate court orders to stop unlawful strikes and take away from
individual union members the right not to take part in industrial action.
Labour would stop economic recovery in its tracks.
By contrast the Tories would ensure that unions gave at least a week's
notice of a strike and give the public new rights against the disruption of
public services by illegal wildcat strikes. Legislation to introduce this
would be in the first session of a new parliament.
Mr Major - speaking to 1,000 Tories from the Yorkshire area - - attacked Mr
Neil Kinnock's remarks yesterday committing Labour to reintroducing credit
controls.
The Labour leader said his party planned to use credit controls in addition
to interest rates to staunch price rises. Housebuyers would rather wait 'a
month or two' for loans than pay penal interest rates, Mr Kinnock suggested.
He said he would use temporary controls if borrowing looked set to rise
unacceptably.
Mr Major said Mr Kinnock's policy was a typical socialist answer. 'Form a
queue. Wait for the state to tell you when you can buy a home,' said Mr
Major. 'Wait for the state to tell you when you can sell your house to
someone who wants to buy it.'
The credit-control plans were also attacked by Mr Michael Heseltine,
environment secretary. He said: 'We have always said . . . that mortgages
under Labour would be more expensive. Now you are going to have to queue for
them as well.'
Mr Heseltine predicted that monthly mortgage payments would rise by an
average of between Pounds 40 and Pounds 50 under Labour, because higher
interest rates would be needed to protect the pound.
Mr Heseltine lambasted Mr Kinnock's 'economic illiteracy', saying it was
'utterly incredible that a delay of a month or two' could affect the level
of interest rates. 'How does he prevent foreign companies lending money
across the exchanges unless Labour is also threatening to reintroduce
exchange controls?'
Mr Heseltine promised a nationwide rents-to-mortgages scheme which would
enable 1.5m local authority tenants to convert their present rent into a
mortgage payment.
Mr Major, in his speech, also claimed Conservatism rather than socialism was
the way of breaking down social barriers. He highlighted his vision of 'a
country in which everyone is able to develop their talent to the full. Our
modern Tory party is for each and every person in Britain. We want to banish
for ever the artificial divisions in our society.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920324

