FT924-11281

FT  27 OCT 92 / Data unlikely to give Bush a lift


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


THE weak economy has been a handicap for President George Bush throughout
the presidential election campaign. He should avoid big embarrassments in
the next week but the figures are unlikely to show convincing signs of
recovery, writes Michael Prowse in Washington.
Today. The single most important pre-election statistic - gross domestic
product for the third quarter - is released. For Mr Bush to gain an
advantage it would have to show growth at an annual rate of 2 per cent or
more.
The consensus view, however, is that third-quarter growth will be 1.5 per
cent, about the same sluggish pace as in the second quarter. Consumption,
two thirds of economic activity, probably grew at about 3 per cent, but this
is likely to be largely offset by weakness of trade and capital spending.
Some bears believe a worse figure is possible. Mr Allen Sinai, chief
economist for The Boston Group, an economic consultancy, forecasts growth at
an annual rate of only 0.9 per cent. A figure below 1 per cent would allow
Mr Clinton to claim the economy was deteriorating again.
The Conference Board also publishes its closely followed consumer confidence
index. Most analysts expect a small decline in October, for the fourth
consecutive month. Confidence is running at about half the level normal in a
vigorous recovery.
October 28. Analysts expect figures for durable goods orders to show a 0.5
per cent increase last month, a modest rebound after a 0.1 per cent decline
in August. However, a nasty shock should not be ruled out as consensus
forecasts for this and other figures have frequently been over-optimistic.
Personal income and consumption figures for September are expected to show
modest increases of 0.5 per cent and 0.3 per cent respectively, following
declines in August. Weaker than expected figures might causes ripples in
financial markets but would have little effect on the presidential race.
October 29. State unemployment insurance claims for the week ending October
17 may show an artificial decline, because of the Columbus day holiday.
Claims figures have been falling in recent weeks and the Bush campaign may
try to use the data as evidence that employment conditions are im- proving.
October 30. Figures for new home sales are expected to show a modest rebound
last month - an increase of perhaps 2-3 per cent after a surprising 6 per
cent plunge in August. Another fall in home sales would be disturbing
evidence that the housing market is not recovering despite repeated cuts in
interest rates.
November 2. The October Purchasing Managers' Index - a reliable indicator of
the health of manufacturing industry - is the last important statistic
before the election.
Mr David Wyss, chief economist at DRI McGraw Hill, the forecasting group, is
typical in expecting a modest rebound after an unexpected fall to 49 per
cent in September.
A figure of around 50 per cent, however, would indicate manufacturing
industry is struggling and is bad news for Mr Bush. However, the index is
mostly of interest to financial markets and means little to the man on the
street.
Mr Bush is fortunate in one respect: he will not be embarrassed on the eve
of the election by news of a rise in the unemployment rate - by far the most
politically sensitive indicator. Monthly employment figures are released on
the first Friday of the month and so will not appear until after the
election is won or lost.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921027

