FT924-11249

FT  27 OCT 92 / Health authority spending criticised


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


SERIOUS shortcomings in financial control in two National Health Service
regions - including the cost of leased houses in London for company
executives, aircraft hire and 'lavish entertainment' - are highlighted in a
critical report published today.
One of the cases covered in the National Audit Office's report - expenditure
by the West Midlands Regional Health Authority on consultancy services
intended to generate Pounds 50m savings through better purchasing
arrangements and administration - has already resulted in the government
sending Sir Roy Griffiths, deputy chairman of the NHS policy board, to
Birmingham to help strengthen the region's management.
Sir John Bourn, comptroller and auditor-general, says that an auditor found
the consultancy costs amounted to some Pounds 2.5m, while the region's total
costs were likely to be closer to Pounds 4m. The auditor had concluded that,
in placing and managing the consultancy contract, the region's then director
of regionally managed services had 'not followed regional policy and had
shown a cavalier disregard for the standards of conduct expected from public
officers'.
Questionable costs included the consultants' expenses, which had amounted
over a year to some Pounds 350,000, 'and had contained such items as leased
houses in London for the firm's executives and their wives, the hire of
aircraft to come to work and lavish entertainment'. The regional authority
had paid invoices without always seeing supporting bills. The director
became redundant in June 1991 after some five years' service and, the report
says, was overpaid in redundancy and other payments by Pounds 41,500. Sir
John says the regional authority had not sought the health department's
approval before making the payments.
West Midlands region, the report says, is also concerned about a potential
Pounds 3.5m commitment for an integrated electronic trading system, and was
'reviewing the legal, contractual and financial position of this project'.
Sir John's report also addresses expenditure of Pounds 43m over six years on
an information system for Wessex region which, he says, was abandoned in
April 1990 'without any significant benefit having accrued to the region'.
An auditor had found that the transfer of part of the regional authority's
information technology function to private companies, staffed largely by
former employees, was not in the interests of the region. Misleading advice
had led to the purchase of a computer for Pounds 3.3m. It was not installed
until 18 months after delivery, by which time in had reduced in value to
about Pounds 1m.
Sir John says members of health authorities must ensure that their officials
do not exceed delegated powers; that NHS regulations for officers'
conditions of service are strictly applied and they they were 'fully
informed of all important matters'.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921027

