FT924-864

FT  22 DEC 92 / Pit closure plan ruled illegal by High Court: Calls for
Heseltine to resign


   By Our Industrial and Political Staff


THE High Court dealt the government's coal programme a severe blow yesterday
by ruling that its decision to close 31 pits with the loss of 30,000 jobs
last October had been conducted unlawfully.
The ruling caused jubilation among mineworkers, and provoked an opposition
call for the resignation of Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary. However, it seemed unlikely to lead to an early resumption of
mining at 10 pits where work is being stopped.
Last night, Mr Heseltine admitted the government had 'got it wrong' over the
pit closure programme but rejected calls for his resignation. He said he
would help set up an independent assessment of prospects for the 10 pits as
requested by the court and suggested John T Boyd, the mining consultancy,
might be used for the purpose.
In their ruling, Lord Justice Glidewell and Mr Justice Hidden found that the
government and British Coal 'unlawfully and irrationally' ignored the right
of mineworkers and trade unions to be consulted over pit closures.
The judges also quashed Mr Heseltine's decision six days later, as a result
of the public outcry, to close 10 pits after a 90-day consultation and to
subject the remaining 21 to a review.
The judges, who were ruling on an appeal against the closures by the mining
unions, found that the lack of consultation broke the Employment Protection
Act 1975 and possibly also breached EC law. Miners' rights are contained in
the modified colliery review procedure (MCRP) which was set up in 1985 after
the last coal strike. But it was suspended by British Coal in October in
order to speed up the closures.
The judges said: 'British Coal shall not reach a final decision on the
closure of the 10 collieries, nor shall the president make available funds
which would enable British Coal to make such a decision, until a procedure
substantially the same as MCRP, including some form of independent scrutiny,
has been followed in relation to each of the 10 collieries.' The
consultations being used for the 21 pits might be incorporated into the
procedure.
British Coal said it was considering an appeal. It also indicated that it
would study the ruling, which took three hours to read out in the court,
before deciding the future of threatened pits. The ruling was about the
process for shutting down mines, not about the legalities of mine closures
themselves.
The ruling was welcomed by some Tory MPs, and deepened the government's
embarrassment over the closures. Many Conservatives, including ministers,
believe a reprieve for several of the 31 pits is inevitable. Mr John Major
hinted at a retreat during a BBC Radio interview, saying the government had
an open mind.
Mr Frank Dobson, shadow employment spokesmen, called for the resignations of
Mr Heseltine and Mrs Gillian Shephard, the employment secretary. 'Lawmakers
should not be lawbreakers,' he said. Union leaders hailed the decision as
the most significant legal victory for organised labour since the 1970s. Mr
Arthur Scargill, NUM leader, called for Mr Heseltine's resignation and
insisted work should be resumed immediately in the 10 pits not reprieved by
the government energy review.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, stopped short of calling for resignations,
but wrote to the prime minister asking for the 10 pits to be included
immediately in the review.
Union strategists believe that at least 17 of the 31 pits will remain open
as part of British Coal, and that up to six more will survive in deals with
electricity generators or large coal users.
Speaking on Channel 4 News, Mr Heseltine said: 'We got it wrong because in
taking the decision that it was necessary to reduce the capacity of British
Coal, the consultation was not considered by British Coal at that time to be
necessarily along the lines the courts have now indicated. I have accepted
that advice - that the court takes a different view.'
Page 4
Miners had right to talks, judge declares

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921222

