FT924-1075

FT  19 DEC 92 / Motoring: Tried and tested wins the day


   By STUART MARSHALL


NEW MODELS grab headlines. But well-established cars that have had a
facelift-cum-heart transplant in mid to late life often are the shrewd
buyer's choice.
All the initial snags - and it is a rare car that has absolutely none from
the outset - have been sorted out. Over the years, the product has been
honed as close to perfection as it is ever likely to get.
In the past few weeks, I have tried four cars in this category: the 1993
model ranges of Jaguar and Vauxhall; the latest V8-engined BMW 730i; and the
24-valve, 3.2 litre Mercedes 320E. Only the Vauxhall Cavaliers (Opel Vectras
in mainland Europe) looked much different. But all the cars were
significantly better than those they succeeded.
The Pounds 43,528 Daimler four-litre is, as ever, a slice of old England,
trimmed in pungently sweet-smelling Connolly hide and wearing its wood
veneer as unself-consciously as any Bentley. Going slowly on winding lanes
and around town, I thought it felt rather soft and loose-jointed but, as
speed rose, it became a real driver's car, not just a chairman's transport.
A driver's side airbag and a state-of-the-art security alarm are among a
number of individually small but cumulatively significant improvements to
all 1993 Jaguar saloons.
Long term, though, Jaguar must produce a smaller, roomier and essentially
more up-to-date model, possibly with a V8 engine, to remain competitive with
BMW, Mercedes and the up-market products of Japanese makers. In short,
something around the size of the BMW 5 series.
Although the present BMW 7 series is nearing the end of its life, it remains
a brilliant performer with the new three- and four-litre V8 engines.
Before long, these V8s will power the 7 series replacement, but they also
are available now in the range-topping 5 series.
The Pounds 37,250 730iA with five-speed automatic transmission was so quiet,
swift and agile that I found it impossible to fault. As I settled
luxuriously into its soft, hide-trimmed upholstery, I scented victory in my
war of attrition against the traditionally hard Teutonic seat. (Come to
think of it, it has been some time since anyone in Munich or Stuttgart told
me, earnestly: 'Hard seats are very good for you').
Vauxhall deserves any number of Brownie points for giving its posher Astra
models a central display on which the radio wavelength is shown boldly
enough for people like me to read easily without glasses.
The power-steered, Pounds 11,912, 1.6 Astra automatic I tried was
well-mannered and compact, lively though solidly built, and parked easily.
On minor roads covered with sodden mats of autumn leaves, a turbo-charged,
204-horsepower, Pounds 19,259 Cavalier 4x4 was astoundingly safe and grippy.
The whole Cavalier range has had a major revamp for 1993, with automatic
seat belt tensioners, side impact protection beams and optional driver-side
airbags. Luxury models with 2.5 litre, V6 engines are coming soon.
The 320E I drove was the top model in a collection of 12 mid-sized
Mercedes-Benz saloons, estate cars and a four/five seat convertible with
new, low-emission, multi-valve petrol engines. All have driver-side airbags
as standard.
Its eager 220 horsepower was usable safely on wet roads because the optional
 -and highly desirable - ASR automatic skid control system (Pounds 1,982)
was fitted. This matches power delivery to tyre grip, avoiding wheel-spin
during hard acceleration and assuring balanced handling.
The 320E is listed at Pounds 32,256. Extras - including ASR, leather seats,
cruise control, Sportline suspension and eight-hole alloy wheels  - raised
the price of my test car to Pounds 39,604.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921219

