FT922-622

FT  26 JUN 92 / Sunday trading may end after legal ruling


   By ROBERT RICE and JOHN THORNHILL


HUNDREDS of do-it-yourself stores and supermarkets in England and Wales
could be forced to close on Sundays from this weekend following a ruling by
the law lords yesterday.
The ruling restores local authorities' power to enforce the Sunday trading
laws.
The House of Lords overturned a 1991 Court of Appeal ruling that prevented
councils from obtaining injunctions banning Sunday opening. The Court of
Appeal had said the councils were not entitled to injunctions unless they
undertook to compensate stores for loss of profits in the event of the
English law being overturned by the European Court of Justice.
A ruling from the European Court is expected in October.
The Appeal Court ruling - in a case brought by Kirklees Borough Council in
West Yorkshire against Wickes, the DIY chain - had made the 1950 Shops act,
which governs Sunday trading, virtually unenforceable. Before the ruling,
councils had obtained hundreds of injunctions to enforce Sunday closing on
DIY stores and other chains.
In a surprising twist to the long-running battle, the law lords also said
that if the Shops act were eventually declared incompatible with EC law, it
was the UK government and not local authorities which would be liable to
compensate stores.
Ministers said they needed time to study the judgment, but their immediate
reaction was that the decision underlined the need for the government to act
quickly once the European Court has ruled in the autumn.
Although the threat of having to pay compensation appeared to have come as a
surprise, ministers pointed out that it would still be for local authorities
to decide whether to seek injunctions against retailers.
Kirklees welcomed what it called 'an historic ruling'. Councillor Jeremy
Cuss said: 'Now the position on injunctions has been clarified, we will be
writing to certain companies asking them to comply with the law.'
Most councils, however, were taking a cautious stance.
Wickes said it intended to open most of its 65 stores this Sunday. 'If local
authorities choose to proceed (with injunctions), jobs will be lost, adding
to unemployment, and millions of pounds of taxpayers' money will be wasted,'
it said.
The big supermarket chains - such as J. Sainsbury, Tesco, Safeway and Asda,
which have been opening hundreds of their superstores every Sunday since
before Christmas - were wary of commenting before studying the judgment.
In the absence of injunctions against specific stores, it seemed likely that
most of the big chains would continue to trade seven days a week at selected
locations.
J. Sainsbury, which opens 139 of its 316 supermarkets and 68 Homebase DIY
stores, said: 'We currently have no plans to change the pattern of our
Sunday trading.'
Background, Page 8
Editorial Comment, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920626

