FT922-4396

FT  05 JUN 92 / Moscow turmoil over ministers' views on reform


   By JOHN LLOYD and LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE RUSSIAN government yesterday appeared in the grip of internal turmoil
because of the appointment of three ministers with different perspectives
and attitudes to those of free-marketers who have been commanding
centre-stage.
Statements by Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, former deputy speaker of the parliament
and now joint first deputy prime minister with Mr Yegor Gaidar, indicate
that he wants a more state-orientated strategy on privatisation and an
immediate halving of the 28 per cent value added tax (VAT).
Mr Alexei Ulyukayev, the government's economic adviser, said yesterday that
neither was government policy. But he refused to say whether Mr Shumeiko or
Mr Gaidar was senior first deputy: Mr Gaidar remained in control of economic
strategy and of the country's finances, while Mr Shumeiko was in 'operative
control' of government policy.
Mr Ulyukayev indicated that the government's first phase of radical reform
was concluded. He said 'realities call for different tactics' and 'you can
be a strict economic liberal, good at solving problems of the first period
of reform, on the macroeconomic level, but the question of combining
macroeconomic and microeconomic issues has not been solved ..the next stage
allows you to make certain changes in course.'
Professor Yevgenny Yasin, the government's plenipotentiary to parliament who
is engaged in drafting medium-term strategy, said there was a danger of
emergence of 'two centres of power' around the two first deputy premiers.
Meanwhile, confusion deepened yesterday when parliament refused to accept
the resignation of Mr Georgy Matiukhin, Central Bank chairman.
Mr Shumeiko told parliament that Mr Matiukhin could not be directly blamed
for all the failures of the bank and that, with only a year in office, he
had not served long enough.
Mr Matiukhin himself appeared and proposed a freeze on wages and prices as
an alternative to the 80 per cent interest rates for which he has been much
criticised.
Mr Vassily Barchuk, finance minister, said he thought interest rates were
too high even though government policy is to defend present levels.
Parliament refused to countenance such a freeze, refused to agree to Mr
Shumeiko's suggestion that Mr Matiukhin be appointed for a five-year term
with security of tenure - a condition Mr Matiukhin said was indispensable to
his doing his job - and also refused to allow him to quit.
Mr Ulyukayev said the government changes in personnel and tactics would have
to be 'explained' to the IMF, with which it is negotiating access to the
Dollars 24bn (Pounds 13.3bn) credits put up by the fund and the major
foreign governments.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920605

