FT921-1343

FT  25 MAR 92 / Berlin attacks Treuhand over sale of factory


   By LESLIE COLITT


   BERLIN


THE Treuhand agency came under fire yesterday from the Berlin city
government and union leaders for selling east Germany's largest light bulb
factory in east Berlin to a west German property developer.
Mr Norbert Meisner, the head of Berlin's economics department, criticised
the Treuhand for seeking to 'maximise' short-term profits from yesterday's
announced sale of the Narva factory to the Erhard Hartl property company in
Bavaria.
Although the price was not disclosed, the Treuhand said it would make a net
cash gain of DM2.8m (Pounds 970m) from the sale. The Social Democratic
partner of the Christian Democratic-led coalition government expressed its
'outrage' over the sale. The privatisation agency was also taken to task by
the influential German Federation of Industry (BDI). It said that instead of
giving liquidity loans and guarantees to former state companies and assuming
their losses - all totalling nearly DM40bn this year - the Treuhand should
grant clearly-defined start-up aid for a limited time. Although the Treuhand
is to be allowed to borrow up to DM38bn annually under a draft law presented
to the Bundestag, critics charge that it diverts too much money to cover
running expenses of companies and too little to restructuring them.
The Treuhand said Hartl intends to close down the Narva plant (formerly
Osram), which lost DM62m last year, and will bring medium-sized producers
from southern Germany to a substitute east Berlin property. It will get the
site from the Treuhand which faces possible claims by the city on the
original Narva property. Hartl pledged to invest up to DM40m and to employ
the remaining 1,080 Narva workers in non-industrial jobs for three years.
The Treuhand agreed to assume nearly DM23m in Narva debts.
A Treuhand plan last August to sell Narva to a west Berlin property
developer was cancelled under pressure from city officials who said it
amounted to a 'gift' of prime urban real estate.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920325

