FT922-4407

FT  05 JUN 92 / Lloyd's will ask each Name for Pounds 20,000 to boost
solvency


   By RICHARD LAPPER


EVERY MEMBER of Lloyd's of London will have to pay on average Pounds 20,000
to bolster the troubled insurance market's central fund. Lloyd's, which is
facing record losses, will double the size of the fund to Pounds 1bn by
means of the compulsory charge.
The fund can be used to pay any claims falling on Lloyd's when Names - the
individuals who provide the insurance market's capital - are unable to meet
their obligations.
A few thousand Lloyd's Names will bear the brunt of the market's record
losses for 1989, which will be reported later this month. Earlier this week,
they were forecast to top Pounds 2bn. Many Names have insufficient assets to
pay claims and face potential bankruptcy.
Mr Alan Lord, Lloyd's chief executive, said that Lloyd's had 'solid legal
opinion' that it was authorised to take the action which would provide a
'substantial margin of solvency'.
The increase is to be financed by a one-time levy on all Names who have
participated in the market in the 1990, 1991 and 1992 underwriting years.
The levy will amount to 1.66 per cent of stamp (the amount of premiums Names
are allowed to accept under Lloyd's rules) per year. In 1990 the annual levy
already paid by Names was increased from 0.35 per cent to 0.6 per cent.
On average, Names face a bill exceeding Pounds 20,000, although this will
not generally be charged until 1993, 1994 and 1995, when, in line with the
market's three-year accounting system, agents settle Names' individual
accounts for the affected years.
In the first instance, the money is to be drawn from the Names' premium
trust funds into which premium income earned by syndicates is channelled.
The first payments will be made in mid-July.
Mr David Coleridge, chairman, described the levy as a 'prudent response to
especially difficult trading circumstances. The Council's action will give a
strong and reassuring signal to policyholders',
Mr Lord said the Lloyd's Council, the market's governing body which approved
the special levy on Wednesday, was still discussing a separate plan to help
many of the hardest hit Names.
Mr Val Powell, chief executive of the Association of Lloyd's Members, which
represents over 9,000 Names, said the levy was 'uncomfortable but
inevitable. It is an essential prerequisite to get us through the next two
years.'
Reinsurer's action, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920605

