FT921-15204

FT  11 JAN 92 / Motoring: Lorry speed limit debate rumbles into centre lane


   By STUART MARSHALL


IN TWO years, lower speed limits for heavy lorries and coaches could begin
to make UK motorways more pleasant and safe for car drivers.
The European Council of Transport Ministers has decided that from January
1994 new lorries weighing more than 12 tonnes and coaches must have devices
fitted which will restrict their speeds: lorries to 56 mph (90 kms) and
coaches to 62 mph (100 kms). Eventually all lorries and coaches will have
these limiters, though not until 1998.
It is a modest change. At present, even the largest articulated lorries are
allowed to use motorways at 60 mph (96 kmh) and coaches at 70 mph (112 kmh).
We all know what some of them, not yet fitted with speed limiters, really
travel at, given half a chance. Talk of 70 mph juggernauts and 85 mph
express coaches has long been fact, not just motorway lore.
Protests from the hauliers and coach operators have been anguished and
predictable. Some lorry men say the lower speed limits will increase journey
times, raise costs and put them out of business. Coach operators say they
will not be competitive with long-distance trains any more.
To which millions of car drivers may well reply: tough]
I could never understand why a 10 tonne coach carrying 50 unbelted
passengers was legal at 70mph (113 kmh) in pouring rain while the driver of
a Jaguar who touched 101 mph (162 kmh) for a mile or so in the dry was a
speed-crazed road hog deserving disqualification. Or why big articulated
lorries, notoriously unstable under hard braking, especially when unladen,
were ever thought safe at 60 mph on busy motorways at all.
Will the new limits be an unmixed blessing for car drivers? My first
reaction was that they must be, but the Freight Transport Association thinks
not. They could, it says, make motorways even more dangerous by widening the
differential between car and heavy vehicle speeds. (I think Germans would
find this argument hard to follow).
If 62 mph-limited coaches are still allowed in the overtaking lane, they
will obstruct 70 mph cars. And if they are to be banned from it, as heavy
lorries are now, then the middle lane will become even busier. That, the FTA
argues, would make it a more alarming place for car drivers who prefer not
to use the third (overtaking) lane. 'They would,' it says, 'find themselves
sandwiched between lines of HGVs (heavy goods vehicles) and coaches.'
In effect, the speed of traffic in the centre lane would be reduced to that
of the slowest common denominator of 56 mph (90 kmh).
I have a feeling the debate has only just started . . .

The Financial Times


London Page XV

920111

