FT924-11405

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (7): Bonn has a change of heart / A look
at Germany as a financial centre


   By DAVID WALLER


IN JANUARY this year, Chancellor Kohl made a long overdue visit to the
Frankfurt Stock Exchange, the biggest exchange in Germany. It was the first
time he had been there in nearly ten years in office, and the visit
demonstrated Bonn's new-found determination to provide active support for
Germany as a financial centre.
The change of heart, after years of neglect of the financial sector, was
probably directly linked to Germany's campaign to have the future European
Central Bank sited in Frankfurt. It also reflected a determination to build
Germany into a financing bridgehead for the fledgling market economies of
eastern Europe - and showed that the politicians had finally decided to help
bankers win back business in German securities currently conducted in other
financial centres, predominantly London.
Just how the government proposed to help had been made clear in a paper
written by Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, and published without fanfare a
few days before Mr Kohl delivered his address to the flower of Frankfurt's
business and financial community. The plans were ambitious - to get a host
of measures in place by the end of the current year - but in the event there
were ten months of silence before anything tangible came of the proposals.
The Waigel document spelt out government support for increased regulation of
the securities markets; for a unified stock-exchange for the whole of
Germany; for an insider dealing law; for more sophisticated dealing
technology; for better stock-market disclosure rules and transparency; for
legislation to enable banks to launch money market funds which give
investors direct access to short-term money market instruments.
It now seems unlikely that there will be a 'German SEC' until the end of
next year at the earliest - nor an insider dealing law, although under
European Community Legislation the latter should have been on the statute
book by this summer.
The explanation for the delay is that there was a personnel change within
the finance ministry in the early spring: the relevant official left without
having produced a draft of the legislation required to set up an 'SEC' and
introduce an insider dealing law.
It was only by the late summer that such a blue-print had been produced,
thereby providing a basis for haggling between Bonn and the Lander - the
states which at present have responsibility for market regulation - but
ensuring that virtually nothing of the original Waigel programme would be in
place by the original deadline.
The only part of the package which will come into being anywhere near on
schedule is the move to create a Deutsche Borse - a German stock exchange. A
new holding company will be formed which will buy the Deutsche Terminborse
(DTB) - Germany's screen-based futures and options exchange and the
Deutscher Kassenverein, the settlements organisation.
The move will not end the particularism which has damaged the German
securities markets: there will still be eight stock exchanges in Germany,
competing with one another and quoting different prices for each stock, thus
splintering liquidity and transparency. But internal rivalries have been
overcome to the extent that the seven smaller Bourses - in Dusseldorf,
Munich, Hamburg, Hanover, Bremen, Stuttgart and Berlin - have agreed to take
a 10 per cent stake in the new venture.
As Mr Rolf Breuer, the Deutsche Bank main board director who will be the
first chairman of the Deutsche Borse, said in early October as final
agreement was announced after three years of negotiations, the structure of
the new entity reflects the realisation that all the exchanges should work
together for their common good.
'I am exceptionally confident that we have entered a new era,' he said as
Deutsche Borse was unveiled.
He cited in particular the development of new technology, which would be too
expensive for the seven smaller borses to finance on their own but would
ultimately be introduced to all exchanges.
He said it was new technology which had helped overcome some of the smaller
exchanges' antagonism towards Frankfurt's plans, in particular the Ibis
trading system introduced in April 1991. This now accounts for 30 per cent
of turnover in the 30 most frequently traded stocks, bringing new business
to the smaller exchanges as the market is screen-based and therefore not
tied to Frankfurt.
Germany now claims one of the more sophisticated stock-market structures in
Europe, providing one-stop shopping and settlement for investors wanting to
buy equities and derivatives. But is this enough?
As Breuer of the Deutsche Bank conceded earlier this month, the lack of a
regulatory body is causing increasing problems for Germany's financial
services industry. This is apparent in discussions with regulatory
authorities in other financial centres who, Breuer said, do not believe
Germany has a credible regulatory structure - making it difficult, for
example, for the DTB to set up screens outside Germany despite undoubted
demand.
Moreover, some investors also fight shy of buying shares in Germany because
of the perception that the regulatory environment is under-developed - and
because of the fact that insider dealing is still not a crime. The objective
now is to see the necessary legislation in place next year.
Mr Friedrich von Metzler, current chairman of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange
and scion of an old Frankfurt banking family, is candid about what still has
to be done. With the move to a Deutsche Borse, he says that Germany is
'setting the ground for future developments'.
Steadily and surely, he and Breuer and other determined Frankfurt financiers
are building the institutional infrastructure essential if Finanzplatz
Frankfurt is to become on a par with London, New York and Tokyo - or even to
achieve the more modest objective of establishing a clear lead ahead of the
other continental European financial centres.
Ultimately, the institutional reforms will do no good without significant
cultural changes: there are only 660 or so German companies quoted on the
market, and most of these cannot be taken over - or are not even managed
with the interests of shareholders put ahead of other considerations. Equity
is still a far less favoured source of finance than bank debt, and private
investors prefer to put their savings in bonds rather shares.
It is often said that the average German family spends more money each year
on flowers than shares. The recent dire performance of the German share
market - down 16 per cent in the third quarter - is not going to change
this. Nor is the founding of the Deutsche Borse or the opening of a new
regulatory body sometime next year or the year after.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921026

