FT923-9724

FT  04 AUG 92 / Strike sparks growth fears in S Africa


   By PHILIP GAWITH and REUTER


   PIETERMARITZBURG


THIS week's general strike and mass action campaign in South Africa takes
place against a crescendo of alarm bells about the weak state of the
country's economy.
Mr Derek Keys, minister of finance, said last week that although the
short-term disruption caused by the strike would be substantial in terms of
jobs lost, income forgone and general disruption, there was also a danger of
more lasting damage.
'If this stayaway becomes prolonged for purely political reasons, if it
becomes more than simply a gesture of protest, the verdict of the overseas
markets is going to be adverse and there is no court of appeal,' said Mr
Keys.
Mr Keys's comments coincided with a warning by the Old Mutual, the country's
largest financial institution, of the damage being caused by political
uncertainty.
Mr Dave Mohr, chief economist, said it needed to be asked 'whether the
economy will recover at all until such time that the current political
disputes have been settled and greater certainty reached about the political
situation in general'.
Mr Mohr added: 'Put differently, there is growing concern that the long-term
deterioration in the domestic growth performance may persist for some years
to come'. The growth performance of the economy over the past three years
has been the poorest for any three-year period since the second world war.
The economy shrank by 0.5 per cent in 1990 and 0.6 per cent in 1991.
Earlier this year, there was consensus among economists that a positive
growth rate of up to 2 per cent would be achieved in 1992.
Slower recovery in world markets, an unexpected deepening of the domestic
recession and a disastrous drought, however, have resulted in a drastic
downward revision of forecasts.
Old Mutual is now forecasting a decline of 1.5 per cent or more in real GDP
for the year, while ABSA, South Africa's largest banking group, is
forecasting a 1 per cent decline.
The further slowdown in the economy has serious fiscal implications. The
Treasury was forced to concede recently that its revenue forecasts for
fiscal 1992-3, on which a forecast budget deficit of 4.5 per cent had been
based, now looked 'somewhat optimistic'.
'Old Mutual says that a deficit of 'well over 5 per cent' is 'very likely',
while ABSA is forecasting 6.1 per cent.
The strike was broadly effective yesterday in urban centres but patchy in
the mines which produce much of the nation's wealth. Mining houses said gold
and platinum production was virtually normal but coal was hit, Reuter adds.
The South African Chamber of Business (Sacob) said the workers' stayaway was
influenced by intimidation, transport difficulties and contingency plans
made by employers. There were wide disparities in regional and business
sector absenteeism, it said.
'The full (economic) impact on business has still to be evaluated,' it
added. 'The total stayaway is not likely to have exceeded 2m workers in the
private sector.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920804

