FT924-11903

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (16): At least you
get your money back - What's New? / These are nervous times in the equity
markets, and the life companies are sympathetic


   By BARBARA ELLIS


AFTER A rocky five years for equity investment, five-year money-back
guarantees have been showering on to the market with the frequency of autumn
leaves.
Three of the latest offerings - all single-premium insurance bonds -
highlight some of the main variations in terms and conditions.
With Lloyds Bank's Black Horse Life, the Guaranteed Capital Bond guarantees
to pay back at least the original investment after five years. Seventy per
cent of the money goes into a fixed-rate bond guaranteed to produce 100 per
cent of the initial investment at the end of five years, with the remaining
30 per cent spread over up to 10 Black Horse Life unit-linked funds. The
minimum investment is Pounds 3,000, with a maximum of Pounds 100,000.
The guarantee does not apply if investors cash in early.
As well as money back after five years, Laurentian Life's Capital Protected
Bond guarantees a percentage of any gain in the FT-SE 100 index over the
period.
On investments of between the Pounds 5,000 minimum and Pounds 19,999, the
guarantee is full return of the initial investment or 115 per cent of the
five-year rise in the Footsie. On Pounds 20,000 to Pounds 49,999, the
respective guarantees are 101 per cent of the initial money or 116 per cent
of the FT-SE 100 rise, with a maximum return of 101.5 per cent of the
initial money back and 116.75 per cent of the Footsie percentage rise on
investments of Pounds 50,000 and above. There is no upper limit on
investments.
However, the gain is taxable at the life company rate, and the guarantee
applies only at the end of the five-year period, expiring on December 17,
1997.
Laurentian points out that investors who come out of the bond before the
five-year stage are unlikely to recover their money in full.
With Citibank Life's Capital Guarantee 100, the guaranteed return of 100 per
cent of the FT-SE 100 rise is after basic rate tax but before the initial
charge of 5 per cent. So investors would get approximately 95 per cent of
the Footsie rise, tax paid.
As the bond is to be backed by financial derivatives, it should reflect the
value of the index more directly than bonds linked to life funds holding
component stocks of the FT-SE 100.
Investors who pay an additional 3 per cent charge on the initial investment
(the minimum is Pounds 3,000) can lock in the gain on the index if this
should hit 50 per cent above the level when Capital Guarantee starts on
December 11, 1992, at any time during the life of the bond. This means that,
if the index falls back after a 50 per cent rise, investors who have bought
the lock-in will have their returns rebased from the point where the index
had risen by 50 per cent.
After one year, Capital Guarantee bondholders will be able to take out a
loan from Citibank equivalent to 40 per cent of their initial investment in
the bond. Interest on the loan will be charged at 3 per cent over Midland
Bank base rate.
At present, this would come to an annual percentage rate of 12.6 per cent.
The only guarantee with 'Pepit', a new investment trust from Foreign &
Colonial, is that F&C will be sticking to its contrarian policy of trying to
buy when others are selling and selling as prices rise.
Investment manager Jeremy Tigue said the strategy had worked well after the
1987 crash and after the invasion of Kuwait, and the group was hoping that
now was a similar time in the UK market.
Qualifying for the maximum Pounds 6,000 Pep investment, the Pepit trust will
initially have about 90 per cent of its investments companies in UK
companies, with 75 per cent in FT-SE 100 stocks and the rest in smaller blue
chips. The remaining 10 per cent will be invested in continental companies,
such as Bayer, Siemens and L'Oreal.
Mr Tigue said the UK was a better place to invest than the rest of Europe at
present, being further down the recession route. He explained that F&C would
concentrate on big international companies with large overseas earnings, so
as to reduce dependence on the UK economy.
Initial expenses are limited to 2.5 per cent of the gross proceeds of the
share issue plus VAT, while the annual management fee is to be 0.4 per cent
of gross assets plus VAT.
The gross dividend yield on Pepit, after expenses, is estimated at 4.5 per
cent annually, with a one-third/two-thirds split between the interim and
final dividends.
Japanese warrants, one of the most volatile forms of financial instrument,
are the main portfolio component in a Luxembourg hedge fund denominated in
sterling, to be launched by the Cresvale group.
Cresvale says it will aim to neutralise the underlying equity market risk of
buying warrants by taking short positions in equity index futures, and use
currency options and futures in an attempt to remove the impact of exchange
rate fluctuations.
Such techniques do not come cheaply. Although the fund does not have a
front-end charge, it levies an annual 1.75 per cent management fee, plus a
steep performance-related fee based on the appreciation in the fund's net
asset value during its financial year. For example, if net asset value per
share rises by between 15 and 20 per cent, 10 per cent of the excess
increase above 15 per cent goes into the performance-related fee.
Aimed primarily at institutional investors, the fund is on offer to
sophisticated private investors with a minimum of Pounds 10,000 to invest.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921023

