FT921-386

FT  30 MAR 92 / Intel files patent suit to block Cyrix challenge


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


INTEL, the largest US semiconductor maker, has pre-empted another challenge
to its dominance of the market for personal computer microprocessors. It has
filed a patent infringement suit against Cyrix, a small Texas company, that
is today announcing its own version of one of Intel's widely-used
microprocessors.
Anticipation of the Cyrix announcement fuelled a sharp decline in Intel's
stock price last week.
Even before seeing the Cyrix chip, Intel filed a suit charging Cyrix with
infringing four patents that protect Intel's microprocessor technology.
Intel said that its claims were based on information gleaned from financial
analysts' comments.
'We do not believe that it is possible to produce a chip that is compatible
with our 386 microprocessor without infringing our patents,' said Mr Thomas
Dunlap, Intel general counsel. Intel is seeking a preliminary injunction to
prevent Cyrix from selling its microprocessor chip.
Until last year, Intel held a virtual monopoly in the market for the
microprocessors that form the brains of IBM-compatible personal computers.
Then Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) and Chips & Technologies, two Silicon
Valley competitors, entered the field with their own versions of the Intel
386.
Intel has filed suit against all of its would-be competitors, but has yet to
win an injunction to prevent them from selling the look-alike chips.
AMD, the first to enter the microprocessor clone market, is now estimated to
hold a 30 per cent market share.
Intel is also already involved in a legal dispute with Cyrix over the Texas
company's earlier product, a version of Intel's 387 co-processor, a device
that works alongside the 386 to speed mathematical calculations.
On Saturday, Mr Jerry Rogers, president of Cyrix, when informed of the new
Intel suit, said that the action represented a 'frivolous lawsuit that
amounts to legal harassment'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920330

