FT923-15590

FT  01 JUL 92 / Life policy penalties face probe: Lautro may curb
cancellation fees


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


REGULATORS are considering whether to limit the amount that life insurance
companies may charge policyholders who cancel within the first few years of
a contract.
Lautro, the self-regulatory body for the life insurance and unit trust
industries, is considering rules that would force shareholders in publicly
owned life insurance companies to bear part of the cost of early
terminations. Mutually held life insurers would have to deduct a portion of
costs from the life pool, owned jointly by remaining policyholders.
If adopted, the rules would allow policyholders who cancel their policies
early to receive refunds larger than those they are now entitled to. The
cost of each sale is deducted from the first few years of premiums paid and
policyholders cancelling in the first two years can lose up to 100 per cent
of contributions.
Rules under consideration would require each company's actuaries to provide
a guidance note specifying which part of early-terminators' sales costs
should be allocated to either shareholders or to the life fund, which is
jointly owned by remaining policyholders.
Present practice in the life insurance industry is to deduct the cost of
selling and maintaining each policy from the initial premiums paid. On
average, according to Lautro, it may take seven to 10 years for the holder
of a 20-year endowment policy to be entitled to a 100 per cent refund of
premiums.
Commission to the sales agent is the largest single cost.
The rules would apply to life insurance, pensions and other long-term
savings contracts.
A recent study by the Securities and Investments Board, the City's chief
watchdog, found that a quarter to a third of all policies were cancelled in
the first two years.
Consideration of the new rules follows completion of a report by Mr Marshall
Field, a partner at consulting actuaries at Bacon and Woodrow, who was asked
by Lautro to study front-ended charges for policyholders.
That report is to be considered by the Lautro board at the end of next
month. A draft of the report, circulated in April, suggested that it might
be unfair and unwise to allow life companies to continue to charge early
terminators for the full costs of their own sale.
Forcing companies to bear part of the cost would be an incentive for them to
see that policies were not mis-sold. Mis-selling occurs when consumers are
sold policies that, while not fraudulent, are inappropriate for their needs.
They are frequently cancelled in their early years.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920701

