FT922-543

FT  26 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Chateau quality crosses the
Andes - An invasion that is revolutionising Chilean wine


   By LESLIE CRAWFORD


UNTIL QUITE recently, Chile's vineyard owners could boast of their
unpronounceable Basque names, family lineages dating back to the Spanish
conquest, and little else. Wine-making, like the local aristocracy, was
trapped in a time-warp. The industry was both moribund and unprofitable.
This was before globe-trotting foreign vintners set their eyes on Chile's
central valley. Mr Miguel Torres of Spain was the first to arrive, in the
early 1980s. He declared Chile a 'wine-makers' paradise' and bought 500
acres in the central valley. Mr Torres was followed by Baron Eric de
Rothschild of France's Chateau Lafite, California's Franciscan Vineyards and
most recently by Mr Bruno Prats of Chateau Cos D'Estournel.
A recent survey by the Wine Spectator found Chile to be the most popular
destination among foreign investors in the business. Even banks such as the
Toronto Trust of Canada are buying vineyards in Chile.
They are being lured by land values that are a fraction of those in the Napa
Valley or Bordeaux, the virtual absence of vine pests and a climate that is
ideal for viticulture: hot, dry summers cooled by Pacific breezes at night.
The foreigners have entered into a race to produce moderately-priced quality
wines out of Chile, and local winemakers have been quick to take up the
challenge. An estimated Dollars 100m is being invested in land purchases,
planting new vines and importing technology to modernise Chile's antiquated
wineries. Some 25,000 acres of vineyards will come into production in four
to five years' time.
The fortunes of Los Vascos, an ailing 230-year-old vineyard owned by Mr
Jorge Eyzaguirre, staged a fairy-tale recovery after Baron Eric de
Rothschild bought half of the estate in 1989. A new state-of-the-art winery
was built in 60 days with Baron Eric scrapping the quaint old wooden barrels
and introduced temperature-controlled stainless steel tanks to improve
maceration. He sends his chief enologist, Mr Gilbert Rokvam, to supervise
the vendime (harvest) every March. Mr Rokvam brought French oak barriques
crafted at Chateau Lafite to age Los Vascos' Cabernet Sauvignon. After four
vendimes, Mr Rokvam says: 'We are creating a French chateau in Chile in the
tradition of the great Bordeaux wines'.
The revolution at Los Vascos has been so complete that Mr Eyzaguirre refers
to his pre-1989 vintages as 'old testament", in contrast to his 'new
testament' wines fashioned by Chateau Lafite. The Rothschild calling card
has also opened up foreign markets. Almost the entire production from the
550-acre estate of Los Vascos, about 150,000 cases a year, is exported to 24
countries. It is almost impossible to get hold of a Los Vascos bottle in
Chile, unless you are invited to lunch at the Eyzaguirre's 200-year-old
hacienda.
Mr Eduardo Chadwick, the great-great grandson of the founder of the
Errazuriz Panquehue vineyard, struck a similar partnership with Franciscan
Vineyards three years ago. He says the Californians' expertise came just at
the right moment.
Franciscan scrapped the old wine-presses, introduced cold fermentation for
white wines, and new oak barriques (small barrels) from the US to lend more
character to the reds. They also introduced the latest vineyard management
techniques - heavy pruning, drip irrigation - that imparted more flavour to
the fruit. Together, they exported 70,000 cases of their Caliterra label in
1991, and demand in the US is growing by 50 per cent each year.
'We can taste the improvements with every new vintage,' Mr Chadwick says.
'In five more years Chilean winemaking will have come of age.'
Mr Chadwick and Franciscan Vineyards parted company earlier this year
because of differences over expansion plans, but the US winemaker has stayed
in Chile.
Franciscan has just bought 7,500 acres in the hottest new vineyard region in
Chile - the Casablanca valley between Santiago and the port of Valparaiso.
Casablanca is acquiring a reputation for producing the best Chardonnay
grapes in Chile, and land prices there have doubled almost overnight.
Franciscan is investing Dollars 6m to transform former grazing fields into a
prime wine estate. The first vines of Merlot, Chardonnay, Cabernet and
Zinfandel, will be imported from California in August. A new winery will be
ready in time for the first harvest in 1994.
European and American palates, meanwhile, have developed a thirst for
Chile's new wines. Exports have grown five-fold in as many years. Chile's
Wine Exporters' Association estimates that 10m cases will be shipped abroad
this year, worth about Dollars 100m. Chile recently overtook Germany as the
third largest wine exporter to the US, behind France and Italy.
With the river of wine flowing out of Chile fast becoming a torrent,
exporters are beginning to lock horns over marketing strategies. Small
vineyards, such as Los Vascos and Errazuriz Panquehue, believe Chile's best
chance is to establish a niche in the quality end of the market. 'Our main
objective is not to grow in volume but to win a better recognition for our
wines,' Mr Chadwick says.
The big players, such as Concha y Toro and Santa Rita, are keen to cash in
on the export bonanza and argue that they are not sacrificing quality for
volume.
Santa Rita's exports have been doubling every year and Mr Rodrigo Buzeta,
the winery's export manager, says he can barely keep up with orders from
abroad. He says Santa Rita will ship 500,000 cases to 30 countries this
year, worth more than Dollars 11m.
But even he acknowledges that this frenzied expansion carries risks. The
European Community is swimming in wine lakes, the world is saturated with
plonk, and wine-lovers are drinking less, although they are spending more on
premium wines. Mr Buzeta says Santa Rita is spending Dollars 3m a year to
maintain the quality of its vineyards while it expands. The company aims to
be producing 100 per cent estate bottled wines by the end of 1994. Even the
race to produce world-class wines, he reflects, requires patience.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920626

