FT922-4365

FT  05 JUN 92 / Rail union under pressure at BR


   By CATHERINE MILTON, Labour Staff


THE RMT rail union came under increasing pressure yesterday to accept
wholesale reform of the British Rail bargaining structure after leaders of
the two other rail unions indicated that they were likely to meet BR's July
31 deadline for agreement.
A BR director said he was confident that Aslef, the train drivers' union,
and the TSSA white-collar rail union would agree to the proposals.
He said the RMT remained intransigent but would have to agree or face
derecognition. The government, which is considering a piecemeal sell-off of
BR, might relish a showdown with a union such as the RMT.
Unions and management have been negotiating the new machinery, which will
reflect the market-led restructure of BR, since autumn last year.
British Rail wants to devolve all bargaining to its five businesses and 30
profit centres, apart from some aspects of pay and a few general conditions
of employment. Under the old machinery, individual grievances could be
discussed at national level and might take more than two years to settle.
The unions have been worried about not being able to discuss industrial
action or compensation for changes to duty, for example, at a level they
consider appropriate.
The RMT denied being under greater pressure to agree and said a range of
issues, including health and safety, promotion and transfer and the extent
of devolved bargaining, had not yet been resolved.
Leaders of Aslef are understood to be expecting delegates to their national
conference, which started this week, to back a July 31 settlement. Aslef
believes BR will impose its proposals if unions fail to meet the date.
Delegates at TSSA's annual conference last month voted to trust their
executive committee to achieve the best deal possible, although BR's
proposal for non-binding arbitration remained a drawback.
The RMT says it was always likely to face the greatest difficulties in
agreeing the package because it represents the greatest number and range of
staff.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920605

