FT922-7135

FT  20 MAY 92 / International Company News: Australian ICI 27% ahead at
halfway


   By KEVIN BROWN and REUTER


   SYDNEY, ADELAIDE


ICI AUSTRALIA, a subsidiary of the UK chemicals group, yesterday reported a
27 per cent increase in net profits to ADollars 30m (USDollars 23m) on
turnover down 3 per cent to ADollars 1.4bn for the six months ended March.
The company said the result would have been still better but for the impact
of the depressed plastics market and increased competition from imports,
some of which it claimed had been dumped.
Mr Michael Deeley, chief executive, said the company was pleased with the
recovery in profits, but warned that full-year earnings were not likely to
show much improvement on last year.
'We are hoping to do a little better (this year), but we are not promising
any big improvements,' he said. 'There are few signs yet of a recovery in
volumes or prices in Australia or on world markets.'
ICI said the plastics division made a trading loss before abnormal items of
ADollars 22m, compared with a profit of ADollars 5m in the comparable period
of the previous year.
'Sales volumes were similar to last year, but overseas plastics prices
continued to decline, leading to weaker local and export prices and
margins,' he said.
Mr Deeley said increased import competition and dumping particularly
affected local vinyl resin and polythene polymer prices. 'Despite concerted
efforts, no effective dumping protection has been achieved,' he said.
ICI said the recent sale of its 12.5 per cent holding in Vinidex Tubemakers
to Tubemakers of Australia would result in an abnormal net profit of about
ADollars 14m in the second half.
Oil and gas producer Santos said first-quarter sales revenue fell 12.2 per
cent to ADollars 144m, mainly due to lower oil prices, Reuter reports from
Adelaide .
Mr Stan Wallis, chairman told the annual meeting crude oil prices for the
March quarter were on average USDollars 3 a barrel lower than for the 1991
first quarter.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920520

