FT924-942

FT  21 DEC 92 / Losses at Lloyd's expected to weaken capital base


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE CAPITAL base of Lloyd's is expected to shrink by at least 15 per cent
next year to Pounds 8.5bn because of heavy underwriting losses at the
insurance market.
Leading agents at the market are also predicting losses of more than Pounds
1.5bn for 1990 - which Lloyd's will report in June - about 50 per cent worse
than expected earlier this year.
The figures indicate that recent losses appear to be taking a heavy toll on
Lloyd's and could prevent it taking full advantage of recent increases in
insurance rates. 'The trough is deeper and longer than we would have thought
12 months ago,' said the finance director of a large agency.
Lloyd's had expected the market's capacity - the amount of premium it can
underwrite - to fall from the present Pounds 10.1bn to Pounds 9bn in 1993,
after losses of Pounds 2.5bn in 1988 and 1989. The fall in capacity is now
expected to be greater because many Names - individuals who provide the
market's capital - have had difficulties meeting solvency requirements,
which govern how much money they can commit to the market.
Mr John Moir, of London Wall Members Agency, said the market had
'underestimated the extent to which solvency would be a problem for many
Names', a number of whom 'had been forced to reduce their participations to
a lower level'.
Mr Anthony Cooper, chief executive of Wellington Underwriting Agencies, says
capacity could fall to Pounds 8.3bn, while senior executives at five other
agencies interviewed late last week all expect a fall in capacity to below
Pounds 8.5bn, with one even predicting a decline to Pounds 7bn.
Next year, Lloyd's syndicates are likely to make maximum use of available
capacity, while new rules giving them more flexibility to buy reinsurance
from outside the market will also cushion the impact of the decline.
But agents fear capacity will fall further in 1994 because of the effect of
the 1990 losses on Names, and that capital shortages could begin to
undermine the market's overall viability, putting more pressure on Lloyd's
to attract corporate capital to the market.
Lloyd's agreed to examine ways in which corporate investors could be
attracted to the market following the publication of the Rowland task force
report earlier this year.
The report's author, Mr David Rowland, takes over as chairman of Lloyd's
next month, and is expected to give more impetus to these efforts. Mr Cooper
says 1990 losses could reach Pounds 1.8bn from storm damage and, in the US,
continuing asbestosis and pollution-related claims.
Losses for syndicates specialising in errors and omissions insurance,
covering agencies and brokers against potential legal awards, are also
likely to be greater than expected as Lloyd's moves to settle legal actions
brought by loss-making Names.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921221

