FT921-15376

FT  10 JAN 92 / Bush in Japan: Small gains for Bush from mishandled tour -
Economic initiative likely to gain momentum


   By LIONEL BARBER, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT George Bush heads home today after a sobering trip to Asia which
fell short of its inflated goals.
However irresistible the symbolism, the sight of Japanese Prime Minister
Kiichi Miyazawa cradling a stricken American president proved no more than a
diversion. Although Mr Bush still looked queasy yesterday, he appeared well
on the way to a recovery from 'Tokyo tummy'.
Far more revealing was the way in which Mr Bush allowed misguided advisers
to turn his four-nation Asian tour into a domestic political exercise.
Spooked by criticism that he was spending too much time on foreign affairs,
Mr Bush said his trip to Australia, Singapore, South Korea and Japan was
about 'jobs, jobs, jobs'.
The pitfalls of this approach soon became apparent. In Australia, Mr Bush
decried protectionism but enraged local farmers by refusing to scrap
subsidies for US wheat exports. 'We've never said we're totally pure,' said
Mr Bush, with a straight face.
In Japan, he turned from master diplomat to car salesman. Accompanied by 21
corporate executives, the loudest being the chairmen of the three Detroit
car makers, Mr Bush retreated steadily from his support of free trade, to
fair trade, before finally embracing 'managed trade'.
This retreat was underlined by the mixed success the chairmen of Ford,
Chrysler and General Motors enjoyed in efforts to negotiate specific numbers
for Japanese imports of US cars and car parts.
Mr Bush could point to a commitment from Japanese car makers to double the
number of US car parts from Dollars 7bn last year to Dollars 15bn in fiscal
1994; but most of the 20,000 US-made cars which Tokyo will import will come
from Japanese manufacturers already based in the US, not the Big Three.
Mr Richard Holbrooke, a former assistant secretary of state for East Asian
affairs, said yesterday progress in shrinking the two countries' annual
Dollars 40bn trade imbalance came at a price. 'An impression has been
created that Japan is the cause of the American recession, that Toyota is
the cause of General Motors' decline, and that's just not true,' he said.
Mr Bush must bear some of the blame; but so too must Mr Robert Mosbacher,
the outgoing commerce secretary who has just been appointed chairman of the
Bush-Quayle re-election campaign. The Texan multi-millionaire's main skill
is raising money. His forays into diplomacy or domestic politics have more
often than not landed the president in trouble.
By several accounts, it was Mr Mosbacher who persuaded Mr Bush to take
corporate executives on the Asian trip. The idea was to use public/private
sector pressure to prise open markets, play tough with the Japanese and bill
the tour as a jobs mission to boost the US economy and bolster Mr Bush's
standing in the polls.
This completely undercut the original purpose of the trip. As originally
timed, for last November, it would have preceded the 50th anniversary of the
Japanese assault on Pearl Harbor with a grand declaration of reconciliation
in which the world's two most powerful economies could join in a new global
partnership in the post-Cold War era.
The wider message has been drowned out - with one important qualification.
Before he fainted at the banquet on Wednesday, Mr Bush agreed with Mr
Miyazawa on a joint initiative to promote world economic growth. Although
short on details, the two sides gave a commitment to a fiscal stimulus to
their economies and urged other countries, particularly Germany, to do the
same.
This initiative is likely to gather momentum in the coming fortnight, ahead
of the president's State of the Union address on January 28, in which he is
expected to announce a growth package involving a capital gains tax cut and
help for first-time home buyers. Already, the US Treasury is sounding out
European allies on the idea of presenting a plan to Group of Seven finance
ministers meeting in the US on January 25.
The campaign for global reflation to head off recession is an effort to
revive the international economic co-operation successfully pursued by the
US in the mid-1980s.
Mr Bush has shown this week that he is a politician running for re-election,
ready to pander to a domestic audience with the best of them. This is
certain to continue, if the November election looks tight. As he told David
Frost in an interview: 'I will do what I have to do to get re-elected.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Illustration (Omitted).

920110

