FT923-11024

FT  27 JUL 92 / Windows thrown open in a suffocating room: The Israeli
government is winning friends in the US and the Arab world with its peace
and settlements initiatives


   By HUGH CARNEGY


As Israel's new government moves into its third week in office tomorrow, its
supporters are asking themselves how long Mr Yitzhak Rabin's remarkable
honeymoon as prime minister can last. The weekend's ebb and flow of tension
between Iraq and the UN illustrates how conflict can all too easily
supersede talk of peace in the Middle East.
Nevertheless, the transformation since Mr Rabin took over has been
impressive. Only a few weeks ago, under Mr Yitzhak Shamir, the previous
prime minister, the country seemed to scowl at the rest of the world,
stubbornly refusing to loosen its grip on the occupied Arab territories. At
loggerheads with the US, its greatest ally and financial prop, Israel
excited little sympathy even from its friends.
Mr Rabin's arrival at the head of coalition led by the Labour party has
changed all that remarkably quickly. Within days of the government's
installation, Mr James Baker, the US secretary of state, was in Jerusalem,
conferring amiably with Mr Rabin and Mr Shimon Peres, his foreign minister,
and publicly praising their commitment to Middle East peace talks.
In particular, Mr Baker welcomed their willingness to curb Jewish
settlements in the occupied territories, the issue which, more than any
other, had soured relations between Washington and Mr Shamir. The juicy
reward of Dollars 10bn in US loan guarantees to aid absorption of mass
immigration from the former Soviet Union - sought in vain by Mr Shamir  -
now seems assured.
The day after Mr Baker was in town, Mr Rabin was warmly welcomed in Cairo by
President Hosni Mubarak, an honour the Egyptian leader never extended to Mr
Shamir. And in a week or two, the prime minister is off to the US to see
President Bush at his Kennebunkport holiday home. Chummy tennis games (Mr
Rabin is a keen player) and boat rides are likely to be the public image of
the meeting - unthinkable in the days when Mr Bush and Mr Shamir spoke
through clenched teeth.
The change has largely been welcomed by Israelis: all the mainstream
newspapers are backing Mr Rabin's initiatives. The opposition - especially
Mr Shamir's battered Likud party - is still reeling from Labour's June
election victory. Many government supporters bubble over with enthusiasm,
now that the long years of battling with what seemed the Likud's eternal
supremacy are over.
'I must tell you I'm so happy about what is happening,' confided a woman in
a Jerusalem record store on discovering her customer was a foreign
correspondent.
'There is a great feeling of relief,' said Mr Gideon Rafael, a former
director-general of the foreign ministry. 'It is as though we were a people
suffocating in a closed room when suddenly someone threw open the windows.'
It is not just that people are pleased at the restoration of diplomatic
cordialities. Many of those who backed Labour and Meretz, its left-liberal
ally in government, were afraid that the Likud's dogged ideological
attachment to permanent Israeli rule over the occupied territories was
leading towards a breakdown of the Middle East peace negotiations begun last
October in Madrid. They feared that, ultimately, such a stance would
precipitate another war between Israel and its Arab neighbours.
'I believe we saved the country at the last minute,' said Mr Tzaly Reshef, a
leading figure in the Peace Now movement.
Mr Rabin has not put it in such apocalyptic terms. But he has made it clear
repeatedly since winning the election that he believes that Israel now has
an opportunity to achieve peace with its neighbours and that it must be
seized.
He sees the disappearance of Soviet influence in the region and the military
subjugation of Iraq by the US and its allies as a priceless windfall for
Israel. At the same time, however, hostility to Israel is still latent in
the region and a new threat lies in the nuclear and other advanced weapons
capability that may be accumulated by states such as Iran.
'I believe this situation will not exist forever. Either we exploit it or we
might miss it,' Mr Rabin said shortly after the election. Later he said: 'A
lot depends on what we do in the area of making peace, something which could
help us get international participation, led by the US, in a war against
nuclear arms proliferation.'
Mr Rabin therefore wasted no time in setting out his store: settlements have
been substantially frozen and the Palestinians and Arab states invited to
engage in continuous negotiations based on an ultimate commitment by Israel
to exchange occupied 'land for peace' - the formula Mr Shamir always
rejected.
But the prime minister is canny enough to know that the smooth ride he has
so far enjoyed may give way to rougher terrain. The honeymoon at home is
unlikely to last forever.
So far, the government has been pleasantly surprised by the lack of
effective protests from the heavily armed Jewish settlers. But they still
have the capacity to cause noisy and perhaps violent disruption through
demonstrations both against the government and their Palestinian neighbours.
The Likud, too, will surely regroup. Mr Shamir is set to resign as party
leader. An election for a successor will be held in December in which the
front-runners will be Mr Binyamin Begin, son of the late Menachem Begin,
Likud's great founding hero, and Mr Binyamin Netanyahu, the energetic former
junior minister.
Both profess deep commitment to the Likud ideology and will seek to rally
opposition to what they regard as Mr Rabin's disastrous willingness to make
concessions to the Arabs. Some newspaper commentators have already begun to
voice anxieties that the government's moves on settlements have met only a
cool reception in the region, failing, for example, to elicit any commitment
to end the Arab boycott of trade with Israel in return, as the US has
proposed.
The Arabs remain sceptical of Mr Rabin, auguring difficulty when the peace
talks resume, probably next month. They are unhappy that, despite his
commitment to giving up territory, Mr Rabin has said that it will not happen
before Israelis have had another chance to vote on the question.
Under the structure of the peace talks as they were launched in Madrid,
permanently giving up land will not be at issue until after an interim
settlement with the Palestinians of the West Bank and Gaza has run for three
years. Therefore, Mr Rabin says, it is almost certain another general
election will be held in Israel before any decision is made on the final
status of the territories.
What Mr Rabin and his allies in Israel are hoping, however, is that an
interim agreement with the Palestinians can be negotiated which will prove
sufficiently successful to persuade Israelis that a reversion to the Likud's
expansionist ideology would be untenable, leaving Labour in the driving seat
for many years to come.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920727

