FT921-692

FT  27 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Conservatives focus on plan to frighten
waverers


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


A THREE-pronged attack on Labour's tax policy, economic competence and Mr
Neil Kinnock's leadership has been put at the heart of the Conservatives'
election strategy.
Senior ministers said yesterday that Tory hopes of reversing Labour's poll
lead rested almost entirely on a plan to 'frighten' waverers in the
campaign's final two weeks.
Mr Chris Patten, party chairman, has all but abandoned his efforts to
project Mr John Major's policy prospectus for the 1990s in favour of what
one senior minister yesterday called: 'a straightforward Thatcherite
campaign to demonstrate that they (Labour) are still socialists.'
The approach reflects an acknowledgement that the Conservative campaign has
been overshadowed by superior Labour tactics. Some ministers believe that if
this weekend's polls do not show a narrower gap there will be intense
pressure on Mr Patten to toughen the assault further.
The ferocious attack on Mr Kinnock during this week's health row was
designed to put in place the final element in his plan. By yesterday,
however, the focus on Mr Kinnock's fitness for office had been obscured by
the row over Labour's election broadcast.
The ministers said they were confident that the Conservatives could overturn
a two-point Labour poll lead by stepping up their onslaught on Mr Kinnock
and his party during the last phase of the campaign.
At the heart of that strategy - directed principally at winning back the
votes of the skilled working classes - would be an advertising blitz saying
Labour would put up the tax of every wage-earner by Pounds 1,250.
That will be combined with a relentless effort to convince voters that a
Labour government would wreck hopes of economic recovery.
The third strand - an attack on Mr Kinnock's leadership and his fitness to
hold high office - is designed to capitalise on what the Tories insist is
widespread mistrust of him among 'floating voters'.
Mr Patten appears confident that the 39 per cent base for his party's
support in recent opinion polls is solid. His strategy now will therefore be
focused almost entirely on three groups among the electorate.
Disgruntled Conservatives who have switched to the Liberal Democrats will be
told that a vote for Mr Paddy Ashdown's party would allow Mr Kinnock into
Downing Street. The same message will be conveyed to former party supporters
who have indicated that they may not vote on April 9.
Finally, the campaign will aim to attract a slice of the working-class
voters who have been convinced by Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, that
their incomes would be unaffected by a Labour victory.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920327

