FT923-6343

FT  25 AUG 92 / TSB Group replaces chief executive


   By ROBERT PESTON and DAVID BARCHARD


MR DON McCrickard is resigning as chief executive of TSB Group, to be
replaced by Mr Peter Ellwood, currently responsible for the group's retail
banking and insurance operations.
Mr McCrickard has faced criticism from past and present TSB employees in the
wake of the group's 1991 financial results, when it incurred a loss of
Pounds 47m. These losses stemmed from bad debt provisions totalling Pounds
432m on commercial loans made by its Hill Samuel subsidiary.
Sir Nicholas Goodison, TSB's chairman, said Mr McCrickard would 'receive
compensation within the terms of his contract'. His annual pay, in a
three-year rolling contract, is Pounds 245,000, so compensation could
approach Pounds 750,000. In addition, Mr McCrickard has 655,000 shares under
option. At yesterday's TSB share price of 129p, unchanged on the day, the
options were showing a notional profit of approximately Pounds 20,000.
Sir Nicholas said there was 'no implication of criticism' in the
circumstances of Mr McCrickard's departure. He said that more than six
months ago he and Mr McCrickard had come to an understanding that 'the task
of the chief executive' was about to 'substantially change'. He added the
board approved the change three weeks ago.
Since TSB came to the stock market in 1986, almost every senior executive
has been replaced. Mr Ellwood said that his promotion to group chief
executive would lead to another management reshuffle, involving 'some
elements of fusion between head office in London and the retail bank's head
office in Birmingham'.
Sir Nicholas praised Mr McCrickard's achievements, which 'included radical
changes to the management structure of the group, the reversal of strategic
direction from a 'broadly based financial services group' . . . and
substantial changes to top management'.
But Sir Nicholas said Mr Ellwood  - whose expertise is in retail banking,
TSB's main business  - had become more suited to the role of group chief
executive, now the management structure has been simplified. Mr McCrickard
joined TSB in 1983 and became a group board director in 1987. In 1989, he
recruited Mr Ellwood from Barclaycard.
Observer, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920825

