FT923-9802

FT  03 AUG 92 / International Capital Markets: Major opts for incredibility


   By ANTHONY HARRIS


MR JOHN MAJOR sounds more and more like King Lear defying the storm. He now
intends, according to the latest leak, to make sterling the strongest
currency in the EMS, displacing the D-Mark. One must suppose that this
nonsense is supposed to send the speculators who have the pound on the floor
rushing for cover, and so permit a cut in interest rates, rather than make
himself look silly; but it does not matter much. He still looks silly.
Currencies, as this column pointed out last week, are not effectively
defended by huffing and bluffing. The markets have grown doubtful about the
British commitment to its present EMS parity. They marked sterling down when
Mr Major attempted to raise the stakes by claiming that if there were a
realignment, sterling would remain pegged to the D-Mark. A reasonable man
might read a warning here; but not Mr Major.
How does he suppose dealers will receive this attempt to steal Mr
Beregevoy's rather tattered suit of clothes - and in broad daylight? The
charitable will assume that the leak is ill-informed; those who believe it
will conclude that the prime minister is getting desperate, as well he might
after the battering of the last week.
In terms of economics, the project is laughable. France has succeeded, after
some years of pain, in meeting every convergence criterion, and in making
the franc credibly strong. Inflation is below German levels, the fiscal and
foreign balances are sound, and the economy is still achieving some sort of
growth. Despite all this, the markets demand a modest interest premium on
the franc. They have very long memories.
In the British case, they need no memories at all. Inflation may be dipping
into the Maastricht range, thanks to the most stubborn recession for 60
years; but in almost every other respect, one would think that things could
hardly be worse - until the next official figures show that they are indeed
worse. The foreign and fiscal deficits are unsustainably high, hopes of even
a feeble recovery have been deferred for another year; and above all, even
the most respectable business leaders are openly discussing devaluation.
Seen from overseas, this is a simple case of 'I told you so'. The DM2.95
rate was regarded as implausible from the start. I was still in Washington
when Britain's decision to join the EMS was announced. It was a some days
before I stopped getting calls from friends in the Fed, the German Embassy
and other parts of the international policy community. Many of the callers
started with the same words: 'Has your government gone mad, or what?'
Perhaps this accounts for my own persistent doubts.
It is different at home, of course. It is only in the last few days that
high-level doubts about the entire strategy have come into the open; and
these doubts will percolate down only slowly. Popular opinion is still
astonishingly supportive of the hair-shirt strategy, and this is Mr Major's
last remaining high card. Mr Beregevoy must know that his chances of
remaining prime minister beyond next March are almost invisible, but Mr
Major has some years to go.
Political stability does help to reassure markets, but only up to a point.
There has been no financial panic at the apparent internal collapse of the
Bush administration in the US, and only a modest tremor so far at the
prospect that French voters may get their revenge on an unpopular government
by voting down the Maastricht treaty.
The fact is that the markets are never as credulous as politicians hope.
They are therefore much calmer than the politicians about the possibility of
all their cherished plans going wrong. They have begun for some time now to
discount an EMS realignment, and indeed a modest sterling adjustment.
They will now edge towards discounting something worse, and something
sooner. It will only look like a crisis when they think the change will come
in a matter of weeks, not months. Not just yet, anyway. Until then
discretion, not bluffing, is the better part of valour.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920803

