FT922-4413

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (11): Rapidly
evolving - Materials handling


   By CHRIS BARRIE


ABOUT 10,000 components make up an average car and they all have to be
brought to the right area of the production line at the right time.
Once on the production line, the components have to be moved from one
assembly station to the next at a given speed and often be positioned with
great accuracy.
The materials handling equipment designed to do this ferrying has evolved
rapidly as the demands made of it have become greater. Production lines are
having to make a greater variety of car models, requiring a more complex mix
of parts. Simultaneously, production managers are reducing stock holdings,
demanding more frequent delivery to the lineside to more precise timing.
The traditional method of transferring parts to the line is to use people,
forklift trucks and towed trollies. The system needs to be flexible and
fast, and it is hard to foresee how sophisticated automation will replace
it. But the other aspects of car production are more heavily automated.
There are three types of equipment in widespread use:
Automatic guided vehicles. AGVs were bought in large numbers five years ago
by some companies, especially General Motors and Volvo. They are flexible,
quiet and extremely effective in certain applications. But the surge of
interest in the early days of the technology has led to a reappraisal of AGV
use within the car industry - and some disenchantment.
Volvo's engine factory in Skovde has more than 260 AGVs. According to Mr
Greger Lundesjo, managing director of supplier BT Rolatruc Systems, the
application suits the technology because the Swedish place a high value on
working environment and because Volvo has a sound understanding of the
technology.
AGVs are expensive, but the numbers can be matched to production increases
to avoid high start-up costs. AGVs can also be effective when used for
complex operations that are best carried out off the main production line:
Mercedes-Benz uses AGVs for certain assembly operations, feeding the
completed assemblies back into the main line which runs free of potential
interruptions.
Chain conveyors. The traditional method of moving car bodies down a
production line will continue for years despite competition from more
sophisticated alternatives. The Japanese car companies are replacing many
basic conveyors to reduce noise and improve working conditions to offset
recruitment difficulties. But cost and noise reduction measures will ensure
this type of conveyor is bought by many plants in future.
Self-propelled monorail carriers. More expensive than traditional conveyors,
these lines will deliver large components or car bodies to a predetermined
pattern. The parts or bodies travel on powered trollies, their movement
tracked by computer.
The Japanese car factories are turning to these systems to replace old chain
conveyors. The systems are often used to feed a principal production line
that is less flexible and has to be kept running at constant speed.
Because of the sophistication of the production process and different
priorities, car companies will choose a mix of materials handling equipment
in future rather than be wooed by one-stop solutions.
The author is the editor of The Engineer

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920605

