FT922-3981

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (4): The bank that always
said yes - Finance


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


A FULL SERVICE BANK by James Ring Adams and Douglas Frantz Simon & Schuster
Pounds 16.99, 381 pages
DIRTY MONEY: THE INSIDE STORY OF THE WORLD'S SLEAZIEST BANK by Mark Potts,
Nicholas Kochan and Robert Whittington National Press Books Dollars 21.95,
274 pages
BOTH OF these books about the birth, life and eventual shut-down of the Bank
of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) claim to offer a comprehensive
story of corruption, regulatory lassitude and international political
intrigue as they seek to unravel the tale of the world's biggest ever
financial scandal. Both, however, are essentially workmanlike products
without much in the way of revelations or even flair in story telling.
The similarities between the two books are striking. Not only do both begin
with the same scene - the atmosphere in the City of London at lunchtime on
Friday July 5, 1991, as the bank is being closed - but both even contain an
identically entitled chapter heading ('Coming to America') as they describe
the way BCCI made use of front men to acquire US banks in secret.
For the most part the two volumes, written by competent American and British
journalists, cover the same ground. Here is the early career of Agha Hasan
Abedi, the founder of BCCI. Here are the bank's roots in Abu Dhabi and the
tale of how its complicated international shareholding structure helped to
evade proper regulation. Equally chronicled are BCCI's penchant for
cultivating influential friends such as former President Jimmy Carter and
former Prime Minister James Callaghan and its tangled dealings with the
Medellin cocaine cartel, former Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega and a
platoon of arms dealers, terrorists and other shadowy clients.
Finally, both books narrate the frustrations of US investigators from the
Congress and the Customs Service and then (justifiably) make a hero of Mr
Robert Morgenthau, the New York district attorney whose own work on the BCCI
affair sped furiously ahead of the less energetic investigations conducted
by officials in Washington or London.
Unfortunately, neither book really breaks any new ground and both have
already been overtaken somewhat by recent events. The bulk of the BCCI fraud
is already in the public domain, but the final verdict on the Bank of
England's handling of the affair, for example, must await the special report
now being prepared by Lord Bingham in the UK.
The main caveat here is that both books should be regarded as little more
than an interim report in a still unfolding saga. The decision as to which
of the two to opt for therefore depends more on how much detail is wanted. A
Full Service Bank is not only longer but a good deal more detailed, with
slightly better reporting than Dirty Money. For example, where Dirty Money
skims lightly across certain details - such as how BCCI was originally
financed by Abu Dhabi and the Bank of America - A Full Service Bank is more
thoroughly researched. Dirty Money is a quicker read, but it also depends
far more on published reporting than A Full Service Bank. The latter,
however, contains more than 100 pages of fly-on-the-wall narrative about the
adventures of US investigators in steamy settings such as Panama City and
Miami.
This reader's view, however, is that better BCCI books are still to come.
Two more books are being written at present, and are likely to be published
next winter; these books will come from journalists at The Wall Street
Journal and at Time magazine who have covered the BCCI affair and are likely
to have further revelations. If the forthcoming books are to live up to
expectations, however, they also ought to be able to make use of the added
time to pull together more of the many threads of this tantalising story.
The present offerings do not.

The Financial Times


London Page III

920609

