FT922-7221

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (9): Bikes given a
rough ride - Motorcycle couriers hit hard


   By JANINA WALKER


RECESSION is continuing to give a rough ride to the motorcycle couriers.
Liquidation and consolidation are still key factors within what is
essentially a transient, fragmented industry business. It thrived in the
1980s and became the very essence of the free-enterprise culture.
It is difficult to put figures on this niche of the express market which has
always had its roots based locally. It is generally believed, however, that
what is happening in London could be occurring throughout the rest of the
country.
In the capital the very nature of a business, which anyone can enter, is
proving a headache for those left in the field.
While insiders estimate hundreds of enterprises up and down the country have
fallen victim to the recession there are still plenty of operators.
With customers cutting costs there is a shrinking market place. It is a
recipe for chaos as companies struggle for a slice of a much smaller cake.
'The situation is getting ridiculous, says Mr Malcolm Bluemel,
managing-director of express courier Rapid Despatch, which has a Pounds 4m
turnover and has offices in London and Birmingham.
'There is a massive price war going on at the moment which will get worse
before it will get better.'
'People are so desperate they are running non-profitable businesses because
they are cutting their prices to the bone. The problem is that the market is
just too easy for anyone to enter and is so fragmented.'
'Without a doubt there is a market for our services in legal, advertising,
accountancy, publishing and music businesses but there is a greater
awareness of costs and margins are being squeezed.'
Mr Bluemel has recently acquired another express courier company and sees
consolidation as the way ahead for the business.
'I believe that to have a future the industry should be in the hands of
maybe five or 10 major operators in a couple of years,' he says.
'What we need are economies of scale, more investment in technology to give
customer confidence and meet their requirements. We have to get away from
the idea that we are the poor relations of the courier and express industry
out to make a quick buck.'
Addison Lee, which has four London offices and a Pounds 7m turnover, handles
more than 2,000 customer accounts in the London market.
Mr John Griffin, its managing director, describes the London market -
generally believed to be the biggest and worth Pounds 150m a year - 'as
extremely tough.' He estimates that ithas shrunk by 28 per cent.
Mr Griffin says: 'Customers are spending less and I am back to the days when
I rolled up my sleeves and started up my business in an empty room.
'There is a price war going on. Competition is becoming suicidal as
companies as a last resort cut prices to unacceptable levels. It is just not
a sensible solution as these people will eventually go down.
'It is just too easy for people to start up who don't have the knowledge and
experience to run a business. I believe that in the end there will be a
polarisation within the industry of those who have managed to survive these
extremely tough times.'
Mr Paul Meunier, a director of north London express courier West One which
operates on a national and international basis through agents, believes the
business has changed.
He says: 'We still have a role to play but I think it won't quite be the
same as the heady days three years ago.
'Our figures are down and they won't get back to the same level -
alternative methods have been found for the service we provide. It used to
be a gut reaction to call for a bike but I don't think that is the case
now.'
Mr Meunier believes that, although there would always be room for the small
operator, the business would move in the direction of large companiesable to
make the necessary investment in technology.
'There is definitely a move among our clients towards using technology.
There are customers who would like to have a modem of their own in their
offices and asking if we can provide it - there is no doubt that it is
available but it is a new thing for us and we are looking at it.'
West One have also shifted ground by moving into the national overnight
service business which they started in October last year.
Mr Meunier says: 'This is a new venture for us. We always thought our niche
in the business was slightly different but our customers are availing
themselves of these services to save money so we felt it was right we should
break into them.'
Mr Paul Jackson, of Triangle, specialist management consultants to the
freight and transport industry, has no doubt that this niche of express
services is losing customers.
He comments: 'People have downtraded considerably because they are
questioning using 'same day' - they can always fax or arrange a delivery for
first thing in the morning.'
'There is also (the question of) economies of scale. Ninety per cent of
motorcycles go one way, it's ludicrous and certainly doesn't make sense  -
no transport business succeeds on a one-way basis.'
'I believe that unless the larger companies wrestle with this and other
things such as balancing loads, introducing track and trace systems and
computer mapping, they will just go on the same old merry-go-round.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920520

