FT921-14009

FT  17 JAN 92 / International Company News: GM to pull out of car production
in S Korea


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


GENERAL motors of the US, the world's biggest vehicle maker, is planning to
withdraw from car production in South Korea with the sale of its 50 per cent
stake in the troubled Daewoo Motor.
GM said yesterday that it was exploring the possibility of selling its stake
to the Daewoo Group, the holder of the remaining equity in Daewoo Motor.
The disposal is a severe setback to GM's plans for expansion in the Asia
Pacific region, as it seeks to counter the overwhelming Japanese presence.
South Korea is expected to be one of the world's fastest-growing car markets
in the 1990s, but GM has decided to pull out of car making in the country in
the face of its prolonged conflict with the Daewoo Group over the management
of Daewoo Motor.
GM said it would maintain its presence in Korea through a number of
automotive components joint ventures, which would continue to supply Daewoo
Motor. GM holds 50 per cent stakes in five components joint ventures in
South Korea, two of which are linked to the Daewoo Group.
The disposal of the 50 per cent stake in Daewoo Motor was subject to the
negotiation of an 'acceptable' price and other terms, said GM.
Earlier this week the company announced that it had agreed to enter its
first vehicle production venture in China, where it is planning to assemble
light commercial vehicles.
Mr Robert Stramy, GM's senior executive at Daewoo Motor, has been
transferred to the Chinese joint venture Jinbei GM Automotive Company, which
is expected to begin kit assembly of pick-ups later this year in north-east
China.
Daewoo Motor was originally established in 1972 as GM Korea. It was greatly
expanded in the second half of the 1980s with the production of vehicles
developed by GM in Europe. The US car maker had hoped that its South Korean
venture would develop as a low-cost production source for small cars.
Blocked by GM's refusal to contemplate expansion of Daewoo Motor, the Daewoo
Group has pressed ahead with other automotive ventures including the
production of mini cars by another group subsidiary under licence from
Suzuki of Japan.
Daewoo Motor produced 184,795 cars in 1990 and 176,504 in the first 11
months of 1991. Its domestic sales rose by 5.4 per cent to 126,349 in the
first 11 months of 1991 in a domestic car market that rose by 25 per cent to
683,081.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920117

