FT922-13315

FT  13 APR 92 / OAS likely to shy away from Peru sanctions


   By LESLIE CRAWFORD


   LIMA


FOREIGN ministers of the Organisation of American States (OAS) meeting in
Washington today will discuss the possible imposition of sanctions against
Peru's seven-day-old dictatorship.
Mr Augusto Blacker Miller, Peru's foreign minister, will have a tough task
persuading the OAS that President Alberto Fujimori's suspension of Congress
and the Supreme Court are 'transitional' measures.
He is likely to argue that the old democracy was flawed and that time is
needed to correct Peru's 'corrupt' institutions. He will also seek to
legitimise Mr Fujimori's military-backed coup with opinion polls showing
overwhelming support for the new regime.
The disbanded Congress, which met in secret last Thursday to impeach Mr
Fujimori, will be sending its own envoy to the OAS. Mr Maximo San Roman,
Peru's vice-president who was in Miami at the time of the coup, will ask the
OAS not to recognise the de facto government.
The OAS is believed to be reluctant to impose economic sanctions against
Peru, although US President George Bush has not ruled out this option.
Diplomats in Lima said the OAS would probably send a peace mission to Peru
in an attempt to broker an early return to democracy.
In an attempt to mollify international opinion, Mr Fujimori has restored
press freedom and released most politicians who were under house arrest at
the weekend. The president has also decreed tough penalties for drug
trafficking and money laundering and has ordered the air force to bomb
landing strips in the Huallaga Valley - the centre of Peru's cocaine
traffic. The last two orders appeared designed to soften US condemnation of
the new government.
Peru faces deep international isolation; the US has suspended some Dollars
320m (Pounds 186m) of economic and military aid, Germany has frozen Dollars
110m in development aid, Spain about Dollars 50m, and Colombia has broken
off integration talks.
At present Peru has about Dollars 1.5bn in foreign reserves. This is enough
to tide the new government over until international outrage subsides.
Mr Fujimori is gambling the US will eventually resume business with him,
given that the fight against drug trafficking remains Washington's main
policy goal in the region.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920413

