FT923-15401

FT  02 JUL 92 / General strike called to oust de Klerk government


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


   JOHANNESBURG


SOUTH AFRICA'S largest trade union grouping yesterday called for a 'general
strike of unprecedented proportions' beginning on August 3.
The move is the latest and potentially most serious of a series of 'mass
action' measures adopted by unions and other anti-apartheid organisations,
designed to force President FW de Klerk to concede majority rule.
Police, meanwhile, fired shotguns and plastic bullets at black
anti-government demonstrators in central Cape Town. Several people among the
4,000 protestors were wounded. A section of the central city area was
blocked for about three hours.
Mr Jay Naidoo, general secretary of the Congress of South African Trade
Unions (Cosatu), told a press conference yesterday: 'We are determined to
remove this government from power.' Cosatu is a close ally of the African
National Congress (ANC). 'Millions of people are going to force them (the
government) out of power.'
Cosatu has in the past demonstrated a capacity to organise one- or two-day
stayaways. But plans to impose a strike of longer duration will have to take
into account the country's high unemployment rate, and a weak union
structure in many industries and many parts of the country. The critical
factor will be the political mood at the time the strike is called. If the
parties to the constitutional talks, currently in stalemate, are back at the
negotiating table, Cosatu may have to reconsider its tactics.
Efforts to break the stalemate continued yesterday, both at home and abroad.
President de Klerk continued the process of introducing an international
dimension to a resolution of the crisis by adding three more foreign legal
experts to the Goldstone Commission, the judicial inquiry into township
violence, including Professor Philip Hayman, director of the Harvard Law
School Center for Criminal Justice.
The ANC has called for an international inquiry into the recent Boipatong
massacre as one of its conditions for the resumption of constitutional
talks.
The possibility of a European Community role surfaced last night, amid
growing speculation that Mr Douglas Hurd, British foreign secretary, would
lead a troika of community ministers on a fact-finding visit by the end of
July or early August.
Further efforts are also under way in Dakar, Senegal, where Mr Boutros
Boutros Ghali, United Nations secretary-general, told reporters at the
summit of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) that chances were
increasing that the UN would step in. 'It can be as a UN observer, which we
have already done. It can be as a UN mediator. It can be a fact-finding
mission.'
The South African issue would be raised at the UN security council, possibly
on July 17, Mr Robert Mugabe, the Zimbabwean president, said in Harare last
night. Speaking on his return from the OAU summit in Dakar, he said he
expected African states to call for the council to send an observer team.
South Africa's participation in the Barcelona Olympics and other
pre-arranged international sporting events can go ahead as planned, the
African National Congress said yesterday. 'The decision will remain under
view,' said the ANC press statement, which warned that unless the country's
political crisis is resolved, it 'will consider a halt to all tours'. This
cautionary note did not disguise the fact that the ANC, for now at least,
has declined to use sport as a weapon. But the ANC said events already
scheduled should only go ahead if athletes wore armbands with the slogan
'Peace and Democracy'. Visiting sports teams should visit the massacre site
of Boipatong.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920702

