FT924-821

FT  22 DEC 92 / Business and the Law: Year of trials and many errors - The
UK's Serious Fraud Office had a poor 1992. Next year is unlikely to prove
any better


   By ROBERT RICE


The UK's Serious Fraud Office (SFO) would, like the Queen, sooner forget
1992.
The year started badly. At the end of January Mr Justice McKinnon, the trial
judge in the year-long Blue Arrow fraud trial, ordered the jury to acquit
the three corporate defendants, County NatWest, NatWest Investment Bank and
UBS Phillips & Drew Securities. The defendants were accused of conspiring to
mislead the markets over the employment agency's ultimately unsuccessful
1987 rights issue. But the judge said there was insufficient evidence for
the cases against the three to proceed any further.
In February, the SFO dropped charges against two men - Mr David Mayhew, a
partner of stockbroker Cazenove & Co and Mr Roger Seelig, former corporate
finance director at Morgan Grenfell - which would have formed the basis of a
third Guinness trial.
The trial, arising out of the Pounds 2.7bn Guinness takeover of Distillers
in 1986, had been expected to start in the autumn. Charges against Mr Mayhew
and Mr Seelig, who at the time was already standing trial in the second
Guinness prosecution, were dismissed at a brief hearing. Mrs Barbara Mills,
the then SFO director, said there was no longer a realistic prospect of
conviction.
Within a week the second Guinness trial had also collapsed. Mr Justice
Henry, the trial judge, discharged the jury five months into the case
because the mental strain on Mr Seelig, who was representing himself, had
reached a point where it was 'no longer possible for him to conduct his
defence adequately'.
Three days after the collapse of Guinness two, the jury in the Blue Arrow
case convicted four of the remaining defendants, acquitting a fifth. After a
trial lasting a year and four days and estimated to have cost Pounds 35m,
six of the original 10 defendants had been found not guilty.
Sandwiched in between the decision to drop charges in Guinness three and the
collapse of Guinness two, the SFO had, after a seven-month trial, secured
the conviction of Mr Peter Clowes on 18 counts of theft and fraud. Clowes's
conviction came three and a half years after the Pounds 150m collapse of his
investment company, Barlow Clowes.
Within the space of seven days in February the SFO and the whole fight
against so-called 'white collar' crime had come within a hair's breadth of
disaster (a fact underscored when the convictions of the four Blue Arrow
defendants were overturned by the Appeal Court in July. Subsequent Blue
Arrow prosecutions were also abandoned.)
In fairness, not all the blame for the collapse of these cases should be
attached to the SFO. In the Blue Arrow case, some of the blame for the
inordinate length of the trial was because of the easy-going style of Mr
Justice McKinnon, the trial judge. In Guinness two, Mr Seelig's conduct of
his own defence inevitably prolonged the trial.
The collapse of these cases provoked a public uproar. Indignant MPs swiftly
demanded an explanation for the apparent waste of so much taxpayers' money.
Mr Justice Henry called for a radical solution to the problems of long fraud
trials. 'It seems to me inevitable that we must find a cheaper and quicker
way to deal with serious fraud trials and the likelihood is we shall need a
radical solution rather than merely tinkering with procedures,' he said.
Mr Justice Phillips, thanking the jury at the end of the Barlow Clowes
trial, said: 'Until recent times, no-one could have imagined that our legal
system could place such a burden on anyone's time.'
Lord Roskill, the former law lord who chaired the 1983-1986 inquiry into
fraud trials, echoed these views. He said the government had been wrong to
ignore his earlier advice that complex and lengthy fraud cases were
unsuitable for jury trial.
'I'm impenitent about non-jury trials for complex frauds. This view was
right in 1986 and nothing has happened to change my mind,' he said.
In the wake of the public outcry, the government promised an immediate
review. Sir Patrick Mayhew, the then attorney general, talked of adopting a
simple all-embracing fraud offence similar to that used in Scotland as a
means of reducing the number of indictments and focusing on the issues at
trial.
However, as the year wore on little more was heard of this idea. The
government seemed content to leave the big issues - such as whether complex
fraud should be tried by jury or by special fraud tribunals, or whether
there should be a simple all-embracing fraud offence and whether certain
market offences should be decriminalised - to the Royal Commission on
Criminal Justice, which was appointed after the release of the Birmingham
Six in March 1991 to inquire into miscarriages of justice.
The government promised a consultation paper on changes in the practice and
procedure of fraud trials; in the meantime it was left to the judges and
other lawyers to carry the torch for reform.
Mr Justice Henry, in various speeches, called for a time limit of four
months for fraud trials save in exceptional circumstances; for the trial
judge to open proceedings by giving an impartial summary of both the
prosecution and defence cases; earlier disclosure of the defence case to
allow the issues for trial to be narrowed down; and tougher powers for
judges to impose sanctions on both prosecution and defence for
non-co-operation in pre-trial hearings.
Mrs Mills, who by April had been appointed director of public prosecutions,
supported Mr Justice Henry's proposals and called for a simple all-embracing
fraud offence and formal plea-bargaining so as to recover more of the
proceeds of fraud. These suggestions were supported by Mr George Staple, her
successor at the SFO.
The government consultation paper, which was eventually published earlier
this month, contained few ideas which had not already been well-canvassed
other than heavy fines for defendants and their barristers for failure to
disclose their defence in detail at an early stage.
With the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice not due to report until July,
prospects for concrete reforms in 1993 look slim. This is bad news for those
involved in the more than 24 serious fraud prosecutions awaiting trial or
making their way through the courts.
As Mr Justice Henry says: 'Without legislative changes, I do not believe
that things will get better, in fact I am certain that they will get worse.'
Business and the Law will next be published on January 12.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921222

