FT922-4480

FT  05 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Richmond reveals loss of Pounds 37m project


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


RICHMOND Oil and Gas, the US natural resources group which is quoted in
London, insisted yesterday that it was still solvent despite losing its most
significant development, resulting in a substantial reduction in its balance
sheet.
The group announced that lenders Johnson Ranch Partners had foreclosed on
the company's interest in the Richmond Ranch oil and gas field in Texas.
This will mean a net reduction in group assets of about Pounds 37m. At March
31 1991, the date of the latest available audited balance sheet, Richmond
had net assets of Pounds 49.7m.
The shares lost 3p to close at 8p yesterday, compared with a high of 173p in
1990.
Mr David Wilkinson, joint managing director, said the directors believed
that the value of Richmond's interest inRichmond Ranch had fallen below the
amount of indebtedness against which it was secured. It was therefore 'very
unlikely' to take up an exclusive option granted by Johnson Ranch Partners
to re-purchase Richmond Ranch within 15 days, if refinancing could be
arranged.
Richmond acquired the Richmond Ranch field for Dollars 33m (Pounds 18.3m)
cash and assumed Dollars 51m debt in October 1989, when it was hailed as the
company's most significant asset. However, the combination of a virtual
halving in the US gas price, which drastically affected returns, and cost
overruns at the drilling stage meant that the project never fulfilled its
promise.
Mr Wilkinson pointed out that the group now had no borrowings and outlined
four factors which he believed could reverse the group's fortunes:
Firstly, it is selling the Lone Star Royalty Corporation, acquired in 1990,
for Dollars 750,000.
A lawsuit which prevented completion of the sale ofRichmond's San Juan Basin
Coal Bed Methane properties in September 1991 has also been settled.
Richmond, which had received only Dollars 12.6m of an expected Dollars 20m
before the lawsuit was served, is now holding discussions with potential
purchasers of the balance of the New Mexico and Colorado properties.
Most significantly, Richmond is negotiating with joint venture partner
American Hunter Exploration to increase its 25 per cent interest in the
Jicarilla Apache Tribal Lands field in New Mexico to 40 per cent. The
agreement would cover two producing wells, and a proposed five-fold increase
in the acreage.
The company also revealed yesterday that it is awaitingregistration of an
agreement to form a Russian joint venture with Krasnoleninsk Oil and Gas in
western Siberia.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920605

