FT924-867

FT  22 DEC 92 / Major pledges industry aid and rules out early reshuffle


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR gave a clear signal yesterday that a package of measures to
underpin industrial investment will be at the centre of the next Budget in
March. He confirmed also that Mr Norman Lamont was not about to be moved
from his post as chancellor.
In an effort to end the speculation about Mr Lamont's future, the prime
minister ruled out an early cabinet reshuffle.
Returning from a trip to Washington he told BBC Radio that he was ready to
make ministerial changes 'as and when' it was necessary. But he added: 'I am
not anticipating a January reshuffle.'
His comments were interpreted in Whitehall as signalling that despite the
prospect of a critical House of Commons report on his handling of his
personal finances, Mr Lamont's position at the Treasury is secure until the
summer.
But the prime minister accompanied his support for the chancellor with a
clear signal that he intends to take an active role in shaping the contents
of the March Budget.
He said that his first priority in 1993 was 'to ensure that companies have
the confidence to invest'.
Capital investment was the key both to medium-term growth and prosperity and
to short-term job creation.
Voicing hopes that the international environment would allow him to focus
much more of his attention on his domestic agenda in 1993, Mr Major added:
'I do see it as a year in which we begin to recreate the confidence, the
growth and the prosperity of British industry and commerce.'
Mr Major wants the next Budget to build on the investment incentives in last
month's Autumn Statement, which temporarily raised capital allowances for
spending on industrial plant, machinery and buildings.
He will also press the Treasury to increase further the scope for private
and public sector partnerships in large-scale infrastructure projects.
Whitehall officials acknowledge there will be no scope for net reductions in
taxation in March. Ministers have not ruled out the possibility of an
overall increase in taxation.
But Mr Major is determined that the government should follow through on its
recent commitment to a revival of manufacturing industry by extending tax
incentives.
He wants Mr Lamont to consider also special help for small businesses, the
worst affected victims of the recession, and for exporters having to compete
in increasingly tough world markets.
Mr Major has given his full backing to Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary, in his efforts to change the 'culture' in Whitehall in
support of industry.
Mr Lamont and his fellow Treasury ministers will not map out their strategy
for the Budget until their traditional weekend meeting at Chevening on
January 9.
Because of the introduction at the end of 1993 of a unified budget embracing
spending as well as taxation, there has been speculation in Whitehall that
the March package might be a 'holding operation'.
But with his longer-term future at the Treasury still uncertain Mr Lamont is
keen to make a significant impact in March.
He is expected to canvass the possibility of an extension of value added tax
to zero-rated items like domestic fuel, transport, new housebuilding and
newspapers to pay for wide-ranging tax reform elsewhere.
Major plans shake-up of public honours Page 4
GDP edges 0.1% ahead in real terms Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921222

