FT921-11709

FT  30 JAN 92 / Tories to confront Scottish separatism


   By IVO DAWNAY and IVOR OWEN


THE government yesterday moved to confront Scotland's mounting independence
movement by convening the Scottish Grand Committee for three days of public
debates next month on the country's constitutional future.
The initiative came in the wake of an opinion poll showing 50 per cent of
Scots now favour outright secession from the Union with England and Wales.
As Labour leaders' gave their backing to a system of proportional
representation for a Scottish parliament, a jubilant Mr Alex Salmond, the
Scottish Nationalist leader, said his party was finalising plans to spell
out the economic benefits of independence at the forthcoming general
election.
Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, indicated that the Grand Committee
debates would answer criticism that the government has ignored a surge in
nationalist sentiment north of the border.
By convening the committee - comprising all 72 Scottish MPs - the Tories aim
to squeeze Labour devolutionists by claiming that Scotland faces a choice
between the Union or the full-blown independence advocated by Scottish
Nationalists.
The committee will meet for one day in Edinburgh and two days in
Westminster. It has no powers to take any decisions. Mr Lang, who yesterday
released a four-page statement defending the government's economic record in
Scotland, is also planning an open letter to Scottish businessmen, calling
on them to spell out the consequences of devolution or independence for the
economy.
In Westminster, Scottish MPs were still reeling from the findings of the
ITN/Scotsman opinion poll that showed 50 per cent favouring full
independence and a slump in support for devolution from 41 per cent to 27
per cent.
The poll also put SNP support up by 6 points to 26 per cent, while Labour
and the Tories fell back 2 points to 41 and 23 per cent respectively.
Both major parties made light of the findings claiming the result was merely
a protest vote. Privately, however, several MPs agreed that the Scots'
disenchantment with Westminster was now reaching crisis proportions.
Labour yesterday moved to promote its plans for a Scottish parliament with
legislative powers by announcing that its ruling national executive had
agreed to back proportional representation for the new body. The proposal
for the adoption of the alternative member system for Scotland and some form
of PR for its proposed Greater London Authority was widely greeted as a
breakthrough by advocates of electoral reform.
Poll jolt, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920130

