FT924-11282

FT  27 OCT 92 / Cuban trade caught in battle for Florida vote: A new law
aimed at winning support from anexile community


   By ELIZABETH PISANI


DEMOCRATS and Republicans, falling over each other to woo the Cuban exile
community and net Florida's 25 electoral college votes in next week's
presidential election, have infuriated America's allies.
At issue is a new law making it illegal for subsidiaries of US companies
based anywhere in the world to trade with Cuba. The European Community,
Mexico and Argentina have complained that the US has no business telling
companies overseas who to trade with; Canada and Britain have forbidden
companies incorporated locally to take any notice of it.
Florida has long been a Republican bastion, thanks to the party's tough
anti-Castro policies that have secured the support of the state's 700,000
Cuban-Americans (83 per cent of them in Dade County).
'Those votes in Dade County, Florida, mean more to George Bush right now
than the whole of the EC and Canada put together,' said Mr Michael Krinsky,
a New York-based lawyer who represents Havana's interests.
Mr Jose Cardenas, director of research at the conservative Cuban American
National Foundation (CANF), added: 'Republicans talk the political language
of Cuban Americans. But now the Democrats are trying it on for size and like
the way it looks.'
Two years ago President Bush vetoed legislation similar to that signed into
law last week and for months opposed the new law, promoted by Democratic
Congressman Robert Torricelli. But once Governor Bill Clinton, the
Democrat's presidential candidate, endorsed the proposals, which were tacked
on to a defence spending bill, Mr Bush changed his mind. He signed the bill
at a Republican campaign function last Friday in a smart Miami hotel.
'It's the Carry Florida Amendment,' snorted an executive at a company that
stands to lose several million dollars of business.
The bill is the brainchild of Mr Jorge Mas Canosa, a Cuban-American
millionaire variously described as a champion of freedom for the Cuban
people and a pretender to the presidency in a post-Castro Cuba. He is
chairman of CANF, whose Free Cuba political action committee contributed
Dollars 17,000 (Pounds 10,430) to Mr Torricelli's campaign. Mr Mas Canosa's
organisations have also rustled up half a million dollars in funds for about
50 other legislators around the country.
US trade with Cuba has been restricted for three decades, but for the last
17 years subsidiaries of US companies based elsewhere have simply had to
apply for approval from the Treasury in Washington to trade with Cuba. Now
such trade is illegal.
However, carefully worded comments from the State Department, which earlier
in the year opposed the Torricelli bill, suggest Washington will be a limp
crusader against US subsidiaries ignoring the law.
Representatives from both the Bush and Clinton campaigns believe the
legislation is the last straw that will break the back of an increasingly
shaky Castro regime. Some analysts disagree and feel the new law will give
Cuban President Fidel Castro a new lease of life. 'This bill gives Castro
all he needs to scream imperialism without hurting materially,' said Mr
Andrew Zimbalist, an economist at Smith College.
About 300 US subsidiaries requested approval for Dollars 718m of trade with
Cuba in 1991, Dollars 13m up on a year earlier, although economists believe
the actual trade was far lower.
Some companies maintain the US suffers most from restricting this trade. An
executive at commodities traders Cargill said: 'One of the basic issues that
we brought to the attention of anyone willing to listen on Capitol Hill was
that if you close off opportunities to US companies, business will move to
other countries.' Cargill's Geneva-based subsidiary Cargill International
accounted for three-quarters of all US subsidiary trade approved with Cuba
for 1990.
The company's entreaties made little headway. 'We were told it wasn't an
economic issue, it was a human rights issue,' the executive said.
But Mr Mas Canosa is well aware of the economic implications. '(When Castro
falls) a market of 11m consumers will open up overnight; a market that will
need everything from toilet paper to the most sophisticated computer. And
most of that will come from Florida.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921027

