FT924-11551

FT  24 OCT 92 / Food: Why it pays to have catholic tastes - Eating out in
Berlin / Giles MacDonogh samples the Bamberger Reiter


   By GILES MACDONOGH


A GLANCE at the latest edition of the red Michelin guide to Germany quickly
reveals the inequality: all those stars seem to have landed on the Roman
Catholic parts of Germany: Bavaria, Baden and the Rhineland.
As you approach the old frontier between east and west stars disappear from
view and the only gap in an otherwise dense cloud is west Berlin where you
will find a modest tally of four one-star restaurants and even one two-star:
Rockendorfs, which is, sadly, miles out in the sticks in Waidmannslust.
There may be few stars but there are plenty of places to eat. This profusion
dates from the time when Berlin was a fun-loving island set in the grim
eastern ocean.
People wanted to enjoy themselves often and it was more important that the
restaurant was reasonably priced and lively than the chef should have had
pretentions to haute cuisine.
There are still more restaurants in Berlin than in any other European city
of comparable size; places representing pretty well every food culture under
the sun.
The variety puts even London to shame. One night you will eat Italian, the
next, Greek. The day after it is the turn of the Yugoslavs, the Spanish or
the Argentinians, the Indians, the Chinese or the French.
There is a Kurdish restaurant in the Uhlandstrasse but given the plight of
the poor Kurds I have never had the courage to try it. Naturally there are
plenty of German places, most of them inspired by south German models.
In terms of typical Berlin food there is Hardtke in the Meineckestrasse
(tel: 881-9827), if you feel like a mountainous Eisbein (pork knuckle) or a
groaning Schlachtteller (a plate of sausages and pork cuts).
In the Mommsenstrasse there is even an east Prussian restaurant called
Marjellchen (883-2676) where, after your Konigsberger Klopsen (meatballs) or
Schlesisches Himmelreich (meat-filled dumplings) you may soothe your stomach
with a tot of Barenfang (literally bear-trapper) a honeyed liqueur schnaps
which used to serve as central heating in that now vanished corner of
Germany.
The one-star Bamberger Reiter in the Regensburgerstrasse no 7 (tel: 24 42
82) serves a refined modern cooking with some inspiration from south Germany
and Austria. Dorothea Raneburger is Austrian and she is quite happy to tell
you as much if you have not gleaned the fact from the indications on the
menu and wine list.
The Bamberger Reiter is in a quiet leafy street in the centre of west
Berlin. The restaurant is on the corner of Bambergerstrasse, hence the name
alluding to the famous horseman in front of Bamberg Cathedral.
The restaurant is small and comfortable. Many of the diners appear to be
regulars who are prepared to put up with fairly hefty prices to eat at one
of the few top-class restaurants in Berlin. The menu is short with a couple
of copious set menus; one with six courses, the other with seven and
available only if the whole table takes it.
As a starter, some roast quails' breasts came with a chunk of buttery foie
gras set on slices of marinated celeriac. This was rather more exciting than
some marinated wild salmon where the chef had gone overboard with the limes
in his vinaigrette. For a little over Pounds 10 a feuilletee of foie gras
and truffles on a bed of spinach was exceedingly generous given the amount
of black truffles which had gone into it. A tomato consomme with a cottage
cheese dumpling was another dish betraying Austrian influence.
Pigeon breasts are a house speciality. On the night I ate at the Bamberger
Reiter they were dished up in savoy cabbage; a sign that the French cuisine
rustique had also taken a grip of this Berlin chef.
Veal fillet was served with shitake mushrooms and a dauphinoise of potatoes.
I was a little disappointed at the farmed mushrooms; especially when there
were so many good wild mushrooms available in the shops.
The cheese was also a disappointment: everything had been stored too cold to
ripen and there was nothing out of the ordinary. Perhaps this is yet another
sign of Frau Raneburger's origins as cheese is one of the saddest areas of
modern Austrian gastronomy, ruined by a combination of fussy state
interference and obsessive pasteurisation.
Puddings are a better bet. There was a delicious apricot dumpling with a
praline ice and some plum tart with vanilla ice; followed, as ever, by more
petits fours than one might advisably eat.
The Bamberger Reiter has a good wine list which is particularly strong on
Austria, with excellent Gruner Veltliners and Rieslings from the Wachau and
Blaufrankisch red wines from the Burgenland.
Ordering Austrian wines is the way to Frau Radeburger's heart. At the end of
the meal she came up beaming and gave us a glass of lovely (Austrian)
apricot schnapps. Clearly, when it comes to eating out in Berlin, it pays to
be catholic.
The Bamberger Reiter menus cost DM115 (Pounds 46) and DM155. A la carte you
should assume at least Pounds 60 a head with decent wine. For half the price
you can enjoy the Raneburgers' food in the bistro at the same address.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921024

