FT924-12001

FT  22 OCT 92 / Credit Lyonnais poised to take control of BfG bank


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN and DAVID WALLER


   PARIS, FRANKFURT


CREDIT Lyonnais, one of France's largest banks, today enters the final stage
of negotiations to buy a controlling stake in BfG Bank, the financially
troubled German bank owned by Aachener und Munchener Beteiligungs, the
German insurance group, and the BGAG German trades union holding company.
The French bank, which has been seeking a base in Germany as part of its
European expansion programme, confirmed yesterday that Mr Jean-Yves Haberer,
its chairman, would meet Mr Wolfgang Kaske, AMB chief executive, in Germany
today. Mr Hans Matthofer, BGAG chairman, will also attend.
Credit Lyonnais is thought to have made a concrete offer for a total of 60
per cent of the bank's shares earlier this week.
None of the parties involved would comment on the price yesterday but
sources suggested the figure could be between DM1.8bn (Pounds 720m) and
DM3.6bn.
BfG, as Germany's sixth-largest bank, provides a rare opportunity for a
foreign company to buy a large German financial institution.
The bank has cost its shareholders several billion D-Marks since AMB
acquired its majority stake five years ago. A further cash injection is
required but the main brunt of restructuring is over, the bank has said
recently.
The negotiations follow this summer's reconciliation between AMB and
Assurances Generales de France (AGF), a big state-owned French insurer which
has acquired a 25 per cent stake in the German company.
Hostilities ended this summer and as part of the deal AGF undertook to find
a French buyer for BfG. A successful sale could lead to further co-operation
between AGF and AMB, including recognition of voting rights on its full
stake.
Today's talks between Credit Lyonnais and AMB come amid controversy over the
aggressive expansion strategy pursued by Mr Haberer.
Its net profits fell from FFr1.61bn in the first half of 1991 to FFr119m
(Pounds 14.2m) in the same period this year, mainly because of higher
provisions on bad debts and depressed property holdings. However, Mr Haberer
has confounded critics of his expensively acquired European network which
has performed well.
Saga comes to a head, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921022

