FT921-15332

FT  10 JAN 92 / Arts: Sweet Desserts - New End Theatre


   By CLAIRE ARMITSTEAD


The last time I went to Hampstead's ever hospitable New End Theatre it was
staging a play about Sophie Tucker and had plates of lip-shaped candies
lying around; for this scrumptious two-handed adaptation of Lucy Ellmann's
novel Sweet Desserts, the foyer is choc-full of naughtiness. Guilt comes, as
guilt does, by the packet or the scoop: by the time the audience is seated
in the theatre, it has slumped neatly into three camps - the binger, the
banter and the effortless abstainer. For the bingers and banters, at least,
it is a treat, unnecessarily repetitive towards the end, but providing
little thrills of recognition while tweaking insistently at those little
hairs at the nape of one's neck.
Ellmann's novel is a stylist's confessional, about growing up and coming to
terms with all the difficult things in life - like siblings and sex and the
curious magnetism of the fridge. In the oversubscribed tradition of
foodie-fantasy it stands apart, belligerently odd in style and structure, a
parody of its own genre, but with an unmistakable ring of truth.
Suzy and Fran are sisters divided by four years and a monstrous rivalry;
united by their taste in food and in men. Charlotte Jones and Elizabeth
Lynton's adaptation embraces the eccentricity of the book with a performance
style that is bouncy, graceful and witty. A loftily staged dance sequence of
sexual postures is typically brought thudding down to earth with the
reflection: 'Hmm. Sperm, how many calories?'
Lynton gives a compelling Fran, small, sharp and ordered in her movement as
in her life, pushing Suzy out from the centre of the story. So absorbing is
the characterisation, that I found myself looking at the taller,
looser-limbed Jones some 30 minutes in and noting with some surprise that
she is not in fact tubby at all.
They must have had as much fun assembling their soundtrack as Ellmann had
pasting in the shards of instruction, poetry and agony-aunt letters that
punctuate her story. For the purgatory of dieting, Mozart's Requiem; for the
death of the girls' mother, throat-catching Tammy Wynette; for the various
men in their lives a Peter and the Wolf-style sequence of signature tunes
ranging from Match of the Day to 'Nessun Dorma'. It is hardly heavy-weight
stuff, but it provides an astute sideways look at what one could dub the
culture of sex and drugs and rocks and rolls.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Photograph Elizabeth Lynton and Charlotte Jones (Omitted).

920110

