FT922-473

FT  27 JUN 92 / Finance & the Family: Lloyd's: what are its prospects now? -
As losses rise and Names face financial ruin, Scheherazade Daneshkhu and
Richard Lapper look to the future


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU and RICHARD LAPPER


THE CITY was expecting Wednesday's annual general meeting of Lloyd's of
London to be tense, chaotic, even violent.
Lloyd's, which reports its results three years in arrears, announced losses
of Pounds 2.06bn in 1989, leaving its Names - the individuals whose assets
provide the market's capital base - facing average losses of Pounds 63,500
per head.
Names on catastrophe reinsurance syndicates, which were overwhelmed by
claims from Hugo, the hurricane that devastated the Caribbean in September
1989, and other natural disasters, bore the brunt and must contend with
bigger average losses. About 4,000 Names on Gooda Walker syndicates suffered
losses of at least Pounds 100,000 per head, for example.
In the event Wednesday's meeting passed off without incident.
The now closed accounts for the 1989 year were described by David Coleridge,
the chairman, as 'one of the darkest chapters' in the insurance market's
300-year history. But how should Names who have avoided the most severe
losses and can afford to trade out of their current difficulties assess the
market's prospects in the future? And should people still consider joining
Lloyd's ?
The traditional advantage of Lloyd's membership - the ability to use capital
twice - still holds good. Names earn returns on their assets from both
investment and underwriting. And in some ways the market is in a better
state today than it was a year ago, when its 1988 losses of Pounds 510m, the
first deficit for 20 years, were announced.
Insurance rates in many sectors are increasing; quite sharply in cases such
as Japanese reinsurance, where competition had driven premiums to very low
levels.
Many of the least efficient syndicates and agencies and the less successful
underwriters have been pushed out of business, as rationalisation proceeds
apace. There are at least 70 fewer syndicates trading in 1992 than last
year.
The result for 1990 will be poor, and a loss of Pounds 1bn is expected when
Lloyd's announces the outcome next year. But 1991 could be better and
Lloyd's should certainly be back in the black - barring a run of
catastrophes - by 1992, when results for this year are reported in 1995.
More important, Lloyd's could soon institute reforms, suggested by the task
force, which completed an extensive review of business practices on the
market in January. These would change the principle of unlimited liability,
by which Names are liable for all losses, down to their smallest
possessions.
For underwriting years starting in January 1993, Names' losses will be
capped at an amount equivalent to 80 per cent of their premium income limits
over four years. Thus, a Name underwriting Pounds 1m (for which he would
need to deposit Pounds 300,000 with Lloyd's) could lose no more than Pounds
800,000 over a four year period. However, this will not help losses for the
underwriting years 1990, 1991, and 1992.
Advisers agree that things have improved. Max Lehrain, of Grimston Scott,
which advises Names on their finances and choice of syndicates, says that
for the right kind of investor it is a good time to join Lloyd's. 'We are at
or near the nadir of the insurance cycle,' he says.
Robert Saunders, of Smith & Williamson, agrees. He says trading conditions
are better than in the late 1980s and people wanting to become Names can
join virtually any syndicate.
Never the less, advisers strike a note of caution. More than 1,000 Names are
seeking compensation for their losses from their agents and, in one case,
from Lloyd's Corporation itself, in a series of legal actions alleging
negligence.
This litigation is bound to affect confidence in the market at a time when
the resources of existing Names are depleted. As many as 4,000 of the 22,300
Names currently trading at Lloyd's could resign at the end of the year,
depressing the size of the market's capital base and increasing the relative
costs of doing business at Lloyd's.
Mike Voller, Lloyd's specialist at accountants BDO Binder Hamlyn, says that
if confidence declines, Lloyd's might shrink and become a much more risky
investment. 'A year ago we might have said it would be a good time to join
but there is so much uncertainty now that we could not recommend it.'
Voller suggests it is better to wait a year to see how the market develops
next year, and perhaps join in 1994.
Most agree that Names must find out more about the business they are in than
they would with more orthodox investments. Many of those worst hit by the
losses of 1989 and 1990 knew very little about their syndicates.
Lehrain offers the following advice to would-be Names.
Be fully aware of the risks
Make sure you have enough money. His own conditions for this are more
stringent than Lloyds itself. 'You should have an annual income of at least
Pounds 100,000 and means of Pounds 250,000 excluding your primary property
or the investments upon which you rely for income. In addition, you should
be able to write out a cheque for Pounds 50,000 with no difficulty.
You do not have to choose the riskiest syndicates just as you would not put
your whole portfolio into Japanese warrants.

The Financial Times


London Page III

920627

