FT921-3888

FT  12 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Nylex falls sharply to ADollars 287m


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


BTR NYLEX, the Australian manufacturing group, yesterday announced a 41 per
cent fall in net profits to ADollars 287m (Pounds 128m) after abnormal items
for the year to the end of December. Sales were up 2.2 per cent to ADollars
4.9bn.
The poor result reflects a difficult year for BTR Nylex in which margins
have been squeezed by recession in its main Australasian markets. The dip in
profits follows a 14 per cent decline to ADollars 489m for the year to
December 1990. The group, which is a quoted subsidiary of BTR of the UK,
said the second half had followed the pattern of the first six months, when
net profits were also down 41 per cent.
The directors cut the final dividend to 5 cents, 50 per cent franked, from
6.5 cents last year. The total dividend is 9.5 cents, franked to 38 per
cent, compared with 11.75 cents, franked to 39 per cent.
The group said it had applied an 'aggressive approach' to rationalising and
restructuring its operations to reflect the depressed economic conditions in
Australia and New Zealand.
The restructuring programme resulted in costs of ADollars 63m, which were
charged as an abnormal item against operating profits of ADollars 759, down
22 per cent on the previous year. Mr Graeme Pearson, managing director, said
the group's automotive, building products, commercial interiors and textile
operations showed no sign of recovery.
Economic conditions in Europe and North America also affected BTR Nylex's
markets, and had applied pressure to most of its businesses, particularly
those related to commercial construction and furnishing, he said.
Economic growth remained strong in South East Asia, with good demand for the
group's consumer, building and infrastructure related products. However,
profits in Taiwan were affected by weak world demand for polymers.
The only bright spot was the packaging division, a technological leader in
glass and plastics, which increased operating profits by 16 per cent to
ADollars 253m on sales up 52 per cent to ADollars 1.2bn.
The packaging result reflected a strong performance by Continental PET, an
Australian glass company, and part-year contributions from Smorgon Glass in
Australia and Rockware, the UK glass company. All were acquired during the
year.
BTR Nylex said the outlook remained uncertain for the economies of
Australasia, North America and Europe. However, it expected to benefit
substantially from the acquisitions and restructuring carried out in 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920312

