FT922-530

FT  27 JUN 92 / US warned on foreign company tax


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


PROPOSALS FOR increasing taxes on foreign companies operating in the US have
drawn a sharp attack from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, the Paris-based grouping of the main industrialised countries.
Joining criticism from several individual European countries, the OECD says
the proposals, contained in a draft bill put forward last month in Congress
and endorsed this week by Mr Bill Clinton, the presumptive Democratic
presidential candidate, would force the US to violate its tax treaties with
other countries.
Mr Jean-Claude Paye, OECD secretary general, has written to Mr Nicholas
Brady, US Treasury secretary, to warn that the bill, in its present form,
'could have a damaging effect on the future development of world trade and
to the long-run interests of the US'.
The OECD committee on fiscal affairs, which brings together representatives
of the tax administrations of the 24 member countries, complained
particularly at a meeting this week about a measure to tax foreign companies
as if their profit margin on gross receipts were at least three-quarters of
the industry average, regardless of whether or not they actually made a
profit.
This would be a serious breach of the OECD's rules on transfer pricing and
could violate the non-discrimination article of some tax conventions, the
committee said.
It also singled out measures to limit tax treaty benefits to qualified
residents of the treaty country. This could hit, for example, a British
subsidiary of a Dutch company.
The tax measures form part of a bill proposed by Mr Dan Rostenkowski and Mr
Bill Gradison, the Democratic and Republican leaders of the House of
Representatives ways and means committee, and are designed to help pay for
Dollars 1bn of tax relief for US-based multinational corporations.
Aides to the two congressmen emphasise that they do not intend to bring it
to a vote this year, but hope by floating a number of ideas to develop a
consensus around measures to be included in a tax package next year.
'The bill is very much a discussion draft,' one aide said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920627

