FT923-15486

FT  02 JUL 92 / A spectacular story of boom and bust: A group of more than
4,000 Lloyd's Names heard yesterday that they would soon have to pay a
further pounds 307m to meet losses from disasters that they helped to insure
against in the late 1980s. Richard Lapper describes the LMX spiral, which
produced the losses, and tells the story of Gooda Walker


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE HISTORY of Gooda Walker, the Lloyd's agency that has been most heavily
hit by losses from spiral reinsurance, is one of the most spectacular
boom-and-bust stories ever seen at the insurance market.
Gooda Walker's seven Lloyd's syndicates produced losses of Pounds 491m in
the 1989 year. The 4,000-plus Names who backed the syndicates learned
yesterday that they must pay a further Pounds 307m by the end of July to
help meet those losses and losses from earlier years. Names have already
been asked to pay Pounds 365m since April last year.
According to Mr Ralph Sharp, chairman of GW Run Off, which is now handling
the syndicate's affairs, the run-off - the process whereby future insurance
liabilities are settled - will be the longest and most complex in the
history of the Lloyd's market.
Yet in the mid-to-late 1980s Gooda Walker appeared to be one of the most
successful businesses at Lloyd's.
The agency's biggest syndicates, underwritten by Mr Derek Walker, co-owner
of the agency, were the 'engine room' of the spiral, underwriting hundreds
of separate reinsurance contracts.
The group's fortunes centre on the relationship between Mr Walker, a
Londoner, and Mr Tony Gooda, son of the founder of the Gooda & Partners
agency, which lies at the core of the business.
Mr Walker, now in his early 60s, joined Gooda straight from school in the
1940s, but from the 1960s gradually took a more prominent role in the
underwriting side of the business, while Mr Gooda built up the group's
members' agency, handling the affairs of Names - the individuals whose
assets provide the market's capital base.
In the 1970s Mr Walker won a reputation at Lloyd's as a spiral underwriter,
providing aviation reinsurance to other London market companies and Lloyd's
syndicates.
Mr Walker's relationship with Gooda strengthened with the business setting
up new syndicates in 1974, 1976 and 1979. In 1981 the relationship survived
its toughest test, when Mr Walker was acquitted at the Old Bailey after
being accused of participation in a series of bogus reinsurance
transactions.
Mr Walker, who was awarded costs, was stung by the episode. After briefly
suspending himself from the market, he re-entered in the early 1980s,
determined to engineer a rapid expansion of the business.
Mr Gooda recruited Names and often channelled them into the group's own
syndicates, while Mr Walker built up his share of the lucrative spiral
reinsurance market. For a time it was a highly successful exercise.
The capital base of the group's seven syndicates rose from Pounds 47.9m in
1983 to Pounds 270.4m in 1988. The number of Names on Mr Walker's own
syndicate - number 290 - more than trebled from 713 in 1983 to 3,163 in
1989, attracted by its impressive record of profitability.
In 1986 the syndicate ranked seventh out of 102 non-marine syndicates, and
between 1981 and 1986 ranked among the top 25 per cent of performers in five
out of six years.
Other syndicates in the stable fared less impressively. Even so, there were
enough encouraging signs to lead the group to believe Mr Walker's knack
might eventually pass on to other syndicates in the group.
The lifestyles of Gooda Walker's leading executives flourished with the
group's expansion. 'They lived the good life,' says a former manager. 'They
entertained royally. There were cars for senior people and senior people's
wives.' Mr Walker maintained a fleet of expensive cars and ran an aircraft,
although he remained stubbornly distant from the socialising. 'Derek was not
prepared to compromise,' says a former colleague. 'He came in his Marks and
Spencers' suits, plain white shirt and Tuff shoes. People from outside the
old-school-tie ethos took a lot of care about the way they dressed in order
to win acceptance, but Derek dismissed all that.'
The group's rapid expansion in the spiral LMX market left it extremely
vulnerable. Business had been won by very aggressive pricing while the group
boosted profits by buying limited amounts of reinsurance cover, running very
large potential exposures in relation to the amount of premium accepted.
Gooda Walker's troubles were aggravated by the inexperience of some of the
newer underwriters.
The succession of catastrophes beginning with Piper Alpha in July 1988 and
ending with the European storms of January 1990 had a devastating effect.
Even after hurricane Hugo in September 1989 - the biggest loss ever to
affect the Lloyd's market - Gooda syndicates were aggressively competing for
LMX business and seemed unaware of their potential losses.
The storms of January and February 1990 were the coup de grace. However,
even then, awareness of the extent of the debacle was slow to dawn.
In a sad but ironic final flourish, Gooda Walker's executives decided they
needed more office space and contracted to lease a large property.
They were the last people to pay a premium before the property market
crashed, ending up paying Pounds 600,000 a month for three times as much
space as they needed.
In October last year Gooda Walker ceased trading.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920702

