FT923-10755

FT  29 JUL 92 / Letter: Teamwork that creates urban renewal and strong local
economy


   From Mr ALASTAIR G BALLS


Sir, I refer to your editorial on urban agencies (July 22). A mythology
about different models of approach to this subject is rapidly establishing
itself, drawn largely on a perception of London Docklands. The impression is
growing that the development corporation method of renewal offers a gung ho,
bricks-and-mortar approach, contrasting sharply with a more sensitive and
strategically planned community development approach which emphasises real
employment and living conditions. In practice this need not be so, and it
seldom is.
Newcastle Business Park, featured on the cover of the Urban Regeneration
Agency consultation document, is the product of teamwork combining the
development corporation, the City Council, the Tec training agents and the
private sector. It is universally reckoned in the north-east to add strength
to the local economy.
The Royal Quays development in North Tyneside, together with an adjacent
City Challenge scheme in a troubled housing estate, is about the Development
Corporation, the local authority and local community groups working together
to bring investment and through this better jobs, training and housing to
the local people.
The St Peter's Riverside scheme in Sunderland, on an old shipyard next to
Bede's Monkwearmouth Church, is being drawn together by the new University,
the City Council, the Development Corporation and again community groups. It
will provide sheltered housing for rent, new homes for sale, new commercial
premises, community recreational facilities, and a new business-based
University Campus. Just a short way upstream, a major new business park -
with sites for traditional heavy industry as well as high-tech manufacturing
 -is also being developed as a partnership project.
The debate about agencies should not focus on stereotypes. Those of us who
are practitioners know that structures do not determine the quality of the
outcome but the willingness of the many parties and individuals necessarily
involved in urban areas to work as a team towards an agreed goal. This
cannot be legislated for.
The real significance of the URA is that the task of managing the major
urban regeneration grant regimes is being transferred from civil servants,
who are required to act as auditors rather than initiators, to a body which
will be action and results orientated. This is helpful, but its success will
depend on the quality of the relationships it can forge with other local
bodies. Alastair G Balls,
chief executive,
Tyne and Wear Development Corporation,
Scotswood House,
Newcastle Business Park,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE4 7YL

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920729

