FT924-6111

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (7): German success -
Profile of Mercedes-Benz


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


AS MIGHT be expected, Germany's reunification has had a profound impact upon
Mercedes-Benz, the luxury car and world's largest truck maker. Nowhere
within the group's industrial activities have the effects been more keenly
felt than in the commercial vehicles sector itself.
Against the background of a 5 per cent drop in total world commercial
vehicle output last year, Mercedes increased its own production by 14 per
cent to a record 296,000 units. Its world-wide unit sales rose by 12 per
cent.
The value of its commercial vehicles sales also jumped by 14 per cent, to
DM27.6bn, outpacing the 31 per cent increase in its car sales.
However, with some other important world markets declining, without the
German surge it would have been a different story.
At 122,000 units, Mercedes' German sales of commercial vehicles were 44 per
cent higher last year than in 1990. Within the total, van sales rose by 42
per cent, those of the trucks carrying the materials for eastern Germany's
reconstruction by 49 per cent.
The increases were thus a notable contributor to last year's 12 per cent
rise in Mercedes' total turnover to DM67.1bn and the 1990-matching DM1.55bn
net income Werner Niefer was able to report to shareholders in his final
year as president and chief executive.
He is to hand over to Mr Helmut Werner, joint chief executive, at the end of
the year.
If Germany underpinned Mercedes' performance last year, developments
elsewhere in the world reinforced the value of its sustained policy of
globalisation. As most other western European markets turned down, Mercedes'
commercial vehicles sales outside Germany also slipped, again by 14 per cent
 -but still by not enough to prevent its share of the over-six tonnes truck
market increasing from 26 per cent to more than 31 per cent.
There was gloom also in the North American market, which dropped by 10 per
cent although Mercedes' US subsidiary, Freightliner, was able almost to
maintain its own sales volume, at 22,600 compared with 23,000 in 1990.
Its global presence meant, however, that Mercedes was able to benefit from
the steady liberalisation of the Mexican economy - accelerated by the North
American Free Trade Agreement with the US and Canada - to the extent of a 63
per cent rise in sales to 9,600. At the same time the loosening of Brazil's
economic reins gave affiliate Mercedes do Brasil a 33 per cent commercial
vehicles sales fillip to reach 40,700.
No-one expected the German surge to last indefinitely. Nevertheless, its
commercial vehicles market rose by a further 9 per cent in the first quarter
and has continued strong, to the extent that Mr Niefer now appears to have
been pessimistic in suggesting that total commercial vehicle sales this year
would fall back from 1991 levels. Market analysts, DRI/McGraw Hill, for
example, predict that by the end of this year van sales will have risen by
another 50 per cent.
In contrast, Mr Niefer's expressed hopes of a recovery in other European
economies and markets have been only partially fulfilled. Even so, total
sales and output are expected to be maintained at around the levels of a
year ago.
In Europe, in particular, and in spite of planned research and development
spending of more than DM5bn over the next few years, Mercedes no longer
believes that putting competitive products into the marketplace is enough.
'More and more, the market is seeking combined product/service packages for
specific transport requirements,' according to Mr Niefer - with actual
ownership of commercial vehicles becoming less relevant.
With this in mind, Mercedes has launched in Germany, the UK and several
other Continental countries a vehicle leasing venture, Charterway, with
contracts based around an agreed transport capacity rather than specific
vehicles.
With the single EC market in mind, the company has also developed related EC
service arrangements under which truck operators can obtain individually
agreed, fixed-price service packages at any of Mercedes' 2,400 commercial
vehicle service outlets in Europe through a cashless payment system.
These actions have been taken in the context of Mercedes' conviction that
growth in European road transport will continue to be extensive for the
foreseeable future. Indeed, it is forecasting 40 per cent growth in the
volume of transport in Europe over the next decade, even though it already
accounts for more than 60 per cent of goods transport in the region.
In that belief, and working within collaborative EC research programmes such
as Prometheus - aimed at maximising traffic flows while increasing road
safety - Mercedes' research engineers are working on a number of programmes
from collision-avoidance radar through to comprehensive route guidance and
congestion-avoidance systems.
'The requirement now is rather for integrated action on the part of all
concerned - the manufacturers of the different forms of transport, the
logistics industry and also the relevant politicians,' according to Mr
Niefer.
Despite the hitherto buoyant state of the German market, Mercedes - like the
country's other major leading vehicle makers - remains increasingly
concerned at Germany's continually rising production costs and the strength
of the D-Mark.
Partly for that reason, and in spite of German plants accounting for more
than 188,000 of Mercedes' commercial vehicle output last year - its top
management has been placing increasing stress on future growth coming from
increased sales and production from what is now a total of more than 50
production and assembly plants world-wide, employing, when output of nearly
580,000 cars annually is included, a total of more than 237,000 people.
Nevertheless, Mercedes is continuing to invest in the expanded Germany:
since February last year light trucks have been assembled at a plant south
of Berlin in Ludwigsfelde, and, since September, T2 vans have also been
assembled there. Mercedes has, however, been forced to postpone indefinitely
a new 40,000-a-year truck factory in Brandenburg.
The commercial vehicle product range itself now totals 200 truck models in
more than 2,700 different versions from vans to 48-tonne trucks.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921123

