FT924-8087

FT  13 NOV 92 / Pounds 750m allocated to revive housing market


   By JOHN GAPPER and SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


THE CHANCELLOR yesterday injected Pounds 750m into the housing market in an
effort to check sharply falling prices. The move marks the first time the
government has intervened directly to reduce empty housing stock.
Combined with a cut in base rates to 7 per cent, the move is an effort to
restore confidence in the housing market. But banks and building societies
said the change was unlikely to act as an immediate stimulus to house
buying.
The aim is to cut by 20,000 the estimated stock of 200,000 empty properties.
Housing associations are being given Pounds 700m to buy empty homes, and
another Pounds 50m is being allocated to subsidise local authority tenants
to buy privately.
Building societies reacted quickly to the base rate cut by reducing mortgage
rates. But Abbey National bank and three societies widened lending margins
by cutting mortgage rates by only 0.75 percentage point.
The chancellor increased short-term spending on housing in England without
raising the overall subsidy to the Housing Corporation. He brought forward
Pounds 577m of a three-year Pounds 6bn expenditure plan, marking it out for
house purchases.
Mr Geoff Ellerton, Midland's product director for branch banking, said
neither the base rate cut nor the reduction in empty housing stock would act
as an immediate stimulus, but would merely accelerate a future recovery.
Mr John Wriglesworth, housing market analyst at UBS Phillips & Drew, said
the market was so depressed that the measures would not have a strong
effect. Associations might not spend money on repossessed homes.
The Building Societies Association said it expected the measure to ease the
oversupply of housing and to help the social rental sector. The Pounds 700m
works out at an average of Pounds 35,000 per property bought by housing
associations.
West Bromwich, Newcastle and Yorkshire building societies announced a 0.75
percentage point cut in rates. Woolwich and Alliance & Leicester building
societies said they would announce a 0.75 point cut, while Halifax,
Nationwide and Leeds promised a cut soon.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921113

