FT924-8343

FT  11 NOV 92 / International Company News: Montgomery in the limelight -
Patrick Harverson reports on a small but ambitious securities firm


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


More than 700 of the most influential money managers in the US, representing
over Dollars 1,000bn in assets, assembled in San Francisco recently for an
annual conference that has become one of the most eagerly attended events in
the investment industry calendar.
The money managers were there for presentations and meetings with senior
executives from a select group of small, fast-growing companies that are
forging a name for themselves in several key industries.
Although it is one of the country's finest cities, San Francisco was not
chosen as the location because of its beauty, but because it is home to
Montgomery Securities, the small but ambitious securities firm that has been
hosting this get-together for more than 20 years.
The firm's sole office is in the pyramid-shaped Transamerica building that
dominates San Francisco's skyline.
As a private partnership, Montgomery rarely attracts much attention
alongside its bigger east coast rivals. Its annual securities investment
conference, however, gives it an opportunity to enjoy the limelight, if only
for a few days.
Outside the industry, Montgomery is probably best known for its successful
rebellion last year against the New York Stock Exchange's proposal to open
trading half an hour earlier each day. So effective was the Montgomery-led
rebellion that within a week the NYSE was forced to abandon its plans.
Inside the industry, the firm is known as a nimble, aggressive broker/dealer
of growth stocks from five specialised industry areas: technology, consumer
products, financial services, healthcare and environmental services.
Although Montgomery's raison d'etre is institutional broking and
market-making, the firm has been working hard - like almost every other in
the industry - to develop a presence in the increasingly competitive, but
profitable asset management business.
Unlike others in the industry, Montgomery has no proprietary or program
trading business. The firm likes to make the point that because it does not
trade for its own account, there are no conflicts between its own and its
clients' interests.
This may go down well with its institutional clients, but it cuts the firm
off from a potentially huge source of revenue. Some of the biggest profits
earned by securities houses this past year have come from the trading of
securities for their own account. Montgomery, however, is a private
partnership, and as such lacks the capital to support a significant
proprietary business.
Consequently, the firm concentrates on three core businesses. The most
important is equity brokerage, where Montgomery offers sales and trading
services to its institutional and a few private clients. Montgomery is
regularly among the top five equity traders of stocks in four of its five
specialist sectors, and recently opened the largest trading floor outside
New York.
Its corporate finance business, which includes mergers and acquisitions and
private placements, keeps the firm among the top echelon of stock
underwriters in its sectors. Like a few other San Francisco-based firms
(such as Hambrecht & Quist and Robertson, Stephens), Montgomery is
well-known for handling technology and healthcare company flotations, or
IPOs (initial public offerings).
It's most famous client is pharmaceuticals group Amgen, which it took public
in 1983 and which is now worth Dollars 8.6bn.
Montgomery has reaped the benefits, along with the rest of the industry, of
the extraordinary underwriting boom of the past 18 months.
Mr Tom Weisel, Montgomery's long-standing chairman, says: 'As the
underwriting calendar took off last year, our firm went from Dollars 100m to
Dollars 170m in revenues, and it should be about Dollars 200m this year.'
Montgomery's smallest, but fastest-growing, business is asset management,
which it is building up as part of a strategy to use fee-based business as
insurance against volatile revenues from market-related activities, such as
broking and underwriting.
Montgomery began to construct an asset management operation 18 months ago,
and has Dollars 750m of assets under its wing, the bulk in a growth fund
(which performed best last year among US small company mutual funds). The
firm recently launched an emerging markets and a fixed-income fund, and
hopes to have Dollars 1bn in its custody by year-end.
The ultimate aim, says Mr Weisel, is to construct Montgomery's revenue base
like a three-legged stool. One leg will be brokerage, the second
underwriting and the third asset management, which he hopes will be a
Dollars 10bn or Dollars 20bn business within the next five to eight years.
The firm is as nationally minded as any on Wall Street. Its clients are
spread across the US, with the bulk in New York and Boston, and Montgomery
works hard at keeping its finger on Wall Street's pulse. Its role last year
in forcing the NYSE to abandon its early trading plans was a case in point.
As Mr Weisel explains: 'We don't think the stock exchange did a thorough
job. After talking to all our institutional clients across the country, we
felt that expanding trading hours was not going to expand trading volume . .
. and it was going to wreak havoc on west coast firms. We felt pretty
strongly about it, and we had to take charge.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921111

