FT921-506

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: A snare for film-makers


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


IN FOREIGN movie hands, London has suffered the fate of a dozen great cities
across the world. The film-maker from abroad takes one look at the unknown
urban maze and decides to concertina the whole thing into a few Instantly
Identifiable Landmarks.
Big Ben, the Tower of London, Buckingham Palace . . . to non-British eyes
the city's crimes, passions and misunderstandings have long tended to take
place under the collective shadow of these monoliths; just as the Eiffel
Tower watches over everything in Paris, with accordion accompaniment, and
all roads lead past the Colosseum in Rome.
There is something special about London, though, and the cinema has mined
it, even unwittingly, since the silent days. The city is dark, large and
formless enough to swallow passing innocents. For the first 30 years of film
history, London was almost invariably Gothic. From American spinecurdlers
like Lon Chaney's London After Midnight (1927) and Bela Lugosi's Dracula
(1931), to subtler European fare like Leni's Waxworks (1924) and Pabst's
Pandora's Box (1928) - both featuring Jack the Ripper - Britain's capital
was a maze of dismal streets and alleys in which evil shadows reared out of
fog and pounced on helpless waifs.
World perception of the British capital was so unflattering that it finally
took a resident foreigner, Alexander Korda to make a series of movies which
graciously reversed the canvas.
Korda and others gave us a London big with empire, royalty and tradition.
Actor-knights like Ralph Richardson and Laurence Olivier were drafted to
play prime ministers or members of parliament; fog was banished and in
movies like The Private Life Of Henry VIII, That Hamilton Woman and Henry V,
the city was a gleaming chunk of history patrolled by the great and famous.
It was still a maze in which one could get lost but, this time, new turnings
led to historical revelation rather than hysterical terror.
One of the ironies of cultural history is that Korda numbered among his
friends the writer Graham Greene. As a film critic, Greene regularly spilled
venom on Korda's cinema, not least on his patriotic visions of Britain and
its capital. Greene's own emergent and distinctive vision of London was
being shaped by the downbeat menace of films like Alfred Hitchcock's The
Lodger, The Man Who Knew Too Much and Sabotage.
As Greene was to do in his novels, Hitchcock took London by the scruff of
its skyline and shook it free both of Gothic fog and Korda-esque pretension.
It was 'seedy' but clear-visioned. And although it was full of Instantly
Identifiable Landmarks, they were exploited for surprise and subversion. A
lord mayor's parade was an overture to murder (Sabotage); the British Museum
hosted a hair's-breadth chase (Blackmail); and Westminster Cathedral,
accustomed to raising citizens to God, obliged Hitchcock by plunging a man
to his death (Foreign Correspondent).
Hitchcock's was not the only voice raised in a counter-Korda spirit. David
Lean, in his magnificent adaptation of Dickens' Oliver Twist, gave us a
period London shorn of period glamour. Since that poetic high point in
cine-portraits, it has been, if not all downhill, a fairly bumpy ride.
First, the 1950s gave us a sparkling picture-postcard London, courtesy of
Hollywood: it was the decade of shopping-at-Harrods movies starring Deborah
Kerr and Doris Day. Then, Swinging London put everyone into shock, since the
idea of London as 'fashionable' was as startling as a tramp announcing he
was about to buy his clothes at Armani.
It could not last, we thought, but it did. Julie Christie and a host of New
Age stars rushed about the town colonising it for mini-skirts and Beatles
hair-dos, purple eye-shadow and flaring trousers. Georgie Girl, Alfie,
Help], The Knack, Blow Up - it was like an outbreak of St Vitus' dance in an
old people's home.
Some 30 years have passed since then, during which London, mercifully, has
resumed its proper, time-honoured identity - which is to have no particular
identity at all save a tendency to sprawl and confuse. This means that the
archetypal London movie motif - strangers getting lost - continues and those
lost strangers often include the film-makers themselves.
But then, what would be left of London's character if visitors could find
their way around? London prides itself on being all things to all people. In
recent films, having abandoned the empire, it has found the empire coming to
it. Swirling multi-ethnic films like My Beautiful Laundrette and London
Kills Me show that topographical diversity is now matched by cultural. We
have outgrown the clean divide between movies glorifying London a la Korda
and those de-glamorising it surgically a la Hitchcock. Like Britannia,
London, having given up ruling the waves, now allows the waves to wash
wildly and multifariously over it.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920328

