FT921-15477

FT  10 JAN 92 / Japan refuses finance for Brazilian debt deal


   By CHRISTINA LAMB and STEPHEN FIDLER


   RIO DE JANEIRO, LONDON


JAPAN has refused to provide finance for a debt-reduction deal by Brazil and
its bank creditors until the government has agreed a three-year economic
programme from the International Monetary Fund, unlikely this year.
This will force the Brazilian government to seek innovative options to break
a stalemate in negotiations, which are to resume this month, over reducing
the Dollars 52bn in medium and long-term loans extended by creditor banks.
Although Brazil is due to obtain agreement for a Dollars 2bn stand-by IMF
loan this month - it is to be discussed by the fund board on January 22 -
the Japanese have said they want to see a three-year Extended Fund Facility
before providing finance for a Brady debt-reduction deal.
This suggests Brazil will have insufficient resources to provide guarantees
of both principal and interest to banks that agree to reduce their claims on
the country.
Brazil has less in resources for these so-called enhancements than provided
by Mexico in its 1990 debt-reduction accord, and has more debt.
Japan supported the Mexican agreement but Tokyo seems to have doubts about
the long-term commitment of Braslia to reform.
Brazil's chief debt negotiator, Mr Pedro Malan, said yesterday: 'We have no
doctrinaire objection to rolling interest guarantees but, frankly, we don't
have the resources. We cannot put up much from our reserves so we depend on
Japanese help or multilateral institutions.'
He added: 'We are trying to think of innovative schemes related to the
volume and timing of enhancements.' He said that banks taking up the
new-money option, for example, would be asked to allow a proportion allotted
to the enhancements. Bankers say another option would be to introduce the
enhancements in stages as finance became available.
A senior official at a large creditor bank yesterday said he did not expect
many banks to be lending new money to Brazil. He described some banks as
being 'hung up on a Mexico-style deal for Brazil'. He believed that, if
creditor banks genuinely wanted a deal, they 'will have to do some talking.'
One option, he said, might be to concentrate on converting a large part of
Brazil's floating rate bank loans into fixed-rate debt, so as to take
advantage of the current low levels of US interest rates.
Braslia has embarked on a new offensive to resolve its foreign debt problem.
External negotiations have taken high priority since Mr Marclio Marques
Moreira took over as economy minister last May. Mr Moreira now wants to
consolidate this with concrete results - deals with the IMF, the Paris Club
of creditor governments and commercial banks by mid-1992.
Providing the IMF deal goes through this month, the government hopes to
reach a quick agreement over its Dollars 20bn debt with the Paris Club,
which comes up for discussion in February. Mr Francisco Gros, Central Bank
governor, will be in France and the UK early next week to present Brazil's
position to his counterparts. Talks with commercial banks are expected to
resume on January 20.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920110

