FT922-4044

FT  08 JUN 92 / European Bonds: Price slide raises long-term questions


   By SIMON LONDON


OPINION remains split over the significance of the precipitous fall in bond
prices which hit most markets last week, following Danish voters' rejection
of the Maastricht treaty.
Some analysts and fund managers interpreted the shake-out as a fundamental
change of direction. To others, the events of the week were seen as a
temporary, if violent, correction in the longer-term process of European
convergence.
The immediate damage was certainly severe, especially in the high-yielding
European markets which have benefited from heavy in-flows of international
funds.
For example, Italian bond yields at the 10-year maturity rose from 11.04 per
cent at the close on Tuesday, net of withholding tax, to 11.36 per cent by
Friday.
Spanish bond yields at the same maturity stood at 11.26 per cent the end of
the week, up from 10.90 per cent before the result of the Danish referendum
was known.
Bonds denominated in Ecu, the potential single European currency, were
especially hard hit. The French government 10-year Ecu bond, the benchmark
in the sector, closed the week on a yield of 8.91 per cent, from 8.58 per
cent on Tuesday.
About the only area of gain was the German market, which ended higher on the
week - 10-year yields at 7.95 per cent by Friday from 7.97 per cent on
Monday - in spite of falling in sympathy with other markets in the immediate
aftermath of the Danish announcement.
The unresolved question is whether the slide in high-yield European markets
will continue or stabilise. It remains to be seen whether investors will
totally rethink their asset allocations and switch funds into the markets of
the D-Mark block, or out of Europe entirely.
Some switching out of high-yielding bonds had already taken place last month
as concern about the Maastricht ratification process started to gather.
According to JP Morgan's government bond index monitor, Spain and Italy were
among the worst performing bond markets in May - returning only around 0.75
per cent in local currency terms. In the year to the end of April, Spain and
Italy were the second and third best-performing markets, outpaced only by UK
gilts.
Last week, some fund managers were switching funds within Europe. A
favourite strategy was to sell Italian bonds and buy Denmark, which has
sound, low inflation economic fundamentals and looked cheap after
Wednesday's sell-off.
The Danish government bond market was closed for a public holiday on Friday,
but yields had already fallen from the 8.97 per cent peak reached on
Wednesday.
Some other markets appeared to have touched bottom by the end of the week.
The yield spread of French government bonds over Germany remained steady at
75 French government even managed to auction FFr11bn worth of new stock on
Thursday, in spite of the nervous market conditions.
However, the scale of the damage was still substantial. At the close on
Tuesday, before the result of the Danish referendum on Maastricht was known,
the yield spread stood at 53 basis points.
Yet the Italian and Spanish markets continued to fall. Both markets closed
on Friday significantly lower on the day.
One line of argument is that the high-yielding markets will not offer fair
value until yields have risen to the levels seen last summer - when it was
unclear whether the European Community governments would be able to reach
agreement on the text of the Maastricht treaty.
On this view, Italian government bond yields could rise to 11.75 per cent
net. Spanish bond yields could rise to 11.9 per cent.
Contrary to the view of some fund managers last week, Danish bonds might not
stabilise until yields are around 9.25 per cent.
Against this, the fundamentals have improved in some economies this year.
For example, Italian inflation is now running at an annual rate of around
5.7 per cent and falling, having averaged 6.5 per cent last year. So bond
prices could settle some way above the levels before Maastricht was
calculated into the price of high-yielding markets.
To some investors these arguments were clearly secondary. On this view, the
debate over Maastricht is likely to hang over European markets - even those
where the economic fundamentals are good or improving - for some time to
come.
International funds were retreating from European bonds entirely last week,
in favour of the US, Canada and Japan. There was strong buying of Euro-yen
bonds towards the end of the week, for example.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920608

