FT921-3862

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Company News: Kyodo Oil and Nippon Mining
agree to merge


   By STEVEN BUTLER


   TOKYO


KYODO OIL, the oil products retailer and wholesaler, and Nippon Mining, the
oil refining and mining company, yesterday agreed to merge in response to
government deregulation of the oil industry.
The deal will create Japan's second largest integrated oil company. The two
companies, which already have close links, had combined oil sales of
Y2,184.8bn (Dollars 17.3bn) in the fiscal year ending last March.
The merger is aimed at creating a stronger oil group in the expectation that
competition will intensify in the Japanese market in the years ahead,
following government moves to deregulate oil refining in the fiscal year
beginning next month.
Under the terms of the merger, Nippon Oil will take over Kyodo Oil's
distribution business, while Nippon will spin off its non-ferrous metals
division, where profits have been under pressure.
Nippon currently controls 47 per cent of Kyodo and is one of the company's
principal oil products suppliers, along with Kashima Oil.
Kyodo is Japan's fifth largest petrol distributor with an 11.5 per cent
share of the market and total sales of 5.19m kilolitres last year. It has
6,381 branded petrol stations nationwide, with about a third in the Kanto
region surrounding Tokyo.
Kyodo and its affiliated suppliers, however, have excess refining capacity
against retail distribution. This excess capacity could become a liability
following deregulation as Mitsubishi Oil, for one, is planning to expand
refining capacity to reduce dependence on outside suppliers.
'There is a very high possibility of overcapacity in the industry,' said Mr
Jason James, analyst at James Capel Pacific.
Mr James said the Nippon Mining-Kyodo Oil group was likely to try to expand
its retail network to find an outlet for refined products.
This, however, would be an expensive proposition that could lead to excess
capacity and severe competition at the retail level.
Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) has tightly
regulated the oil industry since the oil shocks of the 1970s. It began a
process of deregulation in 1987, but measures taken to date have had little
practical impact.
This is expected to change some time in the year ahead when Miti scraps oil
refining quotas and allows refiners to determine their level of production.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920312

