FT924-5944

FT  24 NOV 92 / Westinghouse in Dollars 1bn charge for shake-up and debt
reduction


   By MARTIN DICKSON


   NEW YORK


WESTINGHOUSE Electric, which has been dogged for two years by bad property
loans, yesterday announced plans to get out of financial services, cut its
dividend, take a Dollars 1.13bn (Pounds 740m) after-tax charge and sell off
several businesses to bolster its crippled finances.
Mr Paul Lego, chairman of the embattled conglomerate, said the plan, which
includes a management shake-up and debt reduction scheme, would enable
Westinghouse to 'put our financial services problem behind us'.
One of the main new elements yesterday was identification of the businesses
Westinghouse plans to sell to help its finances. These are a distribution
and control company, Westinghouse Electric Supply, Knoll International, the
office furniture company, and Westinghouse Communities, a property
developer.
Westinghouse said it would retain its Westinghouse Broadcasting television
and radio station operations.
Since 1990 the company has taken two huge charges totalling some Dollars
2.6bn to cover the deterioration in its property portfolio, but problems
have led to credit rating downgrading its debt.
Westinghouse, which had previously aimed to reduce its financial services
operations over five years, will now sell off assets rapidly, taking a
Dollars 2.35bn pre-tax charge against fourth-quarter earnings. There will be
a further Dollars 300m charge for the financial unit's operating costs.
The other businesses being sold will be accounted for as discontinued
operations, together with financial services, and the Dollars 800m of net
gains and operating earnings they are expected to generate will help offset
the property portfolio charges.
Westinghouse said after taking all charges it remained in full compliance
with its bank revolving credit agreement.
The dividend is being cut to 40 cents a year from 72 cents, which the
company said would 'reflect the earnings base of the continuing business'.
Mr Lego said the action plan would provide sufficient funds to retire all of
the financial services unit's debt, which currently exceeded Dollars 6bn.
A possible buyer for some of the property assets is GE Capital, the
financial services arm of fellow-conglomerate General Electric, which looked
over the business a year ago.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921124

