FT924-8357

FT  11 NOV 92 / International Company News: McDonald's puts beef into its
expansion - Fast-food outlets are planned in the world's far-flung corners


   By LAURIE MORSE


The appetite for hamburgers seems immune to politics and recession.
McDonald's, the world's largest chain of fast-food restaurants, has
successfully delivered its brand of capitalism to Moscow, introduced
foil-wrapped ketchup to France, and may even offer its formula meal of
ground beef, fried potatoes and a cola in India's largest cities before the
end of the decade.
It operates in 62 countries, some as remote as Macau (two stores) and as
politically unstable as Yugoslavia, and has long-term objectives to reach
into every corner of the world. After gaining a foothold in western Europe,
China and Russia, the company plans to open in several middle eastern
countries in 1993.
Aside from a teryaki burger in Japan, and 'McSpaghetti' noodles in the
Philippines, McDonald's rarely diversifies its overseas menus beyond
burgers, potatoes and drinks.
International customers are seldom offered breakfast, salads, or any of the
other competitive innovations seen at McDonald's restaurants in the US.
Those frills are saved for mature markets that need an extra boost in market
share.
But those customers are vital if McDonald's, which has seen flat sales
growth in its US restaurants this year, is to maintain its 10-year history
of 14 per cent compound earnings growth.
International operations account for 40 per cent of the Illinois-based
giant's annual earnings, and are projected to reach 50 per cent by 1995.
In 1991 McDonald's earned Dollars 860m, or Dollars 2.35 per share, on
worldwide sales of Dollars 19.9bn while in the third quarter it reported
earnings of Dollars 289.2m, or 79 cents, on sales of Dollars 5.8bn.
The company does not release sales figures for individual countries and will
not say if its operations in regions such as eastern Europe have yet paid
back the 10-year lead time required to arrange suppliers and government
approvals.
However, Mr James Cantalupo, president of McDonald's International, says
expansion into the more far-flung outposts is vital. 'All of these economies
are growing. I don't see any market where we can't continue to accelerate
our growth.'
Market saturation and the appeal of things American in newly opened
economies help explain why McDonald's foreign units produce nearly twice the
average annual sales of their domestic counterparts.
While the US is nearing hamburger saturation - there is one McDonald's
outlet for every 29,000 people in the US, and plenty of fast-food
alternatives - there are millions of potential customers for each new
McDonald's in countries such as Poland and China.
Despite its global presence, the bulk of McDonald's foreign earnings comes
from just six countries. Canada, Japan, England, Germany, France and
Australia produce 80 per cent of the chain's overseas income.
That profile has caused some analysts to believe that its earnings growth
will suffer from the recessions in the UK and Canada, and growing weakness
in Japan, where the company has 912 restaurants, its largest distribution
outside of the US.
'Japan is the big question mark,' says Ms Caroline Levy, a Lehman analyst.
'Twenty to thirty per cent of McDonald's foreign income comes from Japan.
The economy there is weak, the market is much more competitive than it used
to be, and margins are under pressure.'
McDonald's sales outside the US were up 23 per cent in the third quarter,
and 18 per cent for the first nine months of 1992. With 200 more foreign
restaurants scheduled to open in the fourth quarter, sales are bound to
accelerate towards the year-end, although not at the annualised pace
projected a year ago.
Still, Mr Cantalupo's plans are long-term. He says the contributions of
locations outside the 'big six' countries are important to boost profit
growth and will become increasingly important.
He remains committed to eastern Europe and Moscow, where he plans to invest
Dollars 100m in the next three years to bring his restaurant count there to
100, and projected sales to Dollars 250m. Mr Cantalupo also plans to double
McDonald's presence in Europe within three years, and nearly triple outlets
in Latin America.
That would mean 1,000 new European hamburger stores, and 350 new outlets
south of the US border. Overall, McDonald's plans to open foreign stores at
a rate of 500 to 600 per year.
Mr Peter Oakes, equities analyst for Merrill Lynch in New York, says those
plans are ambitious, but realistic. Using even his most conservative
calculations, Mr Oakes says McDonald's is far from reaching market
saturation in most parts of the world. 'This is just the tip of the
iceberg,' Mr Oakes says. 'Just think about China.'
Making a rough estimate, Mr Oakes says investors have gained about three
cents per share in annual income for every 100 new foreign restaurants
McDonald's has opened.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921111

