FT923-10763

FT  29 JUL 92 / Arts: Blues Suite - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


ALVIN AILEY believed that 'dance should primarily be entertainment'. His
mission was to show the themes and styles of black American dancing to the
widest possible public, and it was on the terms of theatre at its most
direct, most instantly appealing, that he chose to work.
The reactions of audiences during the present season by the Ailey company at
the Coliseum - shouting, yipping, wildly applauding after each number -
indicate how immediate is the effect of Ailey's troupe upon a public which
is not, I suspect, prepared to rise with such open enthusiasm to other large
dance companies. It is a response that is given otherwise only to concert
performances by the Bolshoy Ballet, where every pirouette and ardent leap
wins a cheer. The link lies in the performers' vividly communicated sense of
involvement in their roles, and even in the exuberance of their dancing as
an expression of identity.
Ailey's sharp sense of theatre - confirmed by his years performing on
Broadway - always seemed more sure than his ability to create choreography
valid in terms of movement. As we saw on Monday night, when an all-Ailey
programme became the second and final offering of this Coliseum season, his
theatricality constantly rescues his dances.
His early Blues Suite is yet another display of strutting bucks and saucy
girls flaunting their charms in that stiff-legged walk that makes them look
like exotic birds. The dances are cliches, the characters are stereotypes,
but the piece wins its cheers because of the rhythmic bravura of its cast.
They preen or slouch, and their steps have an electric speed and a
self-mocking wit - are they sending themselves up, or merely the characters
they play? - which transcend the predictabilities of what they do. So, when
Nasha Thomas teases and provokes Don Bellamy in Backwater Blues, or Dudley
Williams and Raquelle Chavis (mistress of an acutely crutch-sprung walk)
stalk each other, we are held, not by the power of the choreography, but by
the performers' verve. And, pace W B Yeats, we can know the dancer from the
dance.
Ailey as commentator upon serious social and racial themes - with
Revelations this is probably his most celebrated work - speaks truly in Cry.
Designed as a tribute to 'Black women everywhere', it is a solo whose patent
sincerity outweighs its expressionistic naivete. Created for Judith Jamison,
who now directs the Ailey company, it was danced by Renee Robinson with
absolute conviction, and with an eloquence that avoided bombast or emotional
wallowing. Miss Robinson was very fine.
I thought The River, the major piece in the evening, perfectly dreadful when
it was given by American Ballet Theatre, for whom Ailey made it in 1970. It
had a commissioned score from Duke Ellington, and a choreographic style that
veered between awkward academic writing and the loose-hipped demotic of
popular dance. As performed by the Ailey dancers, it looks even less
appealing, since they do not offer the classic securities with which such
ABT artists as Natalya Makarova and Erik Bruhn redeemed choreographic
blatancies. Eight numbers chart the course of a river. The mood is by turns
soulful or vivacious, and mostly veers towards the cute. The dancers are
tremendously energetic - they look as if they are in deep water. Happily,
the evening ends with Revelations.
The Alvin Ailey American Dance company continues with this programme at The
Coliseum, London, until August 1.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920729

