FT921-485

FT  28 MAR 92 / Discontent surfaces in Tory election campaign


   By IVO DAWNAY, GARETH SMYTH and ALISON SMITH


CONSERVATIVE strategists were once again under pressure last night to revamp
the party's election campaign as City jitters pushed share prices down
sharply and discontent surfaced among party activists.
As Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, returned to the offensive with a
claim that the government's National Health Service reforms would create a
'patchwork quilt of profit centres', Tory campaigners were also faced with
new poll data suggesting for the first time that Labour might be in sight of
outright victory.
With less than a fortnight before polling day, a Harris poll conducted for
London Weekend Television put Labour on 42 per cent in London, the
Conservatives on 40 and the Liberal Democrats on 17 - an 8.5 point swing to
Labour against the 1987 election result in the capital.
Its broad findings were confirmed by a BBC poll of polls showing London
swinging by 8 points to Labour.
An accurate measure of the national outlook, taking in the impact of this
week's fiercely fought battle over the NHS, will not be available until
tomorrow, however, when up to seven polls are expected to be published.
Reports are growing of disquiet among Tory activists at the lack of impetus
in the campaign. Among them, Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the former prime
minister, and Mr Brendan Bruce, the party's former communications director,
hint that the party should project its message with more 'clarity and
conviction'.
Evidence of new thinking in the Tory camp came at yesterday's morning press
briefing when a fresh attack on Labour's tax plans was replaced by a more
'positive' presentation of Mr John Major's personal political philosophy.
The party's plan now seems to be to play up the starkness of the choice
before voters in areas such as taxation, defence and role under a Tory
government in shaping a wider Europe of nation states, he said: 'I do not
believe any other party could build it. This golden chance might slip away
unless we can raise people's imagination.'
He also underlined the Conservatives' determination not to give up
campaigning on the health service, calling on Tories to emphasise the vast
numbers of cases dealt with satisfactorily.
'I would like to hear a bit of that on the radio, I would like to see a bit
of that on television,' he said.
Party strategists said last night that they will now hammer the positive
message, that only the Conservatives can deliver a sound economic recovery.
On the negative side, Mr Michael Heseltine stepped up the assault on Mr
Kinnock, calling him the 'artful dodger' with a proven record of misjudgment
on important issues. He claimed that Labour's campaign was being
stage-managed to keep the Labour leader under wraps, well away from probing
journalists, thus enabling him to dodge questions about his past.
Speaking in south London, Mr Heseltine said Mr Kinnock's 'only consistent
policy is advocating causes today that he betrayed yesterday'.
Mr Kinnock, meanwhile, attempted to steer Labour's campaign away from the
two-day row over its party broadcast.
In a presentation, backed by a group of doctors, he stressed Labour's
opposition to the 'Americanisation' of the NHS.
Though the parties are still at loggerheads about the leaking of details of
the case used in Labour's broadcast, the issue has slipped down the
political agenda partly under the weight of its own complexity.
Election 1992, Pages 4-5
Editorial comment and Race against time, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920328

