FT923-10859

FT  28 JUL 92 / Contempt case opens against Channel 4


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


A CHANNEL 4 programme at the centre of a contempt case which opened in the
High Court yesterday was 'long on accusation and short on evidence,' Mr
Andrew Collins, QC for the director of public prosecutions, alleged.
Channel 4 has been charged with contempt of court over its failure to comply
fully with an order to reveal sources for a programme on terrorism in
Northern Ireland.
Channel 4 and Box Productions, the makers of Committee, a programme on
alleged links between the security forces and Loyalist assassination squads
in Northern Ireland, face sequestration of their assets or unlimited fines.
The order has been made under the Prevention of Terrorism Act - the first
time the legislation has been used in an effort to compel journalists to
reveal sources.
Channel 4 says the order could lead to identification of a source who
appeared in the programme shown last October and put the life of the source
'in grave danger'.
Channel 4 has already handed over an 80-page dossier of material obtained
during the making of the programme but has refused to reveal information
about the source.
Mr Michael Grade, chief executive of Channel 4, said when the contempt
charges were first brought that the Channel 4 board had been placed in the
invidious position 'of having to choose between breaking the law and putting
individual lives in danger'.
Mr Collins told Lord Justice Woolf and Mr Justice Pill that the order
requiring disclosure of documents had been properly made.
Those who chose to investigate terrorism had to do so in the knowledge that
they would commit a serious offence if they did not hand over information
about those involved to the authorities, he said.
The source, identified in court only as Source A, alleged that there was a
group known as the Inner Force including high-ranking police officers which
was responsible for passing on information about suspected IRA members to
Loyalist terrorists so as to provide them with assassination targets.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920728

