FT923-6418

FT  25 AUG 92 / Bush reveals training package


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT George Bush tried to put some flesh on his domestic policies
yesterday by unveiling job training programmes designed to make the American
labour force more competitive.
His grandiosely titled New Century Workforce, an amalgam of new and existing
training schemes, would not take effect until 1994. It involves, assuming
Congress goes along, new federal spending of as much as Dollars 6bn (Pounds
3.1bn), to be offset by unspecified budget cuts elsewhere, and preserves a
number of programmes the administration had previously tried to kill off.
One feature is to combine youth job training with drug treatment at military
installations which are to be made redundant as defence spending falls.
Another would provide Dollars 3,000 in retraining vouchers for those laid
off in industries adversely affected by changing international competition.
The policy package is designed to answer criticisms by Mr Bill Clinton, the
Democratic presidential candidate, that Mr Bush is ignoring fundamental
economic questions in his campaign. It is also a response to the specific
concern that the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada
would displace US workers.
In a speech in New Jersey yesterday morning, Mr Bush predictably contrasted
his new scheme with the proposals of Mr Clinton, which he said required new
taxes and would destroy jobs, not generate them. Its thrust, he said, was
'to empower people with jobs instead of empowering bureaucracies with
people'.
Most of the public opinion polls conducted after last week's Republican
convention in Houston continue to suggest that economic problems are the
president's Achilles heel in the campaign. A Time magazine survey found only
22 per cent giving him good marks for handling the economy, whereas 61 per
cent approved of his management of foreign policy.
In general terms, the polls are beginning to suggest that the president did
not get quite the 'bounce' out of his convention that Mr Clinton got out of
the Democrats' gathering in New York last month. Newsweek gave Mr Clinton a
53-39 point edge, down a little from 53-36 a week earlier, while CNN-USA
Today had it at 52-42 (compared with 56-37). Time elicited a 54-40 negative
response to the question 'does Mr Bush deserve to be re-elected?'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920825

