FT921-1255

FT  25 MAR 92 / International Company News: La Cinq rescue bid abandoned


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


THE future of La Cinq, the troubled French television channel, was last
night shrouded in doubt after Mr Silvio Berlusconi, the controversial
Italian media mogul, abandoned his FFr1.5bn (Dollars 260m) rescue plan.
Mr Berlusconi, one of the original shareholders in La Cinq, has been trying
to raise capital to save the station, which filed for bankruptcy at the
beginning of this year, since early February when his rescue proposals were
passed to the Paris commercial court for further consideration.
When he presented his proposals, Mr Berlusconi claimed to be optimistic over
raising enough money to implement the package, which involved an initial
capital injection of FFr700m and a second of FFr800m.
Fininvest, the company through which he holds his 25 per cent stake in La
Cinq, said yesterday in Rome that Mr Berlusconi had also been deterred by
the discovery of accounting problems at La Cinq.
The collapse of the plan has dealt a heavy blow to La Cinq's chances of
survival. Mr Berlusconi emerged as the only serious contender to salvage the
station.
La Cinq, which is best known in France for its late night line-up of soft
pornography, has continued to broadcast since the bankruptcy filing. Mr
Berlusconi has paid the staff's salaries for the six weeks during which the
commercial court has been considering his proposals.
The channel was still broadcasting last night despite the news of the
withdrawal. Mr Michel Rouger, president of the Paris commercial court, will
deliver his decision on its eventual fate on April 3.
If La Cinq does goes off air, it could prove embarrassing for France's
socialist government, still bruised by its disastrous showing in last
Sunday's regional elections. So far the government has sought to distance
itself from the station's problems, claiming that it has no influence over
privately-owned TV companies.
Meanwhile, a number of companies, such as the French language news service
proposed by TF1, Canal-Plus and M6, are working on plans to replace La Cinq.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920325

