FT922-4438

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (3): A high degree of violence -
Reasons for the soaring crime rate


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


'THE criminals who rob, rape and murder seem to grow in number every day,
and seem to get more desperate and brutal with each passing moment'.
Mr Nelson Mandela struck a common chord in his closing address to the second
round of constitutional talks last month.
Apart from anxiety about the outcome of negotiations themselves, no subject
so preoccupies South Africa than the upsurge in crime, and the gratuitous
nature of the violence that often accompanies it.
Among white South Africans, relatively untouched by the political violence
that scars many black townships, it is a subject of almost obsessive
concern. Whatever the causes of the crime wave, it undermines their
confidence in the transition from apartheid to democracy. For black South
Africans, who bear the burden of political violence, rising crime levels add
to the burden of deprivation.
The figures themselves tell an alarming story. Criminal offences in general
increased 10 per cent last year, compounding a rise of 8.5 per cent in 1990
over 1989; armed robberies were up 16 per cent (27 per cent in 1990 over
1989); housebreaking in traditionally white suburbs rose 13 per cent (22 per
cent), and by double that figure in non-white areas.
The number of whites murdered went up from 305 in 1989 to 488 in 1991,
blacks from 11,445 to 14,205, almost certainly linked to the 92 per cent
increase in cases of illegal possession of arms and ammunition. (By
comparison, 708 people died violently in England and Wales in 1991 out of a
population of about 50m.)
But the bare statistics do not convey a pervasive mood of unease. A suburban
housewife is shot dead in front of her children when her minibus is
hijacked; a baby is shot during another car hijacking; a politician
describes the night he and other diners at a Johannesburg restaurant were
held up by armed men; an office worker tells of muggings in Soweto.
Security has become a growth industry. Concerned householders are offered
electronically-operated gates and garage doors, video intercoms, armed
patrols, Alsatian dogs, barbed wire fencing, panic alarms, radio car
patrols, and for those who wish to take no chances, 'European supervision at
night'.
South Africans black and white derive small consolation when told that all
over Africa the picture seems broadly the same. Economies are depressed,
unemployment is rising, police forces understaffed and under-equipped, and
weapons easy to come by.
From Lusaka to Lagos, private security companies flourish, residents seek
protection behind high walls topped with shards of broken glass, behind iron
gates and barred windows, and hotels warn guests to take care after dark.
It may well be, however, that politics and crime overlap in a way that makes
South Africa unique. 'Criminals have become politicised, and politicians
become criminals,' observes one sociologist.
A depressed economy highlights the grim legacy of apartheid, political
reform falls behind aspirations, ex-soldiers and guerrillas turn their
talents to crime.
At the same time, the role of the police force - nearly 55 per cent of whose
members are black or coloured (mixed-race) - is blurred. One third of the
110,000-strong force are used to curb political violence, weakening its
capacity to deal with run-of-the-mill crime.
AK47s, the ubiquitous weapons of guerrillas in southern Africa, can be
bought for a few hundred rands, hired over the weekend for less. Many of the
rifles have been brought across the border from Mozambique, where
poorly-paid soldiers and rebels readily sell or barter their rifles.
According to a police spokesman, some 1,881 AK47 rifles were seized or
handed in during 1991 - 'a drop in the ocean,' comments a private security
company - as well as nearly 1,800 other rifles and 2,227 pistols.
Within the white community, dealing in weapons is done over the counter at
gun stores catering for hunters and anxious householders alike.
At the end of 1991, there were 1.2m licensed fire-arm holders, with 3.2m
fire-arms - suggesting in a total white population of 5m, most white adults
possess a weapon.
The good news, however, is that violence on the political front, has been
abating - though the situation could change rapidly, particularly after the
failure of the last round of constitutional talks.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920605

