FT921-4004

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): Tax and spending
proposals to be presented together - White Paper on Budgetary Reform


THE chancellor announced that the government has decided to change the
annual budget timetable so that tax and spending proposals can in future be
presented to Parliament at the same time. This will enable all concerned -
Parliament, the public, and government - to consider spending proposals
alongside the tax proposals needed to pay for them.
From December I993, the chancellor proposes to make one Budget Statement to
Parliament a year, covering both the government's tax plans for the coming
tax year and the government's spending plans for the next three years. This
will replace the March Budget and the Autumn Statement. The Finance Bill
will be published in January and the rest of the timetable will be brought
forward.
The current practice is for the chancellor to announce the government's
public spending plans in the November Autumn Statement, and to present his
full Budget proposals in March, just before the start of the financial year.
Revenue and expenditure are brought together in the various projections
shown in the Financial Statement and Budget Report (FSBR), notably in the
medium term financial strategy. In the case of expenditure, however, these
projections are based on departmental spending plans which have been in the
public domain for several months. Attention therefore tends to focus on the
tax proposals, and their link with previously announced spending proposals
is easily overlooked.
This two-stage budgetary process is a relatively recent development, with
few parallels in other developed countries. Until the 1960s, the Budget was
the occasion for presenting both tax and spending proposals to Parliament,
though the detailed Estimates and the financial secretary's memorandum on
public spending were normally laid before the House somewhat earlier.
In the late 1960s, however, governments began to publish an annual public
expenditure White Paper a few months before the Budget, usually in December
or January. This reflected reforms to the system of planning public
expenditure, after the 1961 Plowden report, and, in particular, the need to
make allocations to individual spending authorities well before the start of
the financial year. One consequence was to open up a significant gap between
the announcement of spending and tax proposals, since governments continued
to present their main tax proposals close to the beginning of the tax year
to which they related.
The separation of tax and spending announcements was criticised in the early
I980s by the Armstrong Committee on Budgetary Reform (1980) and by the
Treasury and Civil Service Committee (TCSC; 1982). In its reply to the TCSC,
the government said it accepted 'the desirability of bringing together
decisions on public expenditure, tax and borrowing, in such a way as to
facilitate Parliamentary and public debate and to assist that debate by
bringing out clearly the issues involved'.
The government was, however, concerned that tax changes announced several
months before the start of the tax year might be overtaken by events.
Nevertheless the introduction of the Autumn Statement in 1982 went part of
the way to meet the committee's recommendations. This was followed, over a
period of years, by substantial revisions to the form, timing and content of
the government's financial reports to Parliament.
During the 1980s these changes led to the earlier publication of
progressively more detailed information about public expenditure plans. This
was welcomed by the TCSC and the public accounts committee (PAC). But it had
the effect of accentuating the two stage nature of the budgetary timetable.
In recent years, important announcements about public expenditure and
taxation have usually been separated by four months, compared with two
months or less in the 1960s and 1970s.
The case for change
There are a number of obvious disadvantages in splitting the timetable for
public spending and taxation announcements in this way. Spending plans are
not presented alongside the tax proposals needed to pay for them. And it
means that, at the time of the Budget, the public spending proposals from
the previous Autumn are taken as given, with attention focusing solely on
tax measures, or sometimes on any additions to the plans already announced.
The government continues to think it right to announce its public spending
plans for the year ahead well before the start of the financial year. This
is essential for the wide range of public bodies who manage their own
budgets and need time to draw up their own plans. These include local
authorities. nationalised industries, health authorities, funding councils
and many others, as well as government departments, such as the Scottish and
Welsh Offices and the Northern Ireland departments, who operate block
budgets and have substantial freedom to decide their own allocation of
resources.
Bringing forward the announcement of tax proposals would mean taking
decisions on the basis of less complete information about the current year's
outturn, and against the background of short term economic forecasts which
may need to be updated before the beginning of the financial year. However,
even estimates and forecasts published in March are inevitably subject to a
wide margin of uncertainty.
Having reviewed the evidence, the government has concluded that, while there
may be a small cost in taking decisions on less up-to-date information, this
is likely to be substantially outweighed by the advantages of bringing tax
and spending announcements together.
The government sees four main advantages in moving to a unified Budget:
Ministers will be better able to judge the merits of public spending
proposals in the light of the overall fiscal position and the implications
for taxation.
Bringing together decisions on revenue and expenditure will make it easier
to present the government's fiscal proposals in a coherent and consistent
way.
Improved presentation should contribute to a more informed and focused
debate in Parliament and among the general public on the choices and
trade-offs between public expenditure, taxation and borrowing.
Earlier announcement of the government tax proposals and introduction of the
Finance Bill should help taxpayers in planning their own affairs and will
reduce the administrative burden on employers in implementing tax and
National Insurance contributions (NICs) changes.
In the government's view these substantial advantages are likely to outweigh
the potential disadvantages of delaying slightly the publication of the main
departmental spending plans and of making tax proposals some way ahead of
the start of the new financial year.
Implications of December Budget
Starting in December 1993, the chancellor's Budget Statement to Parliament
will cover tax proposals for the year ahead, and spending proposals for the
next three years. It will be accompanied by the detailed material now
contained in the Autumn Statement and the Financial Statement and Budget
Report:
a summary of the main Budget tax and spending changes;
an analysis of departmental spending plans for the next three years;
a description of the main tax and NICs measures and their revenue
consequences;
a statement of the government's medium term financial strategy;
the short term economic forecast;
detailed material on the likely outturn for the public finances in the
current year, and the revenue forecasts for the year ahead;
information on the cost of tax reliefs.
A December Budget will be followed by a Finance Bill published soon after
the House returns from the Christmas recess. Parliamentary consideration is
likely to begin in late January.
The Provisional Collection of Taxes Act (PCTA), which allows the Revenue
authorities to collect taxes before the Royal Assent, is currently geared to
a spring Budget. A PCTA Resolution passed in March or April can have
statutory effect until August 5. But different rules apply if a resolution
is passed in any other month. The government proposes to amend the PCTA to
replicate the current provisions, but for a December Budget. Royal Assent
would thus be required in May, for a Budget in December.
The government will be able to decide, as now, whether measures should have
immediate effect, or take effect from some other date. Income tax rates and
allowances, which are set for the whole year, would take effect as now from
the start of the tax year, April 6. In other cases, changes might take
immediate effect, for example, where there is a substantial risk of
forestalling. This would be for the government to decide each year, in the
light of circumstances at the time.
Legislation will be needed to change the basis of statutory indexation. At
present, the personal income tax allowances, the basic rate limit, the
capital gains tax annual exempt amount and the inheritance tax threshold are
statutorily linked to the increase in the Retail Price Index (RPI) in the
year to the December preceding the Budget. That figure is published too late
to form the basis of a December Budget. The government therefore intends to
amend the indexation provisions to base statutory indexation on an earlier
RPI figure. These changed provisions would apply for the first time for the
1994-95 tax year.
At the moment, decisions on NICs are announced in the Autumn Statement so
that the Contributions Agency in the Department of Social Security can make
arrangements to implement them the following April. This means that
decisions about national insurance contributions are made separately and
ahead of the Budget decisions on personal taxation. If the chancellor
decides to change NICs in a spring Budget, those changes cannot then be
implemented until the following October.
From 1993, decisions on income tax and NICs will be brought together, so
income tax and NICs changes will be implemented at the same time in April.
This will make it easier for employers to plan ahead. They will be able to
make a single set of changes in their employees' deduction arrangements.
This will apply from the tax year 1994-95.
An advantage of earlier publication of the Finance Bill will be that, in
most cases, taxpayers and their advisers will be aware of the precise form
of tax changes well before the date at which they take effect. On the
present timetable, legislative provisions are not normally published until
after the beginning of the tax year to which they refer.
Earlier announcement will make it possible to streamline the process of
implementing Budget tax changes through PAYE. On the present timetable,
there are two separate coding exercises. In mid-January notices of coding
are sent out to taxpayers whose code for the new tax year has to be changed.
This gives them an opportunity to check the new code before the tax year
starts. But, because notices have to be sent out before Budget decisions are
made, they are based on the income tax rates and allowances for the current
year. By the end of March employers are in a position to start operating
PAYE in the new tax year, but only on the basis of the pre-Budget figures.
After the chancellor's Budget Statement in mid-March, the Inland Revenue
starts a second exercise to reflect the Budget changes. Employers amend
straightforward codes using information sent to them in April. Revised codes
for individuals where the change is not straightforward are sent separately
to employers in early May. This means that the whole package of Budget
changes cannot be applied until the first pay packet after May 17 (backdated
to April 6).
With a Budget announced in early December, it should be possible to
implement most of the changes from the start of the following tax year on
April 6. In effect, the annual and Budget coding exercises can be merged
into one. This will require changes both to Inland Revenue and businesses'
computer systems. With just under two years' notice, it should be possible
to implement the changes announced in the December 1993 Budget from the
beginning of the tax year in 1994.
For the last few years social security benefits have been uprated annually
in April. The increases take account of inflation and may make other
adjustments. The changes for all benefits are announced together in the
preceding autumn. Sometimes there are also mid-year adjustments, announced
in the Budget, such as the increase in child benefit announced in the 1991
Budget, which took effect in October 1991. With tax and expenditure
announcements brought together these mid-year adjustments, reflecting Budget
decisions made after the end of the public expenditure survey should no
longer be needed.
With a December Budget, the government will need to consider the
arrangements for implementing upratings. In particular, it may be necessary
to adjust those for the issue of order books by the Benefits Agency in the
Department of Social Security.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
BUDGETARY TIMETABLE
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1992
November: 1992 Autumn Statement: expenditure plans 1993-94 to 1995-96
1993
February: Statistical Supplement to 1992 Autumn Statement: departmental
reports
March: Budget 1993 (financial year 1993-94)
April: Finance Bill published
July: Finance Bill I993 Royal Assent
December: Budget (Financial year 1994-95 and expenditure plans 1994-95
 to 1996-97)
1994
January: Finance Bill published
February: Departmental reports
April/May: Finance Bill 1994 Royal Assent
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 39

920311

