FT922-4448

FT  05 JUN 92 / Foreign Exchanges: D-Mark firm in calm trading


   By JAMES BLITZ


Activity in foreign exchange trading was considerably calmer yesterday
following the market's stormy reaction to Denmark's decision not to
participate in European Monetary Union, writes James Blitz.
The D-Mark ended the day slightly down against most European currencies from
Wednesday's close. But it still retained most of the gains made in the
aftermath of Denmark's referendum decision, as dealers remained unsure of
the immediate outlook on European exchange rates. 'There's clearly a
question mark over the route map of Emu,' said Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief
economist of Yamaichi International in London. 'There is also much more of a
currency risk for the bond markets, with the financial markets having to
price in the possibility of a currency realignment.'
Sterling ended the day  1/4 pfennig higher against the D-Mark, closing at
DM2.9175. The French franc suffered further loss, closing at around FFr3.370
to the D-Mark, from a previous close of FFr3.368. Analysts believed that the
French currency had done well to hold its ground considering the French
government's decision to hold a referendum on Emu this autumn. The currency
may have been helped by a statement from Mr Michel Sapin, the French finance
minister, that inflation is set to fall to 2.8 per cent by the end of the
year from its current level of 3.1 per cent.
The Danish krone came under little further pressure in European trading
after a hazardous day on Wednesday, when the Bank of Portugal was forced to
intervene in the market as the krone threatened to slip below its permitted
limit against the strongest currency, the escudo. By the end of European
trading, the krone was again firmly at the bottom of the EMS grid. But it
was more relaxed, with only a 5.74 percentage point differential against the
escudo, compared to 6.10 points on Wednesday.
The other EMS currency over which there is apprehension is the Italian lira,
the third weakest currency in the system. On Wednesday, the Bank of Italy
was reported to have intervened in the market to prevent the D-Mark rising
much above Lira 755.0. Yesterday, the lira again closed weaker at Lira 756.6
to the D-Mark, compared to a previous close of 756.1.
According to Mr Michael Feeny, senior dealer at Sumitomo Bank in London, the
lira is a potential concern. 'Italy's weak political system requires the
discipline of Maastricht to help the country take difficult decisions about
its growing budget deficit,' he said. 'Without Maastricht, overseas
investors' confidence could fail, prompting a real run on the lira. These
days, Italy no longer has the protection of controls on capital outflows.'

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920605

