FT921-11723

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (9): An intriguing question - Banking


   By MARK NICHOLSON


THE kingdom's banks surprised themselves in 1991. Despite the trauma of the
Gulf crisis, which prompted an immediate run on deposits of between 10 to 14
per cent after Iraqi tanks rumbled into Kuwait, the country's 12 commercial
banks have emerged into 1992 for the most part highly profitable and
extraordinarily liquid.
With the 1991 reporting season getting underway, most banks are expected to
announce strong income growth in a market which quickly and adeptly managed
the Gulf crisis traumas and has become increasingly buoyant since. 'It's
been a bit of a surprise quite how well we've all come out of it,' said one
Riyadh banker.
In fact, the initial scramble for dollars and travellers' cheques with which
Saudis greeted the Iraqis' invasion of Kuwait abated soon after August,
1990. Once the air war started, Saudis were quickly convinced that the
allies would win a swift and decisive victory and bankers reported already
seeing a return of funds.
This, combined with handling of the crisis by the Saudi Arabian Monetary
Authority (Sama), the central bank, which bankers are unanimous in
applauding, left many bankers congratulating themselves on a financial
system few of them had believed could prove so robust.
The story since has been one of growth and superabundant liquidity. By
October, 1991, the consolidated assets of Saudi banks, at SR302bn, were 12.5
per cent up on December 1990, and banks were seeing not only the return of
flown deposits, but a further accretion.
'An amazing amount of money has flowed back,' says the chief executive of
one bank which has seen a 25 per cent rise in deposits since March, 1991.
The inflow of funds is well short of a wholesale repatriation of
privately-held Saudi funds overseas, which some estimates put at Dollars
80bn. Nevertheless, bankers say it is at once a reflection of declining
returns in overseas financial markets and a desire by some Saudi investors
to stash funds securely at home where they are exempt from exchange rate
risks and tax complications.
'A lot of Saudi investors got burned during the market movement in the Gulf
crisis,' says one banker. 'They're looking for a breather.'
The upshot has been to leave Saudi banks knee-deep in liquid funds - a
staggering consolidated total of SR200bn of cash, interbank money and
short-term investments at home and overseas. Another reflection of this
influx of money is a recent rise in property prices and a stock market boom,
which by the end of 1991 had doubled the market index to 175.5. The
government, which foresees a SR30bn deficit in this year's budget, has
rushed to embrace the large domestic borrowing potential this liquidity has
opened up. In addition to raising Dollars 4.5bn last year in an
international syndicated loan, the government also drew Dollars 2.5bn from
its home banks - an offer most bankers say they were given little choice but
to accept.
In November, the government also introduced fortnightly offerings of
Treasury bills to supplement their fortnightly offering of development
bonds. Banks have swallowed offerings of both whole and without blinking,
and no bankers doubt the government's ability to finance this year's
deficit. In addition, the government has encouraged state-run subsidiaries,
particularly Sabic, the giant industrial holding company 70 per cent owned
by the state, to finance their ambitious expansion plans through domestic
borrowing.
Ibn Zahr, a Sabic petrochemicals affiliate, is presently raising Dollars
600m from the home market to finance its MTBE expansion scheme. Hadeed, the
Sabic steel group, raised Dollars 500m last year, and al-Sharq, the ethylene
producer, Dollars 600m, to list only some projects.
These lending opportunities have also been warmly welcomed by Saudi banks
which, since the bad loans crisis precipitated by the oil-price slump in the
mid-1980s, have been increasingly chary of lending to the domestic private
sector in a market where good lending opportunities are anyway limited.
Banks typically hold only 30 per cent of their assets as loans and advances.
For most banks, the tedious, complex and time-consuming process of
recovering the bad debts of the 1986 slump - a procedure conducted
essentially by face-to-face negotiations with each debtor - is behind them.
The effects of the debt crisis are not yet entirely over, however. Some
provisioning continues: Saudi Cairo, for instance, last year transferred all
of its SR36m profit into provisions and Saudi British Bank raised its
quarterly contribution to provisions last year from SR6m to SR9m.
Some banks are also looking to boost capital, partly to banish any residual
debt problems and partly to catapult themselves into faster growth still.
Riyad Bank, in the most spectacular recapitalisation, earlier this month
issued 8m shares to raise its capital tenfold to SR2bn. United Saudi
Commercial Bank also said this month it will double its capital to SR500m
with an SR250m transfer from reserves. Saudi Cairo is also understood to be
contemplating a SR300m rise in its capital to SR900m, while Bank Al-Jazira,
the kingdom's most troubled with losses in 1990 of SR33m, has also won
Sama's approval to boost capital from SR100m to SR400m.
The biggest question-mark hangs over the privately owned National Commercial
Bank, Saudi Arabia's best-connected and biggest bank, with assets in 1989 of
SR84bn. The bank's accounts were qualified in 1987, 1988 and 1989 under
articles of the banking control law banning lending to a client in excess of
a quarter of reserves and prohibiting some types of credit without security.
The bank has still, unaccountably, not produced figures for 1990, amid
unconfirmed rumours of internal wranglings over management control. The
bank, which has a branch in London, is known to be concerning the Bank of
England which is understood personally to have communicated its concern to
NCB's owners.
Elsewhere, however, the greatest problem facing most banks has been what to
do with their surplus money. For many, the answer has been to invest liquid
funds in a mixed investment portfolio, much of it held overseas. Again
excluding NCB's figures, the result has been to give banks an average 18 per
cent return on equity in the 10 months to October, 1991.
Prospects for domestic business lending, given Saudi Arabia's small
population of about 14m people, of which only about half are Saudis, are
severely limited. 'Even if we threw credit control to the winds, we still
wouldn't be able to get rid of all our funds,' says Mr Andrew Dixon, the
managing director of Saudi British Bank.
Consumer lending is also fraught with uncertainty in a land where the
influence of conservative Islam makes the matter of interest rates deeply
sensitive and where, with Islamic Sharia law the sole formally acceptable
code of conduct, no commercial law containing legally enforceable concepts
of security over loans either exists or appears likely to be promulgated.
Banks are creeping gingerly into what they describe as this 'virgin
territory,' however, by examining ways of offering consumer loans by
guaranteeing payment directly from a borrower's salary - a method widely
used elsewhere in the Gulf.
The banks' success in exploiting this untapped retail lending market will be
an important indicator of how far banks can advance with western-style
products under the eye of the country's influential religious leaders. 'The
big question over the whole banking market is the extent to which these
people are allowed to influence the system,' says one close analyst of the
Saudi market.
So far, the government has been able to borrow both overseas and
domestically at straightforwardly western rates of interest and introduce
Treasury bills without any religious groups crying foul that this is
unacceptably un-Islamic. Louder voices of opposition were recently raised,
however, over the Riyad Bank share issue, which some influential religious
leaders have condemned.
However, Saudi bankers are well used to working within the kingdom's
religious confines. Islamic banks, such as the highly profitable al-Rajhi
Bank, which pay no interest on their large deposits and earn money through
various accepted forms of Islamic trade finance, do particularly well within
these confines. Non-Islamic banks have also managed well enough so far by
quietly referring bad debt cases, where debtors have claimed Islamic
principles as the reason not to repay, to a special and increasingly
effective Sama committee.
The extent to which Saudi banks can grow beyond these religious confines,
however, will be the intriguing question of the decade. But many businessmen
believe that the Saudis, who were once highly suspicious of any form of
banking, are over any such worries.
'If you took the banks from people, they'd scream,' says Sheikh Suleiman
Olayan, a leading Saudi businessman. 'They need banks like they need
electricity or water.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI Photograph Sabic's steel rolling mill, the government has
encouraged domestic borrowing by state-run subsidiaries (Omitted).
Photograph Saudi banking, a story of growth and superabundant liquidity
(Omitted).

920130

