FT924-1065

FT  19 DEC 92 / Books: Darker side of Poe


   By WILLIAM ST CLAIR


EDGAR ALLAN POE, HIS LIFE AND LEGACY by Jeffrey Meyers John Murray Pounds
25.00, 348 pages
EDGAR POE grew up expecting to be rich. His parents, travelling actors in
post-Independence United States, died when he was a boy. Poe was informally
adopted by a Virginia merchant who hoped to shape him into an heir who would
be suitable, in due time, to take over the business and the slaves. Allan's
name was inserted into his own as a sign that he had a new father.
Poe was given the liberal education of a Southern gentleman, but no money.
When he tried to eke out his income at the University of Virginia by
speculative gambling, he was forced to leave. He then enlisted as a soldier
and became a serjeant. Allan rescued him back to gentility, arranging for
him to go to the officer school at West Point, with the prospect of a
secure, financially independent and honourable career. But, with the dour
persistence of his Scottish ancestors, Allan again demanded love and
gratitude but paid Poe a hopelessly inadequate allowance. As the problems
mounted, he refused to settle his son's debts, closed his ears to anguished
appeals, and stood self-righteously by when he went to jail.
In 1831 Poe took matters into his own hands. He deliberately refused
military orders every day for a month, was court-martialled, declined to
offer a an explanation, and was dismissed from the service. He had at last
broken free, but the disgrace cut him off from his family and his prospects.
He was an orphan again.
For the rest of his life Poe earned an uncertain income as magazine editor
and short story writer, seldom out of difficulty and sometimes crushed by
worry. He swung between care and recklessness, abstinence and binge. When he
was 27 he married Virginia Clemms, then aged 14, who declared in the oath
that she was 21. They had been living together for some months. The early
signs of her tuberculosis were already visible, the coughing of blood
followed, and she died a few years later.
Poe - in what was to become a tradition among American men of genius - drank
himself to death when he was 40. When asked what things harmed a writer, he
is said to have replied 'Politics, women, drink, money, ambition. And the
lack of politics, women, drink, money, and ambition.'
Externally Poe's life was as romantic and as doomed as that of any invented
Byronic hero. But it was not enough. Poe pretended to have set off to fight
in the Greek War of Independence and to have visited St Petersburg. Other
incidents merge fact and fantasy. Some of the erudite, exotic, wonderfully
evocative, quotations from Italian authors with which he prefaced his tales
turn out to have been his own composition.
In his excellent new biography, Edgar Allan Poe, His Life and Legacy,
Jeffrey Meyers reconstructs the life with unobtrusive skill, demonstrating
but not exaggerating the extent to which Poe adapted his own experience in
his poems and stories. In a final section he traces the development of Poe's
reputation. The book is well researched, judicious, fluent, scholarly and
readable.
Poe is one of the fathers of the modern detective story. The conventions of
the tradition from Sherlock Holmes to Inspector Morse are already present -
the admiring matter-of-fact narrator, the misleading clues, the bumbling
official force, the sharp easily forgiving detective who prefers justice to
the law - although not all in the same story.
But in the tales of the imagination Poe created something far more
mysterious, a world of enchantment, terror, desire, and impending disaster.
Long before Freud wrote about the unconscious, Edgar Allan Poe had ventured
into the dark cellars and vaults of the mind. Poe is sad, strange, and
unique, and in Meyers he has found a worthy biographer.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921219

