FT924-6152

FT  23 NOV 92 / Economics Notebook: From crisis management to the next
Budget


   By PETER NORMAN


PERHAPS, just perhaps, Mr Norman Lamont is freeing himself from months of
crisis management.
The rebalancing of economic policy forced by Britain's exit from the
European exchange rate mechanism reached a politically satisfactory
conclusion for the chancellor with the unveiling of the government's
spending plans and emergency fiscal package in the Autumn Statement.
Monetary policy is being conducted in calmer conditions, with both the
financial markets and UK authorities seemingly content to wait and see how
sterling's large devaluation and the sharp 300 basis point cut in bank base
rates since September will affect activity and inflation.
Although each day seems to bring a succession of gloomy announcements about
redundancies, there is a sense that the worst may be over. Last Friday,
Gallup, the market research company, suggested that the recent steep fall in
consumer confidence had bottomed out.
So, assuming he is not preparing to leave the Treasury in an end-year
cabinet reshuffle, Mr Lamont should now be looking ahead to his next Budget
in March. It would be odd if he were not weighing the pros and cons of tax
reform.
When Mr Lamont became chancellor two years ago, it was widely expected that
he would follow in the footsteps of Mr (now Lord) Nigel Lawson as a reformer
of Britain's complex tax system.
He showed an interest in taxation when responsible for the Inland Revenue as
financial secretary to the Treasury in the 1980s. One of his first acts as
chancellor was to appoint Mr Bill Robinson, the former head of the
independent Institute for Fiscal Studies, to be his special adviser in the
Treasury.
The chancellor is known to be a supporter of fiscal neutrality: that is a
tax system that does not distort the workings of market forces or
discriminate against specific groups. Over the past two years, he has also
shown himself to be a keen fiscal innovator.
He decided that the spring Budget, which is concerned with revenue raising,
and the Autumn Statement, covering government spending, should be merged
into a unified annual budget from December 1993. Although fraught with
administrative difficulties, this move brings Britain's budget practice into
line with that of other countries and should make the UK's public finances
more transparent to the voter.
Mr Lamont also reformed the annual public expenditure round this year. By
introducing a new 'control total' for government expenditure, which could
not be breached in the negotiations on spending between the Treasury and the
spending departments, he imposed a tougher discipline on the spending round
and probably helped ministers to channel spending more effectively to
priority areas.
But the chancellor's record on reforming taxes has been patchy. 'The past
two years have seen tax policy appearing to be determined by pressure from
interest groups rather than Lawsonian principles of tax neutrality,' says Mr
Andrew Dilnot, director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Mr Lamont's new 20 pence income tax band in this year's pre-election budget
offended purists. Although politically astute, it added to the complexity of
the tax system. The chancellor's decision this month to raise for a limited
period allowances for investment in plant and machinery to 40 per cent from
25 per cent drew criticism for benefiting only those companies that pay
corporation tax.
In one respect, next March would be a good moment for Mr Lamont to put his
stamp on the tax system. As Lord Lawson has noted in his memoirs (The View
from Number 11, Bantam Press Pounds 20), the first budget after an election
is a good time to bring in sweeping changes. The chancellor of the day has
an opportunity to introduce reforms which might be difficult later, either
because they would be too controversial or because it would take too long
for their beneficial effects to be felt before voters again go the polls.
The classic objectives of the tax reformer should be to promote economic
efficiency, fairness and administrative practicality. On this basis, there
is no shortage of scope for reform in Britain.
Britain's corporation tax system, for example, penalises many companies by
requiring them to pay the equivalent of basic rate income tax on dividends
paid to shareholders. Not all companies can fully offset these payments to
the Inland Revenue against their UK corporation tax liability.
The interaction of the income tax and national insurance contributions is
another area where reform would be desirable. The co-existence of the two
systems means that someone earning, say, Pounds 27,000 a year pays a lower
marginal tax and average tax rate than someone earning Pounds 20,000.
Anomalies also arise in the tax treatment of savings and from the relatively
narrow range of products on which value added tax is levied.
But manifesto commitments and election promises have ruled out many moves
such as broadening the VAT base to items such as food or children's
clothing. A more pressing problem facing Mr Lamont is lack of cash.
The Autumn Statement suggests that the public sector borrowing requirement
could reach Pounds 44bn in 1993-94. Many independent forecasters are more
pessimistic.
Certainly, no one should put too much faith in the medium-term assumptions
for the UK economy which are tucked away in the footnotes of the Autumn
Statement. The figures, implying that Britain could grow by a real 3.8 per
cent in 1994-95 and 3.5 per cent in 1995-96, are not based on an up-to-date
judgment of economic conditions. They are projections taken from the Budget
'red book' of last March and adjusted for changed inflation expectations
following sterling's float.
Tax reform is best carried out when the state is flush with funds and able
to compensate the losers from any change. Mr Lamont will not be in that
position next March. Indeed, his first Budget after the election will more
likely be a test of whether the chancellor's tax reforming instincts can
overcome his need to raise revenue.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921123

