FT923-10710

FT  29 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: German take-over of Izok Lake


   By ROBERT GIBBENS


   MONTREAL


METALL Mining, a 67 per cent-Canadian subsidiary of Germany's
Metallgesellschaft, is buying control of Minnova, one of the Noranda group's
mining units, for CDollars 136.6m (Dollars 113.80m) cash.
Metall's main objective is Minnova's Izok Lake high-grade base metals-silver
property in the Northwest Territories.
Development is estimated to cost about CDollars 350m at current prices and
the mine is scheduled to be on stream in 1997.
'Izok Lake would be one of Canada's biggest base metals mines if it were
operating today,' said Klaus Zeitler, Metall president.
'We have increased the reserve significantly this year. The 4,000-mile
shipping route to Europe is open five months a year and the western route to
Japan is more encouraging than we thought.'
Metall already owns 40 per cent of Izok Lake with Minnova owning the rest.
Metall is buying the 50.4 per cent interest held in Minnova by Kerr Addison
Mines, a Noranda unit.
Izok Lake lies 360 km (225 miles) north-east of Yellowknife, the Northwest
Territories' capital, and 240 km south of Coppermines on the Arctic coast,
where a port will be built.
The ore body lies under the lake, which would be pumped out, allowing an
open-pit mine to be developed with a mill. The concentrates will be shipped
to the port by winter road and then moved out to Europe or Japan by
ice-strengthened ships during the five-month season.
In April, Minnova reported 13.4m tonnes of ore with average grade of 3.2 per
cent copper, 14.47 per cent zinc, 1.3 per cent lead, and 74 grammes of
silver per tonne.
Mr Zeitler said that open drilling has increased reserves by 2m tonnes. Only
about one-third of the anomaly has been drilled. The full feasibility study
will be done next year for a low-cost long-term mining project.
'Once we get the infrastructure in place, we can help develop 23 other
smaller potential base metals and gold properties in the area,' he added.
'Environmental studies are underway and two existing Canadian Arctic mines
have shown that underwater tailings disposal is feasible.'
Metall owns 14 per cent of Teck and 14 per cent of MIM Holdings of
Australia, which together control Cominco.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920729

