FT924-6554

FT  20 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Ukraine plugs expensive oil
leak - Chrystia Freeland and Neil Buckley report on an alleged Dollars 20m
scam


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND and NEIL BUCKLEY


VLADIMIR HORIUNOV, until this week the top oil man in Ukraine, had achieved
a lifestyle few of his countrymen can even imagine. When Mr Vitold Fokin
became Ukrainian prime minister, he plucked his friend and associate Mr
Horiunov from the Lysychansk refinery in the dismal rust belt of eastern
Ukraine and appointed him president of Ukrnaftokhim, the state oil monopoly.
But Mr Horiunov was often absent from Ukrnaftokhim's Kiev headquarters,
travelling frequently to the UK, Europe and North America.
This week those halcyon days ended as Mr Leonid Kuchma, the prime minister
who replaced Mr Fokin less than a month ago, disbanded Ukrnaftokhim and
fired its senior directors, alleging they were engaged in illegal resale of
oil on a massive scale. The body has been replaced by a state committee on
oil and gas.
Mr Kuchma - who has launched a major clean-up campaign since coming into
office - alleges that 8m tonnes of oil have been re-exported from Ukraine
this year alone. He says he has passed information on to the Ukrainian state
prosecutor and will press for charges to be brought.
The case illustrates the dangers of corruption as the former-Soviet
republics begin their transition to market economies, and follows widespread
rumours and suspicions of oil industry corruption in several other
republics.
The allegations that Ukrainian officials are profiting from the resale of
oil come at a time when crucial services are being cut because of Ukraine's
worsening oil crisis, created by Russia's gradual shift to world prices.
Ukraine, which traditionally consumed 50m to 60m tonnes of crude oil a year
has received less than 30m tonnes over the past ten months.
Ambulance services in the southern city of Mykolaiv have been severely
affected, domestic flights from the capital city, Kiev, were grounded for
several days last week and the price of a canister of fuel on the black
market is close to the average monthly salary. Ukrainian oil refineries are
working at less than half their normal capacity.
The Financial Times has obtained the details of some of the deals in which
Mr Horiunov and his Ukrainian and foreign associates were involved.
Ukrainian oil industry officials allege that more than Dollars 20m worth of
fuel was re-exported; the FT has evidence of re-exports worth several
million dollars.
Contracts and internal correspondence show that one of the ways Mr
Horiunov's refinery in Lysychansk re-exported petroleum products was through
Triplet, a private business in Kiev that was set up specifically for this
purpose.
With the help of various co-operative government agencies, Triplet obtained
export licences for the fuel. Western purchasers were then directed to send
payment for the fuel to a UK-based company called Eltrip, which includes Mr
Sergei Tsyhankov, director of Triplet, on its board of directors. Mr
Horiunov also became a director in October 1991.
One specific deal, in summer 1991, worked like this: 50,000 tonnes of heavy
fuel oil refined at Lysychansk, the Ukraine's biggest oil refinery, were
exported to an unknown Western purchaser through the Lithuanian port of
Klaipeda. Triplet made the arrangements with the assistance of Istok, a
Russian company that has been accused by the Moscow daily, Izvestia, of
involvement in illegal oil re-export.
Triplet and the Lysychansk refinery then requested that payment for the fuel
 -which amounted to Dollars 1,898,844.47 after transport and other costs had
been subtracted - be transferred to the British bank account of Eltrip. Mr
Tsyhankov, director of both Triplet and Eltrip, admitted yesterday this deal
had taken place but said full payment had not been made by Istok.
The FT has details of other contracts in 1991 relating to the export of
700,000 tonnes of diesel fuel, 200,000 tonnes of gasoline, and at least
980,000 tonnes of heavy fuel oil, and 300,000 tonnes of other fuel, but it
is not clear whether all these deals took place.
Mr Kuchma told reporters earlier this week that while many of the deals had
been licensed, licences had sometimes been obtained fraudulently. Moreover,
the resale of oil products was illegal because it violated Ukrainian law and
agreements with Russia, and the proceeds had ended up in private hands.
Repeated efforts by the FT to contact Mr Horiunov over the past four months
have been unsuccessful.
Mr Tsyhankov, however, said the legality of the licenses was not the
responsibility of Triplet, but of Ukrvneshtekhpromobmen, the body which
issues licences.
He added that Eltrip had only been used to buy equipment for the Ukrainian
oil industry, and claimed that Mr Fokin had given permission for some
re-exports to take place this year to fund new equipment purchases for the
Lysychansk refinery.
'In this bordello which we have, it is impossible to do everything according
to the letter of the law,' he observed. 'We are just beginning to become
businessmen. Sometimes it takes wild forms.'
The process by which Triplet acquired its UK arm, Eltrip, illustrates the
unusual ways in which business connections are sometimes forged with the
former Soviet republics.
Triplet bought Eltrip with the help of a Leeds-based shop-owner, Mr Keith
Gornall. Mr Gornall had been befriended by a Soviet student who wandered
into his city-centre hi-fi and electronics shop in the summer of 1990.
Before leaving the UK, the student promised to put Mr Gornall in touch with
business associates from the Ukraine.
A group of Ukrainians visited Leeds in December 1990 and bought a company
'off the shelf', changing its name to Eltrip. Mr Sergei Tsyhankov became a
director, along with Mr Gornall and several Ukrainians. Mr Gornall, who was
unaware of the sources of Eltrip's funds, continued to work at the company
for several months before he was replaced as director by Mr Vladimir
Horiunov in October 1991.
Eltrip investigated the possibility of exporting everything from condoms to
medical equipment to Ukraine. Early in 1991 it acquired a local company
dealing in televisions, W. Tree Trade TVs, for more than Pounds 200,000,
with the intention of exporting TVs and video recorders to Ukraine.
Mr William Tree, however, who still works part-time at the company, said
only one shipment of televisions ever went to the Ukraine, and despite now
being owned by Eltrip the company continued its UK trade as before. He added
that Mr Horiunov had joined Eltrip as a 'shadow' director in a consultancy
role, when the company was attempting to acquire equipment from the US. He
had since resigned as a director.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921120

