FT924-8019

FT  13 NOV 92 / Arts: 'Tender is the North'


   By MAX LOPPERT


With royalty and prime ministers in attendance, and the trumpeters of the
Welsh Guard sounding the opening fanfares, the Barbican festival devoted to
the arts of the Nordic countries received on Tuesday its grand ceremonial
launching. It continues until mid-December, and shows a boldness of
imagination in the planning that makes event after event a mouthwatering
enticement. The umbrella title - 'Tender is the North', a Tennyson quotation
that sounds like a play of words on Scott Fitzgerald - is a misjudgment, and
its subtitular reference to Scandinavian arts has caused irritation to those
countries (Finland, Iceland) not part of Scandinavia; but in general the
series deserves to win the warmest of welcomes.
Whether the first two concerts, by the Oslo Philharmonic, offered the most
substantial way of launching the series is an awkward question. The
orchestra, under its conductor Mariss Jansons, has developed into an
ensemble of first-rate quality: that much had become clear in its previous
visits and was amply confirmed. But the programmes, whose high points were
fresh, impassioned, alertly balanced and often thrilling performances of a
Russian symphony (the Rakhmaninov Second, on Tuesday ) and a Russian ballet
score (The Rite of Spring, on Wednesday), can hardly be said to have made an
unimpeachably powerful statement of the Nordic musical aesthetic.
The problem was, alas, the contemporary Norwegian works chosen - in
principle, absolutely correctly - to fill out the programmes. Nothing is
flatter, staler and less profitable than the modern-music fashions of
yesterday; and both Arne Nordheim's Tenebrae (1982) for cello (the excellent
young Norwegian Truls Mork) and Olav Anton Thommessen's 1986 Concerto for
synthesiser and orchestra seemed on this evidence to contain no more than
their debts to international musical fashion.
The cello essay, written for Rostropovich, meanders on in elegantly
etiolated style, contemplating a handful of 'frozen North' musical cliches a
good deal more seriously, and lengthily, than one felt they deserved. The
synthesiser concerto, for twiddly soloist and thump-thump accompaniment,
merits a kindly veil of obscurity drawn over its state-of-the-art
banalities; in comparison the Grieg piano concerto (with Leif Ove Andsnes
its exquisitely poetic soloist), sounded positively Biblical in profundity.
On now to the Nielsen and Sibelius cycles, the complete Peer Gynt and Saul
and David in concert, and all the other genuine Nordic riches.
Sponsored by Statoil, BP Exploration and Alliance Gas (Tuesday) and The
Thomas Cook Group (Wednesday)

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921113

