FT921-15249

FT  11 JAN 92 / International Company News: Bull weighs up IBM, H-P offers
for partnership


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


GROUPE Bull, the loss-making French computer maker, is in the final stage of
choosing between rival offers from IBM and Hewlett-Packard (H-P), the US
computer companies, for a technology and equity investment partnership.
Both potential partners have laid their offers before Bull's management and
the government controlled computer company is now reflecting which one it
should propose for acceptance to the state.
The main ministries involved - finance and industry - will meet next week to
weigh up the offers. As a mark of the great strategic importance of the
choice, the final decision is to be made Mrs Edith Cresson, the prime
minister, with President Francois Mitterrand, say observers close to the
negotiations.
The government wants to promote Bull as an independent partner of both the
world's main technology powers, the US and Japan, reminiscent of the
Gaullist view of how France should balance its defence and foreign policy
between and independently of the superpowers, officials said.
NEC, the Japanese electronics group last year took a 4.7 per cent stake in
Bull and the US partner is likely to take a stake of the same order or
slightly more.
This is the second phase of the reorganisation of the state's high
technology industries, following the plans for a merger of Thomson's civil
electronics businesses with CEA Industry, a nuclear fuel and reactor making
group, unveiled last month.
Bull, which lost a record FFr6.8bn (Dollars 1.3bn) in 1990 and is likely to
record a smaller deficit for 1991, has been seeking a partner since the end
of last year to gain better access to so-called reduced instruction set
computing ' technology, which allows microprocessors to execute instructions
faster.
Bull also needs capital, since its access to state cash is being hampered by
the European Commission's inquiry into FFr4bn worth of government capital
injections, while France Telecom, the state-owned telecommunications
operator, has also refused to increase its 17 per cent stake in Bull.
Mr Pierre Barazer, chairman of IBM France, presented his group's case to the
government two weeks ago, followed early this week by Mr John Young,
chairman of H-P. An alliance with Bull, the world's tenth computer maker,
would help both US companies enlarge European market share for their latest
technologies.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920111

