FT923-6632

FT  22 AUG 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Big in a tiny market - A look at
a model train maker


   By NICK GARNETT


PETER Farish muses over the reaction of people when they hear what he does.
'It gets very interesting at cocktail parties. When our company made
speedboats people used to say: 'What, you make boats? That sounds
impressive'. Now that I tell them I make model railways there's this tiny
second when they just look at you. They are thinking of a little guy at the
back of his garage playing around with stuff on a bench. You know, wife,
dog, torn cardigan.'
Well, Graham Farish, the company named after Peter's father, is not quite
like that. From its small factory near Poole, Dorset, it claims to supply 85
per cent of the UK market for tiny N gauge railways and equipment. In the
Lilliputian scale of railway modelling, N gauge is half the size of the
Double-00 of Hornby fame.
Competing with a battery of German manufacturers, Graham Farish makes 20,000
to 30,000 mini locomotives a year and 60,000 models of other rolling stock
as well as supplying complete train sets with track, model buildings and
miniature figures. Some items, such as track and electric motors are bought
in but most are made in-house. 'I like to think of us as a microscopic
vertical corporation,' says Farish.
The recession trimmed turnover to Pounds 800,000 last year from a peak of
Pounds 920,000 in 1989. 'The market is down 20 per cent and I reckon it
could fall another 10 per cent.' UK yearly sales of all forms of miniature
railways fell from Pounds 30m in the 1970s to half that now. Farish says
though that, until the recession, sales were growing steadily. He reckons
three quarters of customers are adults - the man in the council flat who
train spots on Saturdays, the middle class collector with a giant layout in
the play room, finicky club enthusiasts known in the hobby world as 'rivet
counters'.
N gauge forms just 15 per cent of the UK model rail market compared with 45
per cent in Germany. The German market is served by several high quality
German makers including Fleischmann, Minitrix and Marklin. But these German
makers offer few models of British locos and it is British equipment the UK
rail modeller mainly wants.
Graham Farish started in 1919 and once claimed to supply three quarters of
the components used in British radios as well as selling goods from water
sprinklers to fertilisers. It started making model trains in 1947, got into
N gauge in 1970 and dropped out of Double-00 in the late '70s when Airfix
and Mainline piled into an already crowded market, shunting prices downwards
in the process. It now earns all its income from model railways.
Graham Farish's manufacturing plant turns out some 400 different products.
With locomotives composed of more than 100 parts, the company must juggle
with over 4,000 different components. This hardly causes a storage headache
because tracks are less than a third of an inch wide, rolling stock an inch
high and rivets for holding the models together a few millimetres or so
long.
Farish, who co-owns and co-runs the business with his brother Gordon says
manufacturing processes are not up to scratch. 'We have started making
improvements here.'
To manufacture models, copper electrodes are cut to the shape of a
component. This electrode is used to burn through steel by spark erosion -
creating a facsimile of the electrode by 'moltenising' metal. The resulting
'tools' are used to produce components by plastic injection or metal
die-casting. Printing on the rolling stock involves nylon printing plates on
which silicon pads pick up the ink and deposit it on the model's body.
Microscopic brass rivets are inserted by air pressure.
The tool room is rather careworn, the casting machine is of 1940s vintage
and the company purchased a computer design system for drawing components
only this year. Preparing drawings for a wholly new model - like the British
Rail 158 Sprinter - can take up to 10 months. Farish says tooling up for a
complete new loco can cost up to Pounds 30,000 so the company picks rolling
stock chassis on which it can put several bodies and bodies that can take
different liveries.
Model shops say Graham Farish coaches are the best in the business but that
its locos are less detailed and slightly less accurate than those of the
Germans. However, they are Pounds 15 or so cheaper.
'On a Class 47 diesel the steps for the driver from the bogey to the cab are
in a certain position. For the Class 37 it is the same but the cab is set
back a bit so we should reposition the steps by five millimetres. We don't
do it. Marklin would but you pay an arm and a leg for that. We produce good
quality, life-like products. If we did more the cost would go up and the
market would shrink.' Usual retail prices range from Pounds 29 to Pounds 68
for locos, about Pounds 8 for coaches and Pounds 3 to Pounds 7 for wagons.
It also sells complete train sets, and will deliver to your door a rail
system already laid out on block board for Pounds 375.
Recession has cut margins. 'We normally can make about 10 per cent,' says
Farish. 'Now we are just making a profit. If you have a lot of volume you
can make a lot of money. We need more volume.'
To help provide that, Graham Farish two years ago made 100,000 push-along
locos for a Shredded Wheat promotion and has been talking to McDonald's
about something similar. 'I also want to try and utilise our equipment to
make other, quite different products.'
Grafar, Romany Works, Wareham Road, Holton Heath, Poole, Dorset. BH16 6JL.
0202-622-681.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920822

