FT922-4228

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: The Week Ahead


Welsh Water, which attracted unwanted attention last year with results well
ahead of expectations, should on Thursday announce a more muted pre-tax rise
of less than 10 per cent to about Pounds 140m for the year to March. On
Wednesday, Northumbrian Water, smallest of the 10, is expected to show the
most progress with a 25 to 30 per cent increase in pre-tax profit to Pounds
60m. However, this represents a rebuilding of margins after some heavy costs
in its first year, rather than a surge to a new level.
The two dairy groups Unigate and Northern Foods are reporting annual profits
on Tuesday and Wednesday respectively.
These figures will see Unigate's profits beginning to rise again, if only
because it has sold loss-makers such as its chicken business. Analysts are
looking for around Pounds 90m pre-tax against Pounds 75.5m, although there
will be little underlying growth. Northern should continue to see the
benefits of heavy investment Profit forecasts centre on Pounds 125m pre-tax,
up from Pounds 105.4m.
Analysts do not know what to forecast for Pilkington, the glass group, as it
has Pounds 30m to Pounds 35m of exceptional costs to cover redundancies and
the restructuring of the head office. If all these costs are taken in the
year to end March pre-tax profits could be as low as Pounds 70m, against
Pounds 151.6m.
Racal Electronics, which announces annual results on Wednesday, has twice
forecast profits of about Pounds 50m pre-tax for the year to end-March,
against a Pounds 21.8m loss last time. That return will be after exceptional
provisions of about Pounds 30m for redundancies. The main interest is likely
to be in details of the Chubb demerger. Vodaphone will be questioned closely
on how it plans to cope with lower-priced competitors in telecoms when it
announces annual profits on Tuesday. Analysts expect pre-tax profits of
about Pounds 267m, compared with Pounds 245m.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920606

