FT922-4411

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (9): Scope for
more machinery - Final Assembly


   By CHRIS BARRIE


ASK A CAR buyer which bit of his car was most difficult to build and the
chances are that he or she will name the engine or the car body.
In fact, the most time-consuming, and therefore expensive, task is when
engine, gearbox, suspension and interior trim are placed and fixed in the
painted car body - a process known as final assembly.
To please the customer the car company must offer many different options on
each basic car.
Apart from different engine sizes and gearboxes, the production line has to
cater for a myriad of differences in interior trim: colours, fabrics,
equipment, and tinted glass.
Take Ford's latest Escort, built at the Halewood plant on Merseyside. There
are more than 100 variations in the bumper fitted to this car depending on
colour and specification.
Similarly there are up to 90 variations in the body side moulding, 60
variations in the door mirrors, and between 140 and 260 variations in the
door trim panels according to the model mix being built at the plant.
The complexity of choosing the right component and fitting it into the right
model has left these areas of the factory dominated by men and women, not
machines. It has also made this part of car construction the area where, on
the surface, greatest efficiency gains should be possible.
The International Motor Vehicle Programme (IVMP) - an international study
carried out by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology - found that final
assembly accounts for about 15 per cent of the final value of the car, a
significant proportion.
Typically in Europe it takes 15 hours of assembly time per car to carry out
final assembly, compared with four hours to paint the car and five to weld
it together (direct labour only).
By contrast, according to the IMVP, a typical Japanese plant needs six hours
of final assembly per car, two hours for paint and three hours for body
construction - a clear competitive advantage to the Japanese.
There is no escape from the complexity of the tasks to be carried out on
final assembly. Customers will continue wanting more, not fewer, options.
And in any case it is not the complexity itself which makes a factory
efficient. The IMVP study suggested that the factories coping with the most
complex cars were also the most productive, and they were Japanese.
So what are the solutions to making final assembly more efficient? Needless
to say, companies are choosing different ways ahead.
The most obvious answer is to do to final assembly what has already been
done elsewhere in the car factory: use machines instead of men. Machines
will work flat out all day every day to uniformly high quality standards.
The rising cost of labour makes automation more attractive. And as fewer
people want to work in car factories these days, especially in Japan,
machines are having to be used, whether cost effective or not.
There is certainly scope for more machinery. The proportion of direct steps
carried out by automation in Europe is, on average, just 3 per cent. In
Japan the equivalent is 7 per cent. The typical European bodyshop has 77 per
cent of its action automated, compared with 86 per cent in Japan.
Automation suppliers are confident that they can provide the answers. Mr Kai
Warn, Brussels-based manager of automotive sales support for ABB Robotics,
says automation is just becoming cost-effective in final assembly.
He estimates that the cost of robots has fallen by 30 per cent in the past
five years while their performance has risen by the same amount over the
same period.
Mr Warn estimates that the real advance in automation will come in the next
two to three years as new cars come on stream having been designed with
automation in mind.
But it is worth adding a caveat: design a car for easier automation, and you
make it easier for a man to assemble, too. Ford looked long and hard at
automating final assembly of the Sierra replacement, the CDW27, and appears
to have ruled it out as still not cost effective.
But there are companies that have automated already. Fiat builds its Tipo
car on highly automated lines at Cassino in Italy. The factory has more than
100 computers, 400 robots, 24 lasers, more than 1200 wire guided trollies
and 480 automatic guided vehicles. It is the most highly automated factory
in the world.
Similarly, Volkswagen builds the Golf on highly-automated lines, while
Citroen uses automation to carry out large numbers of final assembly tasks
on the XM executive car at Rennes in France.
But there are constraints in such an approach. The high cost of
sophisticated automation systems makes high production volume a must. Yet
the complexity of the systems can mean frequent break-downs, adding to
indirect costs, as systems engineers wrestle with the problems.
Professor Dan Jones of Cardiff Business School says the Cassino plant will
only be cost-effective if it runs at full capacity. And that in turn means
Fiat will need another less efficient car plant elsewhere capable of turning
Tipo production on and off according to fluctuating demand.
Similarly, automation can inhibit new model design by forcing engineers to
cut costs by using tooling installed for the old model. The Volkswagen Golf
is often cited as a case in point.
Instead of trying to replace the workforce, some companies are turning to
automation as a means of using people more effectively. Citroen automates
tasks that are ergonomically awkward. And Jones suggests that automation
should be used to tackle the simple repetitive tasks, not the
labour-intensive pinchpoints on a production line where workforce numbers
may be reduced but the automation left with an impossibly complicated job -
and the people with an impossibly boring set of simple jobs.
Instead of being concerned with machines, some managers are turning to two
sets of people for help: the workforce and the supplier.
Unlocking the skill in the workforce can be extremely effective. Rover
achieved huge improvements to productivity and quality by asking its
workforce to examine prototypes of the new Rover 800 executive car before it
went into production. Similarly, Nissan's car factory in Sunderland is one
of the least automated but most efficient in Europe because of the
management skill in running the factory efficiently.
All car companies will simplify their own tasks by asking suppliers to do
more. Instead of assembling cars under one roof, car companies will receive
built-up modules such as dashboards, seats or mouldings ready for
installation into the car.
But whichever route a company chooses it must get the cost analysis right.
Automation can be hugely expensive. But so is failure to use the workforce.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920605

