FT924-11527

FT  26 OCT 92 / Tory Euro-rebels renew defiance over Maastricht: Major may
call election if debate is lost


   By ALISON SMITH and BETHAN HUTTON


TORY REBELS renewed their defiance over the bill to ratify the Maastricht
treaty yesterday in spite of an apparent ultimatum from Mr John Major that
the future of the government itself was at stake.
Leading rebels insisted that they would not be bullied or blackmailed into
changing their stance, while others dismissed as a bluff a reported threat
by Mr Major to call a general election if the government were defeated on
the issue.
Mr Major was reported to have warned at the weekend that he would call an
early election if he lost the debate next week to pave the way for the
return of the Maastricht bill.
Speaking in El Alamein, where he was attending a service to mark the 50th
anniversary of the second world war battle, the prime minister underlined
the collective nature of the decision by the cabinet to press ahead with
moves to approve the European agreement.
He told BBC radio: 'I am placing before the Commons a policy I believe to be
in the interests of my country, that I believe is my responsibility. It is a
responsibility accepted by the cabinet.'
Mr Major's message that he would hold the line against the rebels was
reinforced in a series of interviews by senior ministers. Mr Michael Howard,
environment secretary, and Mr Tony Newton, leader of the Commons, dismissed
any suggestion that the government would not get the treaty through
Parliament.
To add to the prime minister's difficulties, there were signs that, if Mr
Major insists on treating the Maastricht debate as a matter of confidence,
the opposition parties would vote against him in next week's 'paving
debate'.
Both rebels and loyalists in the Tory party see the move to turn the
European issue into a test of the government's authority as a significant
raising of the stakes in the party's internal struggle.
Mr Winston Churchill, Tory MP for Davyhulme, said yesterday that the threat
of an early election was 'an amazingly risky gamble'.
Some tactical confusion in ministerial ranks was apparent, however, as Mr
Kenneth Clarke, the home secretary, warned the Tory rebels they could not
simply reverse the damage that would be done by a government defeat on
Europe by supporting Mr Major on a vote of confidence.
'The government's authority if it had got battered about like that would be
seriously weakened,' he said.
With the number of known rebels rising above the 11 needed to wipe out the
government's overall Commons majority of 21 over the opposition parties, Mr
Major might be forced to rely on the support of the Liberal Democrats to win
the vote, or on Labour's abstaining rather than voting against the
government.
The government also faces a nervous week on the economy, as the City keenly
awaits the Mansion House speech from Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, on
Thursday. The speech is seen as a critical opportunity for Mr Lamont to
flesh out further the government's new emphasis on growth and its strategy
now that sterling is outside the exchange rate mechanism.
In spite of more gloomy economic news from the Confederation of British
Industry survey this week, Mr Major yesterday held out the possibility of
further cuts in interest rates. 'Every 1 per cent off interest rates is
worth Pounds 1bn to industry. Every 1 per cent off interest rates means more
money in the pockets of people with mortgages to spend in the high streets.
So we do not want to imperil the fact that we have been able to get interest
rates down and will look, when it is prudent to do so, for further
reductions,' he told the BBC.
Even this will not be enough to silence all Mr Major's economic critics
within his own party. Mr Kenneth Baker, a former Tory cabinet minister,
called for interest rates to fall to 4 or 5 per cent.
Cabinet ministers have already begun linking Britain's economic interests to
progress on ratifying the Maastricht treaty - a line Mr Major will elaborate
when he opens the Commons debate in ten days' time.
Rebels try to outstare Major, Page 6
Coal probe, Page 7
Brussels tries to plug information gap, Page 11
'I am placing before the Commons a policy I believe to be in the interests
of my country.' John Major in El Alamein
'Major is a fool to try and make the treaty an election issue. It is the
threat of a weak man.' Sir Richard Body, senior Tory backbencher
'This is nothing short of blackmail.' James Cran, leading Tory Euro-sceptic
'The prime minister's aides must stop bullying the Tory party with threats
of extinction.' Sir George Gardiner, 1922 Committee executive member

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921026

