FT924-11365

FT  27 OCT 92 / Technology: Carving up the specialist pie - Haig Simonian
describes how privatisation will affect the technical expertise of one
Italian engineering group


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


Access to the latest turbine know-how is essential for success in industries
from aero-engines to power generation, but there is one unwritten rule:
never share technology with a company controlled by a competitor.
That rule could pay a big part over the next few months in determining the
future of Nuovo Pignone, the Italian high-tech engineering group best known
for its compressors and gas turbines.
The company, established as a foundry in 1846, invented the world's first
very high-pressure reciprocating compressor for ammonia production in 1920.
But executives of the Florence-based group, now owned by the state-owned Eni
energy and chemicals concern, may have to print new visiting cards should
the company change hands after last month's decision by the Italian
government to privatise it.
The world market for turbines and compressors is dominated by a handful of
multinationals and characterised by cross-licensing arrangements. The future
ownership of Nuovo Pignone - which claims 6 per cent of the the world gas
turbine market - will determine its product mix, possibly to the detriment
of some activities and arguably the benefit of others.
Hence privatisation - probably via a trade sale to another company, rather
than a public flotation - represents the biggest change for the company,
which now employs around 5,000, since coming under Eni's wing in 1954.
Earlier this month Eni gave Istituto Mobiliare Italiano, the Italian
financial services group, the mandate to advise on the privatisation.
Being part of Eni has shaped Nuovo Pignone's development over the past four
decades. It has lent heavily towards products for energy and chemicals,
reflecting the ambitions of Eni's founders to create a broad group spanning
oil, gas and chemicals from exploration and refining to retail sale and
distribution.
Eni's subsidiaries find oil and gas, build rigs and pipelines to extract and
distribute them, and design and construct the refineries and chemicals
plants to process such raw materials.
Meanwhile, Nuovo Pignone provides some of the machinery to fit into that
puzzle. Its compressors, operating at very high pressures and often in
extreme climates, cover uses from liquefying natural gas to pressurising gas
pumped down oil wells to improve extraction rates or store gas surplus to
requirements.
The move into gas turbines, the other main part of Nuovo Pignone's business,
also derives from its role within Eni. Developing gas turbines meant Nuovo
Pignone could offer customers not just established products like
compressors, but also the machines used to drive them.
Today, its turbines operate on Eni's gas and oil pipelines, as well as on
others designed, developed or sold by Eni's subsidiaries to users from
Siberia to the Iranian desert. Even some smaller Nuovo Pignone products,
such as petrol pumps and domestic gas meters, have a marked 'energy' bent.
Such a wide range - largely dictated by Eni's role in the hydrocarbons
business - explains why employees and managers are worried about
privatisation. No potential buyer has Eni's spread of activities, especially
in the energy and chemicals fields.
While Nuovo Pignone's compressors and turbines are likely to flourish in any
circumstances, some other divisions, like textile machinery, which was
developed when Eni was still in the artificial fibres business, look
vulnerable.
Nuovo Pignone executives admit that many client contacts have been won on
the back of the company's role as part of the Eni group. Once out of that
orbit, such business could be difficult to obtain.
Even some newer products, like Nuovo Pignone's gas turbines for generating
electricity, are spin-offs from its oil- and gas-related work. Though Eni
itself is barely active in generating electricity, Nuovo Pignone's turbines
for electricity generation have their roots in those drawn up for driving
compressors or other oil- and gas-related products.
Yet senior managers also insist they are not dependent on Eni. 'The group
accounts for between 25 per cent and 30 per cent of our turnover,' says
Romano Noceti, Nuovo Pignone's head of external relations. 'But we have to
fight for the orders we get from our parent company.'
A takeover by one of the world's big multinational engineering groups like
Siemens or Asea Brown Boveri could spell a substantial change for Nuovo
Pignone's operations. It currently has a licensing agreement with General
Electric of the US, the world's biggest power equipment group, to produce
high-capacity gas turbines using US know-how. Meanwhile, GE has tapped Nuovo
Pignone's expertise on lower-capacity machines, which the US group produces
under licence from the Florentine company.
Such links explain why some analysts see GE as the most obvious buyer for
Nuovo Pignone. Should a competing gas turbine maker end up as acquirer, the
future of Nuovo Pignone's relationship with GE - and hence a large slice of
its turbines business - could be in jeopardy. 'No manufacturer wants to
share technology and know-how with a company controlled by a competitor,'
says one industry analyst.
Even the idea of creating a big Italian turbine group by forcing a merger of
Nuovo Pignone and Ansaldo, the heavy engineering subsidiary of the
state-owned Finmeccanica group, runs up against technological barriers, they
say.
Many engineers say Ansaldo's background in making big, steam-powered,
turbines for power stations does not fit in with Nuovo Pignone's traditions.
'Making gas turbines working at temperatures of up to 1,200 deg C involves
much higher technology than steam turbines, where temperatures seldom exceed
500 deg C,' says one engineer.
Though steam turbines still have a role in today's highly-efficient
'combined cycle' electricity generating plants, where recycled energy from a
big gas turbine is used to heat steam for a smaller steam turbine, the
market for big steam turbines is limited, he argues.
Further complicating the Ansaldo-Nuovo Pignone concept is the fact that
Ansaldo recently agreed to manufacture Siemens's high-capacity gas turbines
under licence. However, some bankers believe the domestic merger may be
favoured on political grounds.
Irrespective of the buyer, Nuovo Pignone faces a difficult adjustment period
ahead. Changes will take place whoever purchases the company. But it is
already clear that the divorce from Eni could be more traumatic in some
circumstances than in others.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921027

