FT923-15558

FT  01 JUL 92 / US ready to protect aid airlift: Pentagon sends ships to
Adriatic as supplies reach Sarajevo


   By LAURA SILBER, ROBERT MAUTHNER


   BELGRADE


THE US is ready to provide naval and air protection for an inter-national
airlift that has begun to fly food and medical supplies into the besieged
Bosnian capital of Sarajevo.
Defence officials in Washington said yesterday the US navy had sent six
ships into the Adriatic so it could provide military protection once the
United Nations asked it to do so. But the US did not intend to send in
ground troops.
The moves to step up US involvement in the Yugoslav conflict came as more
French air force aircraft flew emergency supplies to Sarajevo.
The aid has begun arriving after UN peacekeeping forces on Monday took
control of Sarajevo airport from Serb irregular forces. But sporadic firing
in the city centre and a suburb near the airport underlined how vulnerable a
relief operation could be.
Mr Dick Cheney, the defence secretary, said the US was ready to give air and
naval protection to the aid effort if the tenuous ceasefire broke down.
'It's not something the US would do unilaterally,' he said. 'It's something
we would probably do through the United Nations or under UN auspices.'
Administration officials are also discussing the need for a 125-mile land
corridor to transport aid from the Croatian port of Split, which is emerging
as a staging post for relief operations.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, the German foreign minister, said the aid corridor came up
in his talks in Washington with Mr James Baker, the secretary of state. The
US view, Mr Kinkel said, was that an airlift alone could not get help to
Sarajevo quickly enough.
Mr Kinkel said earlier that western allies might have to use military force
in Bosnia because economic and diplomatic sanctions had not had a big enough
impact on Serb leaders in Belgrade, who are widely blamed for fighting in
breakaway Yugoslav republics.
All peaceful means must be tried to end the Yugoslav conflict, Mr Kinkel
said, but added: 'If that is not sufficient, then unfortunately we will also
have to resort to military action.'
A further three French aircraft flew to Sarajevo yesterday, two from Split
and one from Paris, with signals equipment.
The first French aircraft carrying aid landed in Sarajevo on Monday in the
wake of President Francois Mitterrand's high-risk visit to the battered city
on Sunday.
Some 26 tonnes of food and medicine are due to be distributed by
representatives of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees to a starving and
ailing population of 300,000, cut off for three months by the fighting
between ethnic factions.
In London, Mr John Major, the prime minister, said the UK was ready to
operate four humanitarian flights a day. Royal Air Force Hercules transports
were ready to take off at short notice, he told the House of Commons.
But Mr Major continued to take a cautious approach towards any involvement
of British troops in military action in Bosnia. 'We don't, at present, have
ground action in mind,' he said.
Meanwhile 1,000 Canadian UN 'blue helmets' have begun moving from Croatia to
Sarajevo by road and are expected to secure the airport and restart normal
activity there tomorrow provided the fragile ceasefire holds.
Serb price controls, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920701

