FT923-15697

FT  01 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Harmonising EC taxes


PRINCIPLES MUST be flexible. This seems to be the conclusion reached by Mr
Norman Lamont after years of battles between the UK and most of the rest of
the European Community over harmonisation of value added tax and excise
duties. It is a sensible conclusion. A Britain 'at the heart of Europe' has
to behave like a 'good European'. One of the characteristics of good
Euro-peans is that they are extremely uncomfortable about competition among
fiscal - not to mention, other regulatory - regimes. What is more, the UK
has already shown that it is less than fully attached to the principle of
free fiscal competition.
In the case of value added taxation, the UK's original position was that
neither minima nor maxima were needed. That position has much to recommend
it. The US, for example, manages to survive very well without constraints on
the freedom of individual states to impose taxes. In the EC, however, some
member countries would not eliminate border controls without prior agreement
on minimum rates of indirect taxation. Furthermore, the concern about
revenue erosion in regions of the EC where dense populations fall close to
international borders was at least understandable.
Last year, the UK government accepted a political agreement that the
standard minimum VAT rate would be 15 per cent. This concession came in
return for acceptance by the rest of the EC of the UK's (admittedly absurd)
attachment to zero rating of food, fuel, transport and children's clothing.
The UK had also long agreed that there should be minimum rates of excise
duty on tobacco and alcoholic beverages, mainly for health reasons, but
also, no doubt, to protect as much as possible of the Pounds 11.9bn in
revenue expected from these two sources in 1992-93. While not impossible, it
is somewhat difficult to desire EC-wide minima for some taxes and reject the
principle for others.
Sensible conditions
Past compromises, not to mention commitment to the goal of a single market,
make it difficult for the government to fight to the death for its refusal
to enshrine the 15 per cent VAT minimum in a legally binding directive. It
was reasonable, therefore, for the chancellor to accept the principle at the
meeting of EC finance ministers on Tuesday. But he did so subject to equally
sensible conditions: that the directive would be limited to four years, that
it would require unanimity to reimpose it and that it would be part of a
broader deal.
The problem is that 'broader deal'. There is an argument for taxation of
alcoholic beverages on health grounds. The absence of border controls would,
therefore, seem to make either some minimum rates of taxation or some
controls over imports necessary.
Enfeebled regime
The EC has already agreed on the latter. People may import certain
indicative quantities for their own personal use, these levels being 800
cigarettes, 10 litres of spirits, 20 litres of fortified wines and 90 litres
of wine. But 90 litres of wine here, 90 litres of wine there, and one would
soon be talking of a significantly enfeebled excise duty regime. The case
for minimum excise tax rates remains.
The problem is that the EC has agreed to a minimum rate on wine of zero, the
initial level in several member countries. This means that any positive
minimum on spirits would be discriminatory. With the health case for minimum
excise duties already lost in the case of wine, the chancellor is inevitably
more concerned about the discrimination against the spirits, which the UK -
or rather Scotland - makes.
The chancellor's ability to argue persuasively against discriminatory
taxation of spirits is weakened by the discrimination in the UK's own
taxation. But the principle is self-evidently correct.
By now a logical position on indirect taxation cannot be achieved. No minima
at all might have been best of all, in which case competition would have
delivered a degree of tax convergence. No minima for VAT, but health-related
minima for tobacco and alcoholic beverages, would also have been defensible.
But this too is now out of reach. The UK was right in its initial positions.
But, given what is at stake in the single market, it is right to try to
compromise as well.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920701

