FT923-6346

FT  25 AUG 92 / Uni Storebrand shares suspended


   By KAREN FOSSLI


   OSLO


TRADING was suspended yesterday on the Oslo bourse in the shares and bonds
of Uni Storebrand, the beleaguered Norwegian insurer, following a collapse
in talks between the company, creditors and finance ministry officials.
The board was working last night to prevent the holding company falling
under the administration of the Banking, Insurance Securities Commission,
the finance regulator.
The suspension coincided with the disclosure that Uni's holding company is
suffering a liquidity crisis brought on by NKr3.6bn (Pounds 325m) in
short-term loans used to finance the company's failed raid on Skandia
Forsakrings, Sweden's biggest insurer. Uni last year paid NKr4.7bn for a
28.3 per cent stake in Skandia but efforts to force the Swedish insurer into
a pan-Nordic insurance alliance failed.
A Uni spokesman said yesterday the holding company had payments of 'some
several hundred million kroner' due to creditors this week and further
payments due in about two weeks.
Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland was briefed yesterday by Mr Sigbjoern
Johnsen, the finance minister, on Uni's financial problems. But, apart from
acknowledging hectic meetings at the weekend between Uni, finance ministry
officials and banks, the government has distanced itself from intervention.
It has said Uni's problems cannot be compared with last autumn's bank sector
crisis when the state transferred NKr6bn to prop up the banks.
The finance ministry said Uni's problems had to be solved by the company,
its owners and creditors and declined to comment further. During the weekend
the ministry sought to convince Den norske Bank, Christiania Bank and
Sparebanken Nor to provide NKr500m each in loans to Uni. Talks are
understood to have broken down on the government's refusal to provide
guarantees for the loans.
Uni's board was meeting yesterday to determine its options to solve the
holding company's short-term liquidity problems which threaten plans for a
NKr2bn rights issue this year.
The company stressed yesterday the crisis in the holding company did not
affect the group's life insurance, non-life and international businesses.
Pohjola, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920825

