FT921-512

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Just a little street of shabby chic - A look
at the legendary Portobello Road, the main axis of born-again Notting Hill


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


EVERYBODY knows the Portobello Road. It is not a street where most people
would spend much time; instead, it is a one-day-a-week place where, every
Saturday morning, a good part of affluent London (and much of the rest of
the world besides) seems to want to congregate.
By 9 o'clock, it is so full of Belgravia matrons, Hampstead householders,
and the young and trendy from all over London that there is scarcely room
for the hordes of foreign visitors to swing a video camera. Tatty and
ill-groomed - but, at the same time, fashionable and frequented - it is the
best-known street of shabby chic in London.
What is it that draws the crowds across Notting Hill Gate, along Pembridge
Road and into Portobello's narrow, pedestrian-clogged artery? Much of the
appeal, no doubt, has to do with the scores of shops and sidewalk barrows
that line both sides. Stuffed full of antique furniture, objets d'art,
Victorian bric-a-brac and all kinds of uncommon articles old and new, cheap
and expensive, there is something for all tastes. But if buying such
delicate objects as eggshell-thin, 200-year-old tea cups for Pounds 800
apiece is one part of the thrill, the other is the distinctly indelicate
atmosphere in which the browsing and dealing takes place.
The market looks battered and run-down but it is also colourful, vibrant and
raffish. It is full of easy banter, rough talk and gesticulation. Brash and
energetic, it is alive with curious people and odd sights: blind beggars
singing, jugglers and ambulating magicians, ladies with baby prams full of
small dogs, soapbox orators out to save the world from acid rain or the
Conservative party.
What happens, though, when the Saturday market closes down and the
bargain-hunters drift off? Walk along the empty upper stretches of
Portobello Road on any other morning of the week and you might not recognise
it. The antique shops are shuttered and padlocked and barely a cat stirs.
For all its apparent desertion, however, life has not come to an abrupt
halt. Portobello Road has simply reverted to its more usual existence as the
main axis of Notting Hill, the community that surrounds it.
Quite apart from the visitors and the antiques, Notting Hill leads an
interior life wholly its own. Throughout the week, it remains one of the
most active, distinctive and appealing parts of London. It is a highly
sought-after residential address, a place where you will find businessmen
and bankers, professionals and media people.
Recessions notwithstanding, house prices have doubled and tripled in the
past 10 years; and although the area has the highest density of private
rented accomodation in south-east England, it is so popular that this is now
almost impossible to find.
In the 1960s, Notting Hill was a badly run-down area of cheap bed-sits
maintained by slum landlords, a refuge for the poor and for large ethnic
minorities of black, Spanish and Irish immigrants. Drugs and the hippy
counter-culture moved in. Poverty, unemployment, drugs, crime and
overcrowding combined to give Notting Hill a rough, dangerous and unsavoury
reputation.
Look further into the area's past, however, and you will find some of the
reasons for its present appeal. In the 1820s, London's suburbs, fast
expanding west, began encroaching on a large agricultural estate surrounding
Portobello Farm (so named for a British victory over the Spanish in the Gulf
of Mexico). The estate's owner, James Ladbroke, saw the opportunity for
creating a 'garden city' - a planned, orderly suburb of sweeping, terraced
crescents and broad expanses of greenery.
By the end of the Second World War, though, the once-gracious houses were so
neglected that you could buy one for as little as Pounds 1,000. Through the
late '50s and '60s, Notting Hill's low prices attracted many thousands of
Afro-Caribbean immigrants. Rapacious landlords, racial tension and
occasional explosions of violence kept property developers and investors
away. Today, re-converted from bed-sits into single residences, these same
houses will not leave a great deal of change from Pounds 1m.
It is, however, not just the architecture that has attracted affluent
outsiders to the area. For many, in fact, it is just the opposite. Notting
Hill over the years has developed a tolerant, bohemian, live-and-let-live
atmosphere. Inevitably, it has attracted escapees from the conformity and
constraints of white, straight, middle-class London.
The Portobello Road, as well as being lively, can also be rough and
dangerous. But for those who have grown up in dull suburbia, the frisson of
fear that comes with encountering, say, an aggressive drugs dealer on a
deserted corner late at night can, in a perverse kind of way, have its
attractions - it is cool to be hip, young and street-wise, to court the
risky, the illicit and the thrilling.
Notting Hill's atmosphere has always attracted painters, writers and
musicians as well as myriad schools of youth sub-culture and fashion. There
are life-styles in the area more alien to most Englishmen than those of
tribal Africa.
If you want the latest in Thrash or Grunge music, you can buy it in shops
there. You could scrape an aquaintance with the Crusties, the most recent
variety of aggro-anarchists, although you are better advised not to. Or
perhaps you would like to eat in a cyber-punk restaurant. You can find them
all in Notting Hill.
The most significant newcomers, though, are that large tribe of invaders
already familiar in many formerly less-favoured but convenient and
accessible parts of London: the young and upwardly mobile. Like most people,
they find the Notting Hill atmosphere lively and liberating and go on to
inject it with their own energy and tastes.
More importantly, they also inject it with money. No one can walk around the
streets adjacent to the Portobello Road without noticing the tapas bars and
art galleries, book shops and bistros, florists and restaurants that have
followed the yuppie migration. Slowly, such shops and businesses are
transforming the area and may well, one day, tilt the balance of neglect and
fashionability that makes this part of town special.
For the moment, though, the streets are safe from any such demise. In the
Portobello Road, going down-market still remains the up-market thing to do.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920328

