FT924-8323

FT  11 NOV 92 / World Stock Markets: Dublin's stockbrokers feel the pinch -
Tim Coone explains the reasons for the poor performance of Irish equities
this year


   By TIM COONE


Ask an Irish stockbroker how business is these days, and you are likely to
get an unprintable reply. Ask about his mortgage, and he is likely to burst
into tears.
Anglo-Irish Bank closed down its Solomons stockbroking arm last month,
probably the first in a series of rationalisations among stockbroking firms
in Dublin in the coming year if business does not pick up. Projections made
by numerous analysts at the beginning of the year of some 15 to 20 per cent
growth in the ISEQ overall index during 1992 now look hopelessly optimistic.
In fact the ISEQ fell to 1,110 by last night, 20 per cent down since the end
of 1991 and threatening its October 19, 1992 low of 1,094.88. This was its
lowest since February 1988, a few months after the 1987 crash, and 43 per
cent down from the peak of 1,905 in January 1990.
According to Mr Tom Healey, general manager of the stock exchange, equity
turnover on the market is now at its lowest level in three years.
In fairness, a number of largely unforeseen circumstances have emerged this
year.
The failure of the world economy to pull itself out of recession has had a
major negative influence. Also, the anticipated easing of German interest
rates did not materialise, and when sterling pulled out of the European
exchange rate mechanism last September, Irish interest rates were forced up
to record levels as the government struggled to maintain the punt's link to
the D-Mark.
One key domestic factor has been a change in the taxation environment in the
finance bill, earlier this year, which gave favourable tax treatment to
interest earned on deposit and savings accounts at the expense of equity
investments.
Mr Kevin Barry, head of research at NCB brokers in Dublin, says this has
caused the flow of private funds into the unit-linked market to dry up, as
savings have shifted into bank deposits in anticipation of the changes, due
to be introduced in January next year. As funds are being cashed in, fund
managers are finding themselves forced sellers into an already
underperforming market.
Mr Bertie Ahern, the finance minister, had promised to introduce a new
finance bill by the end of the year to redress the imbalance, but that has
now been postponed by the general election and its fate remains uncertain.
Davy Stockbrokers in Dublin believes that the year ahead will be tough.
According to one of its analysts, the very high interest rates and the high
exchange rate vis-a-vis sterling is putting pressure upon companies across
the board.
The market has thus begun discounting the banks, whose core business is in
the Irish market, as well as companies whose business is largely conducted
in the UK such as Fyffes, whose earnings figures will be lower once
converted into Irish pounds. The gloomy outlook for construction is
affecting CRH.
An EC-US trade war would also affect the fast-growth companies in the food
sector such as Kerry and Waterford Foods whose high-value food ingredients,
and some downstream products, have been pinpointed as likely targets for
punitive tariffs in the US. Waterford Crystal is also vulnerable. Thus
virtually all of the major Irish stocks face diffi-culties on one front or
another.
As if these factors were not enough to set the bears loose, there is GPA,
the Irish-based aircraft leasing company, whose flotation plans failed in
June this year, and which now appears to be facing serious financial
difficulties. The main Irish financial institutions all have significant
exposure to the company.
Mr Barry says: 'In ordinary circumstances, the market would take the GPA
problems in its stride, but it comes as a negative factor on top of five or
six others.'
There are flickers of optimism. Mr Mike Moroney, head of research at
Goodbody stockbrokers in Dublin, comments: 'At present levels Irish shares
are very attractive, and if there is an unwinding of the negative factors
over the coming months, there is a chance for rerating. The catalyst will be
significantly lower German interest rates.'
If this does not materialise, there may be more Irish brokers looking for
jobs.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

921111

