FT922-4466

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Company News: Ahold shows 11.5% advance


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


AHOLD, the Dutch food retailer which generates about half of its sales in
the US, said net profit had risen by 11.5 per cent to Fl 85.1m (Dollars
47.2m) in the first quarter of 1992.
Operating profit showed a significantly stronger rise than net profit,
increasing 25.7 per cent to Fl 146.5m.
Growth in net profit was held back by a sharp increase in financing charges,
reflecting Ahold's acquisition last year of Tops Markets, the New York-based
supermarket chain.
Financial charges nearly trebled to Fl 34.4m from Fl 12.2m in the same
period a year earlier.
Last month, Ahold reported that first-quarter sales had surged by 22.1 per
cent to Fl 6.7bn, boosted partly by the contribution of Tops, the Dutch
company's fourth supermarket chain in the eastern part of the US.
In the first quarter, the US chains BI-LO and Giant Food Stores had produced
'satisfactory' sales rises, Ahold said. However, the First National chain,
with outlets in the recession-ridden New England states, saw only a slight
rise in sales.
Operating profit rose by 6.9 per cent in the Netherlands, where Ahold owns
the Albert Heijn supermarket chain, the market leader.
In the US, operating profits jumped by 40.3 per cent after the first-time
consolidation of Tops. Excluding Ahold's latest acquisition, US operating
profit was up 6.5 per cent in the first quarter.
Ahold, which released the profit figures after the close of stock market
trading, repeated earlier predictions that full-year results would show
further growth.
VNU, the largest publisher of consumer magazines in the Netherlands and
Belgium, has taken a 51 per cent stake in Mona, the biggest publisher of
women's magazines in Czechoslovakia.
The company also acquired an option to buy the rest of the shares in 1993.
No terms were given.
Mona, based in Prague, publishes four women's magazines including Vlasta,
the Czechoslovak market leader with a circulation of 400,000.
The three other magazines have circulations ranging from 80,000 to 300,000
copies.
VNU, which is based in the Netherlands, is concentrating its eastern
European expansion on Russia, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
In November, VNU entered a joint venture with ILK, a Hungarian publisher, in
the field of crossword puzzle magazines and magazines aimed at teenage
girls.
VNU was also involved in the establishment of two English-language titles in
Russia - Moscow Magazine and Moscow Guardian.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920605

