FT923-9698

FT  04 AUG 92 / Arts: Wisdom of the Aztecs, writ in blood - Art


   By PATRICIA MORISON


THE WISDOM of the Aztecs was enshrined in a painted literature. As the
conquistadors observed, the great Aztec ruler Moctezuma had libraries full
of painted books and scrolls, the work of priest-scribes who 'wrote' in
colourful images rather like strip-cartoons. Human blood was dripped on to
the pages to feed the images.
The exhibition Mexican Painted Books: Before and After the Conquest, at the
British Museum in London, offers a rare opportunity to see these most vivid
survivals of a vanished civilisation. But it does not make much of a fist at
explaining the complexity of what 'reading' meant to the ancient Mexicans.
The American peoples were analphabetic. Essentially, the Aztecs and their
neighbours used pictograms and ideograms, although by the 16th century they
were beginning to evolve phonetic symbols. Page layout, the scale of
symbols, the way they are grouped, even colour values: all influenced
meaning. Decoding a book, as the Europeans commented, was a dual process,
the eye scanning the images which prompted the reader to recite oral
history.
Britain's museums and libraries own a remarkable collection of ancient
Mexican manuscripts, the large part of which can now be seen in the
exhibition. The earliest codexes to appeal to English bibliophiles reached
Oxford's Bodleian Library in the early 17th century
The magnificent Codex Mendoza was illustrated by native artists on the
orders of the Spanish ambassador, to show Emperor Charles V what his new
subjects were like. However, it never reached him - the galleon taking it to
Spain was intercepted by a French man-of-war. Bought by Richard Hakluyt, the
English ambassador to France, it ended up in the Bodleian Library at Oxford
University. Libraries at Liverpool, Manchester and Glasgow have also loaned
books, maps and scrolls.
Perhaps inevitably, one's first impression of this show is one of gloom.
Ancient Mexican books are fragile so light levels have to be kept low: even
scholars normally have to make do with facsimiles.
Mexican books were written on animal-skins coated with gesso, or on native
paper made from the beaten inner bark of trees of the Moraceae family, such
as figs and mulberries. Paper (amatl to the Aztecs) was also used to costume
the statues of the Aztec gods and in burnt offerings.
Quite the most remarkable things in the exhibition are the elaborate
pre-Hispanic screenfold books, long accordions of painted animal-skins which
could be read on both sides. In Codex Egerton, a Mixtec genealogy, we see 26
generations of rulers, symbolised by husbands and wives seated on thrones
and passing mysterious presents to each other.
The Fejervary, Zouche and Laud skin-fold books are splendid, but baffling.
Zouche was one of the manuscripts which Cortes sent to Charles V. One side
(it will be turned during the show) relates the bloodthirsty career of the
hero Eight Deer. On the other side, there is a genealogy focused on
generations of goddesses all called Three Flints.
In the brilliantly coloured scenes in the Fejervary codex - red, turquoise,
and pale yellow within heavy black outlines - there are such ominous images
that the human sacrifices of the Aztecs come readily to mind. Gods hold
small figures by ropes around their necks. Severed heads are perched on
stools and a jaguar-headed god holds a human head between its jaws.
Figuratively speaking, these pages are spattered with the blood of
codicologists struggling to interpret them.
Post-Conquest books are, on the whole, easier to follow as native artists
painted for their foreign masters, and became progressively influenced by
the woodcuts in European books. Opportunely, there is a new book on this
topic: Serge Gruzinski's Painting the Conquest: The Mexican Indians and the
European Renaissance (Unesco/Flammarion, 231 pages).
This would be my candidate for the most desirable of all the new books on
the Conquest. Written by a specialist, it is both a pleasure to read and
beautifully illustrated from post-Columbian codices, especially the
Florentine Codex; none of the pictures, oddly enough, are from the BM's
collection.
In the exhibition itself, the Kingsborough Codex provides a vivid picture of
the fabulous wealth of the new country and of the cruel exactions of the
conquerors. Indians are grabbed by the hair to force them to disgorge for
the annual sailing of the tribute-ships for Spain, laden not only with gold,
'the divine excrement', but with furs, obsidian, shoes, pottery jars, and
brilliantly-coloured mantles and cloth.
In one scene, Cortes himself appears, ordering four reluctant tribute-payers
to be burnt alive. Remarkably, one such Aztec tribute-list now on view was
unearthed as recently as 1986 in the Ulster Museum. A charming little
treatise of the mid-17th Century shows the manufacture of cochineal, a red
dye made from crushed beetles, which remained for centuries an important
export.
As for Christianity, arguably Spain's greatest export to Mexico, it is
represented by an 18th century illustrated example of the popular Doctrina
Christiana. Here we see the radical disjunction between word and image which
initially was so foreign to the Indians. The woodcut shows Adam and Eve
expelled from the Garden of Eden. Was this a particularly poignant image to
these recent converts? The text is in Nahuatl, written in Roman script.
The BM's Aubin Codex, a history of the Aztec from 1168 to 1608, just might
jog visitors' memories. Aubin was a 19th century French ethnographer who
also gave his name to a pre-Hispanic codex of horoscopes which in 1841, was
presented to the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris. And then, ten years ago
this summer, a Mexican journalist 'liberated' it from its wooden box. By the
time the library authorities had noticed its loss, the book was in Mexico's
National Museum of Anthropology. Jacques Lang, French Minister of Culture,
objected, but nothing doing. The Mexicans are sticking to their precious
specimen of reverse plunder.
The exhibition runs until next spring.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920804

