FT922-3929

FT  09 JUN 92 / Arts: Artists' worlds converge in London


   By LYNN MACRITCHIE


Hurrying down Brick Lane on my way to the EDGE office, pushing against the
tide of men heading for Friday prayers, suddenly I lost all sense of being
in London, indeed of being in any place familiar to me. This was somewhere
else, not east not west, not north not south, but a place which was all of
these, a place made of things I knew but could not recognise. Just for an
instant, the world had changed.
Not all the works to be seen in the EDGE Biennale of Innovative Visual Art,
which runs until June 14, offer so vivid and unsettling an experience, but
most of them at least try. And pushing through the streets finding them,
from Spitalfields to Docklands and back north to Hornsey, is all part of the
show.
This year, the third time the biennale has been held, it reached heights of
ambition which almost overwhelmed even its redoubtable directors, Rob la
Frenais and Tracey Warr. Since the first show in Clerkenwell in 1988, EDGE
has always had an international cast of artists and several locations -
Glasgow, Newcastle and Rotterdam in 1990. This year Europe's Culture
Capital, Madrid, was approached and persuaded to host the show jointly with
London, thus also offering the enticing possibility of European as well as
UK-based funding for the show.
In an exhibition which attempts such a lot - to symbolise a united Europe,
to question, in several of the pieces by artists from the Americas, the
'achievement' of Columbus and to create, through the environments,
performances and installations the artists made especially for sites in both
cities, genuine new worlds, a new order of the imagination - the possibility
for failure is enormous. The remarkable thing about the show is that,
despite its sometime chaotic interface with the viewing public, clutching
inadequate maps on their voyage of discovery, it often succeeds.
Some of the most accomplished pieces are situated conveniently close to the
EDGE centre in Brick Lane, where dubious maps and a handsome catalogue are
available, along with news of any artworks which may not be accessible that
day. Turning back from one of the huge models of guns made by Czech artist
David Cerny which dot the neighbourhood as part of his piece 'The Day of
Killing', a short stroll brings the visitor to Commercial Street where the
disused underground toilet, not the Hawksmoor church, is the object of
attention. Down the steep stairs (you must choose whether to descend by the
English or the Irish side) Irish artist Dorothy Cross has constructed a
urinal with a difference - a beautifully cast bronze map of the British
Isles, each of the two island masses which form the bowls drained by a
sensitively modelled penis.
Nearby, in an empty unit of Spitalfields market, in a space carefully swept
and lit, stands a font. Instead of the baptismal water, its bowl holds a
mass of strawberries, which a mechanical hammer pounds slowly into a pulp:
the fragrance of crushed fruit fills the air. On the wall, the redness of
more crushed fruit, displayed behind four neat glass ovals lit by naked
light bulbs, reveals at the centre of the sticky mass the white brick of the
wall forming the letters RAGE.
Leaving this pristine and yet decaying environment, the work of British
artist Helen Chadwick, a further short walk to Broadgate reveals a vista of
an Indian village, or at least its human and animal inhabitants, arrayed in
neat ranks on the piazza above the station concourse. The sculptures, by
Indian artist Nek Chand Sinai, seem both ridiculously exotic and completely
at home in their new setting.
Wandering further, near Tower Hill in the old seaman's church of St Paul's,
Spanish artist Pepe Espaliu has created perhaps the most satisfying piece in
the show. It is very simple. In front of the disused altar, miraculously,
water runs, covering the marble expanse and trickling gently over the steps,
where it drains away. In the water sit the hassocks from the empty pews, not
exactly floating, not exactly praying, but seeming to do both, objects
interceding for the congregation which has deserted them. Also in the
church, a delicate piece by Martha Fleming makes use of shells and a mirror
which cannot reflect, although its viewers can.
Those with transport can find other pieces at Allen Gardens, Tobacco Dock,
Trinity Buoy Wharf, the Chisenhale Gallery - a beautiful installation by
Rose Finn Kelcey featuring a cloud of steam - and in the disused swimming
baths in Hornsey Road, where Maria Klonaris and Katerina Thomadaki have
created a huge, hermetic environment presided over by an angel (be sure to
check first by phone whether this piece is open).
Politics, sex, colonialism and prayer are but a few of these artists'
subjects: on a bad day, when the tube gets stuck and the exhibition sign has
fallen down, this diversity of concerns and difficulty of location can make
the whole complex enterprise seem a bit much, even a bit silly. But it is
not. In a world in which city life necessarily involves the parallel
existence of many different universes, seeing but not knowing each other,
experiencing art works in this way heightens our awareness of the infinite
strands of history and possibility which make up urban life.
The EDGE information Office is at 148 Brick Lane, E1, tel: 071-377 2676.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920609

