FT921-3900

FT  12 MAR 92 / Banking on mistrust


   By JOE ROGALY


You have to shake your head in disbelief. Britain's 14th general election
since 1945 is being called at a most inauspicious time for his party by a
prime minister whose personal future depends on the outcome. The omens are
not so bad as to characterise yesterday's decision by Mr John Major as
political suicide, but the ineluctable choice of April 9 does fall between
bravado and foolhardiness.
There must be an explanation somewhere - beyond desperation, that is. Over
the past few months I have asked various members of the cabinet two
questions: 'why should the Conservatives be given a fourth term, something
the British electorate is accustomed to denying any party that asks for it?'
and, when that is answered (never quite satisfactorily), 'why should anyone
think you will win?'
The replies to the first question are unsurprising. Under Mrs Margaret
Thatcher the Tories put the trade unions in their place, privatised
previously unsound publicly owned enterprises, and instilled the concept of
prudent financial management into the national psyche. Under Mr John Major
they have secured our position in the European Community and, most
forcefully, brought inflation down to near-German levels. So they surely
deserve another term.
The natural riposte is that in the process they have plunged the country
into a long recession with no known end in sight, raised public borrowing to
a potentially frightening level, and failed to develop the public
infrastructure. That is, however, to carp. Let us be kind enough to address
ourselves solely to the ministers' basic case. Even if we swallow it whole,
it refers to past performance. A past, good or bad, is something that has
come to an end, after which the rascals are thrown out.
As to the future, the manifesto to be approved by the cabinet this afternoon
will have much to say about choice, freedom, caring Conservatism, the
citizens' charter, and other familiar abstractions. This will be interlaced
with a possibly surprising fistful of specific promises, from a national
lottery to an undertaking to be more liberal in the dispersal of government
information. The supplementary to the first question will therefore be:
'does the answer add up to very much?'
We must wait a few days. So try, then, the second question - 'why should
anyone think you will win?' The polls suggest that there will be a hung
parliament, which in most combinations means that the Tories have lost. Not
so, says the cabinet collective. There will be no hung parliament. The party
chairman, Mr Christopher Patten, has convinced himself and apparently the
prime minister that if the parties are neck and neck on April 9 the
Conservatives will Nobody stood up
to shout: 'You're
crazy - it'll be
the end of us all'
survive to celebrate an outright victory. They affect to believe that they
are ahead on the technicalities. These are: regional swings that favour the
government, strong support for the Tories in key marginal constituencies,
and the propensity of voters to support incumbent MPs, most of whom are by
definition Conservatives.
At yesterday's meeting of the cabinet one minister said that all the media
would be interested in during the campaign would be the state of the polls
and the likely behaviour of the prime minister if he lost his majority. So
they agreed that they would decline to discuss either of these matters. But
everyone knows what they think. The party with the largest number of seats
will form the government. It will survive. That, they say with all the
confidence of lambs en route to the slaughterhouse, will surely be the
Conservative party. Anyhow, said another after yesterday's announcement, the
Tories would do what the prime minister said they would do about Scotland
after the election - consider the situation then and take stock.
These thoughts must have been in ministers' minds as Mr Major suggested that
April 9 would be a fine day for an election and asked if everyone agreed.
Nobody stood up to shout: 'You're crazy - it'll be the end of us all.'
Someone did remark that to hang on for a later date would attract greater
opprobrium than hopes of recovery would be worth. So, crossing their fingers
and placing their faith in Mr Patten and his psephological witchdoctors,
they blessed their chief's brave endeavour.
If my tone suggests that I believe it to be foredoomed, it is a shade too
sceptical. Dangerous, yes. Certain to fail - not quite. For I have not yet
accounted for what, in their heart of hearts, the Conservatives believe to
be their strongest card - mistrust of the Labour party. The Tories will
emphasise the contrast between the past pronouncements of Mr Neil Kinnock
and his present professed beliefs, always treading a delicate line between
legitimate reminders of what their opponent-in-chief once said and the
appearance of running a smear campaign.
This is reasonable enough. The Labour party has undergone a remarkable and,
in historic terms, exceedingly rapid, conversion. The voters would have to
take the huge risk of putting it into power before its sincerity could be
tested. We may therefore put to Labour the reverse of the question asked of
the Tories - that is: 'why should the electorate trust you?'
If we are to entrust Mr Kinnock and his colleagues with better management of
the market economy than the Conservatives we will want to see a manifesto
that is wholly convincing. It must be less regulatory, less interlaced with
goodies for the public sector unions, less anti-wealth than any previous
statement of Labour intent. As to the party's programme for constitutional
reform, it is hard not to be cynical. Are they saying these things for love
of freedom, or fear of the Scottish nationalists? For the sake of democracy,
or merely to seduce votes away from the Liberal Democrats?
In short, the April 9 question will be: who do you disbelieve the most?

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920312

