FT922-4284

FT  06 JUN 92 / Letter: Competitive tendering - no 'level playing field' and
no quality considerations


   From COUNCILLOR JEREMY BEECHAM


Sir, Your editorial of June 3 ('A long road to Whitehall reform') and the
report on which it is based impute to me a far more favourable view of
compulsory competitive tendering than I possess, or than could reasonably be
inferred from my recent speech to the Chartered Institute of Public Finance
and Accountancy's conference.
Compulsory competitive tendering (CCT) has led to financial savings, but in
too many cases at the expense of the wages and reasonable conditions of
employment of the workforce.
It has tied up valuable officer time and led to the creation of costly
systems while reducing the flexibility and responsiveness of some service
industry delivery.
There is no 'level playing field' for the local authority and private
contractors. The former can effectively only compete for their own work. The
government's real intention is to put local authorities out of the business
of direct provision of services.
Clear evidence of this was the announcement last year that local authorities
would not be permitted to tender for street works required by utilities,
notwithstanding a clear pledge by the government during the passage of the
relevant legislation.
I drew attention in my speech to one, quite accidental, benefit thrown up by
the CCT process - that is the fact that in preparing contract documents and
specifications it was necessary (albeit at considerable cost) to re-examine
the content of the work being put out to tender in minute detail.
This facilitated the process of enhancing the quality of service but could
be achieved without competitive tendering in much the same way as service
level agreements have operated for central services, themselves not yet
subject to a tendering process.
Paradoxically, local authorities are not entitled to take quality
considerations into account in deciding the outcome of the tendering
process, and many have found to their cost that successful private bidders
have provided a less than adequate service.
Local authorities, and their citizens, would have nothing to fear from a
competitive process which allowed genuine competition on equal terms, which
reflected minimum standards of wages and conditions and equal opportunities
considerations, and which allowed quality to be built in to the tendering
process.
That is not what the present CCT system encompasses, nor what the government
intends.
Jeremy Beecham,
chairman,
Association of Metropolitan Authorities,
leader,
Newcastle City Council,
33 Great Smith Street,
Westminster,
London SW1P 3BJ

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920606

