FT923-9617

FT  04 AUG 92 / The community revisited: Hazel Duffy examines shifting
strategies in urban regeneration


   By HAZEL DUFFY


When Mrs Gwendolyn Mayfield took over as principal of Fowler Elementary
school eight years ago, few parents ever came into the school. In this poor
part of Atlanta, schools are regarded as institutions and therefore not to
be trusted. Gradually she coaxed some of them to cross the threshold, even
to attend classes to learn the skills of being a parent.
Mrs Mayfield's efforts are part of an approach being used increasingly in
urban regeneration in the US and in Europe. Emphasis is being placed firmly
on recreating a sense of community in inner-city areas, rather than just
pumping in extra resources.
Community empowerment - or community development as the specialists prefer
to call it - is thought by many to be the strongest weapon in the efforts of
public and private sector groups to combat poverty and crime.
There is nothing new about the idea of community. John Gardner, a pioneer of
the community-building movement in the US, traces the strong sense of shared
values which existed in the past to the ties that people had to each other
in their villages back in Europe.
In the poorest areas, however, that sense of community has gone. 'They are
torn by everything from momentary political battles to deep and complex
ethnic rifts. Separate worlds live side by side but fail to communicate or
understand one another,' says Gardner.
The Los Angeles riots demonstrated the dangers arising from such bleak,
separate worlds. Other American and, increasingly, European cities know that
it could be their turn next. The familiar litany of American inner-city
problems - one-parent families, high unemployment, poor housing - is
repeated in many European cities. The educational and social problems
stemming from the growth in racial minorities in many cities accentuate the
difficulties.
Indebted, and therefore constrained in effecting change in their own right,
American city governments are turning increasingly to the big corporations,
voluntary groups, parents and schools to help build some sense of community
which has been lost in the violence and fear of ghettos.
A report to be published shortly by the Washington-based German Marshall
Fund identifies the twin themes of community and schools as potentially the
most powerful action points in the inner cities struggle. The report takes
six cities, three in Europe - Glasgow, Rotterdam, Frankfurt - and three in
North America  - Toronto, Chicago and Atlanta.
The cities reflect different cultures, levels of prosperity, racial mix, and
degrees of governmental and business support in dealing with their problems.
But each city has ideas of relevance to others.
The principals of two elementary schools - one in Rotterdam, the other in
Atlanta - demonstrate, for instance, how much greater is the task of
teaching children from disadvantaged backgrounds.
Rene Vissesser, head of De Vlam School, has 175 pupils spanning 15
nationalities. Some of his teachers have to cope with half a dozen different
languages and customs although the government wants all subjects to be
taught in Dutch.
Mr Vissesser wants to get parents more involved in the school and to make it
a place where they can talk about the problems of adapting to Dutch society.
His first venture will be to open a restaurant as a non-profit-making
subsidiary to encourage parents to come into school after hours.
Gwendolyn Mayfield in Atlanta has used similar tactics. Spaghetti suppers,
talent contests and parents' days which offer trinkets as an incentive to
attend, are all part of the inducements.
Nearly all of her pupils are black. They live in the surrounding public
housing projects. In acknowledgement of the uphill task, she gets extra
staff and equipment, access to special teaching programmes for her staff and
volunteers who work as mentors with many of her pupils.
The help comes from government, Atlanta-based corporations such as
Coca-Cola, Bell South and IBM, and the prestigious Georgia Institute of
Technology across the street.
The plight of Atlanta's poor has been taken up in the past few months by
former president Jimmy Carter under the banner of the Atlanta Project. The
project unit plans to co-ordinate the provision of social services with the
diverse voluntary and business resources in the city, targeting
neighbourhoods in need. The plan again focuses on schools as the focal point
of organisation in each neighbourhood - elementary and middle schools form a
cluster with the high school at the centre.
Beyond the education system, the Dutch approach to building community is a
mix of carrot and stick. The 17 per cent unemployment rate in Rotterdam has
prompted the city to experiment with schemes to get even the most unlikely
job prospects back into work, as assistant caretakers, additional street
cleaners, and so on. Without work, it is hard to foster a sense of being
useful to the community.
Young unemployed people on training courses are closely tracked to make sure
that they attend and follow through with job interviews. If they refuse
three job offers, their social security is at risk.
Weaning people off welfare to make them more responsible for the way they
live, and to impart a greater sense of community into the areas where they
live, is encapsulated in the Social Innovation programme piloted by
Rotterdam city council and now taken up in other Dutch cities.
'Where governments have failed, there is much merit in giving the reins back
to people,' says Gerard Klein, director of the Rotterdam Social Innovation
unit. Giving schools over to parents and the streets to their residents
makes them more responsible. He thinks that there has been too much talk in
the past about peoples' rights, and not enough about their duties.
This may sound like the radical right. But Rotterdam's city government is
Social Democrat, and it deliberately invited leading members from the
opposition to take part in its social planning exercise in order to get
broad backing.
Community development is a long haul and the ground is infertile. To sustain
community, leadership has to be identified. Community workers - voluntary
and professional - must be trained to run the organisations. Leaders of
urban schemes say this is where business can help.
They also emphasise that commitment must come from companies, schools and
higher academic institutions to nurture the grassroots initiatives coming
out of communities. Such initiatives might then turn out to be a rare bright
spot in the cities of the 1990s.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920804

