FT921-1319

FT  25 MAR 92 / Jobs: A promising scheme . . . and what befell it - First
trial of subsidised self-advertising by unemployed executives was marred by
human frailty


   By MICHAEL DIXON


READERS will doubtless have heard the old jingle about all the important
things that fell apart because a nail dropped out of a horse's shoe. Well,
meet the horse-shoe nail.
Just four weeks ago the FT was preparing to run the first trial of a scheme
to help executives who've lost their jobs by providing them with a
subsidised market. As first proposed by redundancy victim Peter Laurence,
the plan was that employing organisations would be invited to join this
newspaper in funding - say - half the cost of a regular advertising space in
our pages, in which people out of work could offer their abilities at a
commensurately reduced price.
Numerous readers responded to that proposal, some volunteering active help.
They included several outplacement and recruitment consultants as well as
Streets Direct Marketing which said it would handle the production of the ad
free of charge. The trouble was a distinct lack of similarly generous
responses from employers.
The only one to offer any help was Bowater, whose chief executive David Lyon
said his group would sponsor a one-off trial. It would consist of sufficient
space for brief self-advertisements by six jobless executives with skills
specifically in business-development, at a personal cost to them of Pounds
50 apiece. The date of the trial was set for the last week of February.
After announcing the project three weeks before, I eventually received
submissions of the right length from 43 suitably qualified people. Although
the majority were in Britain, there were individuals from Belgium, Germany,
Italy, Norway and Spain.
The six to appear were chosen at random, and the advertisement was set up.
The arrangement was that it would run at the foot of the page headed by the
Jobs column which, on the day, would spell out what was happening beneath.
The plans were thus well laid, and ready to run.
At which point I emulated the horse-shoe nail by falling ill.
The Bowater-backed ad ran all right, and generously large it was. But no
explanation of it appeared above, which resulted in grievous bewilderment
among people who had not read my announcement three weeks before. Indeed the
only responses received by two of the half-dozen were from fellow victims of
executive cut-backs, wondering what on earth was going on.
The other four fared at least a little better. The sole overseas candidate,
from Italy, had one lead. Another received two, and the remaining couple
each had four.
The only thing I can see in their self-ads that might account for the
differences is that the pair who were left lead-less offered no
foreign-language skills, whereas the better-off quartet all did. Then again,
the one speaking the most languages - the Italian with six - received only a
single response.
Although even the two who had none have said they still think the scheme was
worth a try, I am sorry for marring it and would like to make amends by
trying again. Unfortunately, except for Bowater, no employers have shown
interest in lending the necessary help. But if any should suddenly be struck
with public spirit, I'll let you know.
NOW to the table alongside, giving the latest indicators of management pay
in Britain as shown by the twice-yearly surveys of the Reward consultancy.
The study just completed was based on information from more than 1,000
organisations of widely varied types, sizes and locations. Anyone wanting
the full report, priced at Pounds 180, should contact Bill Couldrey of
Reward at Diamond Way, Stone, Staffordshire ST15 0SD; telephone 0785 813566,
fax 0785 817007.
Although the survey covers six levels of executives, my extracts focus on
just one - those placed immediately below director. In the smallest
businesses, however, they may be on the board while doing essentially the
same kind of job.
The left-hand two columns of figures refer to the lower quartile manager who
would be a quarter way up from the foot of a ranking of all doing similar
work. The first gives the base salary, the second total cash pay including
bonuses.
The next four columns relate to the median manager halfway in the ranking,
giving the latest salaries and total cash pay, followed by the equivalents
12 months before. Then come the new figures for the upper quartile executive
a quarter way down from the top of the ranking. Lastly we have the
percentages with company cars.
To allow for pay rises between the collection of the data and April 1,
Reward says all cash figures should be upped by 1 per cent, with another 0.5
per cent being added for each further month from May 1 onwards.
Regional variations from the overall median salary of Pounds 29,535 were:
Higher - London by 18.5 per cent, Scotland 8.4, and south-east England 2.5
per cent. Lower - Northern Ireland by 1.6 per cent, west midlands 6.9,
south-west 8.6, north-west 9.0, eastern counties 10.1, and north-east 10.3
per cent.
Variances from the Pounds 29,535 by the employing company's sales turnover
were: Higher - Pounds 100m-plus by 17.5 per cent, and Pounds 40m-Pounds 100m
by 1.6. Lower - Pounds 15m-Pounds 40m by 6.1 per cent, Pounds 5m-Pounds 15m
by 9.4, and up to Pounds 5m by 17.7 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920325

