FT924-12183

FT  22 OCT 92 / Clinton tiptoes around trade issue: The Democratic candidate
says he will not rubber-stamp any Bush administration pacts if he gets to
the White House. But, what will he do?


   By NANCY DUNNE


TRADE, Gatt and oilseeds subsidies are nowhere near the top of the political
agenda for Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate in
the US. But, if he emerges victorious on November 3, these issues may well
leap rapidly to the forefront.
While Mr Clinton has repeatedly stressed his support for a Gatt agreement,
he has been cautious about making commitments. A campaign spokesman would
say little beyond issuing a warning that, if elected, the new president
would not present to Congress just any agreement negotiated by the
Republican administration of President George Bush.
Mr Clinton himself, in Monday's presidential debate, put it this way: 'I'll
have a free and fair trade policy, a hard-headed realistic policy, and not
get caught up in rubber-stamping everything the Bush administration did.'
One Clinton adviser suggested, at the time of the North American Free Trade
Agreement (Nafta), that Mr Clinton's handling of the pact should be seen as
a model of how he would approach others agreed by the president.
Mr Clinton has supported Nafta in principle since he launched his campaign,
despite the strong opposition of labour. Ignoring sniping from Mr Bush, who
accused him of "waffling' on the Nafta, he refused to commit himself on the
details until he had read the entire negotiated text.
Then, on October 4, Mr Clinton delivered a long and thoughtful speech -
largely his own, according to aides - which concluded that free trade with
Mexico was desirable only if accompanied by a national economic strategy.
'Too many Republicans would say that it's a simple issue, freer trade always
equals economic growth,' he said. 'Some Democrats would say that freer trade
today always equals exporting jobs and lowering wages. Well, it sure can if
you don't have a comprehensive economic strategy to maintain a high-wage,
high-growth economy."
He said that, besides having a 'comprehensive strategy' (education, worker
training, investment incentives), he would seek to negotiate three
supplemental agreements to rectify Nafta's 'shortcomings."
They would:
Establish an Environmental Protection Commission, headed by Mr Al Gore, his
party's candidate for the vice-presidency, 'with substantial powers and
resources' to prevent and clean up water pollution and to encourage the
enforcement of each country's own environmental laws.
Establish a commission for worker standards and safety with 'extensive
powers' to educate, train and develop minimum standards, and with dispute
settlement powers and remedies.
Ensure that a country could take protectionist steps to deal with
'overwhelming' import surges.
In this speech, Mr Clinton did more than resolve his own doubts about Nafta;
he was heeding pleas from the Mexican government to refrain from calling for
a renegotiation of the commercial deal. He was also seeking to satisfy the
con cerns of Congressman Richard Gephardt, majority leader in the House of
Representatives, and his key supporters in labour, and the environmental
movement.
On Gatt, Mr Clinton is said to be concerned about satisfying the original US
goals of the Uruguay Round, as expressed in the 1988 Trade Act.
These called for reform of agriculture trade 'to the maximum extent
feasible,' but the emphasis was on ending 'trade-distorting subsidies' and
reducing farm surpluses - a far cry from the total elimination of production
and export subsidies first proposed by the Reagan and Bush administrations.
A Clinton administration could decide to go back to the drawing board on its
position on farm trade reform. Among the farm groups supporting Mr Clinton
is a number wanting to retain US protection for commodities such as sugar,
peanuts and dairy products.
The 'worker rights' issue, which has been ignored by the Bush
administration, also figures prominently in the Gatt round objectives
approved by the US Congress.
Under these, US negotiators were supposed to 'secure a review of the
relationship of worker rights to Gatt articles  .. with a view to ensuring
that the benefits of the trading system are available to all workers.'
Mr Harry Freeman, executive director of the MTN Coalition, which business
has organised to get a new treaty passed by Congress, believes Mr Clinton
would seek to expand the scope of Gatt to 'non-traditional areas' like
workers' rights, human rights and environmental concerns.
He said: 'This may be to the chagrin of other Gatt members who think Gatt is
to be purely a commercial thing.' Mr Freeman also thinks Mr Clinton would
seek 'strong allies in other countries which could cause a schism within
Gatt'.
It is understood that Mr Clinton is sympathetic to some US industry
complaints about the proposals for final settlement of the Uruguay Round
drawn up by Mr Arthur Dunkel, Gatt director-general, in the areas of
investment, intellectual property rights, services and dumping. However, it
is impossible to gauge the extent to which Mr Clinton would be willing to
risk an unravelling of the Uruguay Round in order to satisfy these concerns.
Like most politicians, Mr Clinton has vowed to get 'fair trade' as well as
'free trade', but he has also promised not to subordinate US trade interests
to political and security relationships as many US presidents have done.
He is unlikely to want his first 100 days as president burdened by a need to
push through unpopular trade agreements negotiated by his predecessor.
He could ask for an extension of the president's negotiating authority, due
to expire on March 1 next, and a new Congress dominated by his Democratic
party might give it to him.
In the meantime, the trading partners of the US seem to be calculating the
probability of a Bush defeat, and assuming that there is nothing to be
gained by negotiating a deal with a president who is too anxious to get one
while he can.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921022

