FT924-877

FT  22 DEC 92 / Old Brazil also faces impeachment: The political old guard
being shaken out with Collor


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


THE impeachment process of Brazil's suspended President Fernando Collor
reaches its climax today with a trial in the senate, many politicians
present will be reflecting on their own futures.
The scandal, in which Mr Collor is implicated in a multi-million-dollar
corruption network, has led to a more radical political shake-up than the
end of military rule in 1985, and few of the old guard have been spared in
the fallout.
Not only is there uncertainty over what will emerge from a referendum on the
political system next April, but almost all leading contenders for the 1994
elections and traditional power brokers are on the wane, discredited by
association with Mr Collor or personal entanglements with corruption.
Mr Collor's fate will be determined today by the country's 81 senators in a
marathon 16-hour session presided over by the head of the supreme court. A
two-thirds vote - 54 senators - is needed to impeach him. Mr Collor spent
yesterday closeted with lawyers deciding whether to appear personally to
defend himself.
The suspense gripping the capital on the eve of the judgment was heightened
by claims of senators that they had received anonymous death threats warning
them against voting for impeachment. Added to that was the news that Mr
Paulo Cesar Farias, Mr Collor's alleged front-man, had fled the country with
his family in his private jet to Seville. Mr Mauricio Correa, the justice
minister, has ordered a police investigation.
While the Collor scandal has not stopped corruption it has made it harder
for corrupt politicians to be elected and has devalued the old Brazilian
adage rouba mas faz - he steals but he gets things done. Congress now has
access to bank records and impunity is no longer guaranteed.
Mr Bolivar Lamounier, a political scientist from the Sao Paulo Institute of
Socio-Economic Studies, says: 'This is a historic moment in Brazilian
politics. We have a chance that comes perhaps once a century to completely
reform the system and to allow a new generation of politicians to emerge,
less wedded to the old ways.'
A citizens' action group has been formed to call for the impeachment of all
senators and congressmen on the basis that all Brazil's politicians are
corrupt.
Leading presidential hopeful Mr Orestes Quercia, 54-year-old leader of the
centrist Democratic Movement, Brazil's largest party, was the obvious next
target. A man of humble beginnings, he now has a bulging campaign chest and
a personal fortune estimated by investigative magazine Veja at Dollars 52m.
His increases in wealth coincided with spells in office, particularly as
governor of Sao Paulo, Brazil's richest state, from 1986 to 1990.
For the past two months, Mr Quercia has been embroiled in a damaging
controversy surrounding his authorisation of a Dollars 330m purchase of
Israeli equipment at inflated prices and the privatisation of Vasp, the Sao
Paulo state airline.
His protege, Mr Luis Antonio Fleury, the current governor of Sao Paulo, is
also in disgrace for the mishandling of a recent prison riot in which 111
inmates were massacred by state police.
All those linked to the Collor camp have paid dearly for their loyalty. Mr
Antonio Carlos Magalhaes, 65-year-old governor of Bahia and long-time
'godfather' of the Brazilian political scene, has lost his influence since
failing to support impeachment.
Mr Leonel Brizola, 70-year-old firebrand populist and governor of Rio, has
seen his grip over Rio slip so much that his candidate in the recent
elections for mayor failed even to make it to the run-off. He faces open
mutiny from his own state police, who last week arrested his daughter for
alleged cocaine possession.
Tragedy has also played a part. Within days of the impeachment vote, Mr
Ulysses Guimaraes, the grand old man of Brazilian politics, died in a
helicopter accident after 44 years as a congressman.
One of the younger generation to move to the forefront with the fall of the
old guard is 43-year-old Tasso Jereissati, leader of the Social Democrats.
Widely respected for his work as governor of the poverty-stricken state of
Ceara, Mr Jereissati says: 'I hope as a result of the Collor experience we
will now have a more rational succession of power based not on charismatic
leaders or messianic speeches but on programmes and administrative
capability.'
Municipal elections last month showed that the main beneficiary has been the
left, the Workers' Party taking four state capitals. Mr Lus Inacio da Silva,
its leader and near winner in the last presidential elections, is the only
leading political figure untainted by corruption and events of this year,
and many businessmen are now ordering assessments of the likely actions of a
left-wing government.
On the other side of the spectrum the elections also saw the spectacular
re-emergence of Mr Paulo Maluf, the authoritarian former governor of Sao
Paulo and leader of the right-wing Democratic Social Party. Easily elected
mayor of Sao Paulo, he has become the main focus of conservative forces.
Much now rests on the referendum in April. The Collor scandal is thought to
have discredited presidentialism, particularly as only one civilian
president has completed his mandate in the last 67 years, and shifted the
focus of political aspiration to more parliamentary politics.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

921222

