FT924-8114

FT  12 NOV 92 / Bank chief calls for end to UK boom-bust cycle


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


MR Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, yesterday
committed the Bank to do all it could to achieve price stability and
'demolish the UK's image as a second-rate, inflation-prone economy'.
In the Bank of England lecture at the London School of Economics, Mr
Leigh-Pemberton said Britain must never again experience the boom-bust
cycle. He called for a national consensus in favour of stable prices.
The governor said recent successes in reducing inflation justified easing UK
monetary policy since sterling's departure from the European exchange rate
mechanism eight weeks ago.
But, speaking on the eve of today's announcement by Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, of public spending plans for the next three years and special
measures to revive confidence in the economy, he warned that if the policy
easing began to fuel inflation, 'we would have no hesitation in reversing
it'.
He added: 'No one should believe that easier policy now necessarily means
easier policy for ever.' Mr Leigh-Pemberton said he was not advocating a
target of zero inflation. Instead he backed Mr Lamont's long-term goal of '2
per cent a year or less' in the rate of retail price inflation excluding
mortgage interest payments.
But his speech was a stiff warning to the government not to succumb to
inflationary pressures. He said governments had a moral duty to achieve
price stability.
The governor said the Bank would publish the first of its quarterly reports
on inflation in February, alongside its regular quarterly bulletin. These
reports, foreshadowed by the chancellor some weeks ago, would 'put the
Bank's professional competence on the line', he said.
They would not be restricted to a discussion of the past but would cover
likely future developments in the short-term and medium-term to produce a
'wholly objective and comprehensive analysis of inflationary trends and
pressures'.
Today's Autumn Statement will echo the governor's strong anti-inflation
stance by reaffirming the government's commitment to keeping underlying
inflation in a 1 to 4 per cent band over the life of this parliament.
The chancellor will unveil economies in a number of important spending
departments that have enabled the government to keep its spending plans
within the preset 'planning total' of Pounds 244.5bn for 1993-94.
Mr Lamont's package will also provide for an immediate boost to the economy
through a number of time-limited measures to boost confidence, activity and
investment in industry and housing.
The government is widely expected to approve a further cut of perhaps 1
percentage point in bank base rates from 8 per cent, either today or in the
near future.
Bank urges stability, Page 12
Editorial Comment, Page 20
Jubilee Line setback, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921112

