FT923-9823

FT  03 AUG 92 / Where the wise rehearse well beforehand


   By MAGGIE URRY


VOLUNTEERING to go before the Monopolies and Mergers Commission is like
offering to stand before a firing squad playing Russian roulette. Anyone who
survives would not relish repeating the experience.
The fact that British Gas has brought this fate on itself was seen as a
reflection of the extent to which relations between it and its regulator
have broken down.
A vital part of a company's strategy or an industry's whole basis of
operation can depend on a few hours' grilling by a team of highly expert
interrogators at their offices in Carey Street, the site in London of the
old bankruptcy court.
They can ask anything, and there is little guidance on which aspect of a
takeover, merger or suspected monopoly position they will pick on.
The commission takes a different attitude to people giving evidence to an
inquiry, when they are more likely to listen politely.
One who has been through the experience is Mr Tim Clement-Jones, company
secretary of Kingfisher, the retail group which bid Pounds 568m for rival
Dixons in December 1989. The bid was referred to the MMC in January and the
commission was given three months to report. Eventually the bid was blocked.
Mr Clement-Jones says that being summoned before the tribunal, whose members
sit round a semi-circular table, gives 'a feeling of corporate nakedness
that can best be compared to appearing before the House Unamerican
Activities Committee. It is a very thorough process'.
Others who have suffered the same fate say it is like having an oral
examination on a thesis.
After producing evidence inches thick, involving hundreds of hours of senior
management time, the commission's members can ask questions on any point.
The wise rehearse well beforehand.
Mr Clement-Jones' tip is to provide lots of evidence based on market
research. 'They seem to be very influenced by market research,' he says.
Lawyers can help produce the evidence, but when it comes to the meeting it
is the directors of the company themselves who the commission's members want
to see. If they are not satisfied after the first meeting they can recall
their victims for further questioning.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920803

