FT923-10703

FT  29 JUL 92 / World Stock Markets: Crab-like Malaysia dispirits investors
 -The excitement surrounding the recent flotations has evaporated


   By KIERAN COOKE


Malaysia's stockbrokers are a shade dispirited. The excitement of recent big
privatisations has evaporated. There appears to be a shortage of liquidity
in the market. Speculative investors have been heading for the more
interesting money-making grounds of Hong Kong.
'The KL (Kuala Lumpur) Stock Exchange is like a crab,' says one broker.
'Plenty of sideways movement but not much else.'
The KLSE composite index closed at 585.77 yesterday, up 5.7 per cent since
the start of the year, but it has lost 3.3 per cent over a 12-month period.
This performance is far from bad, especially compared with Tokyo or, closer
to home, Singapore, which the KLSE has now supplanted as the biggest bourse
in south-east Asia with the exception of Hong Kong.
Kuala Lumpur's ascent in the region has been brought about by the heady
activity arising from the government's privatisation programme. In November
1990, the government floated a 22 per cent stake in Telekom Malaysia.
In March this year, Perusahaan Otomobil, the Malaysian-Japanese joint
venture automobile company - manufacturers of Malaysia's Proton car - came
to the market. In May, a 22 per cent slice of Tenaga Nasional, the state
electricity utility, was thrown into the arms of eager investors.
The privatisations have transformed the KLSE. Tenaga, capitalised at
MDollars 28.8bn (Dollars 11.5bn), is now the largest company on the
exchange, accounting for more than 14 per cent of total market
capitalisation. Together, Tenaga and Telekom account for just under 30 per
cent of total market weighting and are larger than the next 15 stocks
combined.
Meanwhile, the influence of commodity-associated companies, once the giants
of the KLSE, has declined. In 1980, plantations constituted 20 per cent of
the market, compared to 7 per cent at present.
The change reflects Malaysia's transformation from a primarily
commodity-based to a manufacturing economy. In 1980, commodities accounted
for more than 70 per cent of exports. By 1991, manufactured goods, mainly
electronics and associated equipment, made up 60 per cent of exports.
The partial privatisation of Tenaga, Telekom and the Proton company came at
an opportune time: Telekom and Tenaga have been placed on the market as the
Malaysian economy has been recording 8 per cent-plus growth rates in each of
the last five years.
Other companies have taken advantage of favourable market conditions to go
private. Mergers and acquisitions have produced powerful new corporate
groups, some with important political connections.
While privatisations gave new life and confidence to the KLSE, the index has
become top heavy: the 10 largest companies on the market account for about
70 per cent of total market capitalisation.
Mr Lum Ming Jang of brokerage concern K & N Kenanga says: 'Tenaga and, to a
lesser extent, Telekom tended to soak up the funds that were available.
Institutional investors - both here and from overseas - felt they had to
have Tenaga as part of their portfolios. In many cases that has meant that
holdings in other stocks have been reduced.'
The KLSE is heavily dependent on foreign investors: funds from abroad made a
substantial contribution to the MDollars 8.6bn raised on the market in 1990,
MDollars 3.9bn in 1991 and MDollars 5bn in the first half of this year. But
not only is the buoyancy of Hong Kong attracting foreign funds away, some
investors are concerned about continuing signs of overheating in the
Malaysian economy.
A growing balance of payments deficit and high domestic interest rates have
meant that many smaller investors have banked funds rather than risk the
stock market. The ringgit has continued to strengthen, particularly against
the US dollar, harming export competitiveness.
The market hopes to raise MDollars 5bn in the second half of this year: this
includes a MDollars 1.7bn rights issue by the partially privatised Malaysian
airline MAS. While it is unlikely that the government would allow such a
cash call to fail, smaller companies could suffer as remaining market
liquidity is soaked up.
But all is not lost for the market's small fry. In recent days, more funds
have been flowing into the less well-known stocks, in part due to market
sentiment that the blue chips are slightly overvalued. Perhaps the crab is
beginning to move slowly forward.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

920729

