FT923-9626

FT  04 AUG 92 / Management: Following in Lovejoy's footsteps


   By THOMAS SLEMEN


An entry into the antiques trade is easy. Making it pay - especially during
a recession - is more difficult. The basic requirements are hard work,
experience, knowledge, flair, and considerable capital.
There are three paths for those who want to become an antiques dealer but
are lacking experience: a course at a college or university; a practical,
hands-on apprenticeship working as an assistant to a dealer; or a job as a
saleroom porter. There are many courses for students who want to pursue a
career in antiques. The British Antique Dealers' Association (Bada) can
supply details.
Finding a job in an antiques shop can be difficult because most dealers rely
on the grapevine to obtain new staff.
For this reason, many antiques experts started as porters in the big auction
houses where they were able to handle valuable antiques and gain experience
at the same time.
Others decide to go it alone, buying antiques on their own account and
opening a shop or even a stall. Some dealers have become successful without
formal qualifications, but many fail.
To avoid being duped into buying fakes and forgeries from the unscrupulous,
the safest way is to buy from one of the 400 British antiques dealers who
are members of Bada. These dealers provide an after-sales service and seek
to build long-term relationships with clients. They also offer advice on the
restoration of antiques.
For all dealers, financial backing is paramount. Many ventures have failed
because would-be dealers underestimated the capital needed to cover start-up
costs. To stock a basic market stall can cost up to Pounds 10,000. The best
place to set up a stall is at one of the large antiques markets or one-day
antiques fairs that are advertised in the local press.
Salesmanship is vital in the trade. Having an esoteric knowledge of netsuke
and English silverware is all very well, but you also need to be able to
translate that knowledge into a tempting sales pitch.
The British Antique Dealers' Association. 20 Rutland Gate, London SW7 IBD

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920804

