FT923-6521

FT  24 AUG 92 / People: Bolland moves up - Press Complaints Commission


In the midst of what is proving to be an eventful summer for the Press
Complaints Commission, 29-year-old Mark Bolland, who has served as deputy
director since the turn of the year, has been promoted into the vacant hot
seat.
The PCC, set up at the beginning of 1991 in accordance with recommendations
of the Calcutt report on privacy and the press, initially took over the
resources - from staff to desks - of the old Press Council. The previous
director Ken Morgan left at the end of December, and now the council is
peopled almost entirely with new faces.
Bolland had worked for PCC chairman Lord McGregor, who is 71 tomorrow, at
the Advertising Standards Authority; he joined the PCC a year ago. He had
previously been on the marketing side for IBM, and has also spent a stretch
with a Toronto public affairs consultancy.
McGregor says Bolland had been told he would be considered for the
directorship after a year as deputy, but that he had 'been so good and
effective, particularly in dealing with the staff' that he was promoted
early.
The ASA experience is relevant, according to McGregor, 'to the extent that
both are self-regulatory bodies that have to enforce a code of practice
framed by the industry and not by the self-regulatory body itself'.
This autumn Sir David Calcutt is to reconsider the question of whether a law
of privacy is desirable, and is expected to report to the government around
Christmas. In the course of this he will be examining how effective the PCC
has been since it was created.
*****
The troubled jewellery chain Ratners has persuaded David Wellings, managing
director of the Cadbury Schweppes confectionery business, to join the board
as a non-executive director, thus giving the company three part-time
directors when Sir Victor Garland retires at the forthcoming agm.
'I am not terribly interested in the kind of company where it is a question
of sitting at the back of a Rolls-Royce,' says Wellings concerning his
appointment at the loss-making company which has yet to recover from Gerald
Ratner's description of one of its products as 'total crap'. 'Rather than
coasting along on someone else's success, it is a much more attractive
proposition actually to be able to do something,' he says.
He says that jewellery and sweets share both the seasonality - a huge
pre-Christmas bulge - and, to some extent, the element of impulse buying. He
also believes that, with his experience in confectionery display, he can
perhaps encourage the company 'to think in other directions' as to how it
arranges its shops.
Wellings, 51, has known James McAdam, who stepped in as Ratners' chairman in
January, since they met when advising the London Region Post Office in the
mid 1980s.
*****
After four years marketing jet fuel to airports worldwide, John Auld faces
the challenge of marketing to a different type of consumer as he takes over
as managing director of Kuwait Petroleum (GB).
Auld is not entirely new to the job. He was managing director of Ultramar's
UK marketing arm Ultramar Golden Eagle when it was one of five companies
acquired in 1987 by Kuwait Petroleum, which had recently started to develop
a UK marketing operation.
As the most experienced manager from the largest of the acquisitions, Auld
became acting managing director of Kuwait Petroleum (GB) for five months,
before being offered the chance of heading Kuwait Petroleum International's
aviation company.
He has 22 years of petroleum experience, beginning with Occidental, before
13 years with Ultramar. He returns to a company which has expanded rapidly
since 1987.
'I am very excited that someone else has done all the groundwork,' he says.
'It will be enjoyable for me to be able to focus on one country, after
running a business with activities all over the world.'
Auld takes over from Brian Stanley, who becomes managing director of Kuwait
Petroleum (Denmark).
*****
Richard Humphreys, formerly president and joint chief executive of Saatchi &
Saatchi Worldwide, who joined the BIRKDALE GROUP as a non-executive director
in June, is to become group chief executive from September 1 when Neil
McClure becomes group md.
*****
Stephen Jones has been appointed md of Vinylex, part of HEYWOOD WILLIAMS
GROUP, and chairman of Thurgar Bolle. He was previously md of Thurgar Bolle
and Bardex Plastics which were acquired by Heywood Williams last year.
Stephen Bridgens is appointed financial director of Vinylex.
*****
Marie Bakowski has been appointed medical director of Duphar Laboratories,
the pharmaceutical division of SOLVAY, in the UK.
*****
Rosie Barnes, the former SDP member who lost her seat at the general
election, has been appointed director of BIRTHRIGHT, the charity which
raises funds for research into the health of babies and women.
*****
Paul Rivers, company secretary, has also been appointed finance director of
MORLAND & CO.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920824

