FT921-12086

FT  29 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Asean members sign pact on area tariff
cuts


   By VICTOR MALLET


   SINGAPORE


THE SIX members of the Association of South East Asian Nations (Asean)
signed a mutual tariff reduction agreement yesterday at the end of their
summit, and said they wanted an Asean free trade area in 15 years or less.
But the low level of intra-Asean trade, and the inclusion of clauses
allowing individual countries to exempt sensitive products from the tariff
cuts, suggest the pact's success depends more on Asean's determination than
on the small print.
Mr Anand Panyarachun, Thai premier and the pact's promoter, said he would
ensure that Thailand's tariffs for manufactured products imported from Asean
(grouping Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Singapore and
Brunei) were no more than 30 per cent by the start of next year. He promised
to try to cut them to 20 per cent by 1994, and to reduce rates for the 15
sectors chosen by Asean for accelerated cuts to below 5 per cent as soon as
possible.
Ms Rafidah Aziz, Malaysia's international trade and industry minister, said
the country had identified numerous products for which Malaysian tariffs
could be set at 0-20 per cent next year; cars and probably cement would be
excluded for the time being. Manila also wants to be exempted from tariff
cuts on cement.
The agreement on the common effective preferential tariff (CEPT) scheme,
linked to a more general economic co-operation pact, is restricted to
products with an Asean content of at least 40 per cent and covers
manufactured, processed agricultural and capital goods but not agricultural
raw materials. Starting on January 1 1993, tariffs are to be cut to 20 per
cent within five to eight years, preferably year by year, and the aim is for
the tariffs to fall below 5 per cent in the subsequent even years.
Governments can move faster if they want, but they can also put 'sensitive'
products on an exclusion list, or use 'emergency measures' to suspend tariff
preferences if imports threaten to cause 'serious injury' to a domestic
economic sector.
But Asean members agreed to scrap quotas for CEPT products, end other
non-tariff barriers for CEPT products within five years, and make exceptions
to foreign exchange curbs to allow payments for CEPT products.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920129

