FT923-9621

FT  04 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Balkan refugees


THE UNITED Nations conference last week on how to deal with the problem of
Yugoslav refugees did not come up with any ready-made solutions. But it has,
at least focused governments' attention on an increasingly critical
situation, demanding urgent action.
It is all the more unfortunate that the donor countries have been unable to
reach a genuine consensus. Those such as Germany, Austria and Hungary, which
have offered asylum to hundreds of thousands of former Yugoslav refugees,
understandably feel that the burden should be more equitably shared between
countries.
Others, such as Britain and France, which have already absorbed a large
numbers of immigrants from their former colonies, do not want to open their
doors to a new flood of refugees, particularly during a recession.
Critics of Germany's proposal that refugee quotas should be fixed for each
host country argue that transporting hundreds of thousands of refugees
abroad merely plays into the hands of the Serbs, whose policy of expelling
Croats and Moslems is designed to create ethnically pure regions. But the
alternative favoured by most nations, the creation of
internationally-protected 'safe zones' in the former Yugoslav region, also
has some serious drawbacks.
The danger is that the Serb policy of 'ethnic cleansing' has already gone so
far that it will become impossible for most Moslem refugees ever to return
to their homes. There is also a risk that the protected zones may become
semi-permanent fixtures, like the Palestinian camps in Lebanon, at a huge
cost to an already overburdened UN.
Given the urgency of the situation - shelter will have to be provided for
some 500,000 Bosnian refugees next winter - all countries should be prepared
to make an additional effort to take in refugees pending a move on the safe
zones.
Washington's decision to offer Bosnian refugees 'temporary protected
status', is a formula which even Britain and France should find it possible
to accept.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920804

