FT921-14044

FT  17 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: PM refuses call for 'supergun'
statement - Exports To Iraq


   By DAVID OWEN


MR JOHN Major yesterday brushed off Labour demands for a ministerial
statement on the Iraqi supergun affair and dismissed recent allegations
about the extent of official awareness as 'nonsense.'
The prime minister was responding to a question from Mr David Winnick, the
Labour MP for Walsall North. Mr Winnick's remarks came the day after the
project manager of the supergun project informed MPs that British and US
officials were told about the gun's military uses before parts were
delivered to Saddam Hussein's regime.
Mr Major also dismissed criticism of the way ministers handled the Gulf war
campaign a year ago, describing it as 'one of the most successful military
operations ever undertaken in this country or elsewhere.' The campaign
'achieved its objectives more swiftly and with less bloodshed than anybody
could possibly imagine,' he said.
His comments follow the embarrassing disclosure of an internal armed
services report strongly criticising interference by ministers in the
conduct of Britain's role in the campaign. The report says that the
government showed 'a preoccupation with money and politics', 'excessive
ministerial influence', and 'a frustrating loss of cohesion.'
Mr Winnick called for 'a full and frank ministerial statement, which in fact
should come from the prime minister, of what was known inside the government
at the time over the supergun affair'.
He also referred to 'military items sold to Iraq right up to the invasion of
Kuwait'.
Mr Major will seek to intensify work on the Citizen's Charter, set to be a
important part of the Conservative election manifesto, at a Downing Street
summit today.
Most cabinet ministers have been asked to report on progress made in
implementing the package of proposals for improving public services unveiled
by the prime minister last July.
Mr Major will outline in a speech on January 27 how he sees the programme
developing.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920117

