FT921-14397

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Commodities business faces
threat


   By RICHARD WATERS


A LEGAL wrangle between the London Clearing House and several banks is
threatening to disrupt the financing of commodities business in London.
As a result, talks have been held between the clearing house, banks and
exchanges over whether changes to the settlement arrangements are necessary
to encourage some banks to continue to provide finance to the markets.
The dispute arises out of the collapse a year ago of Woodhouse Drake & Carey
(WDC), a medium-sized London commodities trader. Some banks which financed
WDC's trades are in dispute with the clearing house to recover assets over
which they claim to have security.
Separately, the clearing house is in dispute with customers of Woodhouse
Drake & Carey (Commodities), WDC's futures broking subsidiary, who are also
trying to recover assets which were held up in the clearing system.
Mr David Hardy, LCH managing director, said the dispute arose out of a
'failure of some banks to understand how delivery of commodities takes place
in London'. Once commodities pass into the clearing system, any security
interest of a bank over them lapses, he said.
However, some banks which lent money to finance WDC trades, taking in return
security over the commodities concerned, are attempting to enforce their
security interest. While the dispute continues, the banks involved are
reported to be concerned about advancing more money to commodities
businesses.
Mr Hardy said talks had been held to explore ways of meeting the banks'
concerns over the way the settlement system operates. 'Maybe you could find
a way to recognise their interest,' he said.
Meanwhile, the clearing house is being challenged over its decision to use
assets belonging to Woodhouse clients to offset liabilities of the failed
group, rather than bank guarantees which had been given for the purpose.
Mr Harsh Kumar, whose company, Afexp Commodities, stands to lose about
Pounds 300,000 as a result, said that the clearing house's actions meant
that clients of London commodity brokers could no longer rely on recovering
their assets once in the clearing system.
The clearing house is proposing to meet Woodhouse debts by applying some of
the Pounds 1.2m of Woodhouse clients' money which it holds.
The decision to use client money comes in spite of the fact that the
clearing house holds Pounds 3m, representing guarantees pledged by banks to
cover Woodhouse's trades. Under the LCH proposal, this money would be
returned to the banks, even though the guarantees were specifically given to
meet any liabilities of Woodhouse to the clearing system in the event of
failure.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920116

