FT924-6570

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: Carrier must escape the winter -
Nikki Tait and Ronald van de Krol on Northwest Airlines' troubles


   By NIKKI TAIT and RONALD VAN DE KROL


Just how bad is the financial situation at Northwest Airlines, the fourth
largest US carrier? That is the question bouncing around Wall Street's junk
bond desks, as analysts try to figure out whether yet another US carrier is
headed for the bankruptcy courts. 'My guess is that it's very critical,'
says Ms Chris Daley at Bear Stearns.
As ever with distressed US carriers, the pressing issue is liquidity, rather
than long-term capital structure, although the latter is scarcely
encouraging.
Northwest - whose 370 aircraft, Dollars 7bn-plus in annual revenues, and
46,000 employees make it roughly similar in size to British Airways  - was
taken private via a Dollars 3.65bn leveraged buy-out in 1989, bringing in
KLM as a minority equity partner. Today, the US carrier still has Dollars
4bn in long-term debt and, against a dire industry backdrop, has notched up
Dollars 880m in after-tax losses since the beginning of 1990.
But the focus of concern is whether it can survive the low-travel winter
without fresh financial assistance. Northwest drew down the last tranche of
a Dollars 600m revolving credit, its main source of flexibility, last month.
In the wake of this move, analysts are left guessing at the precise level of
cash balances: 'I wouldn't think there's a near-term liquidity crisis,' says
Mr Phillip Baggally, with New York credit rating agency, Standard & Poor's.
'But if they want to get through the winter period, they will probably need
some financial help.'
Support for this comes from several sources. First, even in the high-travel
summer period, NWA Inc clocked up a Dollars 19.7m loss after interest
charges and tax.
Now that the duller winter season has set in, some analysts reckon that
daily operat ing losses may be about Dollars 1m-Dollars 2m - a good rate at
which to eat up cash balances.
Second, Bankers Trust (BT), the US investment bank which acquired a minority
equity interest in the air line at the time of the buy-out, is trying to put
together a Dollars 300m one-year term loan for Northwest, with a deadline of
November 27.
Sources involved suggest the bank is prepared to contribute Dollars 50m, and
that the begging bowl is being passed widely to other existing banking
backers, other equity investors and even to suppliers.
Yesterday, KLM helpfully assisted the effort by offering to contribute
Dollars 50m, if others come in, and said it believed a Dollars 250m-plus
loan would enable Northwest to meet its near- term financial commitments.
But the question which everyone - including, presumably, the targeted
contributors to the BT loan - is asking, is whether an emergency facility
would really fix anything longer-term.
Again, the bullish view is that, having escaped the win ter, Northwest could
then look again at attracting new equity funds, partnership deals, a
renegotiation of the repayment terms on existing banking facilities, and/or
alterations to its new aircraft delivery schedules.
The bears, by contrast, point to the volatility of US airline business; the
very slow improvement in the economy; and the propensity for fare wars to
break out.
One potential plus for the airline could be concessions from its unions.
Northwest pilots have already offered to inject Dollars 100m a year, for a
three-year period, either through lower wages or other means. (If a deal was
struck solely through wage concessions, this would equate to a 15 per cent
pay cut.)
However, like KLM, the pilots insist other constituents at the airline must
play their part, for the offer to hold - a condition which was partially
fulfilled yesterday when four other labour unions tentatively proferred
another Dollars 200m in annual financial concessions over a similar term.
The pilots also want a share in Northwest's equity, or some equivalent deal,
and job security.
If the BT loan is not forthcoming, what are the airline's alternatives? One
possibility is asset sales; the disposal of slots at Chicago's O'Hare
airport, for example, has been mentioned. However, as one analyst points
out, such deals can seldom be arranged in a hurry.
Another is a Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing. The Cassandras have noted that
the 'drop dead date' for the BT loan is two days after Thanksgiving, which
could allow the airline to cash in on the heavy holiday traffic, and then
file in the subdued period which follows.
There are even unconfirmed suggestions that some of NWA's management would
welcome this option, since it would allow the airline to abrogate certain
contracts and, if pursued quickly, enter bankruptcy with a good cash balance
and a fair chance of emerging as a much stronger carrier.
In all of this, KLM's interests are plain to see. On the one hand, its stake
in Northwest is part of a grand design to become a global airline straddling
Europe, North America and, partly through Northwest, Asia Pacific.
On the other hand, Northwest's continued losses are putting pressure on its
own results, which are forecast to go into the red in the year 1992-93. For
this reason, KLM emphasised its Dollars 50m contribution to the Northwest
loan would not involve taking a higher stake and, by implication, a larger
share of the losses.
In 1989, KLM's involvement in Northwest was heralded as a strategic coup of
global proportions. The carrier must now fear its investment could land it
in the middle of a grimmer US phenomenon - a Chapter 11 filing.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921120

