FT921-15240

FT  11 JAN 92 / Docklands: Will it stay a cut-price ghost town? - As tycoons
and banks grapple with recession, big questions remain over major London
office and business developments


   By VANESSA HOULDER


ON A CLEAR July day in 1986 Margaret Thatcher, clad in blue with a white
hard hat, took the helm of a crane and swung the last chunk of granite into
place in the core of the Broadgate office complex on the edge of the City of
London. As the champagne flowed and a band played, the two developers -
Godfrey Bradman, slight and intense, and Stuart Lipton, a large,
softly-spoken figure with a passionate interest in architecture - stood
among the watching crowd of bankers, builders and architects.
They listened to the superlatives: the largest building project under way in
London; the fastest and largest single office development in the EC; and the
largest project in the City since the Great Fire of London in 1666.
The project summed up the spirit of the age. The City's deregulated, 24-hour
global trading blazed a trail for the largest surge in building that London
had ever seen. The boom eventually turned to bust. Bradman and Lipton were
among those who suffered heavy losses.
But in 1986, there was not a cloud in the sky. Bradman and Lipton were on
the threshold of one of the most exhilarating periods in the history of the
property market.
Developers became rich, influential and famous. 'I wake up every morning and
thank God I'm not a chartered accountant any longer, but involved with
property,' said Bradman, who made his first fortune by advising other
millionaires how to exploit tax loopholes in the pip-squeaking era of the
1970s. He turned to property after his ingenious schemes were stymied by the
taxman.
Property men, reviled as rapacious philistines in previous development
booms, inspired adulatory articles in the press. Stuart Lipton, who started
as an estate agent at 17, was acknowledged as a genius on architectural and
construction matters, becoming the first developer to be appointed a Royal
Fine Art Commissioner. David Goldstone, a Welsh lawyer and friend of Neil
Kinnock, who revived derelict inner-city council estates and later built
multi-million pound flats overlooking Prince Charles at Kensington Palace,
also caught the eye of the media. As did the articulate Trevor Osborne - the
first entrepreneur of his generation to float his company on the stock
market.
But the loudest fanfares were reserved for Godfrey Bradman, vegetarian,
teetotaller, fervent anti-smoker, chairman of Friends of the Earth,
confidante of the Prince of Wales and a campaigner on every issue from
homelessness to freedom of information. Friends paid tribute to his modesty,
sincerity and philanthropy; the less-friendly accused him of
self-righteousness and intolerance.
He once burned Pounds 10 notes in front of a dithering agent to demonstrate
how much time he was wasting. He sent every MP a plastic foetus when they
were debating the abortion bill.
Bradman and other lesser-known figures seemed unstoppable. Encouraged by
political rhetoric and relaxed planning rules, they redrew the map of
cities, transforming down-at-heel areas and breaking traditional boundaries.
They built higher-quality buildings than before and used more sophisticated
finance. The established property companies, built by an earlier generation
of tycoons, were often made to look like stodgy rent-collectors.
At the outset, the boom was solidly built on the needs of British business.
Retailers wanted shopping centres, high-tech companies wanted to combine
their operations on green field sites and the aggressive new financial
services houses wanted to swap their poky offices for cathedral-like trading
floors with air conditioning and banks of computers.
The drab office slabs that had been thrown up quickly and cheaply in the
1950s and 1960s were loathed by the tenants. Nowhere was this more true than
in the City of London, where rigid planning controls, high rents and ageing
offices reduced the expanding financial services industry to despair.
This disaffection, coupled with the ambitions of property developers, lit
the touchpaper that would lead to the most significant development of the
era.
In February 1985, Dr Michael Von Clemm, chairman of Credit Suisse First
Boston, went to the Isle of Dogs, a watery wasteland two miles east of the
Bank of England, to look for a packaging plant for the Roux Brothers'
restaurant chain. An enterprise zone had been set up in the area to attract
development, under the leadership of Nigel (now Sir Nigel) Broackes,
chairman of Trafalgar House, in Margaret Thatcher's first administration.
From the barge where he was eating lunch, Von Clemm spotted a disused banana
warehouse. Forgetting the Roux Brothers, Von Clemm started to toy with the
idea of converting the warehouse into a back office for Credit Suisse.
After several more visits he consulted Ware Travelstead, a US developer who
advised First Boston on its real estate investments. Ware Travelstead turned
Von Clemm's idea on its head. He knew that the bank had wasted five years in
trying, unsuccessfully, to obtain a new front office location in the City of
London. The real question, he insisted, was: 'Can we consider Canary Wharf
on the Isle of Dogs as a front office location?'
The question was breathtaking in its audacity, suggesting a 180-degree
reversal of London's pattern of development. For generations, any
institution with wealth or influence has gravitated towards the west of
London, while the east has been associated with poverty, dockyards and
sweatshops.
The idea that companies would move their headquarters to the East End was
credible only if London continued to burst its seams. If so, Ware
Travelstead's idea might save London's future as an international business
centre. If, however, demand died to a level which central London could
accommodate, Travelstead's proposal might be seen as one of the biggest
follies in London's history.
London's established landlords had no doubts. For them, Travelstead's idea
seemed an outright attack on the oldest law of property: 'Location,
location, location'. Only an outsider would imagine that businesses would
leave their contacts and favourite watering holes for an untried spot
separated from the heart of London by some of the poorest council estates in
Britain and linked merely by a small light railway.
But there were precedents, of a sort. The project had echoes of La Defense,
the modernist office complex outside the centre of Paris. It was also
reminiscent of the World Financial Centre, the glittering ziggurat built on
reclaimed land south of Wall Street by Olympia & York, the largest property
company in North America, owned by the reclusive Reichmann family.
The parallels between Canary Wharf and the World Financial Centre grabbed
the attention of Paul Reichmann, the chief strategist of O & Y. His company
had a matchless reputation for bold moves, having bought up swathes of
Manhattan when the city was close to bankruptcy in 1977, and having
established the World Financial Centre at a time when New York was in
recession. He felt his company was ready for its boldest move yet.
His opportunity arose when the consortium behind Canary Wharf started to
fall apart. O & Y stepped in. After just a few weeks of round-the-clock
work, it signed the master building agreement for a Pounds 4bn building
project, Europe's largest commercial development.
Margaret Thatcher was rapturous about O & Y's undertaking, seeing it as the
very spirit of enterprise. Her warm admiration for Paul Reichmann was tinged
with gratitude for his injection of new momentum into Docklands, which was
one of the government's key projects.
The Reichmann family was taking a risk that no UK developer was prepared to
take. Yet Paul Reichmann, a principled, pious man, did not look on it as a
gamble. He predicted that London would be the base for US and Far Eastern
companies wanting to expand in Europe, and his research told him that
companies wanted to consolidate their operations under one roof in modern,
prestigious offices. 'We believe that London will be the best office market
in the world over the next ten to 20 years,' he said.
The comment seemed uncontroversial. But even people who agreed with Paul
Reichmann and admired his long-term view wondered whether his company would
be able to reap the rewards. Was any private company strong enough to
reshape an entire city?
Whatever the doubts about O & Y's faith in Docklands, the Canadian company
was not alone in its conviction that businesses needed modern offices. Nor
was it alone in its belief (to which it had more claim than most) that it
was building the best offices in London. Palaces of marble, glass and steel
were erected all around the capital.
Ironically, the developers' faith in their buildings blinded them to the
coming crash. Although they took note of the growing competition, they
thought that the quality of their schemes would see them through. In any
case, the prospect of a downturn was on nobody's mind in the heady years
after 1986. The economy seemed transformed, making the old stop-go cycles a
thing of the past.
What followed was a property boom to end all property booms. What made it
possible was a banking free-for-all. Money, it seemed, could be borrowed by
anyone, from anyone. Deregulation and the reduction of interest rates after
the 1987 stock market crash encouraged banks to pour money into bricks and
mortar. UK property loans doubled to Pounds 40bn in the two years to 1990:
more than three times, in real terms, the peak of 1974.
The property market was a deal-makers' paradise. Anyone with a sharp eye for
the market could make a turn by buying a building and selling it a few
months later. One master of the art was Tony Clegg, a blunt Lancastrian, who
turned Mountleigh into one of the era's go-go stocks before retiring to
breed highland cattle in Yorkshire. Another was Michael Slade, the
high-spirited boss of Helical Bar, who became the second highest-paid man in
Britain when he made Pounds 1.1m in 1987 on the back of a land sale.
It was not to last. Gradually, interest rates rose, demand fell and the
letting boards piled up, particularly in the City and Docklands.
The developers shrugged their shoulders - and were supported by the experts.
'The UK non-residential property industry is in better financial shape than
at any time since the 1960s . . .' said an economist from Barclays Bank in
August 1989.
By autumn 1989, deals had slowed to a trickle. In September, a firm of
chartered surveyors voiced the unthinkable by forecasting falling City
rents. Property share prices tumbled.
The first clear warning of the impending crash came in February 1990 when
Godfrey Bradman sent tremors through the stock market by asking shareholders
for Pounds 125m to shore up Rosehaugh's balance sheet.
But many developers felt that Rosehaugh had no general lessons for the
industry, arguing that the fault could be laid at Bradman's own door for his
over-ambitious expansion. The tensions that had been building between
Bradman and his partner Stuart Lipton rose to a point where the two would
hardly talk to each other.
Confusion mounted when O & Y, the reputed masters of counter-cyclical
investment, bought an 8 per cent stake in Rosehaugh. Paul Reichmann, who had
already bought a third of Stuart Lipton's company, Stanhope, was signalling
a striking vote of confidence in London.
And then the music stopped completely.
Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait and business confidence, already fragile,
evaporated. Potential tenants and buyers melted away.
The collapse of the market revealed the flimsiness of the emergent property
companies. The new breed of 'merchant developers' depended on sales to pay
their interest bills. The sophisticated financing used by the young
investment companies assumed ever-rising rents.
One by one the mercurial entrepreneurs of the 1980s saw their companies go
under. They included Iain Shearer, a former airline pilot; Berish Berger,
the scion of one of the UK's largest property-owning families; and Irvine
Sellar, an exuberant dealer who had been known as the 'King of Carnaby
Street' in his former career in the rag trade.
Others struggled to keep their heads above water. Trevor Osborne's Speyhawk
announced that it was unable to pay even its preference dividends - a
predicament made worse by the knowledge that he had been just 16 hours from
clinching the sale of his Speyhawk business the previous summer.
Days after Saddam Hussein's invasion, Nordstjernan, the Swedish bidders
pulled out, citing 'the uncertain world political and economic climate.'
Stuart Lipton's Stanhope and Godfrey Bradman's Rosehaugh announced annual
losses of Pounds 77m and Pounds 227m respectively; and Godfrey Bradman
stepped down from chairman to vice-chairman as the company fought for
survival.
Merger talks between them became bogged down, partly because of the
animosity between the two men. O & Y lost more than Pounds 100m on its
investment in the two companies, adding to the problems emerged throughout
its financial empire.
As the downturn deepened, the mood of the property industry turned to
despair and anger. The developers blamed themselves and the banks; most of
all, they blamed the government. The politicians they once lauded were seen
as short-sighted and ignorant for having set off a gold rush they could not
control.
The length and scale of this downturn is unprecedented. Even the property
crash of the early 1970s, with which it shares many similarities, did not
produce so much empty space. The property companies and their banks are in
unchartered territory, grappling with awesome, unanswered questions.
Will the empty buildings find tenants? Or will the worst-hit areas, such as
the City of London, where nearly one in five buildings is empty, remain
glutted for the rest of the century?
Will this oversupply and the flagging economy force rents to continue to
plummet? If so, it will further undermine the value of commercial property
across Britain, which has already lost some Pounds 70bn, more than a quarter
of its value.
Will the banks continue to support the UK property industry? A handful of
impatient lenders could bring down scores of over-borrowed companies and
flood the market with property.
And what of Docklands, the embodiment of laissez-faire policies, with its
millions of square feet of empty offices, served by an erratic Toy Town
railway? Possibly, it will succeed in becoming London's third business
centre, so breaking the stranglehold of the established landlords and
forever ridding London of the vested interests that made it the most
expensive capital in Europe.
But it is also possible that its disastrous launch has tarnished its
reputation for good. Far from being a prestigious rival to central London,
Docklands may evolve as a cut-price location for clerks and computer
facilities, more akin to Croydon than the City.
The sheer number of empty buildings could well mean that some will not
attract tenants at any price. For years to come, Docklands may remain a
half-empty ghost town - a monument to the hubris of the 1980s.

The Financial Times


London Page I Illustration (Omitted). Illustration From left, Stuart Lipton,
Godfrey Bradman and Paul Reichmann. Their property deals attracted attention
from all over the world (Omitted).

920111

