FT921-1384

FT  24 MAR 92 / Frank B Hall stake for sale


   By RICHARD LAPPER and NIKKI TAIT


   LONDON, NEW YORK


RELIANCE Group Holdings, the US insurance and investment company controlled
by Mr Saul Steinberg, is seeking a buyer for its majority stake in Frank B.
Hall, its troubled insurance broking subsidiary.
Hall, which is the seventh biggest broker in the world with income of around
Dollars 462m (Pounds 267m) in 1991, owns Leslie & Godwin, the Lloyd's
broker.
Its sale would signal further realignment within the highly competitive
broking sector.
Hall revealed that Reliance, the investment and insurance company was
exploring the sale of its stake in a filing with the US Securities and
Exchange Commission last week.
Reliance owns 68 per cent of the common stock, or 84 per cent if all
warrants are exercised and preferred shares converted. It is believed to
have called in Bear Stearns, the Wall Street investment bank, to advise.
Hall has incurred losses after tax in four of the last five years, reporting
a deficit of Dollars 25.6m in 1991.
The sale opens new opportunities for Hall's leading international
competitors who have been expanding market share in recent years. Three of
Hall's toughest competitors in the US retail market have all made
significant headway in the last 18 months. Corroon & Black linked up with
the London-based broker, Willis Faber, in October 1990 to form Willis
Corroon, the world's second biggest broker.
Rollins Burdick Hunter, which is part of the Aon Corporation, has also been
expanding in Europe. It bought the Dutch broker Hudig-Langeveldt last
August, overtaking Hall in the rankings (by revenues) as a result. Aon also
owns a significant minority stake in the London market broker, Nicholson
Chamberlain Colls, but lacks any presence in UK retail broking.
Last month New York-based Marsh McLennan, the world's biggest broker, also
broadened its base in Europe, by buying Faugere et Jutheau, France's biggest
broker.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920324

