FT923-10655

FT  29 JUL 92 / Industry to help focus teaching


   By ALAN PIKE


BUSINESS and industrial sponsors will be encouraged to support schools
specialising in technology, science, languages and other fields.
More than 90 per cent of secondary schools already have some form of link
with local business communities, and the white paper says the government is
keen that the existing commitment of business and industry to schools should
be 'reinforced and supported'.
A new category of sponsor-governor will be created at schools specialising
in particular subjects, with legislation introduced to permit up to four
such appointments.
Under the proposals the education secretary will have to approve the
appointment of sponsor-governors, taking account of 'the financial and
curricular benefits which the school would derive from such sponsorship'.
Many of the schools will specialise in the teaching of technology -
particularly its vocational aspects - which the white paper describes as the
government's top priority. 'The economic health of the country requires the
vigorous promotion of technology in schools and the active involvement of
private-sector sponsors in that process.'
The 15 city technology colleges, which have been established in partnership
with business to implement an innovative curriculum, were, the white paper
says, proving outstandingly popular with parents in inner-city areas. One
hundred secondary schools - both local-authority and grant-maintained - had
been selected this year to become the first of a chain of technology
schools.
They will then be joined by a wider network of technology colleges - schools
specialising in technology - established in partnership with business
sponsors.
'Technology colleges will have the strong curricular emphasis of technology
schools. In addition, like city technology colleges, they will enjoy a
direct commitment from their business sponsors, leading to a more focused
technology curriculum as well as other benefits.'
Business sponsors, in return for up to four seats on the governing body and
a direct role in the school's management, would be expected to make a
'substantial contribution' to the initial and continuing capital costs of
turning a school into a technology college, the white paper says.
In addition to their financial contributions, the government wants sponsors
to use their expertise to enrich a school's curriculum and to offer pupils
work experience and other vocational opportunities.
Existing grant-maintained schools, which are already running their own
budgets outside local-authority control, will be able to apply to become
technology colleges and seek a contribution towards the cost from the
government. Schools doing so would not be required to undertake a second
ballot on opting out. They would, however, need to demonstrate that they had
the support of sponsors for the project and 'show evidence of full
consultation with parents and interested parties'. The schools' existing
governors would remain in a majority.
The white paper emphasises that schools opting for subject specialisation
would continue to teach the full range of national-curriculum subjects, but
says that should not stop them choosing to develop special expertise.
Other leading industrial nations combined the attainment of high standards
with a measure of specialisation, the white paper stresses. 'Such
specialisation does not mean selection, which implies choice by the school;
instead it means increased choice for parents and pupils.'
The white paper says that high-quality, enthusiastic staff would be
attracted to a school which had shown its commitment to excellence in a
particular subject.
MAIN POINTS OF PATTEN'S PLAN
New powers to replace governors of failing schools or groups of schools
Making opting out easier so all schools can become grant-maintained
A Funding Agency for Schools to distribute cash to opted-out schools
Allowing clusters of small primary schools to opt out together
Encouraging more schools to specialise

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920729

