FT921-15378

FT  10 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Washington seeks 'quiet talks' with Gatt
chief


   By NANCY DUNNE


MRS Carla Hills, the US Trade Representative, yesterday said she would bring
US concerns about the draft of the Uruguay Round text to Mr Arthur Dunkel,
the Gatt Director-General, for 'quiet consultations' after all the members
of the multilateral trading organisation had met to 'appraise' the paper
next Monday.
However, she indicated that the number of changes sought in the 451-page
paper, prepared by Mr Dunkel, must be minimal. 'If all 108 Gatt members want
to renegotiate, it will all unravel,' she said.
Mrs Hills emphasised that the 'fairly positive' Dunkel draft was not final
and her 1,000 private sector advisers were being consulted.
She acknowledged that many US groups 'have their disappointments' but, in
the end, they will have to weigh the improvements to the world trading
system provided by the proposed reforms against the current system.
One of a number of private sector groups to weigh in against the Dunkel
draft yesterday said it would get 'little or nothing' from the proposals.
The American Soyabean Association said the US should either press for 'a
better Gatt agreement or end the round of negotiations without modifying the
rules of trade.'
Mr Steve Yoder, the Association's first vice-president, said the failure of
the Gatt to resolve effectively a US-EC dispute of the Community's oilseed
programme called the entire system into question.
'If the US accepts the Dunkel paper, it will be tantamount to accepting the
EC's system of higher internal support for oilseeds,' Mr Yoder said.
He joined the textile producers, American Motion Picture Association, the
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association and others in their opposition to
the Dunkel draft.
Opposition also began to surface in Congress, where Congressman Ron
Marlenee, a Montana Republican and member of the House Agriculture
Committee, complained that Mr Dunkel had taken 'a little slice of pie from
one proposal, then a little scoop of ice cream from another nation, and then
added a little fruit in an attempt to give everybody a little bid of
dessert.
'That's not the way good, solid trade relations are built.'
Another Republican committee member, Congressman Steve Gunderson, complained
that the Dunkel draft would not achieve 'the level playing field in terms of
the international dairy market.
'Europe will be able to continue to subsidise their exports or dumping of
their diary products in the world market at a higher rate than will the US,'
he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920110

