FT924-6015

FT  24 NOV 92 / Radical reform of health care system recommended


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


RADICAL reform of the US health care system, including tough budgetary curbs
on physicians and hospitals and steps to expand access to care, is
recommended by the OECD.
Its report criticises many aspects of the system and says linking employment
and health insurance provision is 'archaic and makes no more sense than
linking automobile insurance to people's employment'.
The US has the worst record among OECD countries in controlling health care
costs and securing access to care. In real terms, costs have risen at an
annual rate of 5.5 per cent for two decades, twice as fast as GDP growth. In
per capita terms, the US spends twice as much as the OECD average. Yet 35m
people, one in seven, still lack insurance cover.
The root cause of cost inflation lies in the 'nature of the system'. Once
insured, the marginal cost of treatment is low; yet 'physicians have
incentives, both moral and financial, to offer as much and as good a
treatment as they can'. To stop costs exploding, all OECD countries except
the US have placed budgetary curbs on providers, limiting doctors' ability
to provide costly new treatments.
The OECD says the US has no choice but to impose broad controls on price and
volume of health care services. Such controls are already imposed in US
publicly-financed schemes such as Medicare, the programme for the elderly,
but are likely to be resisted in the US private sector.
Gaps in health care cover persist because the private insurance system for
those under 65 is voluntary and closely tied to employment. Private insurers
'have a powerful incentive to charge bad risks their (high) actuarial cost,
or refuse coverage'. Such 'cream-skimming' results in prohibitive insurance
costs for small companies and individuals because there are few policy
holders over whom to accommodate bad risks. (Bad risks are people most
likely to become ill or those with pre-existing conditions.)
The OECD outlines two options for reform. The federal government could
regulate private insurers more heavily - to prevent them excluding bad risks
 -and cut insurance premium costs by offering means-tested subsidies. Or
they could move to the tax-financed social insurance system favoured in
other OECD countries, 'guaranteeing universal access, carrying lower
administrative costs and avoiding cream-skimming'. The 'play or pay' plan
put forward by Democrats in Congress and backed by Mr Bill Clinton, might
serve as a transition to a mainly tax-financed system. Under this, employers
would have to provide insurance for employees or pay a payroll tax to
finance an expanded public-sector scheme.
OECD officials say the most promising reform comes from Mr John Garamendi,
California's insurance commissioner. Under this, care would be financed by
payroll taxes. The link between employment and insurance would end, since
individuals would sign up with competing 'health insurance purchasing
corporations'. These would use payroll taxes to buy care from competing
private-sector providers. The US problem is that such a plan, while cutting
growth of health care costs, would raise tax burdens.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921124

