FT924-11561

FT  24 OCT 92 / Briefcase, Q&A: Equal shares for tax man


MY WIFE and I own a second home as tenants in common but in the shares two
thirds/one third. We are planning our inheritance tax. Would it be better to
convert this to equal shares? Is it possible to do so by a simple
declaration?
Estate equalisation can certainly reduce inheritance tax payable but the
planning involved has changed over the last couple of years as the tax bands
and rates have altered.
A husband and wife each has a nil rate band of Pounds 150,000. Once the nil
rate band has been utilised, the rest of the estate is subject to tax at a
flat rate of 40 per cent. In many cases, wills are drafted so that each
spouse leaves all assets to the survivor. However, by doing this, they would
not be taking advantage of the nil rate band available on their death as
transfers between husband and wife are exempt in any event. Therefore, under
the present tax rules, it would be beneficial to leave the equivalent of the
nil rate band to persons other than the spouse, for example the children.
The rest of the estate could then be passed to the spouse.
If a husband and wife have a total estate of Pounds 300,000 then by using
both nil rate bands, all the tax can be avoided. However, if the value of
the chargeable estate is higher than this, I would suggest that only the nil
rate band is left to persons other than the spouse, otherwise tax can be
payable on the first death.
For example, if a husband and wife have an estate of Pounds 500,000 and
fully equalise the estate with all their assets passing to their children on
their respective deaths, then they each leave assets of Pounds 250,000, of
which Pounds 150,000 will be tax-free and the balance will be subject to tax
at 40 per cent, giving rise to a Pounds 40,000 charge on the first death.
This reply was provided by Barry Stillerman of accountants Stoy Hayward.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

921024

