FT924-12158

FT  22 OCT 92 / Bomb police reject criticism


   By RICHARD JOHNS


SCOTLAND YARD last night angrily refuted charges that it had been slow to
react to IRA bomb warnings as a fresh spate of bombings hit London. It said
the warnings were aimed at creating confusion and discrediting the police.
The first blast was at 4.36pm on a bridge near Silver Street station,
Edmonton, north London. Three people were slightly injured. British
transport police had said just before the explosion that no security alerts
were under way.
At a press conference Mr George Churchill-Coleman, commander of the
anti-terrorist squad, said: 'It takes time to react and we couldn't have
reacted any faster than we did.'
The conference was delayed by a second explosion at the Territorial Army
centre in Olympia at 8.36pm which slightly injured three people. A third
device went off at 9.14pm on a railway in Willesden.
All routes out of Euston station were closed as police searched for further
devices. British Rail said it was unable to say whether today's rail
services would be affected.
Mr Churchill-Coleman said police were still 'investigating' the IRA
statement issued in Dublin to a media organisation just after 3.30pm, an
hour before the first blast. The statement - also passed on by the Irish
Garda - said: 'In spite of repeated phone calls to a number of London radio
stations, British police have made no effort to act on authenticated
warnings that our volunteers have a bomb on the rail line at Four Bridges on
the North Circular Road, London.'
Mr Churchill-Coleman described the IRA claim as part of a campaign to make
the police look 'confused, incompetent and inept'. Before yesterday's
incidents the IRA's 'so-called codeword' had been used 61 times since
February last year and 37 of these had been hoaxes.
Nine radio stations covering north London said they had not received a
tip-off.
An IRA car bomb went off last night in the centre of Bangor, County Down.
There were no reports of serious injuries.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921022

