FT921-11745

FT  30 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: An upheaval waiting to happen
 -The London Stock Exchange's delayed reforms


   By RICHARD WATERS


   TWO years ago, the London Stock Exchange


then called the International Stock Exchange - seemed on the point of rapid
transformation.
Under new management, and with a new strategy agreed in outline, it seemed
set for an upheaval to parallel the Big Bang reforms that had reshaped the
City in 1986.
Two years on, nothing has happened - and the securities companies which are
the exchange's biggest customers are getting impatient. The exchange seems
no closer to achieving its original plan: to split its markets into two,
creating a national, retail market for the UK and a wholesale one for all
European stocks. Frustration has begun to turn to anger.
An executive at one of the City's top securities companies, who has been
deeply involved in the stock exchange's work on its new strategy, says: 'I
just can't understand why there isn't any progress. We've done all the hard
work - why aren't they putting it out?'
Another, who also declined to be named, added: 'The strategy was accepted
conceptually by the whole market place 18 months ago. Mr Peter Rawlins (the
exchange's chief executive) has let this one slip, and has lost credibility
because of it.'
One person who is prepared to speak openly is Mr David Jones, managing
director of Sharelink, a telephone-based retail broker which regularly
handles more than 10 per cent of the trades in the UK market. Mr Jones's
proposals for a new retail stock market in the UK, separate from the stock
exchange, were previously cold-shouldered by the exchange. 'They led me and
everybody else to believe that they would not only do it more effectively
themselves, but also that they would do it quicker. Yet here we are, two
years later, with no progress.'
What has added to the frustration of these and other financial firms is that
their contribution to the redevelopment of the exchange was completed long
ago. Two high-level committees of brokers, set up to advise the exchange's
staff, finished their work last autumn, and expected a quick response from
the authorities. Since then, there has been a deathly silence.
Three possible reasons are put forward for the delays. One is that upheavals
among the exchange's staff has held back development and that the work will
now be completed by a team of outside consultants from Andersen Consultants
(Mr Rawlins is an Andersen-trained accountant). A fortnight ago, the
exchange revealed that Andersen partners would henceforth hold key line
management positions in the exchange, effectively providing a
middle-management below Mr Rawlins and his fellow directors.
That arrival of Andersen has awakened fears in the industry that the
exchange's redevelopment has now fallen into the hands of technocrats, and
previously-agreed changes will be subject to amendment.
Mr Peter Hogarth, the exchange's director for trading markets (its secondary
market activities) says such fears are misplaced.
'They (Andersen) are not responsible for the business definition or
requirements at all,' he said. 'They are there to implement the answers, not
to give them.'
He also played down fears that the arrival of Andersen signals an expensive,
long-term overhaul of the exchange's decrepit systems. All sides agree a new
technological base for the market needs to be created, but the market's
users do not want an expensive refit.
The second reason put forward for the delays is that the exchange has failed
completely to disentangle the two segments of its new strategy, and so has
become bogged down in finding ways for the retail and wholesale markets to
stand side-by-side.
'We need two completely separate structures,' said Mr Jones. 'They need to
be designed, managed and run separately, from separate budgets.'
A third possible reason has been the difficulty of overcoming entrenched
interests in the market. A good example is the position of market makers in
the UK market (as opposed to Seaq International, London's successful
international share market). At present, market makers in the UK market
benefit from privileges such as the exclusive right to borrow stock to meet
settlement obligations - something that gives them a considerable advantage
over others. On the other hand, they suffer from the rule to publish details
of all trades within 90 minutes. They claim this exposes them to attack from
other market-makers before they have a chance to unwind their positions,
they claim.
Market-makers on Seaq International find themselves in the opposite
position. Trades are not published and there are no stock-borrowing
privileges. The question for the exchange has been: how to migrate to a
single European market, with UK as well as foreign stocks, without upsetting
the market-makers on the one hand, or regulators on the other?
An answer could be close. Discussions with market makers and regulators have
intensified recently. On February 27, the exchange's board is (finally) due
to be presented with the a proposal.
If all goes as the exchange hopes, that will involve scrapping the trade
publication rule for large bargains - a move which has met with resistance
from the Office of Fair Trading and the Securities and Investments Board. It
will also mean the launch of a limited pilot scheme for a new 'matching
principle' scheme for trading small, illiquid stocks.
Other changes will then be phased in.

The Financial Times


London Page 27 Photograph Peter Rawlings, Exchange on the point of
transformation (Omitted).

920130

