FT924-6261

FT  21 NOV 92 / Wide welcome for trade pact


   By REUTER


   POLITICAL leaders in western Europe


with the significant exception of France - hailed yesterday's trade pact as
a triumph, but farmers condemned it as a sellout of their interests, Reuter
reports.
In Bonn, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government welcomed the farm deal.
Government spokesman Dieter Vogel said the agreement formed a good basis for
a Gatt agreement. 'The German government assumes that this agreement can be
implemented within the framework of the EC agriculture reform,' he said.
'The world economy and the German economy need a positive impulse in the
present critical phase. Prosperity in Germany and in the European Community
depend decisively on free world trade and open markets.'
But in Paris Agriculture Minister Jean-Pierre Soisson said France could not
accept the deal. But, although pressed repeatedly, he declined to say
definitely that the government would veto the accord.
The Spanish agriculture minister, Mr Pedro Solbes, said: 'This is good news,
and means sacrifices on both sides, but we are concerned over France's
dissatisfaction with the agreement.'
French farmers called for a popular revolt against the deal. Mr Luc Guyau,
president of the biggest farmers' union, FNSEA, described the accord reached
in Washington as 'a knife in the back' and called for immediate nationwide
protests by farmers.
France would not be alone in objecting, Mr Soisson said. 'When other
agriculture ministers discover (the details), they will have the similar
positions to mine.'
The German Farmers' Association (DBV) said the Community had caved in to
'massive pressure' from the US.
In the US, President-elect Bill Clinton, who would have to guide the package
through Congress, was guarded in his response yesterday.
'I'm hopeful but we've got to look at it,' he told reporters. 'I've been
fooling with farm issues for 20 years now. We've got to look at it, see the
details.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921121

