FT921-15423

FT  10 JAN 92 / International Company News: French to reform pension schemes


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


THE FRENCH government will this spring produce proposals for the creation of
new private equity plans and to reform corporate pension schemes as part of
moves to expand the use of private pensions, a move which could have
significant consequences for France's financial markets.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the finance minister, yesterday told a Paris conference
that he planned to launch a tax-efficient private equity plan. He also said
he would in early April unveil proposals for the fonds salariaux, corporate
pension schemes used by a small number of senior managers.
The French stock market rose on the news. The main Paris bourse index, CAC
40, ended the day 2.7 per cent higher at 1,833.86.
At present, almost all French pensions are administered by the state, with
the exception of the fonds salariaux, available only to a minority of the
workforce. The system is administered by the Caisse de Retraite, which acts
as a cash manager by paying for pensions from the money received from those
in employment.
This system is coming under strain as the French workforce grows older. By
the year 2020, France is expected to reach a demographic 'crunch' whereby
there are more people living off pensions than there are in employment to
pay for them.
As a result, the French government has been considering ways of stimulating
the use of private pensions, a politically sensitive subject given the
opposition of the powerful trade union lobby.
The expansion of private pensions has important implications for the French
financial sector. First, it provides a potentially lucrative new market.
Second, it could produce a sorely-needed source of investment for the stock
market thereby helping to improve liquidity.
'At present, we don't know exactly what the French government plans to do,'
said Mr Robin Hubbard, European economics analyst at Paribas in London. 'But
the development of private pensions would be good news for both equities and
bonds.'
Paris bourse, Page 27

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920110

