FT921-1132

FT  25 MAR 92 / Radiation leak renews safety fears over Russian reactors


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


FEARS over the safety of nuclear reactors in the former Soviet Union were
revived yesterday following a leak of radiation from a Russian nuclear power
station at Sosnovy Bor, 60 miles west of St Petersburg.
The leak initially registered three on the seven-point scale of seriousness
devised by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to classify nuclear
accidents. The 1986 Chernobyl explosion was rated level seven.
The state nuclear inspectorate, Gosatomnadzor, said radioactive iodine and
inert gases leaked into the reactor's machine room early yesterday and were
transmitted by the ventilation system into the outside atmosphere.
The agency said an emergency control system immediately came into operation
and the stricken reactor had then been closed and was being cooled.
There were conflicting reports about the significance of the accident. Mr
Yuri Rogozhin of Gosatomnadzor said the 'degree of the incident is serious,
with possible consequences for the environment and the population'.
But there was 'no comparison' between the incident and the Chernobyl
disaster, although the Sosnovy Bor reactor was of the same type as that at
Chernobyl.
Mr Sergei Galkin, deputy chief engineer at Sosnovy Bor in charge of safety,
told the official news agency Itar-Tass that the leak of radioactive gases
'did not exceed the sanitary norms for nuclear power installations'.
Nuclear safety organisations in Sweden and Finland said there had been no
rise in radioactive levels on their monitors.
Mr Matti Vuorinen, head of the Finnish Centre for Radiation and Nuclear
Safety, said the leaks appeared to pose no threat to residents.
Western governments and environmentalists expressed concern over safety
standards for reactors in the former Soviet Union and renewed calls for
unsafe plants to be shut.
The incident also highlighted concern, especially in neighbouring countries,
over the future of ageing reactors kept in service in republics which have
no alternative sources of power - especially at a time of falling supplies
of oil, gas and coal.
Swedish inspectors who visited Sosnovy Bor noted that two of its four
reactors lacked safety fixtures to prevent radiation leaks.
Nuclear worries, Page 2
Editorial comment, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920325

