FT921-14059

FT  17 JAN 92 / CBI wants Budget lift for investment


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff and IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


INCREASES in investment allowances to help industry, rather than cuts in
income tax, should be the priority in the Budget, the Confederation of
British Industry said yesterday.
In a report to be sent to Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, the CBI said
recent declines in investment had put UK businesses at a disadvantage
against overseas competitors.
The CBI wants Mr Lamont to raise investment allowances for plant and
machinery from 25 per cent to 40 per cent.
It said introduction of the new allowances would cost the Treasury Pounds
1.05bn in 1993-94 and increase public-sector borrowing when the government's
finances are under strain.
Sir John Banham, CBI director-general, said: 'Our proposals are designed to
put the economy in a position where it can afford tax cuts.'
Other measures advocated in the report include:
Shelving the introduction this autumn of monthly rather than quarterly
collection of value-added tax from 1,600 large companies.
Ending the double taxation of profits from overseas operations through
advance corporation tax.
Speeding up payment of financial benefits for companies which stand to gain
from introduction of the uniform business rate.
Provision of 100 per cent relief for business assets from inheritance tax.
Stepping up investment on training and transport.
If the Treasury took up all the CBI's suggestions, the total cost to the
taxpayer would be Pounds 1.76bn in 1992-93 and Pounds 1.63bn the following
year.
Ian Hamilton Fazey writes: the CBI's Yorkshire and Humberside regional
council reported yesterday that business confidence had dipped further, with
many companies saying there would be no economic upturn before the second
half of the year.
Mr Peter Barker, regional chairman and chief executive of Fenner, a
Humberside industrial belting company, said many companies were having
trouble getting credit or finance. Half of the members were expecting to
shed more jobs. He called for a Budget to encourage investment.

The Financial Times


London Page 8 Photograph Budget call, Sir John Banham launches the report
yesterday (Omitted).

920117

