FT922-4556

FT  05 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Partners leave Danes to ponder
their fate - Community's strategy is to carry on as if nothing happened,
pushing legalities to one side


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   OSLO


FOR ALL the high stakes riding on the outcome of the European Community
crisis, caused by Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the simple,
not to say simplistic, strategy of all 12 states is to try to carry on as
though the earthquake had never happened.
The game plan of Denmark's 11 partners is politics first, legalities later.
They hope to plod through the Maastricht ratification, negotiating such
tricky obstacles as the June 18 referendum in Ireland, the autumn plebiscite
in France, and the crucial November-December vote in the German parliament,
so that by year-end they will have notched up 11 acts of ratification with
which to confront the Danes.
Only then would the Danes be asked to choose. It would not be a repeat of
the question put to voters this week - do you want Maastricht's political
and monetary union or not? - but something more menacing. It could run on
the lines of: 'Since, by our acts of ratification, we have shown you that we
intend to transform the Community into Maastricht-style European union
(whether you like it or not), the old-style Community soon will no longer
exist. This gives you the choice of joining us in the union, or negotiating
some kind of associate status.'
The strategy would depend on maintaining that the rejection is basically a
Danish problem. It is a strategy in which the Danish government appears to
be conniving.
Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, Danish foreign minister, said in Oslo yesterday,
before meeting his EC counterparts in emergency session, that he would not
be asking to re-negotiate Maastricht 'because we know that would be
impossible'. Echoing other ministers, he said: 'I think we all need a long
time for reflection.' What that means in practice is making the Danish
people sweat out, over the coming months, the consequences of their vote on
Tuesday.
What is psychologically worse for Danes is that they will be left pondering
imagined, as much as real, effects of their decision. For all the talk of EC
legal experts, poring over the complexities thrown up by the Danish vote, it
will probably be months before Danes get a precise idea of their isolation.
There are several practical reasons for this. No real isolation will emerge
until the 11 start chalking up ratification successes. In the meantime, as a
UK official said yesterday, they 'do not want to slam any doors or rule out
procedures which would prevent Denmark becoming a full member of the
European union eventually'. Nor is there any clear idea yet which door to
slam.
Whatever the Danes signalled this week, they did not vote to leave the
present Community from which, as the members with the highest average
income, they draw a net financial benefit. But a period of reflection would
be a deliberate ploy to leave the Danes in the dark, where imagined
nightmares are often worse than real ones.
Not everyone has been able to restrain themselves from being more explicit.
'If the Danes don't want to join us, and won't leave the Community
themselves, then we will just move the house,' said a French foreign
ministry official yesterday. According to this theory, which is gaining
currency, the 11 would denounce the Treaty of Rome, take its substance, add
Maastricht and leave Denmark in an empty wing of the new house called
European Union.
At first, according to this scenario, Denmark might share in much activity
of the European Union, particularly regarding the single market. But it
might lose, or have reduced, its representation in the Council of Ministers,
Commission and parliament. This might well jeopardise Copenhagen's planned
EC presidency for the first half of 1993.
As time went on, Denmark might find itself squeezed out of the single
market, or at least without a proper say in the updating of environmental or
social policy. That would be ironic in view of the Danish left's complaints
against Maastricht that it left Brussels too inactive in raising labour and
anti-pollution standards.
It would also leave Denmark worse off than European Free Trade Association
(Efta) countries which have joined the EC in the new European Economic Area
(EEA). This, imperfect though it is, gives the Eftans some say in shaping
future EC single-market laws that will form the core of EEA legislation.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920605

