FT923-15716

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Contradictory criteria for
membership of Club Emu


   By EDWARD BALLS


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
THE SACRIFICES come now, the rewards later: only a select band of
'converged' countries will be allowed to join Europe's monetary union when,
and if, it occurs later this decade. But the convergence criteria for Emu
are proving painfully tough to meet. Most countries aspire to join, but few
currently make the grade.
The Maastricht treaty has set a high standard of economic rectitude against
which the performance of EC member states is now being judged. The
convergence criteria impose limits on acceptable inflation rates, long-term
interest rates, general government budget deficits and the stock of
outstanding public debt.
At first sight, the recent record of inflation convergence looks promising.
Progress towards nominal convergence within Europe is illustrated on the
left-hand chart. It shows Europe's progress since 1988, when this latest and
most serious attempt to establish a single European currency was born at
that year's EC summit in Hanover. Only those countries which pass both
inflation tests are located in the shaded box.
The number of qualifiers has increased from three to five since 1988. The UK
and Denmark have shown the most impressive shift from high to relatively low
inflation; but Italy, Spain and Portugal have made no progress towards
inflation convergence. The three missing countries, for whom no long bond
rates are available, currently have inflation rate differentials of 0.8 per
cent (Luxembourg), 5.8 per cent (Portugal) and 15.4 per cent (Greece).
The discipline of the European exchange rate mechanism is part of the reason
for this inflation convergence. Germany, the anchor country within the ERM,
was understandably unwilling to relinquish the D-Mark unless Germany's
single currency partners had first proved their commitment to low and stable
inflation.
Yet Europe's success is not all it seems. The average inflation rate of the
three lowest countries has increased from 1 per cent in 1988 to 2.7 per cent
today. Convergence has been as much about rising inflation in the low
inflation countries as falling inflation elsewhere. The most significant
deterioration has been the sharp rise in Germany's inflation rate since
unification in 1990.
While Europe's record on inflation convergence is good, if relative to an
upwardly mobile target, the fiscal policy performance has been almost
universally bad. The fiscal rules set absolute limits for permissible
deficits and debt ratios; but most EC member countries have been moving away
from this target range, as the right-hand chart shows.
Five EC member states would have passed both fiscal rules in 1988, with
Spain not far away. That number has now fallen to just two - Luxembourg and
France. Even these two countries have seen their fiscal deficits increase,
although not as dramatically as that of the UK. Ironically, Germany,
previously the most committed advocate of fiscal rectitude and critic of
Italian profligacy, now fails to pass the deficit test.
Only Ireland has bucked the trend and moved decisively towards fiscal
sobriety, although it still has some distance to travel. Of the other high
debt countries, Italy and Greece have staggered in the opposite direction.
Why has this general fiscal deterioration occurred? The economic strains
that German unification has imposed on the European economy is part of the
answer. Germany's rising fiscal deficit has forced up real interest rates
across Europe; while the accompanying inflationary pressures in Germany have
set a painfully high floor for short-term interest rates across the ERM.
The inevitable result of this prolonged period of tight monetary policy and
high real interest rates has been slow or no economic growth across Europe.
As usual when growth is slow and unemployment rising, governments have spent
more and collected fewer taxes: hence the growing fiscal deficits.
Yet German unification is not a good enough excuse. It may have made the
fiscal targets harder to meet, but it has made inflation convergence less
demanding, if only for the time being. The Bundesbank has proved its
determination to reduce German inflation to its previous levels; and even
after this long period of slow growth, most European countries, including
the UK and Ireland and France, still do not meet the 1988 inflation
criteria. Without German unification, they would have needed at least as
tight a monetary policy as they have currently have.
Reducing inflation to very low levels is costly and implies rising budget
deficits unless the government is also prepared to cut public spending. The
suspicion remains that, for many countries, the pursuit of low inflation may
be inconsistent with meeting the fiscal rules set out in the treaty, unless
the fiscal rules are fudged. The fiscal convergence criteria may eventually
be interpreted as aspirations rather than pre-conditions, or refer to
cyclically-adjusted rather than actual budget deficits.
Yet no country, especially the fiscally profligate, can rely on a lenient
hearing from their fellow members. If all four criteria are strictly
applied, only France and Luxembourg now qualify to join Club Emu. Even
Germany fails two of the four conditions - although Emu without Germany may
not be a club worth joining.
CONVERGENCE CRITERIA
INFLATION: a consumer price inflation rate within 1 1/2 points of the
average of the three lowest national rates;
INTEREST RATES: a long term interest rate within 2 points of the average
rate of these same three countries;
BUDGET DEFICITS AND DEBT: no 'excessive deficit', defined as a general
government budget deficit greater than 3 per cent of gross domestic product
or a ratio of gross public debt to GDP greater than 60 per cent  - unless
this debt ratio is falling 'at a satisfactory pace';
DEVALUATIONS: no devaluation within the ERM in the two years before joining
the monetary union.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920701

