FT924-794

FT  22 DEC 92 / Pursuit of riches from among the rubble: A new generation of
entrepreneurs is hoping to profit from the depressed UK property industry


   By VANESSA HOULDER


One by one, the stars of the UK property industry have fallen to earth,
leaving a trail of lost fortunes in their wake. Godfrey Bradman of
Rosehaugh, and the Reichmann brothers of Canary Wharf, are only a few of the
long list of casualties.
But as the dust begins to settle, attention is turning to the entrepreneurs
who turn the devastation in the industry to their advantage. This is no easy
task: in a rising market, anyone can look clever; in a falling market, few
succeed.
After every serious downturn, the property tycoon has been declared extinct
 -only to reappear some years later. That is because the property business
is capitalism in the raw: it allows people the chance to make - and lose -
fortunes, far more rapidly than most manufacturing or service businesses.
The main ingredients of success are good contacts and negotiating skills.
For this reason, many property entrepreneurs begin their careers as estate
agents or chartered surveyors.
Nick Leslau, a surveyor, is one of the new breed. Since joining Burford
Holdings, a newly formed property company in 1983, when he was only 23, he
has acquired a reputation in the City as an astute dealer.
He sold at the top of the market and has bought at distressed prices during
the past 18 months. Sales included Henrietta House in the West End in
mid-1990; acquisitions have concentrated on small offices and properties
outside London.
Another surveyor who has ridden the ups and downs of the market with some
skill is Michael Goldhill, 43. He worked as an estate agent until 1983 when
he set up a property investment company. He sold the company six years later
at the peak of the market, and started again with a vehicle called Hemingway
Properties, a fledgling investment company.
Solicitors can also cross the professional divide. Among the
laywers-turned-entrepreneurs are Peter and Michael Freeman, two brothers who
head Argent Estates, a private company with gross assets of Pounds 170m.
After qualifying at D J Freeman, the family law firm, their first foray into
the property world was in 1981 when they built an office building in
Southampton with the help of Pounds 100,000 of family money.
Argent now occupies offices in the Albany in Piccadilly, a prestigious
London address, and claims its corporate objective is to become 'one of the
largest and best-respected property companies in the country by 2000'.
These investors are vulnerable to the charge that they have moved too early.
Many critics think commercial property values will continue to fall for at
least another year. By contrast, most buyers are convinced they are seizing
an historic opportunity. Property, they say, is cheap compared with its
historical cost.
'The market is turning. It is a marvellous time to set up a business,' says
Martin Barber, the 48-year-old chairman of Capital & Regional, another small
property company which returned to the market in 1991, after selling much of
its property in 1988. 'The last three months of 1992 and the next six months
of 1993 will be a window of opportunity.'
But even those who believe property values are attractive admit that the
odds are stacked against the newcomer.
First, opportunities are hard to come by, both in the development and
investment markets. In development, newcomers have often started by
assembling the site, obtaining planning permission and finding a tenant. An
outside investor could then be brought in while the developer could retain
some of the equity. But this avenue has been largely closed by the glut of
property on the market.
Second, even in the investment market, investors complain that it is
surprisingly difficult to find good-quality buildings at knock-down prices,
despite the large numbers of property owners who need to sell to lighten
their debt burdens. 'It is almost inconceivable there are not some cracking
bargains out there - but we haven't found them yet,' says Leslau.
Another problem for a new property company without a strong asset base or a
distinguished record is the difficult of attracting finance.
Mr Goldhill's first company started out with the help of Pounds 1m from 'a
dozen avuncular shareholders'. It would be harder to find venture capital
today, he says. 'People in all sorts of business have lost a lot of wealth
in recent years. They are more concerned with preserving their wealth than
backing entrepreneurs.'
When entrepreneurs have been successful at attracting capital recently,
personal contacts have tended to be all-important. Hemingway attracted funds
from some of the same institutions that backed Goldhill's previous property
company, including Courtaulds Pension Fund and Clerical Medical & General.
Argent Estates got an injection of Pounds 20m from US investors 18 months
ago as the result of an introduction from an investment banker who lived
next door to Peter Freeman.
Best placed of all are those investors who have substantial capital of their
own. Among them is Jack Walker, patron of Blackburn Rovers football club and
a former steel magnate, who has invested heavily this year in commercial
property. The Tchenguiz family, entrepreneurs who moved from Iran to the UK
after the fall of the Shah, has also invested substantial sums by buying
properties such as Sea Containers House near Blackfriars.
The few established property men who emerged well from the 1980s are also
potentially large deal-makers. Examples include John and Peter Beckwith, two
Old Harrovians who received Pounds 40m each when they sold London &
Edinburgh Trust, their development company, for Pounds 491m in April 1990.
One established figure who is gambling on a market upturn is John Ritblat, a
rare example of an entrepreneurial chairman of a large quoted company. He
runs British Land, which recovered from near-collapse in 1974 to become one
of the largest and most daring property investment companies.
He shares a common characteristic of developers - the ability to put
reserves of optimism, audacity and resilience into a well-timed comeback.
Witness Ronald Lyons, a property veteran who presided over company failures
in 1974 and again in 1983. This year, he has been discussing deals in
eastern Germany with Godfrey Bradman, newly departed from Rosehaugh.
Not even personal bankruptcy need be a lasting deterrent. William Stern, the
most spectacular casualty of the 1974 crash, who accumulated debts of Pounds
104m, had his bankruptcy suspended and was back in the market by 1988.
Such comebacks did not happen overnight, illustrating the protracted nature
of the recovery from the 1970s crash. This time round, the decline has been
steeper and the recovery is likely to be even slower. The entrepreneurs who
are trying to buy at the bottom of the market could have an uncomfortable
few years before their courage is vindicated.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921222

