FT921-14172

FT  17 JAN 92 / Letter: 'Open season' attack is no cure for pensions ills,
while new structure is logical answer to abuses


   From Mr ROBERT K YOUNG


Sir, John Plender's approach to the problem of pension fund security
('Sinking funds: The so-called pensions experts taken to task', January 15)
may have been more telling if he had first read the personal view on the
following page by Howard Davies on the accuracy of journalists.
His gross exaggeration and lack of balance will result in the important and
critical issues he raised being ignored in the heat generated. If 'warning
signals have been there for years' why have we only just heard from him?
'Since there have been countless cases where directors have looted pension
funds' why no hue and cry? The answer, of course, is that he overstates the
case and is joining the open season on pension fund trustees. Mr Plender
could also be accused of jumping on the 'bite Maxwell' bandwagon.
The National Association of Pension Funds, which recently issued more
guidelines on the responsibility of trustees, is also criticised, but no
mention is made of the fact that it has been pressing for some time for NO
self-investment when the government recommendation is to allow 5 per cent.
Tighter application of existing rules would cure most ills. Far more damage
is done by incompetence than 'scams' and dishonesty. If Mr Plender looks
seriously at the personal pension provision offered by insurance companies
which hand over 50 per cent or more of their customer's first contributions
to a salesman in commission and then refuse to disclose the fact clearly to
the customer, he would find millions being siphoned off every year.
Perhaps he could also turn his efforts in that direction. Only a few
journalists seem concerned. There are some notable exceptions, one at least
from the Financial Times.
If Mr Plender wants to go on the offensive that's commendable, but it does
require him to be accurate. Otherwise the 'dismal self-serving pensions
lobby' he reviles will not take him seriously. Worse still, neither will the
issues he raises be tackled.
Robert K Young,
Wilcox Young & Co,
77 Bedford Place,
Southampton

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920117

