FT923-6609

FT  22 AUG 92 / Books: Married in the eyes of God alone - Gripping tales


   By JH PLUMB


UNCERTAIN UNIONS: MARRIAGE IN ENGLAND 1660-1753 by Lawrence Stone Oxford
Pounds 25, 296 pages
LAWRENCE Stone is a grandmaster of the historical profession. He is learned
and creative, often seeing (and exhausting) new strategies, and with equal
dexterity pounces on old openings to enrich his game.
Cliometrics - depth given to historical scholarship by the use of a computer
 -was brilliantly used in his work on The University in Society. He was
quick, too, to realise that, in a world dominated by a class without
ancestors, social history was bound to proliferate, and his contribution has
been very considerable, if rarely without criticism.
Yet he knows the importance of narrative, indeed has begged for its revival.
And he has withstood radical chic nonsense such as the fashionable (but
fortunately minority) view that the Civil War in England was nothing more
than the last hiccup of the War of the Roses when power mattered and belief
did not. But who would have thought that Professor Stone would write a
brilliant bedside book - rather like Nigel Short taking to draughts?
When he and his research assistants were working on his monumental Road to
Divorce, 1570-1875, they unearthed real-life stories that had been long
banished to the attics of history, yet were of gripping human interest. Most
of the stories of clandestine marriages vanished after the judgment of the
ecclesiastical courts or the litigants gave up. Nevertheless the evidence,
false or true, remained in thousands of documents rarely, if ever,
consulted.
This volume (and we are promised more) deals solely with clandestine
marriage; which, if legal, meant that the woman could claim support and the
man all of his wife's property if she had any. Money (and of course status)
entangled with lust and greed was a heady mixture, ripe for creating
disaster.
Secret marriages were very easy to obtain. An open marriage with banns,
certificate, church ceremony and subsequent feast was expensive even for
craftsmen, let alone for the poor and the riff-raff of society, so many did
not bother to marry except 'in the eye of God', especially in the
ever-changing working population of London. If they did, many preferred to
cut costs.
They could get a parson, imprisoned for debt in the Fleet, or find some
destitute curate to read the marriage service and sign a certificate: they
cost little, and witnesses even less.
The majority of Fleet marriages were of thoroughly ordinary young couples
(often the men were sailors, soldiers or labourers). No doubt the system
bred laxity - registers were ill kept, parsons and witnesses vanished.
Naturally there were golden opportunities here for the dishonest, the
brutal, the men and women of guile, for those who knew how to exploit two of
the deeper passions of mankind, greed and love. Here human nature in the raw
unfolds, a fantastic panorama, as case follows case, some almost
unbelievable, all compulsive reading.
Take Rudd v Rudd. It has everything in three pages. An overheated
16-year-old adolescent but also a baronet, Sir John Rudd, fell hopelessly in
love with the servant of the family of a friend at school (socially speaking
hardly anything lower could be imagined); in return for sex he offered
marriage and she took it. Under age, it had to be clandestine. The scandal
broke and he was banished by an irate mother to Utrecht.
For five years the Rudds brooded on what to do. Sir John, they decided, must
die - at least officially. Lady Rudd announced his death in the South Wales
press, his brother became a baronet, and Lettice, far too poor even to sue
for maintenance, felt free to marry (and did).
A life of poverty followed, so abject that she had to rent out the extra bed
in the room in which she and her husband slept at 6p a week. As in a
Fielding novel, chance brought her a Welshwoman as lodger who knew Lady
Rudd. She went at once to her ladyship, sold her information for Pounds 5.
Bigamy] The Rudds were delighted and a writ followed. Lettice of course, was
utterly ruined. Her misery ended five years later with a private Act of
Parliament that finally wiped out the consequences of a 16-year-old's act of
folly.
This tale of bribery, corruption, buying of witnesses and endless subterfuge
is typical of the stories in this book - none of them takes more than a
quarter of an hour to read. They are all gripping, like stories in the News
of the World, sordid, salacious, very human, sometimes hilarious, but mainly
sad.
Who would have thought that Lawrence Stone would publish a superb bedside
book of Real Life Stories? I cannot think of a better holiday read.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920822

