FT922-594

FT  26 JUN 92 / Creditors go to court to forestall BCCI pact


   By DAVID WALLER and ANDREW JACK


   LUXEMBOURG, LONDON


CREDITORS of the collapsed Bank of Credit and Commerce International tried
in the Luxembourg district court yesterday to prevent the implementation of
an agreement between the government of Abu Dhabi, which is the bank's
majority shareholder, and its liquidators.
Under the provisional agreement, creditors are offered a payment of between
Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 640m) and Dollars 1.27bn in comparison with
liabilities of Dollars 8bn. Creditors must also give up rights to legal
redress against the majority shareholders.
The approval of the court is required before the settlement can take effect.
It was approved earlier this month by courts in the UK and the Cayman
Islands.
The final decision will not be reached before next week. The court decided
yesterday to postpone hearings until Tuesday.
In a hearing characterised by heated exchanges in French and English, the
main opposition to the plan came from the London-based creditors committee.
Mr James Lingard, of Norton Rose, solicitors to the committee, said: 'The
proposed contribution by the Abu Dhabi parties is inadequate.' He said that
the committee was looking for a payment of about Dollars 4bn.
He complained that the settlement was being forced on creditors even though
the liquidators had had limited access to BCCI papers held in Abu Dhabi.
He said: 'Until the Abu Dhabi parties make available to the liquidators all
relevant papers and witnesses in Abu Dhabi it is premature for the
liquidators to agree proposals which the creditors' committee find
unacceptable. Such a settlement will inhibit investigation into the
responsibility of the Abu Dhabi authorities for what occurred.'
He also complained that the proposed settlement was contrary to the
principle of law that all creditors should be treated equally unless they
have preferential rights under law. He argued that creditors with individual
claims against the bank were unfairly being asked to give up their rights.
An emotional intervention came from Mr Adil Elias, a Florida-based
businessman and a member of the creditors' committees in London and
Luxembourg. He denounced the liquidators as acting in the interests of Abu
Dhabi and not the shareholders. 'I lost all of my money. I lost millions and
I've had to sell my home to survive. We ask this court to give us justice.'
His lawyer cited a letter sent from Senator John Kerry, chairman of the US
Senate foreign relations sub-committee which is investigating BCCI. In the
letter Mr Kerry said: 'I remain deeply concerned about the impact of a
global settlement between the majority shareholders and the liquidators
before investigations have proceeded further.'
Lawyers representing Abu Dhabi said their clients were co-operating fully
with the Senate. They rejected any suggestion of wrongdoing on the part of
the majority shareholders. They argued that Abu Dhabi had been a victim of
fraud for a number of years and was not itself implicated in the fraud.
They said the liquidators would have access to all documents they needed to
conduct the liquidation once the agreement was signed.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920626

