FT924-6521

FT  20 NOV 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Sweden devalues the krona


   By JAMES BLITZ


THERE was strong speculation yesterday that another realignment of the
European exchange rate mechanism is imminent after Sweden's central bank
decided to float the krona against the European currency unit (Ecu), writes
James Blitz.
The Swedish authorities abandoned their policy of fixing the krona's
exchange rate against the Ecu after an earlier decision to raise interest
rates to 20 per cent failed to staunch a heavy flight of foreign capital out
of Stockholm.
By 1700 GMT, the float had effectively devalued the currency by 9.4 per cent
against the D-Mark to a level of SKr4.1200.
The effects of the devaluation were felt across the world's currency
markets, forcing the D-Mark up against the dollar, the French franc and the
lira as investors sold kronor for the German currency.
The dollar closed nearly 2 pfennigs down against the German currency at
DM1.5790. The Italian lira, which had appreciated sharply as investors grow
increasingly confident about the Italian government's emergency package,
fell to a close of L859.1 against the D-Mark from a previous L855.1. Later,
in US trading, it had slumped to L863.
Perhaps the most striking fall was the French franc's. Dealers have come to
see it as one of the strongest currencies in Europe in recent weeks. That
impression has still not been severely dented, but the franc closed at
FFr3.3800 against the D-Mark, down 0.7 centimes on the day.
The overall effects of the devaluation remained small in comparison to the
floating of the Finnish markka in the autumn, at a time when markets were
moving towards the currency crisis crescendo.
However, some dealers suggested that yesterday's move might have a domino
effect, increasing volatility in exchange rates in the next few days.
Mr Avinash Persaud, an economist at UBS Phillips & Drew in London, believes
that European financial authorities could now be forced into an imminent
realignment of the ERM, in which the Spanish peseta, the Portuguese escudo
and the Irish punt are devalued.
Dealers believe these currencies are still overvalued against the D-Mark,
and that they will need to be devalued by between 5 and 10 per cent to
trigger a badly-needed spurt of economic growth.
'European financial authorities will now start to believe that the system
needs a catharsis - a cleaning - from which it will become far more stable,'
said Mr Persaud. 'The Swedish devaluation was not an isolated event. Sweden
is the first of the devaluation candidates not to be defended by capital
controls.'
Sterling, which is extremely unlikely to return to the ERM in the near term,
fell one pfennig to a close of DM2.4200. Sterling closed up more than one
cent against the US currency at Dollars 1.5325.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921120

