FT923-9561

FT  04 AUG 92 / Canals keep the recession at bay


   By RICHARD EVANS


BRITISH WATERWAYS, which runs the country's canal system, has increased
revenues and maintained capital spending in spite of the recession and a
third year of drought.
Mr David Ingman, the chairman, says in the report and accounts for 1991-92,
published yesterday, that earned revenue had increased by 6.6 per cent to
Pounds 29m in the face of difficult economic circumstances, compared with an
increase of only 3 per cent in central government grant.
The public-sector organisation is on target to become more self-financing
but it is unlikely to become a target for privatisation as it will never
make a profit.
Its board, substantially restructured in the past few years with the
introduction of senior private-sector personnel, aims to improve waterway
facilities by raising finance from various sources, increasing fishing and
boating use of the waterways, and preserving the heritage and environment of
the system.
Spending on priority repairs remained at a high level last year and
increased to Pounds 14.4m from Pounds 13.6m in 1990-91. The corporate plan
envisages expenditure of Pounds 68m over the next four years to eliminate a
backlog of high-priority engineering works.
Recreation, leisure and tourism income rose by 12 per cent, and even in a
period of recession there was an increase of more than 4 per cent to 26,000
in the number of pleasure boat licences issued. More than 100,000 angling
licences are also issued annually.
Sales of water for industrial and other purposes are running at Pounds 2.7m
a year, and the imbalance of water reserves across the UK, with a surfeit in
Scotland, Wales and northern England and a shortfall in East Anglia and
parts of the south-east, has highlighted the possible use of canals to
transfer water in bulk. A six-month feasibility study will be launched
shortly.
British Waterways report and accounts 1991-92. Customer Services, British
Waterways, Willow Grange, Church Road, Watford, WD1 3QA. Pounds 6 plus
postage.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920804

