FT924-6425

FT  21 NOV 92 / Germany acting to strengthen Euro-MPs


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


GERMANY is set to approve a string of key constitutional amendments which
will ensure no further steps are taken towards European union without real
strengthening of democratic control at the level of the European parliament.
The parliamentary committee set up to prepare the Maastricht treaty on
European union for ratification will complete its work on Monday, paving the
way for changes that will also significantly extend the power of the German
Lander, the 16 federal states, over EC legislation.
Mr Gunter Verheugen, the Social Democrat chairman of the committee, said
yesterday no further moves towards European union would now be possible
without fulfilling the German constitution's strict conditions.
'There will be no approval of a European defence union without ensuring that
the democratic deficit has been removed,' he said.
At the same time, there would be no move to final implementation of European
economic and monetary union (Emu) without the express approval of the two
houses of the German parliament, the Bundestag and Bundesrat, in a joint
resolution.
Mr Verheugen also claimed victory for the parliamentarians over the
government, to ensure that only a European central bank, as strictly defined
in the Maastricht treaty, could be set up. He suggested that the
government's looser wording would have allowed another form of European
central bank to go ahead, for example between just Germany and France, even
if Maastricht was not ratified.
The Bundestag is due to vote on ratification of the treaty, and on the
constitutional amendments, on December 2.
The constitutional amendments require that future transfer of national
sovereignty to Brussels will need a two-thirds majority in both houses. Mr
Verheugen said that would affect any moves to increase defence co-operation,
and co-ordination at a Community level of police work and law enforcement.
At the same time he expressed considerable pessimism about the prospects for
ratification of the Maastricht treaty, insisting that Denmark's objections
could not be met in any form short of full treaty amendments. Such
amendments were unacceptable to other member states.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921121

