FT921-15216

FT  11 JAN 92 / Cookery: Puddings for Sunday lunch


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


IF NOVEMBER and December are the months of the dinner party, January and
February are favourites for Sunday lunch invitations. This is the season for
a more relaxed and informal style of entertaining. An easy mix of age groups
comes into play - great aunts and god-children are welcome - and the seating
plan need not strive to partner every man with a mate, as though going into
the Ark two by two.
With no frantic appointments to keep, Sunday lunch is a deadline-free zone.
Lazing by the fire, wallowing in the newspapers, these are the sort of
unhurried pursuits to put on the agenda.
There is no call for the cook to indulge in any first course fuss.
Time-honoured tradition demands that we stick to a simple menu of roast
meat, cheese, and - what bliss - a proper pudding.
Diehard pudding fanciers will argue that only puddings in the heavyweight
class are good enough for Sunday lunch. Spotted Dick, Treacle Sponge or
Sussex Pond Pudding are the answers for them.
Others may feel the temperature is a mite too mild, and the timing a bit too
soon after the Christmas pud, to do proper justice to such solid offerings.
For them I suggest a steamed chocolate pudding confected with eggs and
almonds but no flour, designed to satisfy greed without lying heavy on the
stomach.
Those who relish the clean sharp taste of fresh fruit will opt for a pie
made with the first - and pinkest and best - rhubarb of the year.
STEAMED CHOCOLATE PUDDING (serves 4-6)
 1/4 lb best bitter chocolate;  1/4 lb butter;  1/4 lb caster sugar,
preferably vanilla sugar; 1 oz best cocoa powder, sifted and mixed with 3 oz
freshly ground almonds; 6 large eggs.
Cream the butter in a warmed mixing bowl. Add the sugar and beat again until
fluffy and light. Add the cocoa mixture and the egg yolks, in alternate
spoonfuls, and continue beating until smooth and creamy. Whisk the egg
whites. Slacken the chocolate mixture with one-third of them, then fold in
the rest.
Turn the mixture into a buttered 3 pt pudding basin, cover with buttered
greaseproof paper and foil. Tie down and steam for 70 minutes, by the end of
which time the pudding should be puffed up and set with a just-molten streak
in the centre. Unmould onto a hot plate and serve straight away with
brandy-flavoured cream.
FORCED RHUBARB PIE (serves 6)
scant 1 3/4 lb forced rhubarb (trimmed weight);  1/4 lb caster sugar; the
finely grated zest of a large orange; 1 teaspoon ground cinnamon; 1
tablespoon cornflour; phyllo pastry; melted butter; a sifting of icing
sugar.
Mix the sugar with the orange zest, cinnamon and cornflour. Cut the rhubarb
stalks obliquely into 1 1/2 inch lengths.
Put the fruit into a shallow baking dish of 9 1/2 -10 inches in diameter
(earthenware, porcelain or ovenproof glass is suitable) sprinkling the
sugary mixture between layers.
Cover with eight layers of phyllo pastry, cutting the sheets to size,
brushing each layer with melted butter and tucking in the ends neatly before
adding the next.
Score the top sharply with a diamond pattern. Add a shake of cold water to
stop the pastry curling and cook on a baking sheet at 400`F (200`C) gas mark
6 for 35 minutes until the quilted pastry lid is crisp and brown.
Let the pie cool for 5-10 minutes before dredging it with a snowy drift of
icing sugar. Then serve with creme fraiche or custard.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920111

