FT921-3934

FT  12 MAR 92 / Anti-corruption fighter joins Perez unity team


   By JOE MANN


   CARACAS


VENEZUELA'S President Carlos Andres Perez has named an anti-corruption
campaigner as interior minister as part of a new cabinet of national unity
that includes two figures from the main opposition party.
The appointment of Mr Luis Pinerua Ordaz to one of the most powerful jobs
after the presidency is intended to satisfy popular demands for a serious
government attack on corruption and violent crime.
Although Mr Pinerua has long been prominent in the ruling Democratic Action
(AD) party, his appointment represents a blow to many other senior figures
in the party. Most of AD's leadership see the new minister as a maverick
figure who may try to put some of their party brethren behind bars.
Mr Perez also named six other new cabinet ministers, but kept the
government's free-market reformers in place in other key ministries and in
the presidency of the central bank. The president thus refused to cave in to
demands that he roll back unpopular economic reforms initiated three years
ago.
Mr Perez appointed some new cabinet members at the end of February, but he
was forced to make broader changes this week in the face of a political
crisis following last month's abortive coup and calls for his resignation.
This week's changes are the third cabinet shake-up this year.
Six of the seven new cabinet officers were sworn in Tuesday as police and
National Guardsmen used water cannon, tear gas and firearms to confront
protesters, some of them armed, in several parts of the capital.
The six other cabinet changes were: Mr Pedro Valenilla, a prominent
businessman, minister of economic development; Mr Humberto Calderon Berti, a
member of the Christian Democrat (Copei) party, foreign minister; Mr Jose
Ignacio Moreno, a member of Copei's leadership, to the presidency of the
Venezuelan Investment Fund, which oversees Venezuela's privatisation
programme; Mr Jose Mendoza Angulo, a senator for the ruling Democratic
Action (AD) party, justice minister; Mr Jose Andres Octavio, a political
independent, minister of state reform; and Ms Teresa Albanez, a member of
AD, minister of family welfare.
Copei was quick to point out that while two of its members are, with the
permission of party leaders, holding posts in the AD administration, this
does not mean that the party is forming a coalition government. Copei
leaders say they will continue to work as the country's main opposition
party.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920312

