FT923-10723

FT  29 JUL 92 / International Company News: Special items prop American
Express


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


AMERICAN Express has reported that after-tax operating income fell 30 per
cent to Dollars 269m during the second quarter following a sharp rise in the
cost of promoting and marketing travel services and charge card products.
A series of extraordinary gains and charges, however, meant that Amex's net
consolidated income in the April-to-June period totalled Dollars 310m, or 63
cents a share.
The special items during the quarter were a Dollars 425m gain from a public
offering of First Data Corporation shares in April, a Dollars 300m after-tax
addition to reserves at Balcor, and a previously announced Dollars 84m
after-tax charge at securities subsidiary Shearson Lehman Brothers in
connection with a reduction in the carrying value of its loan to Prime
Computers.
In the second quarter a year ago, Amex's net consolidated income was Dollars
256m, or 53 cents a share. Those figures also reflected a special item - an
after-tax charge of Dollars 130m at Shearson related to the write-down of an
investment in First Capital Holdings and the scaling down of Boston
Company's international lending operations.
The notable feature of Amex's second quarter was the sharp decline in the
contribution to group earnings from its travel services division, where net
income fell almost 50 per cent to Dollars 124m.
Although revenues were slightly higher, due to a rise in charge card
billings and growth in the travel business, marketing and promotion expenses
rose, as did provisions for losses on lending products.
General operating expenses were also up, reflecting the growth in the travel
business, the cost of card member loyalty programmes and other initiatives
designed to strengthen the group's worldwide franchise. Amex warned that its
quarterly marketing and promotion expenses for the rest of the year would
continue at the high levels of the second quarter.
Shearson reported after-tax operating income of Dollars 88m, down slightly
on the Dollars 93m the securities house earned before special charges last
year, while IDS Financial Services posted record quarterly profits of
Dollars 73m, First Data earned Dollars 31m, and American Express Bank
Dollars 19m, all after tax.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920729

