FT922-7166

FT  20 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Customers likely to stay with enlarged bank
 -The Battle for Midland


   By JOHN AUTHERS and ROBERT PESTON


The Bank of England has now given formal permission for Hongkong and
Shanghai Banking Corporation to buy Midland Bank, having already given the
banks guidance that such a deal would be allowed, writes Robert Peston.
Having been given this permission, Hongkong Bank now has the right to buy
Midland shares in the stock market to add to its existing 15 per cent stake.
However, it is understood that Hongkong Bank is reluctant to exercise this
right for the time being.
LLOYDS BANK would not expect to lose a significant proportion of Midland
Bank's customer base if its proposed takeover was successful, Mr Brian
Pitman, the bank's chief executive, said yesterday.
He pointed to the recent merger of ABN and Amro, the Dutch banks, where he
said a tiny percentage of customers had deserted the new bank, and to the
sale by Midland of Crocker Bank to Wells Fargo. 'There was a fear that they
would lose many customers, but they didn't,' he said.
However, he did not follow up the commitment Lloyds made last week to
provide support for small businesses with any equivalent promise for private
customers.
He said the bank may make further commitments to private customers, and
promised that integration of products would involve keeping the better
product provided by the two banks in each case. But he declined to comment
further on what Lloyds might offer.
He said integration of the banks' products, including changes to cheque
books and charge cards, could start 'quite quickly' after the passing of the
act of parliament which would be needed before the merger could go through.
Until this happened, Midland Bank would operate as a subsidiary of Lloyds,
and its products would remain unchanged. He predicted that the process would
start by the end of 1993.
Midland has suggested that product integration would be a difficult process.
Lloyds also revealed a few extra details about the mechanics of the changes
it would make to the new combined bank's product range:
Midland's range of credit cards, including the 'affinity' cards which at
present do not carry an annual charge, would be maintained;
Firstdirect, Midland's telephone banking subsidiary, would be expanded;
Midland Life, Midland's life assurance company, would continue to operate
separately thanks to the difficulties involved in merging life companies,
although Lloyds would look to extend its successful Black Horse Life range
of products to existing Midland customers.
Mr Pitman said that the transition would be made 'as smooth as possible' for
both Lloyds and Midland customers, and remained very optimistic that this
could be achieved, despite the doubts of some observers.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920520

