FT924-8296

FT  12 NOV 92 / Bhopal safety violated, court told


   By SHIRAZ SIDHVA and REUTER


   NEW DELHI


INDIA'S Central Bureau of Investigation said yesterday that Union Carbide
and its Indian subsidiary had poor safety controls at the plant in Bhopal
where a gas leak in December 1984 killed more than 3,000 people and affected
thousands more.
The bureau presented documents to a court in Bhopal, central India, which is
hearing two cases against Union Carbide, the US chemicals company, Union
Carbide of India Limited, its Indian subsidiary, and their executives, on
charges of culpable homicide.
It said the companies were aware of the hazardous nature of the gas, but had
'failed to maintain proper control and adopt adequate safety measures'
stipulated by the industrial development ministry when a licence was
granted. The companies had violated the agreement with the Indian
government. More gas had been stored in a tank than was permitted, and no
high-temperature alarm had been installed to warn of an accident. 'Sheer
negligence' led to the disaster, it said.
The testimony yesterday was for the trial of Union Carbide of India Limited
and nine of its employees. The court is hearing a parallel case against
Union Carbide, Mr Warren Anderson, its former chairman, and three executives
of its Hong Kong subsidiary. The split trials were necessary because Union
Carbide and Mr Anderson have refused to honour court summons or be
represented by lawyers. Their trial will resume on December 5.
The court has ordered Mr Anderson to be extradited from the US. It is not
clear whether the Indian government will press for his extradition. The
court has also ordered the seizure of all of UCIL's assets in India,
including the now-closed pesticides plant in Bhopal.
Union Carbide has admitted 'moral responsibility' for the accident, but
blames sabotage. In 1989, it agreed a settlement with the Indian government
under which it deposited Dollars 470m with the court for compensation to
victims. Criminal proceedings were to be dropped.
India's supreme court last year upheld the compensation amount but lifted
the immunity from prosecution. Compensation, with the exception of nominal
interim payments, has been delayed by litigation, though in June the
government fixed the compensation amounts at Rs100,000 (Pounds 2,325) to
Rs300,000 for relatives of those killed, and Rs50,000 to Rs100,000 for the
injured.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921112

