FT924-11554

FT  24 OCT 92 / As They Say In Europe: Britain's leaders keep up the
interest rate


   By JAMES MORGAN


LAST April, foreign correspondents in London were grieving over the result
of the general election.
This was not because of any special love for the Labour party or leftish
prejudice. It was, rather, the natural reaction of those who had been living
well to the prospect of reduced rations. The future held just another Tory
government under boring but competent John Major. It would be a dreary
sequel to the horrors of the poll tax, the decline and fall of Margaret
Thatcher, and the baroque complexities of the BCCI and Robert Maxwell
swindles and other manifestations of the 1980s boom.
I remonstrated with members of the Foreign Press Association. 'Do not
despair. Something will turn up.' And today those same correspondents admit
they were wrong. Britain has resumed its place as the one Community country
whose domestic political affairs can be relied on to produce regular front
page news for its neighbours. 'We should have trusted the British,' say the
newsmen as they contemplate the results of the government's new policy of
reculer pour mieux reculer.
In Le Monde, Laurent Zecchini began a breathless week thus: 'Will the
British government give way or will it choose a trial of strength? The
question that is posed, this day, Monday October 19, at the beginning of a
week that is without doubt the most critical in the career of John Major.'
But much of the rest of the article seemed tainted with British
understatement: 'The coalmine crisis is only one of the aspects of Mr
Major's numerous difficulties.'
By the next day the situation seemed to have got worse. In Borsen-Zeitung,
Reinhard Frohlich had a front page editorial headed: 'John Major in danger.'
It ended with the words: 'Soon there will be no area of politics where John
Major will not feel seriously threatened by his own party.'
In Les Echos, Patrick de Jacquelot wrote: 'The U-turn can only add to the
impression that the government's credibility is at its lowest . . . Monetary
policy seems uncertain, subject to the political imperatives of the moment.
And the repeated pledge of chancellor Norman Lamont to put the fight against
inflation as the top priority is hardly taken seriously.' A prescient
observation as it turned out.
So it is that contemporary Britain and its government enjoy only modest
renown on the other side of the Channel. One might have expected worse. But
the visit of die Queen to Germany served to underline the fact that Britain
is not viewed with total derision. At times the general amiability of the
provincial German press seems almost excessive. It was even fair-minded over
the recent row involving the Bundesbank. So this week the Schwabische
Zeitung wrote:
'That Elizabeth the second makes east Germany the main point of her visit
should emphasise that the majority of the British population gave an
unconditional welcome to German unification and has no fear of an
'overmighty Germany' in a Europe that is growing together. The Queen thus
often places herself publicly against Conservative politicians and media who
try to stir up anxieties about German domination.'
The Rheinische Post gave a clue as to what this anglophilia was all about: '
. . . the monarch from Windsor deserves our gratitude and thanks because she
and her government - like the American president - resisted the threats of
the East German boss Honecker who demanded to be invited to Buckingham
Palace. Britain conducted itself differently as a victorious power from
France.'
But in Dresden things changed. Newspapers in the west regretted the
hostility but implied the Queen could have done more. The Sachsischea
Zeitung, published in Dresden, went further, saying the church service was
welcome: 'But it is understandable that there was disappointment in Dresden
because a stronger gesture had been expected from the Queen. The monarch
took part but did nothing herself - no word to the Dresdners, no trip
through the city centre, no stop at the Frauenkirche.'
In the Frankfurter Allgemeine, Gunter Nonnenmacher summed up why things had
gone wrong: 'The Germans, like all continentals, have a penchant for the
symbolic; the British have a mind for tradition. That is a contrast which
brings with it difficulties that can hardly be bridged.'
James Morgan is diplomatic correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921024

