FT923-9793

FT  03 AUG 92 / PM stresses commitment to keeping strong pound: Fresh calls
for realignment


   By IVO DAWNAY and PETER NORMAN


MR JOHN MAJOR is willing to endure a 'bitter autumn' of personal
unpopularity as the price for sticking to the government's policy of keeping
sterling at its DM2.95 parity in the European exchange rate mechanism.
According to Whitehall officials, the prime minister is determined to shake
off the government's present embattled image over economic policy by making
a virtue out of the government's anti-inflationary zeal.
He will present the Conservative party's annual conference in October with a
vision of Britain having the lowest inflation rate among the world's leading
industrial powers and - in time - interest rates below Germany's.
But senior directors of depressed British companies are stepping up their
calls for the government, which currently holds the presidency of the
European Community, to seek a realignment of currencies in the ERM.
Executives are stressing the need for European countries to cut interest
rates to boost their economies and stem company failures. The most effective
action, many believe, would be either a revaluation of the D-Mark or by a
devaluation of a range of European currencies against the D-Mark.
Downing Street officials at the weekend underlined that Mr Major and Mr
Norman Lamont, the chancellor, would be unwavering in their commitment to a
strong pound, even to the extent of keeping sterling pegged to the German
currency in the event of a realignment of ERM parities or a revaluation of
the D-Mark by Germany.
Signs that the government is prepared to take a stronger line in the battle
against inflation came as a Mori opinion poll carried out for The Sunday
Times put Labour ahead of the Tories for the first time since the general
election and registered a sharp decline in consumer confidence last month.
Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury, will stress the
government's determination to combat inflation through the control of public
spending in letters to cabinet members which will contain proposals for
spending cuts in their departments.
Although it is clear that the current public expenditure round will be one
of the toughest on record, government officials made light yesterday of
pressure from some senior Conservative backbenchers for a total freeze on
public sector pay rises next year.
It was pointed out that many salary scales are directly linked to the
findings of independent pay review bodies which have yet to report for the
coming year.
Both the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) and some senior
backbenchers are arguing, however, that Whitehall pay rises should be
trimmed to levels below the inflation rate in preference to capital spending
cuts.
About the only area in which there is any possibility of policy flexibility
is the housing sector. While the Treasury insists that no moves to bolster
the troubled housing market are planned, it is understood that contingency
measures are being prepared.
Away from Whitehall, pressure continued to mount for action to combat the
recession.
Two economic forecasting groups - Oxford Economic Forecasting and Midland
Montagu - predicted that national output will drop by about 1 per cent this
year in contrast with the Budget forecast of 1 per cent growth.
The CBI, the London Chamber of Commerce and the Institute of Purchasing and
Supply, which represents the UK's purchasing managers, warned of worsening
business conditions among man-ufacturers, and especially among small
companies.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, repeated the charge
that the government had misled the public into expecting a recovery and
called for measures to defend small businesses. 'When you are heading for a
precipice, there is nothing wrong with doing a U-turn,' he said.
Fiscal boost sought, Page 4
Pressure for realignment, Page 4
Letters, Page 11
Economics Notebook, Page 13
Anthony Harris, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920803

