FT922-4359

FT  05 JUN 92 / GEC to shed further 825 jobs and close factory


   By DANIEL GREEN


MORE THAN 800 defence-sector jobs were cut yesterday by GEC in Chelmsford,
Essex. The company blamed competition and the transfer of manufacturing to
other countries.
Marconi Radar and Control Systems, a defence electronics contractor,
announced the closure of a factory with the loss of 600 jobs.
In a separate statement, GEC-Marconi Communications, which designs and
manufactures civil and military communications systems, said it was shedding
225 jobs.
The cuts are the latest stages in a restructuring of GEC's defence
activities, which shed about 5,000 staff last year, about 10 per cent of the
workforce.
Yesterday's losses at Marconi Radar came in spite of a series of orders won
by the company recently. Many of the contracts have been with Third World
and Pacific rim countries that insist on some local manufacturing.
The deals are typically worth at least Pounds 10m each and are for products
such as a new long-range radar and surveillance system.
The company said it would concentrate its UK manufacturing at factories in
Fife and Leicester. There would be some transfer of production from
Chelmsford, but no jobs added at either site. The Chelmsford factory will
shut by December.
After the 600 redundancies, 1,400 people will remain employed in research,
sales and administration.
GEC-Marconi Communications said its 225 redundancies were the result of
'heavy competition, particularly overseas' and came after a review of costs.
The competition in equipment made by the company, such as satellite ground
stations and microwave communications systems, comes from international
telecommunications giants including Siemens of Germany and SGS-Thomson of
France.
GEC shares rose 1 1/2 p yesterday to 221 1/2 p. Mr James Ross, of
stockbroker Hoare Govett, said: 'The job cuts are in response to poor market
conditions and should feed through to better margins for shareholders.'
They were, however, described as 'disastrous' by Mr Bill Pigram, area
secretary of the AEEU engineering and electrical union. 'This is another
bitter blow for the defence industry,' he said.
Both subsidiaries said they were trying to find alternative work for those
affected, within GEC and elsewhere.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920605

