FT922-4341

FT  05 JUN 92 / Midland to sell Thomas Cook for Pounds 200m


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER and CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   LONDON, BONN


MIDLAND BANK yesterday announced the sale for Pounds 200m of Thomas Cook,
one of the oldest names in the travel industry and the inventor of the
traveller's cheque, to Germany's third-biggest package tour operator, LTU.
Midland said the sale was unconnected to the Pounds 3.9bn recommended
takeover bid for the bank by Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. It
said Hongkong Bank was informed in advance and was happy for the sale to go
ahead.
The announcement that Midland was selling the travel agent and financial
services group was greeted with some surprise in the travel industry, where
a deal had not been expected until after the bid was resolved. However, it
had been known for 18 months that Midland had planned to sell Thomas Cook as
it regarded it as a non-core asset.
Thomas Cook runs 1,600 outlets in more than 100 countries. Midland, which
bought Thomas Cook from British Rail in 1972 for Pounds 20m, expects to
report a net extraordinary gain of Pounds 99m. The proceeds will be used to
develop core businesses.
LTU, and its 34 per cent shareholder, Westdeutsche Landesbank, will acquire
90 per cent and 10 per cent of Thomas Cook respectively. Although the deal
has been referred to the European Commission for standard approval, both
parties said it was unlikely to meet any obstacles.
LTU is the only group in Germany offering charter flights and tour packages.
In addition to its large tour operation, LTU is Germany's largest charter
airline carrier. Operating profits last year were DM68m (Pounds 23.3m) on
turnover of DM2.5bn.
Mr Peter Middleton, chief executive of Thomas Cook, said a five-year
contract based on a percentage of turnover was being negotiated.
He and other senior managers will stay, and the group does not expect any
redundancies. Thomas Cook will continue to run bureaux de change in 103
Midland branches in Britain.
Arthur Andersen, the administrators of the private side of the collapsed
Maxwell empire, are discussing the sale of their 50 per cent shareholding in
Thomas Cook USA. The possible buyer - the US individual who owns the other
50 per cent of Thomas Cook USA - is understood to be the only party to whom
the administrators are speaking.
Observer, Page 19
Lex, Page 20
HK application granted, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920605

