FT921-3710

FT  13 MAR 92 / Italy's state sector shake-up: Rationalisation deal on
railways and defence


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


ITALY'S principal state holding company, IRI, and the third largest state
industrial holding group, Efim, yesterday announced agreement on a
significant rationalisation of their interests in railways, mass-transit and
the defence sector.
This is the first serious move to co-ordinate the activities of state
companies operating in similar sectors of advanced technology in an attempt
to make Italian industry more competitive in international markets. It also
involves parts of the private sector.
The move, first mooted five years ago, also breaks new political ground
since IRI and Efim have jealousy guarded their independence, being
respectively controlled by Christian Democrat and Socialist appointees. The
combined sales of the new consortium in the railways sector are worth
L1,500bn (Pounds 693m).
The logic of the move is the eventual disappearance of Efim, burdened by
over L6,000bn of debt, mainly because of accumulated losses in the aluminium
business. Yesterday's agreement involves two separate but similar
arrangements. The first concerns railway rolling stock, engines and
mass-transit systems. Under this IRI's engineering subsidiary, Finmeccanica,
will form a joint management consortium through Ansaldo Transporti with
Efim's transportation subsidiary, Breda CF and the privately owned, Firema
group.
This link will be reinforced by a mutual exchange of shares of up to 20 per
cent in one direction via Ansaldo Transporti and Breda CF, and in the other
via Aviofer Breda and Ansaldo Transporti. Both the latter will in turn
acquire a stake in Firema. The value of the shareholdings is still to be
assessed.
The main absentee from the deal is Fiat's railway's division, Fiat
Ferroviaria, which has opted at the moment for a technical co-operation
agreement with France's Alsthom. However, IRI officials hope this
rationalisation will bring Italy into line with alliances already made in
this sector in Europe - notably Alsthom and GEC, Siemens with a number of
small German groups including Kraus Mafei, and Sweden's Asea with
Switzerland's Brown Boveri to form Abb.
In Italy alone over the next eight years the national railways, FS, are
expected to place orders worth L12,000bn. Finmeccanica recently signed a
technology agreement with Siemens for the production of carriages and
traction; while Efim has signed a letter of intent to co-operate with Abb.
The second part of the agreement, concerning the defence sector, involves
Efim and Finmeccanica forming a joint partnership to pool resources in
defence avionics and aircraft protection systems.
However, details of share swap arrangements have yet to be worked out.
Beyond this, Efim, through its stake in the jet trainer manufacturer, Sai
Marchetti, and Finmeccanica, through its minority holding in the jet trainer
manufacturer, Macchi, will work on a plan of joint industrial development.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920313

