FT923-9807

FT  03 AUG 92 / UK Gilts: Putting the argument for underfunding the PSBR


   By EMMA TUCKER


THE British government is in a predicament. Because of its commitments to
the European exchange rate mechanism it cannot cut base rates.
At the same time, it has ruled out fiscal measures to stimulate the economy
by pledging to rein in public spending. Meanwhile, calls from industrial
leaders for the government to do something about the long recession are
getting louder.
So what can the government do to appease its critics, other than to sit
tight until the economic cycle takes its course? One avenue, about which
there has been much speculation recently, would be to under-fund the public
sector borrowing requirement deliberately.
This would mean breaking with the full-fund rule whereby the authorities are
obliged to fund the net total of maturing debt, the PSBR, and any underlying
increase in the foreign exchange reserves by sales of debt outside the
banking and building societies sectors.
Mr Roger Bootle, chief economist at Midland Montagu, argued recently that
under-funding would stimulate the economy by leading to lower long rates of
interest and higher equity prices, thereby raising wealth levels and
reducing the cost of capital to companies. It would automatically imply an
increase in the rate of growth of the money supply.
Speculation that the authorities might choose to follow this route has been
gathering strength if only because a number of economists, such as Mr
Bootle, have argued in its favour. Furthermore, the Bank of England has not
cut the prices of a tap stock that has been sitting on its books for three
weeks, giving the impression it is in no hurry to sell.
Because of this, attention this week will focus on the possible announcement
of a gilts auction to be held on August 26 - the last Wednesday of the
month.
The Bank's unofficial auction schedule means that the market expects an
auction roughly every two months. If there is no announcement then some will
jump to the conclusion that the authorities have decided to under-fund.
This could be a wrong conclusion. The Bank is still ahead of its schedule.
Last week's final monetary figures showed that net official gilt sales in
the year to June were Pounds 10.3bn. It could therefore afford to skip an
auction in the quiet month of August. But would a decision by the
authorities to underfund have the desired effect of easing monetary
conditions?
'The effect might be large, or it might be small, but it would surely be in
the right direction,' says Mr Bootle.
Mr Nigel Richardson, at Warburg Securities argues that the move could have a
negative effect.
'A decision to underfund would not result unambiguously in a lower level of
yields. It might indicate to some people that the Bank of England had
decided there was not enough institutional demand for gilts or, more
significantly, it might place a question mark over the long-term direction
of policy.
'If the government is desperate enough to consider easing through
underfunding, it might be prepared to consider rate cuts or a realignment
within the ERM,' he said.
Many analysts therefore believe the Bank will go ahead with the auction
anyway and are wondering instead, what kind of stock will be issued.
The Bank will probably sell stock into areas where it perceives demand to be
strong - namely longer dated stock for the domestic market.
In spite of better-than-expected overseas sales of gilts in June, revealed
in the Bank's final monetary figures last week, overseas demand appears to
have weakened in July.
Sterling weakness and fears that French voters may reject the Maastricht
Treaty in a referendum on September 20 have made overseas investors nervous.
Last week, traders were saying that anxiety about whether or not Mr Norman
Lamont, the chancellor, could withstand pressure from industry and from
within his own Conservative Party to devalue sterling was adding to jitters.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920803

