FT921-1217

FT  25 MAR 92 / Survey of North Wales (5): In intensive care - Commercial
Property


   By ANTHONY MORETON


IF IT were not for the local authorities and the Welsh Development Agency
the property scene in north Wales would, with one exception, look sick.
Developers have shied away from the area with the result that most new ideas
came from the public sector.
The one exception has been the Redrow group, a fast-expanding UK-wide
company, which has its headquarters on the St David's business park at
Ewloe, which it built itself, and where it also opened a year ago the only
four-star hotel in north Wales.
Redrow, with a Pounds 100m-plus turnover a year and building operations
throughout the UK, has already attracted prime names to its business park.
Barclays Bank, Allied Dunbar, Bank of Wales and Scottish Amicable have all
moved to the site.
Now the company is expanding nearby at Northop Hall, putting up a European
headquarters for Kimberly-Clark, the US paper concern, as part of a Pounds
40m development that will eventually include another hotel, a golf course
and housing.
'We aim to attract other international companies to the site,' says Mr
Jeremy Williams, Redrow's commercial development director.
'The importance of this development,' says Mr Glyn Pittendreigh, the WDA's
property manager for north Wales, 'is that it is in an end of the market we
are hoping to develop strongly. The need is to go upmarket and provide space
for slightly different users, the sort of people who have already arrived at
St David's or our own development outside Bangor, Parc Menai.'
The sort of user Mr Pittendreigh has in mind is Pearl Assurance or Targed,
the north Wales training and enterprise council, which are both to be found
on Parc Menai, a development at the point where the A55 expressway leaves
the mainland and crosses to Anglesey.
Parc Menai, which is being undertaken in conjunction with Gwynedd County
Council and Arfon borough council, is the agency's flagship at the moment.
A larger business park, covering 150 acres and being developed in
conjunction with Clwyd County Council and Rhuddlan borough council, is
planned for St. Asaph, however. A 50,000sq ft speculative building is being
put in, and the authorities hope the first tenants will be looking at the
site this time next year.
An even larger site, the Glyn Rhonwy research park, is being developed by
Arfon council on a former slate quarry at Llanberis in the shadow of
Snowdon.
One prestige tenant, Euro DPC, which makes medical diagnostic kits, has
already been attracted from Witney in Oxfordshire, and phase one of its
development is under way.
If Euro DPC meets its targets it could build up to a further eight phases on
the site.
The other growth area is Wrexham, where the technology park is benefiting
from its proximity to Chester, a town that has probably reached the limits
of its ability to absorb newcomers, and Deeside. A number of service
companies have found their way across the border into Wrexham and the town
is aiming to meet demand not just from financial services companies but also
to develop medical links.
Wrexham has one potential site of great importance in the former Brymbo
steelworks. Steelmaking ended almost two years ago but its parent, United
Engineering Steels, has still not made up its mind about what to do with the
400 acres site. About a quarter could be used for development.
Deeside, too, has made a successful start, with 90 factories providing work
for 5,000 people on a 1,000-acre site and with Toyota's engine plant the
flagship development.
An area such as north Wales must inevitably place considerable emphasis on
small units and small estates to provide jobs in largely rural towns such as
Denbigh, Porthmadog, Ruthin and Bethesda.
None of these will support large-scale investment: at Llangollen a
three-storey mill has been refurbished as being suitable for offices and
craft workshops, a small business park is about to be started at Porthmadog
and a marina with associated small industries is being developed at
Pwllheli. A private developer has put up nursery units at Ruthin.
The aim of the WDA is to involve as many outsiders in joint ventures as it
can. This approach, highly successful in south Wales, can help overcome the
low returns obtainable.
Private-sector developers are more noticeable by their absence, though one
or two locally-based companies, such as Macbryde in Colwyn Bay and Watkin
Jones & Sons in Bangor, have prospered supplying tailor-made developments
for clients, and are now expanding outside their traditional areas. There
has been little rental growth on small units, and with the private developer
having to go for long leases it is left to the public sector to offer the
shorter leases that sometimes attract companies thinking of relocating.
Parc Menai has been able to let at rates of around Pounds 10 a sq ft, but
elsewhere about Pounds 4 is more normal for an office and between Pounds 3
and Pounds 4 for factories. 'For a developer,' says Mr Pittendreigh, 'this
is a good time to be in the market.
'Prices are low, and when the upturn in the economy comes there will be
considerable interest in the area. It could not be a better time to get into
property.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920325

