FT922-3928

FT  09 JUN 92 / Arts: Jenufa - Opera


   By DAVID MURRAY


In the stirring revival of Janacek's Jenufa at Glyndebourne, Anja Silja has
been universally praised as the Sextoness (the 'Kostelnicka'), Jenufa's
stepmother - and arguably the tragic heroine of the opera. Twice in the run,
however, the role has been assigned to Susan Bickley: last Sunday, and also
on July 17. I can assure any readers who have booked for the latter
performance that they needn't fear disappointment. The formidable strength
and depth of Miss Bickley's Kostelnicka belie her still-tender years. Quite
rightly, she won vociferous acclaim on Sunday.
I have not seen the Silja portrayal, but Miss Bickley cannot be simply
stepping into her shoes, for these two performers are alike in nothing but
their dramatic dedication. The Bickley Kostelnicka is neither a tyrant nor a
hypocrite; at least, she isn't played as either of those things. If in the
course of events she proves to be both, it is a bitter discovery for her -
and not, therefore, a come-uppance to be relished, but genuine tragedy.
Though she moves with heavy dignity, she does not arrive in Act 1 as a moral
bully (and therefore makes less immediate impact than Kostelnickas who think
they are Katishas). For once, her fatal refusal to let Jenufa marry Steva
until he has spent a whole year sober seems like mature commonsense, against
the sentimental cries of 'Hard-hearted]' from the chorus. From Act 2 to the
end, while she turns the disaster of Jenufa's pregnancy into a worse
disaster of her own, she pours out anguished feeling on a grand scale.
There is hard steel in the Bickley timbre, as a Kostelnicka needs, but her
phrases have the ring of searing candour - not melodramatic or
self-righteous, but saturated with clear-eyed desperation. She is too
stiff-necked to plead for our sympathy, and thus earns it in spades. Vocal
steel like hers will be more comfortably accommodated, we all hope, in the
larger new Glyndebourne house. And the sound of a Janacek orchestra, too: it
was no fault of Yakov Kreizberg, who conducts the score with incisive
understanding, that the result - always compelling  - was sometimes gritty.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920609

