FT924-5968

FT  24 NOV 92 / This could be the last time: EC support for stricken
steelmakers will depend on industry restructuring


   By ANDREW HILL and ANDREW BAXTER


The European steel industry - still one of the European Community's most
powerful industrial lobbies - has been given one more chance to flex its
political muscle.
In Brussels today, EC industry ministers will discuss far-reaching European
Commission plans to provide steelmakers with political, financial and
commercial support under the Treaty of Paris, foundation-stone of the modern
Community and protector of European coal and steel industries since 1951.
The Commission proposals, published last week, are the initial response to
an appeal last month from Europe's 15 largest steelmakers suffering from
overcapacity, non-EC competition and the economic downturn.
The prospect of renewed intervention has arisen despite the fact that two
years ago, most European steelmakers seemed to be back on the road to
profitability and the Commission was considering calls for immediate
abolition of the treaty.
According to Sir Leon Brittan, EC competition commissioner who championed
the calls for abolition, the treaty had been responsible for holding back
the steel industry in the 1980s. He was particularly critical of the
lingering effects of the 1980 Davignon Plan, named after the then industry
commissioner. The plan was put in place under treaty rules which allowed the
Commission to endorse production quotas, protectionist trade measures and
large government subsidies to cope with a 'manifest crisis' in the industry.
In March 1990, however, an optimistic Commission report referred to the
'irreversible' free-market attitude of the then-thriving industry. The
treaty, Sir Leon believed, had outlived its usefulness.
But instead of abolition, the Commission opted for gradual revision of the
Treaty of Paris until it expires in 2002. Now, faced with a crippling
downturn, steelmakers have been quick to call for assistance, prompting
accusations that both industry and the Community are hankering after the
protective measures of the old days. Some member states, notably Germany,
fear the steel plan may be the first step towards a new Davignon Plan.
But a closer look suggests the current plan could be the last time steel
will get the favoured treatment given to so-called strategic European
industries.
Under the plan, steelmakers could benefit from up to Ecu450m (Pounds 368m)
of central funding to cover redundancy and restructuring costs, and perhaps
the same amount again if member states agree to match the Brussels hand-out.
A former senior Commission official will prepare a special report to guide
the industry on essential capacity cuts, and measures to protect European
steelmakers against cheap non-EC imports will be beefed up.
The Commission response is based on two industry claims which have been
readily accepted in Brussels. First, strategic or not, the European steel
industry is in crisis. Second, while the Treaty of Paris exists, it still
provides a framework for coping with such crises.
Commissioners on both the free-market and interventionist wings of the EC
executive agree that the situation is grave. As one Commission official put
it: 'Even the most liberal companies, which always complain about state aid,
have told me that they welcome the industry initiative, because it is that -
or catastrophe.'
Last week, for example, British Steel passed its interim dividend and said
that the level of its final dividend would depend on improved trading
prospects. That in turn will depend on a rise in prices. 'In the absence of
a strong increase in demand, price rises in the EC are likely to be achieved
only through a cutback in output and capacity involving restructuring,
coupled with anti-dumping measures,' the company says.
Steel prices in Europe have declined by about 30 per cent in the past three
years, as the UK and, later, the continental markets, saw customers reduce
demand.
On top of this, the threat of trade sanctions by the US, which could be
announced on Friday and which were prompted by allegations of dumping of
European steel, is encouraging European producers to divert exports to
neighbouring EC markets. At the same time, the alleged dumping of steel in
the EC by east European producers has contributed to the price falls.
With just over 50 per cent of the European steel industry still state-owned,
the industry has found it hard to rationalise and reduce overcapacity. This
overcapacity is estimated at about 30m tonnes of annual output, based on the
full operation of all Europe's steel plant, compared with forecast
production this year of 136m tonnes.
Not before time, the industry is now cutting production, with reductions of
about 2.5m-3m tonnes announced across Europe in the fourth quarter, compared
with a year ago. But further production cuts will probably be necessary next
year before the market can recover. Mr Brian Moffat, British Steel chief
executive, sees demand in the UK - first into the recession - stabilising
next year as the continental market continues to fall.
In the light of the industry's problems even the strongest advocates of free
trade within the Commission have been sympathetic to calls to assist the
industry. They believe there will be a trade-off between their support and
vital restructuring.
Sir Leon Brittan, for example, is a proponent of restructuring and capacity
cuts, provided they are carried out in a way which does not encourage
anti-competitive collusion between steel producers.
In defending their attempts to support the steelmakers, Brussels officials
also point out that:
The situation is not as bad as in the early 1980s. This time, the steel
industry has not sought to activate the 'manifest crisis' clause of the
Treaty of Paris, although it says it might still do so, if the situation
deteriorates further.
The cash element is modest, compared with industry estimates of Ecu4bn for a
three-to-four-year programme of restructuring. In spite of last week's claim
by Mr Martin Bangemann, the industry commissioner, that up to Ecu900m might
be available, new EC money in the plan amounts to just Ecu240m. That is
supposed to help cover the cost of up to 50,000 redundancies estimated by
Eurofer, the European industry federation, over the next three to four
years. Member states are not obliged to match those contributions. But under
treaty rules, if an individual government decides to give nothing to its
industry, that industry will receive nothing from the Commission.
So if the plan is conservative, why are some member states still worried
about it?
More market-oriented governments - broadly speaking, the northern EC
countries - fear that the plan will be applied to a far from level playing
field. Some national industries have already been rationalised, or even
privatised, while others still benefit from hefty subsidies. 'It could help
those people who didn't take commercially prudent decisions, and penalise
those who rationalised earlier,' says one British official.
Those same member states are also anxious that approval of the plan might
trigger a state aid free-for-all for other national industries. As if to
underline the point, industry ministers are likely to spend most of today's
meeting talking about Spain's controversial Pta558bn (Pounds 3.22bn) plan to
restructure its steel industry, which aims to safeguard steelmaking in the
volatile Basque country.
Concerns that the Spanish steel plan might be blocked brought thousands of
Spanish steel workers onto the streets of Madrid last month. The Commission,
in an indication of the political sensitivity of the case, issued a
double-edged statement a month ago welcoming the 'courageous and
constructive' approach of the Spanish government, but suggesting that
capacity or state aid would have to be cut for the plan to be accepted.
In fact, ministers do not have to take a decision today on either the steel
restructuring plan, or the Spanish state aid case. Both take the form of
'communications' from the Commission rather than formal proposals. But
ministers will have to decide how strong a political signal to send about
the importance of the steel industry, at a time when other sectors of the
depressed EC economy are also suffering.
This is a political conundrum which some ministers would probably rather not
tackle. The German government, for example, has to reconcile its firm line
against subsidies with growing complaints from its industry that steelmakers
in other countries - Spain, Italy and France particularly - are benefiting
from state aid and not cutting capacity. Italy, in turn, would not want to
be too tough on the Spanish while it is in the throes of discussions with
the Commission about restructuring plans for its own state-owned industry.
As one German official puts it: on the one hand, 'if (the Spanish industry)
gets the aid on offer then there are several countries prepared to follow
up. Once you get started there's no barrier for the others'; on the other
hand, 'you can't just sit there and do nothing'.
Most steel producers, however, have already recognised that steel will never
be given the same high strategic priority as in the past. Instead, the
industry talks in terms of the 'responsibility' of the Commission and member
states to provide help, while the coal and steel treaty is still in force.
Brussels officials make clear that they expect an equal or greater effort
from the industry itself.
The success of any 'Son of Davignon' plan will thus depend very heavily on
the will of individual producers to rationalise through restructuring, and
hence improve the industry's financial health. And the state-owned companies
will have to play their part without help from subsidies that could
jeopardise the position of the private sector.
The problem, says Mr Moffat of British Steel, is that 'people don't want to
face the fact that restructuring might apply to them'. But, with the
overcapacity in the EC steel industry, 'nobody can think it won't apply'.
As Mr Edward Hadas, an analyst at Morgan Stanley, the investment bank, wrote
recently: 'I do not believe that steel will ever again receive the sort of
attention once naturally accorded it in western Europe.'
At the same time as sanctioning the aid plan last week, the Commission
quietly approved recommendations to wind down the Ecu750m financial reserves
of the Treaty of Paris, or absorb them into other EC funds by 2002. For
those steel producers who may still be reluctant to let go of the EC's apron
strings it is a small but telling reminder of what is to come.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921124

