FT923-9552

FT  05 AUG 92 / International Company News in Brief: Ciba-Geigy buys polymer
unit


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS, ALICE RAWSTHORN and BRUCE JACQUES


   LONDON, PARIS, SYDNEY


CIBA-GEIGY, the Swiss pharmaceuticals and chemicals group, has bought
Rhone-Poulenc of France's high-performance polymers operations, writes Paul
Abrahams in London. No financial details were given.
The sale is the latest of a series of disposals by the French company, which
is aiming to refocus its business, reducing its debt to equity ratio from
0.8 in 1991 to 0.5 next year. In June, Rhone-Poulenc sold its 50-50
polychloroprene rubber joint-venture with British Petroleum to Enichem of
Italy for an estimated FFr450m (Dollars 88.23m).
The high-performance polymers operations are expected to generate sales of
about FFr80m this year. The technology is used to make printed circuit
boards for the electronics industry and structural parts resistant to high
temperature in jet engines.
Ciba-Geigy will market the products worldwide, and will use the French
company's production facilities until its own have been completed. A number
of specialists will transfer to the Swiss group.
*****
Yves Saint Laurent, one of the leading French fashion houses, countered
lacklustre sales in the US and Europe with a strong performance in the
Middle East and Latin America to increase turnover by 7 per cent to
FFr1.39bn in the first half of this year, writes Alice Rawsthorn in Paris.
YSL has been clouded by controversy because of the internal rows over the
decision of Mr Pierre Berge, chairman, to launch the first ready-to-wear
fashion collection, of Mr Robert Merloz, his young friend. It was affected
last year by the impact of the Gulf war on sales in the important duty free
sector.
Duty free sales have recovered this year and the company benefitted from the
contribution of its first skincare range, which made sales of FFr87m in its
first three months on the market compared to a first year target of FFr140m.
The group saw its turnover from fashion, which includes the YSL haute
couture collection as well as the ready-to-wear ranges, rise by nearly 1 per
cent to FFr258.3m in the six months to June 30.
Sales of perfumes rose faster, by 8.2 per cent, thanks to the recovery in
the duty free market, to FFr1.13bn.
*****
Mayne Nickless, the Australian-based international transport group, is
expanding further into Europe with the purchase of Centropa, a distribution
company with operations in the Netherlands and Belgium, writes Bruce Jacques
in Sydney.
Mr Bill Blytheway, Mayne Nickless managing director, said the acquisition,
combined with the group's existing Heijden Transport business in the
Netherlands, would make it a leading food distributor in the Benelux region.
Centropa group had revenues of more than ADollars 43m last year.

The Financial Times


International Page 14

920805

