FT921-1508

FT  24 MAR 92 / UK Company News: A new era in prospect for predators - The
proposed dismantling of Govett Atlantic


   By PHILIP COGGAN


THE investment trust sector has been in an expansionary mood over the past
year or so. New issues have abounded and the air of gloom that followed the
1990 takeover of Globe, the sector's largest trust, has disappeared.
But now Govett Atlantic, a trust with a market capitalisation of more than
Pounds 160m, is set to dismantle itself after pressure from its
shareholders.
Is this a sign that predators are returning to the market or is Govett
Atlantic the victim of special circumstances?
Govett Atlantic was founded in 1925 as the Stockholders Investment Trust,
adopting its current name as recently as 1986, when it also acquired the
sister trust Govett Enterprise.
Its policy has been to invest in North America, with a concentration on
smaller companies. This focus has caused some difficulties, given the long
period of underperformance of small company shares since 1983, a trend which
only showed some signs of reversal in 1991.
The trust has produced just 12 per cent growth in net assets over the past
five years, according to Mr Lewis Aaron, an analyst at Barclays de Zoete
Wedd.
But its current difficulties really date from November, when a big
shareholder called Sequoia Investments, a Jersey-based vehicle for James
Hardie Industries, an Australian group, placed a 23.5 per cent stake in the
market. The stock was sold at a 20 per cent-plus discount to net asset
value.
The placing had two effects. First, there was a lot of loose Govett Atlantic
stock available. Second, the size of the discount made the trust vulnerable.
According to Mr Aaron, a 20 per cent-plus discount is the point where
arbitrageurs can see the prospect for profit in the investment trust sector.
Sure enough by February, ST Partners, a vehicle for Mr Andrew Schechtel, an
American investor, and Buchanan Partners, a London-based investment group,
had each emerged with 5 per cent stakes and had requisitioned an
extraordinary general meeting. They called on the managers to propose plans
to eliminate the discount at the EGM.
Govett has duly produced a plan, which will split the trust in three. The
bulk of the assets will be spun off into a unit trust, which will be managed
to track the S&P 500 Index. In practice, however, this is a device to enable
investors to realise their holdings for cash at asset value.
A smaller part of the assets will be converted into a new investment trust
to be called the Govett American Smaller Companies Trust. This will allow
private investors to maintain their investments in the US and enable such
investors to roll over their holdings and thus postpone liability to capital
gains tax.
The investment trust will have a limited life, probably five years. By
offering the prospect of realisation at asset value in the foreseeable
future, the hope is that the discount will be contained.
The unquoted element of the portfolio will be transferred into a
Dublin-listed vehicle, the Realisation Company, shares in which will be
distributed pro rata to existing holders. This will allow the assets to be
sold off in an orderly fashion, and thus at better prices than if a 'fire
sale' was held immediately.
The plan which needs 75 per cent shareholder approval, seems to have met the
desires of ST and Buchanan Partners, who have withdrawn their EGM
requisition. John Govett, the management group, will receive a Pounds 1m
pay-off but will lose perhaps more than 5 per cent of its funds under
management.
The story of Govett Atlantic is highly reminiscent of the late 1980s, when
trust after trust was taken over or reconstructed in the face of action from
predators and dissident shareholders.
That era seemed to have ended with the Globe bid. In the past few years,
investment trusts have had great success in marketing themselves to private
investors, via savings schemes and personal equity plans. Private investor
demand has steadily mopped up the unwanted stock owned by institutions, and
resulted in a narrowing of the discount to asset value. A narrow discount
does not allow the opportunity for profitable reconstruction.
In addition, many of the trusts launched in recent years have been
geographical specialists, meeting the needs of institutions which lack the
resources to specialise in such areas. And such trusts are expensive to
liquidate, again reducing the scope for arbitrage profit.
Nevertheless, there are one or two straws in the wind to suggest that
predators have re-emerged. Scottish Value Trust, a revamped shell company
formerly known as Bremner, has been involved in reconstruction at trusts
such as Ensign and Pacific Property.
And the fashion for new issues, by increasing supply in the sector, may
eventually lead to a widening in discounts. That in turn will bring back the
predators. Fund managers will need to keep a wary eye on their share
registers.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920324

