FT924-957

FT  21 DEC 92 / Letter: Holding companies likely to be penalised by VAT
ruling


   From Mr RICHARD WATSON


Sir, Your readers are already aware of the new value added tax burdens on
large companies which will begin on January 1. They will also know that
monthly payments of VAT for large companies began in October. I wonder,
however, if they have yet realised that every holding company is due to be
further penalised from March 1. Customs and Excise has achieved this hat
trick by taking a European Court of Justice ruling on a Dutch holding
company (Polysar Investments Netherlands BV) and developing the thinking to
justify an approach it last tried in 1987.
Polysar was a Dutch intermediate holding company, of a type often used,
quite legitimately, in direct tax planning. The Court held that the basic
activities of such a holding company did not constitute an economic activity
and, therefore, it was not entitled to a refund of VAT on costs.
Customs has ended this doctrine to all holding companies and has ruled that,
from March 1, VAT on costs incurred by holding companies on basic
activities, such as acquiring subsidiaries and mounting or defending
takeover bids, will cease to be deductible.
By applying this judgment to British holding companies of a quite different
type, Customs seems to be extending the Court's judgment far beyond its
limits.
For example, the Court commented that its ruling would have been different
had Polysar been involved in managing its subsidiaries. This could be taken
to imply that input tax recovery on Polysar's basic functions would have
been allowed under these circumstances.
Above all, however, the differences between the activities of a Dutch
investment holding company and a typical UK holding company are so great
that the judgment cannot simply be transferred intact.
VAT is a tax on consumption - not a tax on business costs. By taking this
action, Customs is placing a new and very real burden on business at a time
when so many other burdens are being introduced.
To add insult to injury, the change was announced by press notice and
apparently requires no change in the law.
Price Waterhouse will continue to add its weight to the representations
against this charge. This is a further unnecessary setback to UK business
recovery and yet another example of an increasingly alarming trend to
legislate by press release.
Richard Watson,
Price Waterhouse,
New City Court,
20 St Thomas Street,
London SE1 9RP

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921221

