FT922-7273

FT  19 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Small businesses will see merger benefits -
Lloyds' claim to a sector critical of high street banking services / The
Battle for Midland


   By DAVID BARCHARD


WHEN THE bank with the stiffest charges for small business customers
proposes making a takeover bid for its rival with the lowest, eyebrows are
bound to be raised
Nonetheless, Lloyds is now claiming that small businesses would eventually
benefit if it was to buy Midland.
Lloyds says it will offer Midland shareholders much better terms than the
rival Hongkong Bank But now it has to convince its customers and also the
competition authorities of the benefits a takeover of Midland would bring.
It has a great deal of scepticism, in the City as well as among the general
public, to overcome. 'Lloyds has got an awfully long way to go to convince
people that its customers will benefit,' one stockbroker analyst said.
So Lloyds has begun a charm offensive to persuade the world that the merger
will mean enormous benefits to bank customers.
Those chiefly in its sights are small businesses, a politically powerful
group whose discontent with existing high street banking services has been
voiced repeatedly over the past year.
As Lloyds and Midland each have about 15 per cent of this market, any
combined bank would immediately take its place alongside Barclays and
National Westminster as a new market leader.
Lloyds has not been enormously popular with small businesses. Last year its
new package for them was described as 'weak and one-sided' by the Forum of
Private Business, a lobby group with nearly 20,000 members.
More recently, a study by Rochester Research has shown that Lloyds charges
its small business customers sub-stantially more than the other Big Four
clearers, while Midland costs the least.
Some small businesses would save about 20 per cent in charges if they kept
their account with Midland rather than Lloyds.
Lloyds claims this picture would change dramatically after the merger. It
says the economies to be achieved by merging with Midland would enable it to
make a quantum leap in its small business services, thereby helping
stimulate long-term economic growth.
There is no doubt that several of the new services Lloyds says it envisages
offering are certainly very enticing by comparison with anything offered by
it or its main rivals at the present time.
To start with, new businesses would not have to pay any tariff charges for
their first two years. 'This is something no other bank offers,' says Mr
Brian Pitman, the chief executive at Lloyds.
Small businessmen everywhere should find other ideas being floated by Lloyds
mouth-watering, even if they cannot help noticing that the bank has not been
very forthcoming about what it would charge.
Even the smallest new businesses would be able to tap equity capital, in
amounts as low as Pounds 5,000, from a new Pounds 100m venture capital fund.
Businesses would also be able to borrow on fixed rates for up to seven
years.
Small businesses would be given help with cash flow when large companies
paid them late, through a new invoice discounting service.
They would also be able to get specialist advice on computer services and
more advice in co-operation with the Department of Trade and Industry.
So instead of there being less market competition in the UK after the
merger, Lloyds believes there would be more intense rivalry, as the two
other large banks, Barclays and NatWest, would be forced to improve their
services.
Mr Stan Mendham, chief executive of the Forum of Private Business, last week
welcomed the package from Lloyds, but pointed out that Lloyds and Midland
have distinctly different approaches to their small business customers and
merging their operations could be problematic.
His reserve is based partly on the close relationship that Midland has
forged with its small business customers. The clearer's business branch
managers are trained at seminars at which Mr Mendham and other leading small
businessmen teach.
Last week the FPB - whose policies are based on periodic polls among its
membership - swung behind the Hongkong offer for Midland, saying that it
would bring more benefit in the long term to small businesses through the
injection of new ideas into the British banking system.
Against this Mr Pitman points to the Pounds 700m cost savings which Lloyds
expects to achieve, compared to only Pounds 150m envisaged in the Hongkong
bid.
He foresees powerful synergies springing from a Lloyds merger with Midland,
and small businessmen taking their place alongside shareholders as the
principal beneficiaries.
Time will tell whether this argument wins general acceptance, especially
where it counts, at the Office of Fair Trading and at Westminster.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920519

