FT921-614

FT  28 MAR 92 / Adelaide News forced to close after 69 years


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


THE Adelaide News, the afternoon newspaper which formed the base for Mr
Rupert Murdoch's international media empire, closed yesterday after losing a
long battle against falling circulation and revenue.
The closure of the News follows its sale to a group of local businessmen in
1987 as part of a deal in which News Corporation, Mr Murdoch's media group,
acquired the Herald and Weekly Times (HWT) group of newspapers.
Ironically, the closure gives a monopoly of south Australian daily newspaper
circulation to the Adelaide Advertiser, a morning newspaper acquired by News
Corporation as part of the HWT deal. News Corp also owns the city's only
Sunday newspaper and its largest chain of suburban weeklies.
Mr Tony Baker, editor of the News, said the closure was forced by 'a simple
inability to get the readership and the advertising that we needed for
survival'. Mr Baker said the newspaper would honour a redundancy agreement
with 54 journalists, photographers and artists.
Mr Murdoch inherited control of the News, which was established in 1923,
from his father, Sir Keith Murdoch, a prominent war correspondent in World
War One, who developed the newspaper into a major metropolitan daily.
He joined the newspaper as a cadet reporter in 1953, and became managing
director in 1959. The News then became the launching pad for Mr Murdoch's
assault on the Australian media, subsequently extended to the UK and US.
News Corp is now the biggest newspaper publisher in Australia. Other assets
include five UK national newspapers, a half share in the BSkyB satellite TV
business, and a US TV network and film studio.
The group is still registered in Adelaide, and holds its annual meetings
there. However, it has long been managed from the US, where Mr Murdoch has
lived since becoming a US citizen.
The News was the last afternoon metropolitan newspaper published in
Australia, following closures in other capital cities over the last five
years.
News Corp merged its tabloid morning and afternoon newspapers in Melbourne
and Sydney last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920328

