FT923-9690

FT  04 AUG 92 / Rifkind in talks to save fighter


   By IVO DAWNAY and HAIG SIMONIAN


   LONDON, MILAN


MR Malcolm Rifkind, Britain's defence secretary, flies to Madrid for talks
with his counterparts on the troubled European Fighter Aircraft today amid
signs that Italy and Spain may be losing faith in the four-nation project.
Ministry of Defence officials said last night that the chief aim of the
talks remained to persuade Mr Volker Ruhe, the German minister, not to 'shut
the door' on joining the aircraft's production phase. Germany made clear in
May that it would not participate in the production phase, due to begin next
summer.
But well-placed UK industry officials believe that the gloomy economic
outlook is increasingly undermining the commitment of Madrid and Rome to
what is, at an estimated cost of Pounds 20bn, Europe's largest defence
collaboration project.
Italy's new defence minister, Mr Salvo Ando, gave the clearest indication to
date yesterday that his country was having second thoughts about the
project, at least in its present form.
Speaking in Brindisi he said the EFA 'needs the German contribution (to the
project)'.
Alluding to the new Italian government's financial troubles and spending
cuts, Mr Ando said: 'If Germany has problems with costs, imagine the
position of nations which aren't adrift in gold like Italy and Spain.'
Since Germany's announcement, the UK has fought vigorously to persuade Spain
and Italy to proceed with the aircraft as a three-nation consortium.
Last month, Mr John Major, the prime minister, wrote to Mr Felipe Gonzalez,
the Spanish prime minister, asking him to 'confirm publicly' his faith in
the project and a readiness to study the feasibility of production on a
three-nation basis.
However, Mr Gonzalez has so far failed to do so. Instead, the Spanish
government has appeared to offer tacit support to the German proposal that
the project, still in its development stage, either be adapted to build a
more modest aircraft or should be replaced.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920804

