FT923-6631

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: Nominee accounts, are they entirely
safe? - The debate over protection for investors


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


MANY stock market investors are surprised when they discover shares held by
their stockbroker may not be in their own name but in that of a nominee
company.
These companies are formed by brokers or fund managers to hold shares on
behalf of their clients. Investors with personal equity plans often find
their shares held in a nominee account.
Nominee accounts have existed since the 1950s, but their use has grown in
recent years. In 1957, 12.5 per cent of institutional and private
shareholdings was in nominee accounts, rising to 26.1 per cent in 1975. In
the 1980s the proportion rose from 33.4 per cent in 1981 to 61 per cent in
1989.
Stockbrokers favour nominee accounts because they ease administration and
reduces costs. Companies usually have to pay their registrar a fee based on
the number of shareholder accounts. If private investors are held in one
nominee the registrar is paid for only one account.
In the run-up to the introduction of Taurus, the Stock Exchange's paperless
trading system, stockbrokers are urging clients to switch into nominee
accounts. This will ease the administrative headache of the transition to
Taurus for brokers.
Investors also face less paperwork with a nominee account. They do not have
to sign transfer deeds to sell shares, and dividends and rights issues are
handled by the nominee company and the client.
However, there are disadvantages. The investor does not automatically
receive the annual report of the company in which he has bought shares. More
importantly, nominee services fall outside the scope of the Financial
Services Act and technically are not covered by the Investors Compensation
Scheme. This pays up to Pounds 48,000 of losses by an investor in a
FSA-regulated company .
Instead, the investor's only protection is whatever insurance policy the
broker may have, though reputable houses should have adequate insurance for
their clients.
There are two main types of nominee account: a designated nominee, where the
broker's name and that of the client appear together on the company
register; and a pooled nominee account, which groups together shareholders
with only the nominee company's name appearing on the register.
Alison Rennison, Taurus project manager at Barclays, says designated nominee
accounts are preferable, if only because were a stockbroker to go bust,
sorting out who is owed what in a pooled nominee account is more difficult.
David Cresswell, of the Securities and Investments Board, the regulatory
body for the investment industry, says that in practice, if a nominee
company goes into default, the investor is likely to have a claim against
the investment company running it. 'You would probably be covered because of
the close connection between the authorised institution and the nominee
company,' he says.
So long as the investment company, or stockbroker, is authorised by Sib or
one of the self-regulatory bodies such as the Securities and Futures
Authority (as it is legally bound to be), compensation would be available.
The investor can claim against the investment company, for example, if it:
has been negligent in selecting the nominee,
has breached its regulator's rules regarding safe custody of client assets,
or;
has given the investor a guarantee that it stands behind the liabilities of
the nominee company.
This was illustrated last year when Diameter, a low cost stockbroker,
collapsed. Some investors who had instructed shares to be bought for them
could not find them in the nominee company. The ICS compensated them on the
grounds that the authorised company, Diameter Stockbrokers, had been engaged
in wrongdoing because it did not buy stock when it was instructed to do so.
This provides scant reassurance to those in nominee accounts. With this in
mind, Mike Jones of Capel Cure Myers has called for level playing fields.
'We've argued with the SFA that since it is treating nominee clients as part
of the whole stockbroking operation, we see no reason why it should
differentiate between a client in a nominee account and one with their name
on the register.'
APCIMS (the Association of Private Client Investment Managers and
Stockbrokers) has also been discussing the issue with SIB.
This week it secured agreement from Sib that member firms of APCIMS can tell
clients that a nominee meeting 'certain conditions and criteria will be
eligible to apply for compensation under the terms of the Investors
Compensation Scheme in the event of a SFA-regulated firm's default. The
Scheme Rules treat them in the same way as those with stock registered in
their own name.'
These conditions include making sure that the nominee company is well
managed and accepting liability for losses in the nominee as if they had
arisen in the company itself.
Sib announced last month, as a result of the Maxwell affair, that it would
review the supervision of the custody of investor assets, including the
'increasing use by investment firms of nominees.'
The introduction of Taurus also creates opportunities. Details of a
compensation scheme are under discussion, and that could plug the gaps in
the ICS.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920822

