FT923-15416

FT  02 JUL 92 / Call for new Lloyd's regulator: Proposals may lead to
insurance market's integration into City's supervisory framework


   By RICHARD LAPPER


AN eagerly awaited report into the management of Lloyd's of London will
today recommend a new framework to manage and regulate the troubled
insurance market.
The report, by Sir Jeremy Morse, the chairman of Lloyds Bank, suggests that
regulation should be separated from the day-to-day administration and
business planning of the market.
A second report by a committee headed by Sir David Walker, former chairman
of the Securities and Investments Board, the investment watchdog, dismisses
allegations of fraud or malpractice by Lloyd's but criticises the way in
which many Names - the individuals whose assets back underwriting in the
market - were funnelled into the high risk spiral reinsurance syndicates.
The two reports could go some way to quelling concerns in Parliament about
allegations of malpractice at Lloyd's, although dissident Names last night
attacked Sir David's conclusions.
The Morse report recommends that a proposed regulatory board would be one of
two new executive bodies governing the market, along with the existing
Lloyd's council which has faced criticism in the wake of record losses.
While the recommendations leave intact the system of self-regulation
codified by the 1982 Lloyd's Act, they could pave the way for the future
integration of Lloyd's into the City's regulatory framework.
The Walker report, which was also considered by the Lloyd's council
yesterday, concerns the specialist 'spiral' reinsurance market - in which
Lloyd's syndicates combine with insurance companies to reinsure each other's
exposure to catastrophe loss.
Mr Alfred Doll-Steinberg, chairman of the Gooda Walker Action Group, the
biggest group of loss-making Names, said he 'was disappointed but not
surprised' by the report. Sir David had 'apparently concluded that the
spiral was not improper. We will want to know why', Mr Doll-Steinberg said.
More than 4,000 Names who were members of some of the worst performing
spiral syndicates will learn this week that they face a further cash call of
Pounds 307m to meet losses from 1989 and earlier years.
Cash calls on members of the same syndicates made since April 1991 already
amount to more than Pounds 365m. GW Run Off, an agency, is now managing the
Gooda Walker business, following its liquidation last year.
According to the agency's chairman, Mr Ralph Sharp, Gooda Walker's gross
claims (before reinsurance recoveries) in 1989 amounted to about Pounds
890m. Net losses for the year - which has been left open - amount to Pounds
491m. But a further deterioration on the 1989 year 'cannot be ruled out', Mr
Sharp said.
The Morse proposals are broadly in line with the conclusions of a market
task force which presented a wide ranging programme of reform in January.
The task force's proposals on governance and regulation were initially
rejected by Mr David Coleridge, the chairman of Lloyd's, who described the
ideas as 'codswallop'.
Sir Jeremy's committee was appointed to re-examine the proposals following
strong pressure from Lloyd's agents and underwriters.
Sir Jeremy is understood to recommend a reduction in the size of the
council, its numbers falling from 28 to 14.
Page 6
Suggestions of fraud and malpractice dismissed
Leaked details of report spark angry reaction
Lloyd's spiral to ease risk led to disaster
How the spiral works

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920702

