FT921-14175

FT  17 JAN 92 / Arts: One Over the Eight - Stephen Joseph Theatre,
Scarborough


   By ANDREW ST GEORGE


It might be surreal, but watching eight men in a boat, in a theatre, for
most of two hours, can be a very funny experience indeed. Peter Robert
Scott's One Over The Eight, directed by Alan Ayckbourn at the Stephen Joseph
Theatre, Scarborough, proves to be exactly that; a lightweight, uplifting
play about competitive rowing, energetically performed and crammed with
knowing jokes.
The plot, unashamedly, is even shallower than the river Cherwell: a
provincial university rowing club challenges the Oxford third boat, and then
tries to live up to its bravado. At the outset, the rowers bear out the
truth that only the mediocre are always at their best. They row according to
chaos theory: one slip and the whole crew disintegrates. Their cox has
abandoned them, and they are amazed the replacement is a woman. Their
macho-slobbish instincts subside as she kicks them into shape. En route,
there are arguments and intrigues, but the action makes directly for the
finishing line.
Movies thrive on this type of situation: a team of hopefuls come to believe
in themselves and each other. Scott's play resembles the training scenes
from Stepping Out or 42nd Street, only here the characters find themselves
through rowing, not dancing: the doubter finds faith, and the bully
humility; the fatty loses a few pounds, and the smoker his habit. The play's
serious concerns are lightly touched: it looks wittily at the relation
between cox and crew, between beefcake and brains; and wryly at the palpable
values of loyalty and trust which remain after the high-octane testosterone
has evaporated.
Scott dispenses platitudes like liniment to smooth things along and give
everyone a warm glow; they come mostly from Saskia Wickham's excellent cox
and John Robinson's all-American college jock. They are balanced by a surly
dissenter,
played with tact and judgment by Jonathan Cake. Throughout, the rowing
patois holds water; Wickham is native in it: bow-side, stroke,
half-pressure, feathering, catching crabs.
As director here, Ayckbourn refines himself out of existence; his actors
move around the boathouse set so naturally, interrupt each other so surely
and squabble so realistically that they hardly seem to be acting. The
setting - in the round - helps the cast of nine (crew plus cox) to generate
a winning energy and exuberance; this keeps the action going long after the
plot runs out of breath, and it is helped by John Pattison's efficient mood
music.
The crew of this unnamed university eventually loses to Oxford's third boat
by fourteen lengths; but they should feel confident when their show visits
the Oxford Playhouse next month (February 3-8; and Brighton Theatre Royal,
February 10-15).

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920117

