FT924-8129

FT  12 NOV 92 / Tokyo ready to boost economy further


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


THE Japanese authorities stand ready to provide a further boost to the
flagging economy, Mr Akira Nambara, the executive director of the Bank of
Japan, said yesterday.
Mr Nambara said the bank and the Ministry of Finance would use fiscal
policy, lower taxes or higher public spending to stimulate the economy if it
did not show signs of recovering.
His comments are the furthest a senior Japanese official has gone towards
acknowledging that the Y10,700bn (Pounds 54bn) emergency spending package
announced in August may not be enough on its own to prevent the economy
slipping into recession.
Mr Nambara told the annual meeting of the Institute of Foreign Bankers in
Japan that, although a further stimulus was not yet justified, the
authorities would act when they judged the time was ripe.
The supplementary budget needed to implement a large part of the Y10,700bn
package is stalled in the Japanese parliament which is consumed by power
struggle sparked by the Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin scandal. Some analysts believe
another supplementary budget may be needed because tax revenues for 1992 may
be even lower than originally forecast. A heated debate is under way over
whether the budget for next year should include an income tax cut.
Mr Nambara said the pressures on the Japanese banking system were bad and
getting worse with non-performing loans still growing. The top 21 banks'
non-performing loans rose from Y8,000bn at the end of March to Y12,000bn at
the end of September. The Japanese banks' profits would be reduced for
several years as they devoted their earnings to writing off bad debts, he
said.
He predicted that no big Japanese bank would face a severe crisis as a
result of mounting bad loans but cautioned that the outlook was less
reassuring for smaller institutions.
He said it was likely that the authorities would have to orchestrate rescue
operations among the smaller banks, some of which may have to merge with
larger institutions.
Land prices continued to fall in the three months to October, according to a
report published yesterday by the National Land Agency.
The report based on a survey of 804 sites around Japan found that
residential land prices around Osaka were 30 per cent below the same period
last year, while in Tokyo and its environs prices at more than 60 per cent
of sites fell by 3 per cent or more.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921112

