FT921-11765

FT  30 JAN 92 / International Company News: Fiat sticks to its investment
guns - The car-maker's efforts to maintain confidence


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


SOME manufacturers would react to a severe decline in demand and severe
price competition by axing spending. But Fiat, Italy's biggest
private-sector company, is sticking to its ambitious long-term investment
programme, despite the damage to short-term finances from tumbling profits.
Even skilful window dressing failed to make Fiat's preliminary results,
disclosed in a letter to shareholders this week, encouraging reading.
Falling sales, high costs and growing competition meant Fiat's core business
of producing motor vehicles was barely profitable last year.
Increased revenues from non-industrial activities such as financial services
and retailing softened the blow. But with Mr Giovanni Agnelli, Fiat's
chairman, warning that no upturn was in sight, the company will have to
depend on one-off capital gains and extraordinary items to tide it over.
Operating profits fell to around L636bn (Dollars 530m) last year, or about
L450bn after tax. That is frighteningly little for a group with sales of
L57,828bn. In 1990, operating earnings for Fiat's core industrial activities
alone amounted to L2,103bn. But in 1991, the decision to add operating
earnings for highly profitable non-core businesses was just one of the steps
the group had to take to produce an acceptable figure.
The result is that Fiat's industrial activities, principally cars and
trucks, which account for more than 61 per cent of turnover, were barely
profitable last year.
Fiat stressed its car business remained in the black, despite selling 65,300
fewer vehicles and seeing its domestic market share tumble to 47 per cent
from 53 per cent in 1990. However, it admitted that recent purchases of
loss-making activities, such as the Ford New Holland farm equipment business
and the Enasa trucks group in Spain, had cut into earnings.
Moreover, careful reading of the figures suggests the situation worsened in
the second half. On the cars side, the group's domestic market share edged
down during the year, dropping to 46.40 per cent in November and just 45.13
per cent the following month.
Matters look set to get worse before they get better. A number of importers,
notably Ford, have targeted the Italian market, which remained fairly
buoyant last year, to make up for falling demand elsewhere.
Others, like Volkswagen, were held back by model changes. With growth in its
home market slowing, VW may be in a position to give customers in Italy, its
biggest export market, the cars they have been crying out for.
Mr Agnelli admitted that European demand for cars showed little sign of an
upturn this year. Nor will Fiat have another windfall in Germany, where
group sales rose by 28 per cent last year. And although it is now committed
to an ambitious new model programme, neither the new Cinquecento minicar nor
the mid-sized Alfa 155 saloon are the sort of mass market models to produce
a sudden change in fortunes.
The group is in the throes of a huge L47,000bn investment programme over the
next five years. Around L28,000bn will be devoted to the cars side, on which
a total of L40,000bn is to be spent over the next decade.
But at a time of sharply declining cash flow, such ambitious spending is
already taking its toll on Fiat's balance sheet. Fiat's financial position
swung to a deficit of L385bn last year compared with a positive figure of
L570bn at end-1990 - the first time the company's financial position was in
the red in a decade. The likelihood of a continuing fall in cash flow, which
plunged to L4,604bn from L6,065 in 1990, means debt is bound to rise.
Fiat will increasingly depend on one-off gains and asset sales to prop up
its earnings until the benefits of its investment programme come on stream.
Selling the Telettra telecommunications operation and other disposals
provided a L900bn extraordinary boost to earnings last year. As a result,
net profits for 1991 will fall to around L1,100bn - not as bad as some
analysts expected.
That is still around one-third below the L1,613 made in 1990, but a great
deal more than would have been the case but for the disposals. The task for
Fiat now is to pull enough extraordinary gains out of its hat to retain
shareholders' confidence until its long-term investments start to pay off.

The Financial Times


London Page 24 Photograph Giovanni Agnelli, warned that no upturn was in
sight (Omitted).

920130

