FT921-15409

FT  10 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Chilean copper output forecast
to rise


   By LESLIE CRAWFORD


   SANTIAGO


CHILE'S COPPER output is forecast to rise to almost 2m tonnes in 1992 after
reaching 1.8m tonnes last year, according to the Chilean Copper Commission
(Cochilco).
La Escondida, the giant open-pit mine which started production in December
1990, was almost entirely responsible for the 13 per cent increase. The
mine, which is owned by BHP of Australia, RTZ and a consortium of Japanese
smelters, produced the equivalent of 294,000 tonnes of copper in the form of
concentrates.
In its first year of operation, La Escondida surpassed El Teniente to become
the second biggest copper mine in the world after Chuquicamata, also in
Chile. La Escondida says it will produce the equivalent of 340,000 tonnes of
copper this year.
The current global shortage of smelting and refining capacity, which has
sharply raised treatment charges, will not affect La Escondida because
long-term supply contracts were clinched with smelters in Japan, Germany,
and Finland before the mine came on stream.
Apart from La Escondida, the other main source of Chile's increased copper
output in 1992 will come from Exxon's Los Bronces mine, which has just
completed an important expansion programme.
Codelco, the Chilean state copper company, remains the world's biggest
producer with an output of 1.12m tonnes in 1991. It's production, however,
has been falling since 1989 and is unlikely to recover in the near future.
Codelco's mines were hit by mid-year strikes and El Teniente, its
second-biggest division, has been plagued by rock-bursts in a section of the
underground tunnels that contains most of the mine's remaining reserves.
Despite Codelco's declining importance, the Chilean Copper Commission
estimates that the country's overall production will rise steadily due to a
number of large private-sector projects that will come on stream in the
mid-1990s. It forecasts that output will reach 2.18m tonnes by 1994.
Mr Holger Bannach, Chuquicamata's general manager, will be leaving the mine
in March to take up a post with a Codelco subsidiary in Germany, the company
announced this week. Mr Bannach was deeply unpopular with Chuquicamata's
miners, who accused him of running the mine with an authoritarian hand. His
dismissal one of the workers' demands during a three-week strike in July.
Although Codelco backed its general manager during the stoppage, Mr
Bannach's move is being regarded as a gesture to improve industrial
relations at the Atacama desert mine.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920110

