FT924-6183

FT  23 NOV 92 / Arts: Vision in a visitors' building - Architecture


   By COLIN AMERY


The recent death of Sir John Summerson leaves a colossal gap in the world of
architectural history and writing. For me and many others in the arcane
world of architectural criticism, he was both mentor and model. He was
simply the very best writer in English on architecture.
But he was more than a writer because for many years, as curator of the Sir
John Soane Museum, he protected and nurtured both the atmosphere of the
museum and the thinking of England's most original neo-classical architect.
One felt, on seeing Sir John Summerson in his silent and empty office on the
top floor of the museum, that you might almost have visited Soane himself.
Summerson was 87 when he died, having suffered from Parkinson's disease for
some years. He will be remembered for his major writings. The Classical
Language of Architecture explains in the most lucid way how the elements of
classical order began and how they can be used and interpreted. This slim
book began life as a series of Third Programme talks and perhaps it was the
discipline of using just words to make architecture visible that gives this
book such power.
All lovers of London will know his Georgian London; it expanded the
boundaries of architectural history by looking beyond architectural style to
economics, patronage and social mores. His volume on the history of English
architecture in the Pelican History of Art series remains a bible, but the
book I re-read most often is the volume of essays, Heavenly Mansions. Here
he writes about architectural ideas from Soane to Le Corbusier in ways that
are positively exciting. I felt that Sir John condensed many of the ideas
from this book into one of his best essays when he wrote about the design
for the unbuilt Liverpool Cathedral by Sir Edwin Lutyens for the catalogue
of the Lutyens Exhibition at the Hayward Gallery a few years ago. He was so
skilled a writer and interpreter of architectural thinking that the whole
cathedral now lives in those pages as though it had been built.
This year has seen the loss of three great architectural Englishmen: Sir
James Richards, John Piper and Sir John Summerson. They all influenced my
generation and demonstrated that architecture can, above all the arts, bring
intellectual and visual satisfaction. They were all marvellous mentors - but
it was always the few well chosen words by Summerson that gave any
architectural debate its cutting edge. His pellucid prose is his finest
monument.
*****
The deaths of prominent and distinguished men always prompts thoughts about
the values they represented in English life. There is a distinctive English
vision in the work of the three men who have died so recently. Pondering on
that vision, I felt that one of the bodies in England t which does so much
to sustain it, and is relatively unsung, is the National Trust. I visited
Chartwell last week - where Churchill contemplated the Kentish Weald and
English values - to see one of the Trust's new visitors' buildings.
The National Trust takes enormous care over all its buildings, and that
includes the relatively minor additions, shops, restaurants, kiosks and car
parks. At Chartwell, the new shop is designed by a local Sevenoaks
architect, Richard Reid. The Trust is prepared to be quite adventurous, and
believes that it should patronise the best contemporary architects.
Mr Reid has given the Trust a simple and elegant modern building from which
to sell its wares. It is a cross between a barn and an oast - the tall tiled
roof culminates in a curved oast funnel that lets a shower of top light into
the centre of the shop. From a distance the new building groups well with
the (much less satisfactorily designed) restaurant.
There are oasts on the skyline in this part of Kent and so the new roof
looks at home. The Flemish bonded brickwork and warm clay tiles lend what
could be a mundane shop a considerable architectural presence.
I liked the open arcades at each end and the loftiness of the interior.
The roof of the shop is tall and steep and filled by a web of openwork
timber trusses. There is a rewarding sense of high light that elevates the
whole shop. There are fine views from well placed large windows - a bonus
for staff working indoors all day. The quality of the shop furnishings is
high. National Trust shops have sometimes been criticised for the cosiness
of the goods they sell, but that is another story.
The Trust's commitment to good new architecture is borne out by Richard
Reid's pleasing interpretation of vernacular Kentish architecture at
Chartwell, and I am looking forward to reviewing the much larger new
visitors' centre at Fountains Abbey in Yorkshire which has recently opened,
designed by Edward Cullinan for the National Trust. Cullinan has just won
the competition for the new visitors' centre at Stonehenge in a competition
organised by English Heritage. It will be largely underground.
In these recessionary times I suppose it is inevitable that there should be
an enhanced appreciation of small buildings. It was John Summerson who
pointed out the crucial importance of the aedicule. He would have
appreciated the care that the National Trust is taking to make its smallest
new buildings of the highest quality.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921123

