FT923-10661

FT  29 JUL 92 / CBI expects drop in output and cut in jobs


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


MANUFACTURING output will continue to fall over the next four months, more
jobs will be cut and demand will remain flat as an end to the recession
remains firmly out of sight.
That was the gloomy message from the Confederation of British Industry
yesterday as it presented the results of its quarterly industrial trends
survey.
The CBI's latest results overturned the optimism of the previous survey in
April, when UK manufacturers said they expected orders and output to
improve. In fact, both fell in the four months to July.
The survey, which covers 1,291 manufacturers and was conducted from the
middle of June to the middle of this month, found that optimism among
manufacturers had fallen back sharply since April. The balance expressing
optimism about the business situation was minus 9 per cent, compared with a
positive balance of 8 per cent in the April survey.
'The post-election boost to confidence has clearly run its course,' said Mr
David Wigglesworth, chairman of the CBI's economic situation committee.
Although the fall in demand over the past four months was at the slowest
rate since 1990, it confounded expectations of a small rise in new orders
expressed during the previous survey. Expectations of a significant increase
in export orders were also disappointed.
Overall, manufacturers expect total new orders to remain flat in the next
four months, but are expecting a slight rise in new export orders.
The survey points out that, in spite of sterling's increased strength
against the dollar since April, there was little change in the proportion of
companies regarding relative prices as a likely constraint on exports.
The fall in output since April was at a slightly faster rate than in the
previous four months. According to the CBI's own data, taken from the
results of the industrial trends surveys, manufacturing output in the second
quarter fell by 1 per cent compared with the previous quarter. The CBI is
forecasting that output will fall by a further 0.9 per cent in the third
quarter of 1992.
With deliveries falling, stocks of finished goods were reduced by less than
planned. They are now higher, relative to expected demand, than in April.
Mr Wigglesworth said one of the most worrying aspects of the survey's
results was the continuing decline in manufacturing investment, which the
CBI now expects to fall by over 10 per cent this year.
'While we have clearly been winning the battle against inflation, investment
has been a major casualty of the recession. This is a deeply worrying
situation that poses major threats to UK competitiveness,' he said.
According to the survey, only 5 per cent of manufacturers view their present
fixed capacity as less than adequate to meet demand in the year ahead.
Overall, investment intentions were little changed from the previous survey,
with more than half the respondents citing uncertainty over demand as the
biggest constraint on investment. However, most manufacturers do not intend
to cut spending on product innovation and training.
Although employment in manufacturing was cut further in the four months to
July, which corresponded with April's expectations, the rate of shedding was
slower than at any time since October 1990. It is expected to continue at a
similar rate over the next four months, with cuts most severe among big
firms.
In spite of a slowdown in productivity growth over the past four months,
average unit costs rose only slightly and are now running at their lowest
level since 1958, when the survey began.
With the downward pressure on prices even more severe than in the four
months to April, more manufacturers cut the prices of goods at the factory
gates than raised them for the fifth successive survey.
Taken together, the results for unit costs and prices suggest that domestic
profit margins were squeezed a little more over the past four months than
during the previous four-month period.
The CBI said a number of factors would continue to hinder a recovery. They
included consumer uncertainty in the face of a weak housing market,
household indebtedness and a renewed build-up in stocks, suggesting that a
rundown is in prospect. Slow world demand and government spending cuts added
to the depressed outlook.
'We don't know when the recession is going to end, but it has to be through
increased demand,' Mr Wigglesworth said. 'World demand doesn't appear to be
sufficient to enable our exports to grow, and in the home markets demand is
weak.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920729

