FT923-6493

FT  24 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: European car market


Ford's decision to put its UK plants on short-time working is partly a
reflection of the poor state of the British economy. But the move also says
something about the weak state of Europe as a whole. Last year car
manufacturers were relatively sanguine about depressed sales in Britain and
France, because post-unification Germany was growing rapidly. This year
Germany was expected to slow, with Britain, France and Spain taking up the
slack. Germany, however, has now turned down sharply but the British and
French markets at least remain stubbornly depressed.
Excess capacity has a double impact on Europe's carmakers. German groups
could comfortably sell much of their output at home last year, so had little
need to chase market share elsewhere. That has now changed. Price
competition was also subdued in markets outside Germany while non-German
manufacturers could divert production to the German market. Now the worry is
that German manufacturers will compete aggressively for a bigger share of
export markets, sparking price wars. Manufacturers with dated or unpopular
models - like Fiat and to some extent Ford - are likely to be hit hardest.
Shares of Europe's carmakers have already fallen in anticipation of extra
margin pressure. But there are still worries about the high labour costs of
German manufacturers. While much of German industry can ease such costs by
high productivity, carmaking technology is increasingly easy to transfer.
Companies such as General Motors now find it cheaper to make a Cavalier in
Britain rather than Germany, a problem exacerbated by the strength of the
D-Mark.
The problem is even greater for component makers. The tradition of German
carmakers buying from German component manufacturers is being challenged
because UK manufacturers now have a significant price advantage. Lucas, T&N
and GKN have all made gains in market share, and the opening of Japanese
transplants will help further. In the short term cyclical pressure may
depress profits, but further out Britain's component manufacturers look well
placed.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920824

