FT922-13427

FT  11 APR 92 / Minding Your Own Business: An old craft faces modern
economics - Editions Alecto, which painstakingly reproduces historical
hand-coloured prints


   By NICK GARNETT


IN A somewhat rundown six-storey former bag warehouse in the London district
of Hackney, machines like giant mangles press sheets of paper. The printer,
wearing a white apron, is surrounded by inks, cloths, and rather
primitive-looking tools. While the image is a little Dickensian, the
economics are not. One large set of paper sheets generated by this seemingly
antiquated workshop recently sold for Pounds 150,000. And the presses are
not churning out banknotes.
Printer Edward Edgerton-Williams and his studio work almost exclusively for
Editions Alecto, a tiny family-owned publishing house claiming to be the
only one in Britain producing limited edition, hand-coloured prints from
18th and 19th century plates etched and engraved with historically important
images.
These include sets of prints of the plants collected on Captain Cook's first
voyage around the world in 1768-71, all produced from the original copper
plates made in the 1770s. Others are the bison and Red Indian-strewn prints
made from the original plates depicting the 1830s travels, in north America,
of Maximilian of Wied-Neuwied, a German prince with a taste for exploration.
Exact facsimiles in the original Norman, Latin and English of the Domesday
Book are also in 'production,' using modern lithographic printing
techniques. Almost all of Editions Alecto's work is done in close
collaboration with the museums which own those plates and manuscripts.
Operating from its own gallery in a beautifully converted former dairy in
Kensington, the company has made a very handy living for Joe Studholme and
other members of his family. The company generated sales last year of Pounds
1.5m on which it made a pretax net profit of Pounds 144,000.
'We started off in the early 1960s publishing the works of contemporary
artists,' says 56-year-old Studholme. 'Our first historical series was
William Daniell's Voyage Round Great Britain for the Tate Gallery. I
actually did that because I thought it would be a wonderful peg for hanging
a modern series on to. Since then, we've rather got to like historical
series.'
The Studholme family are the sole shareholders, though for Editions Alecto's
next project - reproduction of prints of the Tales of Chaucer held in a
Californian museum - the company is seeking shareholders who will pay
Dollars 100,000 (Pounds 57,803) for a slice of the project's profits. Big
numbers are nothing new for the company. The North American prints (Bodmer's
America, from the name of the Swiss painter) are on sale at Dollars 80,000
for the set of 81 engravings. All the 100 sets of Banks' Florilegium - 740
engravings of the plants collected by Joseph Banks, later director of Kew
Gardens, on one of Captain Cook's voyages - have been sold, though one
version of final proofs is on offer at Pounds 175,000. The most expensive of
the Domesday Book editions, encased in ancient oak, bound in goatskin, is a
snip at Pounds 7,500.
The company's biggest cost is printing, reflecting meticulous preparation
and reproduction. The steel or copper plates, usually unused for more than
100 years and suffering acid damage caused by the environment and their
protective wrapping, must be restored.
Ink is made from tinned products and dried pigments, mixed with boiled
linseed oil and rubbed into the etched or engraved lines.
The plate is then placed face-up on a press bed and specialised paper is
placed on top. The press forces the paper onto the plate, pulling the ink
from the etched lines. After each roll through the press, each plate must be
cleaned and re-inked.
Then comes the hand water-colouring. For Bodmer's America, 90 per cent of
the work involves water-colouring, each print absorbes four to 14 hours of
hand-colouring. The final master proof for each print is inspected by the
museum owning the plates and stamped once it is satisfied.
There is a high chuck-out rate. 'I would say that, last year, 300 out of the
2,000 prints we did failed on our own test and had to be shredded,' says
Edgerton-Williams. It can also be very time-consuming. 'It took us between
400 and 500 hours restoring one plate, the male turkey in Audobon's Birds of
America. It took over 200 hours of proofing work to get the image right for
Dog Dancer in the Bodmer series.' The Banks' Florilegium project took ten
years to complete.
Administration costs are high. The publicity and exhibition budget is over
Pounds 100,000, and, though Editions Alecto's permanent staff is just eight,
scores of specialists are hired on temporary contracts. More than 50
scholars were involved on the Domesday project. The Domesday Book, a
massively detailed survey of land and asset holdings carried out under the
orders of William the Conqueror between 1085 and 1087, excites Studholme,
who studied history at Oxford.
'It was an incredible bureaucratic feat. We now think just one scribe was
used who was English, because he wrote with the English open 'e'. The
correcting scribe, though, was a Norman looking over his shoulder. The first
scribe didn't quite finish it. The section on East Anglia was published
separately.'
The third largest cost is royalty payments to the museums. This can run to
'a few hundred thousand pounds' for one series, Studholme says. Usually,
agreements with museums prevent publication for 50 years of any other
editions from plates used by Alecto.
Because the number of sets per series is so small (100 for Banks'
Florilegium, 1,000 for the Domesday Book, with a further 1,000 separate
county editions) Alecto only requires a small number of customers. About 40
per cent are museums and public libraries. Most of the rest are wealthy
individuals interested in botany, exploration or printing. Some also buy as
an investment. The price of Florilegium has risen from the original Pounds
45,000 to Pounds 150,000.
'It's a funny business, really,' says Studholme. 'The things we produce may
be wonderful but you yourself have to visit people who show an interest. You
can't sell it through the mail.'
A large chunk of customers are in Australia and the US.
The company has retained its level of sales over the past few years, but the
recession has hurt. 'It has shrunk the market enormously, though
temporarily. Museums have had their acquisition budgets slashed and private
donors are not making up for it. We've sold 30 of the Bodmers but by now we
were expecting to have sold another 30 out of the 125.'
A number of projects are under consideration, apart from Chaucer. One is to
combine CDs with videos in educational and entertainment packs based on the
company's various series of prints and the Domesday facsimiles.
'We are very keen to do this because so far we have not been successful in
developing a bread-and-butter part to the business,' Studholme says. 'We
want to exploit the intellectual property rights we hold.'
Editions Alecto, 46 Kelso Place, London W8 5QG. Tel: 071-937-6611.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920411

