FT923-9706

FT  04 AUG 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Cash mountain in search
of a home - Ian Hamilton Fazey looks at the venture capital industry


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


Pressure is mounting on Britain's venture capital industry, the world's
biggest after the US. The continuous growth of the 1980s has stopped and
about Pounds 1.8bn of funds is available but uninvested.
A resultant pause in fund-raising is giving the venture capitalists' own
backers - mainly pension funds - time to think. In spite of the clamour from
companies to swap debt for equity to help them through the recession, or for
working capital to help finance their way out of it, the uninvested funds
are not available for these purposes.
They are for growth, for gambling on higher-than-average returns for
higher-than-average achievement. They are not even for long-term investment.
Venture capitalists - and the pension funds that back them  - want returns
of 30 per cent in three to seven years in exchange for taking the risk of
losing all if a company they support fails.
Since they get their returns from the flotation on the stock market of the
companies they back, or from the sale of the whole business or just their
stake in it, recession affects them badly. If the funds cannot exit easily
from existing investee companies, this inhibits them from backing new ones.
At the same time, pension funds which have backed the venture capital funds
are still being charged management fees of up 2 1/2 per cent of their
investments, even if the money has not yet been put into any growing
businesses.
Peter Folkman, a former 3i director who now runs North of England Ventures
in Manchester, says: 'What is now very clear is that this is a cyclical
business. You cannot raise money in the UK at the moment, certainly not in
the quantities that were available in the late 1980s.' He questions whether
the pension funds will ever again be as enthusiastic as they used to be when
they are tapped again for money next year or, more likely, in 1994, when
present stocks are depleted. 'There will start to be a real shortage of
funds in about a year's time,' Folkman says.
The figures show what is happening. If 3i's network of more than 20 offices
in London and the regions is excluded as an ever-present background of
long-term development capital from the clearing banks, significant change in
the venture capital industry is quickly apparent.
According to Ernst & Young, the accountants, UK funds invested Pounds 1.39m
in 1988 in promising companies. This rose to Pounds 1.65bn in 1989, then
fell back to the 1988 level before dropping to Pounds 1.15m last year. Since
around Pounds 200m a year goes overseas, the UK position is worse than this
looks. Yet while the market was turning down, the total pool available for
investment was continuing to rise as pension fund managers got on to what
most still saw as a bandwagon.
Venture Economics, a consultancy which analyses the industry, puts the pool
of uninvested money at Pounds 384m in 1988, rising to Pounds 1.45m in 1989
and Pounds 1.85bn in 1990, when another Pounds 900m was, none-the-less,
raised to carry forward.
Folkman has been analysing the UK's figures for the last three years. With
overseas investment stripped out, these show Pounds 1.42bn invested at the
1989 peak, declining to Pounds 989m last year, a fall of 30 per cent.
This pressure told on numbers of funds, with a shake-out from 124 in 1989 to
114 last year. However, the number of deals fell by only 8 per cent, from
1,302 to 1,196, so that the number of deals done by each fund - 10.5 last
year - was the same as in 1989. To make these numbers add up, there had to
be a fall in the value of investments made by each fund - from Pounds 11.5m
in 1989 to Pounds 8.7m last year, a drop of 24 per cent.
However, this is not entirely bad news for the funds, as Folkman's further
analysis reveals. Of the Pounds 989m they invested last year, 28 per cent
was in the Midlands and north, the area where Folkman's fund operates. This
was worth Pounds 277m and compared with Pounds 256m in 1990 when the
regions' share was 23 per cent. Moreover, the same regions' share of the
1,196 deals in 1991 was 34 per cent, or 406. The comparative figures for
1990 were 29 per cent and 354.
The trend, therefore, is for more deals in the regions where recession has
not had such a serious effect as in the south, but at lower individual
value. This is good news for regional funds, which grew from a handful in
1985 to more than 70 now. However, the regional funds are small, having only
Pounds 5m-20m each to invest. This means that none is likely to put more
than Pounds 1m into any single deal.
Charles Sherwood of Schroder Ventures says this is likely to lead to
important changes in the industry. The first signs came in May when Schroder
backed the purchase of Sumit Equity Ventures, one of the oldest regional
groups, from AE Sharp, the Birmingham-based stockbroking and financial
services company. Sumit has three funds worth Pounds 43m. It will now be run
by Lindsay Bury, previously a founder of Apricot Computers. AE Sharp retains
10 per cent but Bury's other shareholders will be Schroder Ventures and
Folkman's North of England fund, which Schroder also backs.
Sherwood says the industry is now mature and is segmenting. The strength of
London funds is in big, complex, international or specialised
high-technology deals. This is making it hard to compete in the regions. 'We
don't have the ability to respond quickly to deals outside London and we
don't have enough regular contact with intermediaries in regional centres to
develop trust between them and our funds.
'If you have a small deal in, say, Leeds and don't need anything more than
generalised venture capital skills, why even think of taking it outside
Yorkshire?' he asks. He sees Schroder's tie-up with Folkman and Bury as akin
to a franchising operation, with London money made more easily available for
medium-sized or bigger deals in the regions.
It means a regional fund manager can score on local knowledge and contacts
with the growing professional networks of Manchester, Leeds or Birmingham,
but then get over the problem of only being able to invest about Pounds 1m
at a time.
There are, of course, other structures for disbursing funds from London,
such as 3i's national network or County NatWest's chain of regional offices.
But Sherwood thinks the new alliance between Schroder, Sumit and North of
England offers small regional funds an alternative to syndicating promising
deals with competitors.
He thinks it will also appeal to pension funds when they start investing
again, so it is a model other London funds are looking at. The potential
benefits are also obvious for any growing business outside London that is a
genuinely good venture capital prospect - however fraught the industry's
struggle with the economic cycle.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920804

