FT924-6012

FT  24 NOV 92 / Cement maker cuts jobs


   By ANDREW TAYLOR and KAREN FOSSLI


   LONDON, OSLO


CASTLE CEMENT, Britain's second-largest cement company, announced yesterday
that it was cutting its manufacturing capacity by a tenth with the loss of
more than 100 jobs.
It is the second large British cement manufacturer in less than a week to
announce cuts.
Blue Circle, the country's biggest producer, announced on Thursday that it
was reducing its capacity by a sixth with the loss of 550 jobs, a fifth of
its workforce.
The companies blame the deep recession in the construction industry for the
fall in demand for cement, which they say is unlikely to rise to previous
levels even when the market recovers.
Castle, which is owned jointly by Aker, the Norwegian cement producer and
engineering company, and Euroc, the Swedish industrial group, is to reduce
manufacturing capacity by 320,000 tonnes a year by mothballing one of the
three kilns at its Ribblesdale works in North Yorkshire.
The closure of the kiln will involve the loss of 70 jobs. A further 38 jobs
are to go due to shift reductions at the company's Clyde works in Scotland
and at Ketton in Lincolnshire.
Before the latest cuts Castle employed 1,350 workers. Overall the group is
reducing its capacity from 3.2m tonnes to 2.9m tonnes, which represents a 25
per cent reduction in capacity since 1989.
The group has already closed its Pitstone works at Tring in Hertfordshire
and shut down two kilns at Padeswood in north Wales, with the loss of about
450 jobs.
Castle supplies about a quarter of all cement sold in Britain. Blue Circle
supplies about 45 per cent and Rugby about 20 per cent. Only a very small
amount of cement is imported by other suppliers.
Mr Leslie Hewitt, Castle's managing director, said the latest closures
reflected the greater strength of the group in the north, where it had most
of its surplus capacity. The closures would ensure a better balance in
production between the north and south.
Aker and Euroc said the kiln closure and redundancies would cost the group
NKr15m (Pounds 1.5m) this year but would generate net savings of NKr15m to
Nkr20m.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921124

