FT924-961

FT  21 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Television's market failure


IF EVER there were any doubt that the regulation of British broadcasting has
fallen into a muddle, the decision to block the establishment of a fifth
television channel removes it.
The Independent Television Commission was faced with a single bid for the
10-year Channel Five franchise from Channel Five Holdings. That bid was
rejected because the commission feared the consortium was being too
optimistic about its revenue and cost projections and because it was not
satisfied about the financial commitment of the proposed members of the
consortium.
As a result, British television viewers and advertisers may well be denied
the development of the last part of the terrestrial TV broadcasting
spectrum, which Channel Five Holdings had intended to use for a
regionalised, big city-based alternative to existing services.
Whether the commission has acted properly within the terms of the 1990
Broadcasting Act will probably be tested by judicial review. The chances are
that it has; it would be unlike the commission's lawyers to make a mistake
of that kind, as it demonstrated by successfully seeing off legal challenges
to its decisions in awarding the ITV Channel Three franchises which come
into effect next week.
That does not necessarily mean the commission is right. Ten-year revenue
projections are no easier in broadcasting than in any other business, and
the bottom of the worst recession since television was invented may not be
the most reliable vantage point for making a judgment.
As for the depth of commitment by members of the consortium, that is also
something about which lawyers can quibble, but the names on the application
 -Thames Television, until January 1 holder of the weekday London ITV
franchise, Associated Newspapers, Time Warner, Cox and Pearson (owner of the
Financial Times) - are scarcely lightweight.
But the crucial point is this: the ITC is failing to do what the
Broadcasting Act intended it to do, namely to adopt a lighter touch than its
predecessor, the Independent Broadcasting Authority, and to steer the ITV
system towards a more open market, in which performance and takeover bids -
rather than questionable franchise rounds - determine who comes out on top.
This point applies with particular force to Channel Five, an experimental,
even marginal service, which can only succeed if it wins sufficient viewers
to build advertising support. If a group of investors think it worth risking
their money to test the viability of the new channel, it is not clear what
public gain there is in the ITC thinking it knows better.
If a Channel Five consortium were to go bust after, say, four years, it
would hurt no-one but its shareholders. The government needs to watch the
ITC's step.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921221

