FT922-4011

FT  08 JUN 92 / BT assesses TV service using telephone lines


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


BRITISH Telecom has found a way of delivering a television service along
existing telephone wires and is exploring the commercial feasibility of
offering a service to homes.
BT engineers have demonstrated that the project is technically feasible, and
good-quality pictures have been received using ordinary telephone cables.
Mr Steve Maine, director of BT's visual and broadcast services division, is
beginning to assess the commercial implications and whether BT would need
broadcasting partners to go ahead.
If extra television channels could be offered to everyone who has a
telephone, such a system might be a powerful competitor to cable and
possibly even satellite television.
It can cost more than Pounds 30m to build a cable television network serving
100,000 homes.
Only one channel of television can be delivered down a telephone line at a
time, but if computer-controlled switches are installed at central points -
say at telephone exchanges - viewers could choose from a range of channels.
Mr Maine believes that the first and possibly most economic application
would be to send individual feature films from a central library - a
telephone equivalent of the video shop.
Assessing the commercial potential of television by telephone is still in
its early stages, but Mr Maine has not ruled out joint ventures with
broadcasters and cable television channels.
Over the past few years BT has been pulling out of cable television and has
only a few stakes left, including that in Westminster Cable, a pioneer cable
television company.
The corporation's visual and broadcast services division, which covers
everything from videoconferencing to linking broadcasters with their
transmitters, has an annual turnover of about Pounds 150m.
Increasingly, cable companies see providing telephone services in opposition
to BT as an attractive business. The company is likely to face growing
competition from the cable television companies, which are backed by large
North American telephone groups, but it had decided to compete by improving
its core services.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920608

