FT924-6125

FT  23 NOV 92 / International Capital Markets: Gilts slip on worries over UK
funding needs


   By PETER MARSH


GILTS edged down last week amid funding worries and signs that the UK
economy may be flickering into life.
Against German bonds, gilts also suffered due to last week's strains on
European currency markets which pushed funds out of weak currencies into the
D-Mark and led to the weekend's ERM realignment.
The falls in prices along the yield curve had been widely anticipated. The
turnround brought to an end a generally healthy period for gilts since the
devaluation of sterling in mid-September. Short-dated gilts turned down
partly because of the perception that further cuts in UK base rates are
unlikely by the end of the year, while longer-dated securities fell on
inflation worries and concern about funding.
The short-dated Treasury 8 3/4 per cent stock maturing in 1997 lost ground
by about a third of a point during the week, being quoted on Friday night at
106 7/32 . The yield was pushed up 8 basis points during the week to 7.18
per cent. At the other end of the yield curve, the 8 3/4 per cent Treasury
bond due in 2017 lost about 1 point to 98 31/32 , with the yield rising 9
basis points to 8.85 per cent.
According to calculations by Mr Nigel Richardson of S. G. Warburg
Securities, the government will need to issue Pounds 5bn worth of gilts by
the end of this financial year - even taking into account the auction of an
expected Pounds 2bn or so worth of gilts on December 2.
This estimate is much higher than that of many economists prior to the
Autumn Statement on November 12, which said the government would need to
borrow Pounds 37bn this financial year, rather than the Pounds 28bn forecast
eight months ago. The escalation is almost totally due to higher spending
and weaker tax revenues triggered by the longer-than-expected recession.
While more than Pounds 1bn a month of gilts seems likely to be on offer to
institutions until next April, the funding needs in 1993-94 will be even
greater. About Pounds 55bn of new securities could find their way into the
market, driving up yields and pushing down prices along the yield curve.
As funding became a talking point, scraps of evidence last week pointed to a
faint improvement for the UK economy. Some believe this means inflationary
pressures could become a problem next year. The 0.9 per cent increase in
retail sales volumes in the three months to October compared with May-July
may signal increased consumer spending, while October also saw a Pounds
5.1bn rise in bank and building society lending.
While no-one is trumpeting an end to the recession, many gilt investors are
reasoning that the worst may be over. This points to a period of relative
decline for gilt prices.
As strains emerged in the ERM last week, gilt yield spreads over German
bunds widened. Two weeks ago, yields for 10-year gilts were 78 basis points
above their German equivalent which widened to 114 basis points on Friday.
Over the same period, the yield spread between 10-year gilts and the
comparable French bonds rose from 8 to 38 basis points. According to Mr
Sanjay Joshi, an analyst at Daiwa, the trend to higher gilts yields will
continue as investors 'look more at the fundamentals of what is happening to
the UK economy compared to other parts of Europe'.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921123

