FT922-7408

FT  19 MAY 92 / Letter: Public sector stimulus and elimination of private
sector distortions would help meet need for affordable houses (1)


   From Ms SHEILA MCKECHNIE


Sir, Your leader ('More housing choice needed', May 13) is a timely reminder
that the government's commitment to increasing home ownership through
schemes such as rents-to-mortgages does not necessarily translate into
greater housing choice for the individual.
High house prices have ruled out the possibility of home ownership for many.
Renting is their only option and, while the private sector has a role to
play in providing more homes, many people simply cannot afford to pay market
rents.
You suggest tax incentives for landlords as one way to boost supply.
However, these could lead to insecurity for tenants while encouraging rising
house prices and so excluding more people from home ownership. There are
more efficient ways of financing social housing that produce better value
for money for the tax payer and more security for the tenant. These would
involve changes in the public sector borrowing requirement rules in the way
suggested by your columnist, John Willman. The government's antipathy to
local authority management of rented housing could be met by introducing
arm's length agencies or through further housing association growth.
The ever growing demand for affordable homes can only be met by a greater
level of public investment in housing. Shelter has identified a need for an
additional 100,000 affordable homes annually over the next five years. This
could in part be done by redistributing Miras. This avenue has been ignored
by politicians of the two main parties in the belief that it is akin to
electoral suicide. However, Shelter commissioned an opinion poll before the
election which showed that 71 per cent of the population were in favour of
the redistribution.
The housing industry is not short of ideas on how to deal with the housing
crisis. What is lacking is the political will.
Sheila McKechnie,
director,
Shelter,
88 Old Street,
London EC1V 9HU

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920519

