FT922-658

FT  26 JUN 92 / International Company News: Midland makes its mark on Milan
 -Euromobiliare's planned management changes


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


THE departure of Mr Guido Roberto Vitale as managing director of
Euromobiliare, the Milan merchant bank he founded in 1973, points to a
watershed in Italian finance.
Mr Vitale is not stepping down until October, and thereafter will remain on
the board. But, combined with Monday's resignation by Mr Renato Preti as
managing director of Sviluppo, another entrepreneurial merchant bank which
thrived in the strong corporate finance markets of the late 1980s, it
suggests the end of an era.
Mr Vitale's decision probably rests on a mixture of personal and
institutional factors, heightened after the UK's Midland Bank, which already
owned 49 per cent of Euromobiliare, assumed control of a further 5 per cent
last year, giving it a decisive majority.
Closer integration into the Midland network may have been inevitable, even
without the recent raft of problems which have confronted Euromobiliare.
Mergers and acquisitions operations have been increasingly dovetailed with
Midland Montagu, the investment banking arm of the UK institution.
Euromobiliare managers now commute regularly between the City of London and
Milan.
But Midland's concern with Euromobiliare has undoubtedly grown following its
collapse in profitability. The bank reported a group loss of L976m for 1991
and passed its dividend, compared with net earnings of L9.5bn (Dollars
8.09m) in 1990.
The causes were diverse. Income from equity trading slumped, owing to
plunging volumes on the stock market, while Euromobiliare also made heavy
write-downs on its own portfolios as a result of falling share prices.
Meanwhile, staff costs had accelerated following steady expansion.
But among other factors was a L5.5bn write-down of the bank's position on
its holding in VM Motori, the motors group for which it arranged a
management buy-out in 1989. To cap it all, Euromobiliare suffered L3.5bn net
foreign exchange losses.
Cutting costs through job losses and avoiding the same mistakes again are
part of Midland's new recipe. Mr Sencar Toker, Midland Montagu's director
for Europe who will now chair Euromobiliare's executive committee, points to
retrenchment.
The bank will concentrate on the three core businesses of fund management,
corporate finance and securities trading. Illustrating its priorities,
Euromobiliare is paying L30bn to buy a Florence-based fund manager with
around L1,000bn under management.
But Mr Vitale's decision and the changes at Euromobiliare also reflect wider
factors. Bankers say Mr Vitale may have been losing steam after almost 20
years at the company. And Euromobiliare's image has suffered recently from
staff defections and its association with L'Indipendente, the newspaper it
helped to launch last year.
The management changes come as Italian merchant banking undergoes a wider
transformation. Economic recession has caused a drop in corporate finance
and M&A business. The market has become more competitive as some of the
world's top investment banks have moved into Milan in the 1990s.
Some bankers think houses like Euromobiliare, which made their name with
audacious corporate finance deals on the back of Italy's economic boom in
the 1980s, will have to respond.
With fewer mandates and more competition, the presence of Midland - plus the
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank - with its wider international links, may have
become more important.
That has been true at Sviluppo, whose founder, Mr Francesco Micheli, sold
control to the Dutch ING banking and insurance group last December.
With the Mr Vitale's gradual retreat, it appears to be the case at
Euromobiliare, too.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920626

