FT924-921

FT  21 DEC 92 / Risk and Reward: UK insurance groups see a brighter future
in derivatives


   By RICHARD WATERS


SOME UK insurance companies are becoming big users of equity futures and
options. Protecting their solvency margins and making their investment
operations more efficient are things which derivatives should make easier.
Also, some of their latest investment products are derivatives-based.
Expected changes in regulations and a changing attitude on the part of the
insurers themselves, are likely to speed the process.
The insurers have a high proportion of their shareholders funds invested in
equities. This reflects the long-run out-performance of equities, and a
desire by insurers to protect their capital bases during periods of high
inflation.
Many use equity options to protect themselves against the devastation to
their solvency margin that a market collapse would cause.
'We do it from time to time to lock in a healthy level in the UK equity
market,' said Mr Mike Payne, investment director at Legal & General. Royal
Insurance - whose solvency margin is under greater pressure than many other
insurers - and Commercial Union are others which follow this policy.
As the general level of share prices moves up, L&G buys options to keep
raising the floor under its shareholders funds.
'There is a ratchet effect here,' says Mr Payne. Buying out-of-the-money
options (where the exercise price is well below market levels when the
option is bought) helps to keep down the cost of hedging. 'It's when you
protect at the money that you really have to pay. You have to self-insure
the first 100-point drop.'
Such prudence is not now rewarded under solvency regulations issued by the
Department of Trade and Industry, the insurers' regulator. The DTI specifies
which assets insurance companies can count towards their solvency margins,
and in what proportion. Last produced in 1981, these regulations have not
kept pace with the sort of financial instruments insurance companies now
use, and futures and options are not included in the list of recognised
assets.
So long as the stock market goes up, this does not present a significant
problem. If an insurer holds options that are considerably out of the money,
the market value of these assets is likely to be small in relation to the
equity holdings they are designed to protect.
Perhaps for that reason, insurers appear relatively unconcerned by the
outmoded regulations. However, if share prices fall, the value of the
options would quickly rise, making them a more significant part of the
insurers' capital base (this is why they are bought in the first place).
This anomaly is now the subject of discussion between the DTI and the
Association of British Insurers, the industry's trade association. Amended
regulations are expected to recognise the use of derivatives to protect
solvency margins, so encouraging insurance companies to make greater use of
such instruments.
Insurers have become big users of equity derivatives to help them manage
their portfolios more effectively.
The Prudential is widely recognised as the company to have used derivatives
most extensively and for longest, though its approach is highly
conservative.
It uses stock index futures for two purposes, says Mr Rodney Dennis, of
Prudential Portfolio Managers: to make a change in asset allocation, and to
take a position in the equity market in advance of expected cash receipts.
The costs of shifting an exposure through futures is far smaller than
through an investment in the underlying stocks.
Taking into account commissions, stamp duty and the spread paid to market
makers, the Prudential reckons the cost of moving into and out of stocks at
1.9 per cent. A similar round trip in futures, it says, costs 0.054 per cent
(though futures contracts need to be rolled over every three months).
Futures are only used to make short-term shifts in asset allocation, though.
Nor does the Pru - or any other insurer - use futures or options to generate
better investment returns. It invests on fundamental views about particular
stocks or asset classes, looking to derivatives only as tools to help make
those selections.
Trying to enhance returns through derivative-based trading strategies 'is an
activity which doesn't appear to be a natural part of our business', Mr
Dennis says.
In spite of this, the investment products offered by insurers are likely to
become increasingly dependent on futures and options.
Retail futures funds may not have taken off, in spite of new regulations a
year ago; but many insurers have launched guaranteed equity products this
year, which give investors a proportion of any gains in the equity market,
plus their money back.
This is tantamount to selling investors an equity call option, with the rest
of their money placed on deposit.
Some insurers, such as Legal & General, hedge their exposure under such
products internally through their investment funds. Others, if market talk
is to be believed, don't hedge at all. As such products become more common,
insurance companies' ability to price options, and to use the markets to
hedge, will become an important part of their investment skills.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921221

