FT922-13355

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Waverers frightened back into the fold - The
Tories played on fears of higher taxes to hang on in the south


   By DAVID MARSH


NEAR . . . and yet so very, very far. In a range of crucial southern
constituencies which Labour had to win to take office, the Tories held on
with reduced majorities, leaving the shire counties almost as strongly
bathed in ultramarine as they had been in 1987.
Fear of the effect of a Labour government on mortgage payments and taxes,
skilfully and brutally played upon by the Conservatives in the final days of
campaigning, steered waverers firmly into the Tory camp.
Mr Alan Whitehead, the Labour leader of Southampton City Council, who
achieved a 5.6 per cent swing but failed by 585 votes to unseat the Tory
incumbent in the city's Test constituency, concluded glumly yesterday: 'Neil
Kinnock succeeded in making Labour electable, but not elected.'
As a consolation prize, Labour gained Southampton Itchen with a 6.6 per cent
swing over the Conservatives.
Mr Whitehead said the Tories succeeded in 'scaring voters into the polling
booths' with a cascade of leaflets warning the electorate of financial
disadvantages under Labour. 'People's hands hovered over Labour, but they
decided to hang on to nurse for fear of finding something worse,' he said.
The Tories lost Thurrock in Essex on a 1.8 per cent swing to Labour, but
hung on to Basildon, Swindon, Slough and Dover, and successfully defended
Portsmouth South against a well-organised Liberal Democrat drive.
Apart from unseating Mr Chris Patten in Bath, the Liberal Democrats' only
southern scalp was Cheltenham, taken with a 1,668 majority. Antagonism by
Tory traditionalists to the black Conservative candidate, Mr John Taylor,
was undoubtedly an important factor behind the 5.2 per cent swing to the
Liberal Democrats in the spa town. Liberal Democrat organisers yesterday
angrily accused the Tories of organising a last-minute smear campaign
against Mr Nigel Jones, the new MP.
Mr Don Foster, the Liberal Democrat victor in Bath, with a 5 per cent swing
in his favour, toured the city yesterday in an open-top bus. But he said he
was 'terribly disappointed' by the poor Liberal Democrat showing nationwide.
Mr Patten's downfall was caused not just by poll tax protests, but also by
voters' desire for a return to 'compassion' after the 'selfishness' of the
Thatcher years, Mr Foster said.
However, Mr Nick Troup, a healthfood shop proprietor, who helped organise
the tactical voting campaign that swayed the Bath result, was sceptical
about prospects for a change in direction. Mr Foster's win vindicated two
years of planning to unseat the Tory chairman, Mr Troup said. But the
prospect of five more years of Conservative government was 'a nightmare'. Mr
Troup said he might emigrate to Bombay.
Elsewhere in the south, the Tory mood was understandably buoyant. Mr Simon
Coombs, the acerbic MP for Swindon, who achieved a reduced 2,826 majority,
said: 'Tory voters were dissatisfied with government policies but fearful of
the alternative. If someone shoves you in the arm, you don't shoot yourself
in the other arm.'
Mr Coombs said that Labour's defeat showed that Britain was 'now a
homeowning, share-owning democracy that doesn't want its freedoms tampered
with'.
Labour faced a terrible dilemma, he added. 'If they put forward policies
which are not in the interest of these people, they do not get the votes. If
they do put forward such policies, people say 'why vote for them?''
Mr John Watts, returned in the marginal seat of Slough with a slender 514
majority, said 'the Kinnock factor' was the main reason behind the Tory
surge. Mr Watts had targeted the 4 per cent of the Slough electorate
identified as uncertain Tory voters. Party organisers also pulled out all
the stops in bringing supporters to the polls.
'No one who said they would vote for us didn't vote for us, unless they were
dead,' Mr Watts said. 'If we can hold on to the same share of our vote in a
recession as after the Falklands war and during the 1987 boom, it suggests
we have a firmly entrenched chunk of support. Unless there is some
realignment in the opposition there is no alternative government,' he added.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920411

