FT924-8172

FT  12 NOV 92 / Accountancy Column: Court case gives unique insight into an
auditor's work - Andrew Jack on the lessons to be learned from the
spiralling costs of an unfortunate acquisition


   By ANDREW JACK


WHEN Walker Greenbank, the wall-coverings group, sold one of its
subsidiaries in September 1990, the directors were hardly concerned that
they were paid just Pounds 1 on the deal.
Nearly four years after its acquisition, Greenbank's board was glad to see
the back of Alkar, a supermarket and warehouse shelving company that had
cost the group up to Pounds 15m.
The first sign of trouble came in October 1988. Mr Alan Carr, Alkar's
managing director and the man who had sold his company to Greenbank at the
start of 1987, made his normal monthly presentation to the board.
After nearly two years' of monthly written and oral management reports, and
the launch of an ambitious expansion programme, he told the directors that
there might be a shortfall in anticipated profits in his subsidiary.
The next month, these doubts re-surfaced in discussions Greenbank was having
with a potential takeover candidate. As a result, Sir Anthony Jolliffe, the
company's chairman at the time, suggested that Mr Carr might want to buy
back Alkar.
Mr Carr sought professional advice, and suggested a figure. This number
suggested his advisers had been given different information on Alkar's
performance to that previously presented to Greenbank's board.
The next day, on a Friday in mid-November 1988, Mr Carr called Greenbank's
finance director. He said Alkar's stated figures were incorrect, with stocks
over-valued by Pounds 2m-Pounds 4m and debtors over-valued by up to Pounds
4m. He tendered his resignation.
By Sunday, Greenbank had obtained an injunction to prevent Mr Carr and his
father - who had received Greenbank shares in payment for the acquisition of
Alkar - from selling these shares. Investigating accountants and senior
Greenbank management moved in to Alkar.
The final chapter of Greenbank's involvement with Alkar took place just a
few weeks ago, when Arthur Young, Greenbank's auditors, and Mr Carr and his
father - Alkar's previous owners - agreed to an out-of-court settlement
totalling Pounds 4.6m including costs.
The story of the Alkar acquisition is a valuable case-study, not least
because rarely do such intimate financial details make it as far as open
court. The details of the case are based on court documents presented by
Greenbank's lawyers during the trial. The case was settled before evidence
was heard from the Carrs or Arthur Young.
Walker Greenbank - previously known as C & W Walker Holdings - was the
holding company for a group of engineering businesses growing by
acquisition, based in Lancashire. In December 1986 it considered buying a
new business. That company was Alkar - originally called WH Carr & Sons -
based near Newcastle upon Tyne, which made and installed supermarket
shelving systems and warehouse racking.
Alkar was owned by Mr Alan Carr, the managing director, and Mr William Carr,
his father and a former director. Alan Carr wanted to expand the business,
and decided that finding a purchaser which would inject more money would be
the best option.
Alan Carr negotiated with Greenbank, and told the company that Alkar would
make a profit of at least Pounds 900,000 for the year to December 31 1986.
He supplied audited accounts for 1984 and 1985, and management accounts up
to October 1986.
Greenbank asked Arthur Young, its auditor, to investigate Alkar. It says
that nothing untoward emerged, and it purchased the company by the end of
January 1987. Alan Carr joined Greenbank's board, and Greenbank's deputy
chief executive joined Alkar's.
Payment was Pounds 2.2m in shares initially, with a series of further
amounts on later dates related to Alkar's profits for 1986 and 1987. What
emerged many months later was the inaccuracy of both the profit forecasts
and of the financial information fed to Greenbank's board after acquisition.
Greenbank alleges that the information was far too reliant on Alan Carr. It
says he decided what transactions should be recognised as sales, he
anticipated sales and he decided what the company's stock was worth. It also
highlights the role of Arthur Young, saying the firm should have raised
questions over Alkar's accounting practices and profit forecasts.
The 1986 accounts showed pre-tax profits of Pounds 1.1m. They were
over-stated by Pounds 240,000 of overvalued stock, and by Pounds 271,000 not
properly attributable to that year. According to Greenbank, the real net
profit should have been just Pounds 784,000 - well below the Pounds 900,000
forecast level.
After acquisition, Greenbank alleges fraud on the part of Mr Alan Carr and
negligence against Arthur Young, as auditor to Alkar once it had become part
of the group. The Carrs and Arthur Young deny these allegations.
During this period, Alkar made monthly written reports of its trading
figures and oral progress reports to Greenbank's board. In February 1988,
for instance, Alan Carr said sales to January of that year were Pounds 10.4m
and pre-tax profits were Pounds 2.7m. In fact, sales were no more than
Pounds 8.5m, and Alkar had made a loss, says Greenbank.
What Arthur Young allegedly failed to detect was an over-valuation of stock
totalling Pounds 4m - with a corresponding increase in profit. That included
Pounds 500,000 over-stated as a result of double-counting stock and
miscalculating overheads.
In late December 1987, there was a stock-take at Alkar's factory and
warehouse attended by auditors from Arthur Young. The count was apparently
carried out properly, using stock tickets stuck to the items being counted.
Carbon duplicates were taken to the office for computer entry.
But the audit senior carrying out the work was accompanied by Alkar's
in-house accountant as he went round. On the instructions of Alan Carr, this
accountant then altered figures on the computer to inflate the amount of
stock, being careful to only inflate items that he knew were not being
tested by the auditors. He added digits to the beginning of the figures or
noughts to the end, and altered the figures shown on the duplicate tickets
by inking over the carbon figures.
Arthur Young also failed to highlight inflated sales figures. Alkar included
in the accounts two sales not attributable to the financial period under
examination, which inflated sales by Pounds 2.5m and profits by Pounds
400,000.
The first was a Pounds 2.2m order from the Gateway supermarket chain,
Alkar's principal customer. There was no such order, but simply an
arrangement that sales made after February 1988 up to Pounds 2.2m would
receive a discount by the company.
Greenbank alleges that the auditors were talked round into accepting this
sale and told Alkar staff what documentation would be required to confirm it
had taken place. These sales figures were also to be included in the
accounts for the following financial year.
The second sale was a Pounds 306,000 order to equip 17 supermarkets. Only
two, in fact, had been equipped during the accounting period. Finally, Alkar
included Pounds 300,000 in income from a grant from the Department of Trade
and Industry, even though the conditions for payment were not met until long
after the end of the accounting period.
Greenbank argues that based on these accounts, which were finally published
in June 1988, and the continued healthly progress reports from Mr Carr, it
extended new loans to Alkar to help fund its expansion.
Fuller details of the Alkar acquisition - contained in 2,000 files in the
High Court in London last month - would no doubt have emerged during a trial
expected to last at least until next January. But after two weeks' of
opening arguments, the Carrs and Arthur Young, now part of accountants Ernst
& Young, agreed to settle without any admission of liability. They denied
Greenbank's allegations.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921112

