FT921-14395

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Bonds: Further supply of dollar paper
saturates market


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


AS a further supply of paper continued to emerge yesterday, despite
increasingly confused views on the direction of the Treasury market, the
dollar sector of the Eurobond market began to look saturated.
The US Treasury bond market appeared to find support at a yield level just
above 7 1/2 per cent on the long bond, suggesting that the market may have
undergone a correction which is now complete.
However, a rally in Treasuries at this stage, with spreads at such tight
levels, would be likely to force spreads to widen. 'Even if the Treasury
market steadies, spreads are likely to widen, because of the heavy supply of
paper,' one head of syndicate said.
Not only has the excess appetite for dollar securities at the start of the
year been filled, but many bond desks are now holding substantial amounts of
recently-issued paper which has not yet been placed. In addition, the
quality of new issues has begun to falter.
For most of the six further new issues totalling Dollars 1.3bn in the market
yesterday, demand was decidedly slack. Spreads in some of the more
tightly-priced issues showed signs of widening: the spread on Credit Local's
10-year deal shifted to 33 basis points from 28 basis points at launch,
while Denmark's five-year deal has widened from 20 to 25 basis points over
the curve.
Of yesterday's new issues, corporate and financial names generally met
weaker demand. Dealers said there was little incentive to buy a Dollars 200m
issue of four-year bonds for ABB International, the Swiss-Swedish
engineering group, priced to yield 50 basis points over the interpolated
yield curve.
Lead-manager Morgan Stanley International reported strong demand in
Switzerland, but most traders said the issue was too aggressively priced.
Kommunekredit, a Danish financial institution which tapped the market for
the first time yesterday, also proved hard to place. The deal was considered
aggressively-priced for a virtually unknown name.
A Dollars 300m issue of 15-year bonds for KFW International, the German
financial institution, is expected to fare rather better because of the
strong credit of the government-owned borrower.
Elsewhere, a matador issue for Bancomext, a Mexican bank guaranteed by the
Mexican government, met strong demand, and was quoted at its par issue
price. The deal is the first matador deal for a Mexican borrower other than
the government.
Meanwhile, the European Investment Bank continued its heavy schedule of
issuance with two more deals, in the wake of its two offerings on Tuesday.
The EIB launched a L500bn issue of 10-year bonds and a Skr1bn offering of
seven-year bonds.

The Financial Times


London Page 31 Table (Omitted).

920116

