FT921-12077

FT  29 JAN 92 / Cavallo optimistic of debt breakthrough


   By JOHN BARHAM


   BUENOS AIRES


MR Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's economy minister, promises that when he
faces the country's bankers in New York tomorrow for the first round of
formal debt talks, his proposals will be 'realistic, complete and very close
to what we expect to be the final agreement.'
Mr Cavallo wants to restructure Argentina's Dollars 37bn (Pounds 20.4bn)
commercial bank debt this year, a decade after the debt crisis began.
Argentina is now paying only Dollars 60m a month in token interest payments
and has accumulated more than Dollars 8bn in interest arrears.
However, before talks can advance Mr Cavallo must finalise negotiations with
the International Monetary Fund for a three-year extended fund facility
loan.
The IMF is reported to be offering about Dollars 2.6bn, while Argentina is
demanding Dollars 3.5bn. The Argentines also want as much of the loan as
possible to be paid out quickly, whereas the IMF is more cautious.
The IMF is expected to announce today how much it will lend. The facility
should unlock more loans from the World Bank, the Inter-American Development
Bank and the Japanese government.
Argentina hopes these loans, plus available central bank reserves and
Dollars 1.8bn in privatisation receipts, will add up to the Dollars
5bn-Dollars 6bn needed to finance a reduction in the bank debt. This would
be done by offering banks a range of options, including:
Replacement of old loans for bonds bearing a fixed, low-interest rate, or
for bonds with full market interest rates but which are worth less than the
original loan. Payment of these bonds will be guaranteed by US Treasury
bonds. Bankers want as small a discount as possible. Mr Cavallo has been
advised to demand a 50 per cent reduction.
Cash payment of part of the Dollars 8bn in arrears, with payment of the
balance to be refinanced. The more the banks receive in cash, though, the
less will be available to buy guarantees for the bonds.
Permission from banks for Argentina to buy its loans back in the secondary
debt market. Mr Cavallo said he might swap debt for Argentine government
bonds, which could be cashed in for shares in state companies as they are
privatised.
The minister's presentation to the IMF states that GDP will grow 39 per cent
to Dollars 196bn in 1994. Net interest payments on all Argentina's debts
would be equivalent to about Dollars 250m a month, while principal would be
repaid with privatisation revenues.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920129

