FT922-4218

FT  06 JUN 92 / Travel: Lahore - the elegance of three empires / Enjoying
the pleasures of a provincial capital


   By ANDREW ANDERSON


THE TWO men are locked in aerial combat, a fight to the death above the
rooftops of Lahore. It is a battle of skill and timing. The weapon is ground
glass, mixed with sticky paste and spun on to flax to form a lethal string
hundreds of yards long. The object: for one man to manoeuvre his string over
that of the other, then twist and jerk and saw it until it cuts the twine,
leaving his rival's kite to flutter to earth while the winner's soars in
triumph.
Kite-flying is taken seriously in the capital of Pakistan's Punjab province.
A three-day festival is dedicated to it, when thousands of kites are
launched in pursuit of fleeting glory; during the rest of the year, the
city's parks and rooftops are packed with fliers every evening, their
scarred fingers a testimony to their art.
Lahore is not the biggest city in Pakistan, but it is the most beautiful,
packed with fine Moghul, Sikh and British Empire buildings, mosques and
forts, lush gardens and fountains, teeming bazaars jammed with hawkers,
tinsmiths, sandal-makers, dye shops, purveyors of sticky sweetmeats and
tackier clothing, cheap bangles and cheaper rings. There is poverty, but not
of the gut-wrenching, perpetually visible sort seen in many Indian cities.
The Shalimar Gardens, laid out by the warlord Shah Jahan in 1642, is a good
place to start: tiers of lush greenery filled with fountains and dotted with
bougainvillea. The smart set come here to see and be seen. Parakeets swoop
and dive, keeping their distance from the bullying, black-hooded crows
waddling through the undergrowth like ornothological louts.
The tombs of the Moghul emperor Jehangir and empress Nur Jahan lie a few
kilometres outside the city in a similar garden. The tombs - hers relatively
simple and serene, his an ornate mausoleum inlaid with semi-precious stones
 -are separated by a canal lined with rose bushes and mango trees: a
heavenly setting for the empress, who was known as the Light of the World.
The road back leads inevitably to The Mall, Lahore's main artery, lined with
modern buildings and offices, including a steel-shuttered BCCI branch. It is
worth stopping off at Kim's Gun, a 17th century cannon mentioned by Kipling,
whose father was curator of the museum for 18 years. But the main
attractions are to be found in the Moghul City, dating largely from the 16th
and 17th centuries and partly walled in by a brick rampart overlooking a dry
moat.
Badshahi Mosque has the most immediate impact, as one would expect from the
world's second largest mosque. Its warm red brick wall encloses a vast
courtyard thronged with the faithful each Friday; for the rest of the week
it echoes emptily to the sound of the hammers of stonemasons hand-lapping
new blocks for the eroded areas. The tall, graceful minarets lean out at a
slight angle: in the event of earthquake they would fall outside the central
courtyard to avoid crushing people inside.
Outside - and dwarfed by - Badshahi is the Gurudwara Arjun Singh, a Sikh
temple containing the ashes of Ranjit Singh, the Sikh ruler of Lahore who
died (peacefully) in 1849. Others were not so lucky: four of his wives and
seven concubines became satis at his cremation, flinging themselves on his
funeral pyre.
Opposite the temple and mosque is the Fort of Lahore, built largely by
Akbar, son of Babar, the first Moghul emperor, and improved by Jehangir and
Shah Jahan. All gave free rein to artistic extravagance. The result is a
melange of styles and excesses among which one can wander for hours.
The Palace of Mirrors is a series of rooms tiled with tiny, if now
tarnished, silvery slivers. The emperor of the day held his daily meetings
in The Hall of Public Audience, or received visitors perched on a marble
throne surrounded by cool water, musicians and dancing girls. Squads of
trumpeting pachyderms used to mount the great stairs of the Elephant Gate on
feast days. The stonemasons' skill is extraordinary: a tracery of
trellis-work turns out to be a solid four inches thick.
There are other fine buildings in the Old City surrounding the fort,
including the Golden Mosque, whose builder, Bokhari Khan, is said to have
been trampled to death by the handmaidens of a widow whose attentions he had
scorned. But the human element of the Old City is the main attraction - the
best and busiest bazaars are here, teeming with people, auto-rickshaws,
horse-drawn tongas (taxis) and innumerable eating stalls displaying
distinctly dead chickens.
Walking through the maze of narrow alleys can be risky. One is forever
leaping aside to avoid thundering water buffalo carts laden with sacks of
chapati flour, wizened old men staggering under impossible burdens, or
auto-rickshaws handled by drivers who are apparently deranged.
Towards dusk, colours become muted as dust is kicked up by innumerable feet,
until all detail is lost in haze and smog. Then is the time to take an
auto-rickshaw back to one's hotel. Agree a price, jump in, close your eyes,
hold your breath and put your faith in the Lord. If that does not work,
offer to pay double to get you back slowly.
Pakistan International Airlines flies to Lahore from London Heathrow via
Karachi on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Cheapest fare is Pounds 572 return,
minimum stay two weeks, maximum two months. Tel: 081-741-8066.
Hotels: The Hilton International and the Pearl Continental are comfortable
and relatively bland. Faletti's Hotel on Egerton Road is clean (if a little
basic), central and with a touch of character.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920606

