FT922-13334

FT  11 APR 92 / BAe to sell stake in business jet arm


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


BRITISH AEROSPACE yesterday put up for sale a majority stake in its
profitable corporate jets business. The move is part of a rationalisation
strategy designed to focus the group on its core defence and aerospace
activities.
To facilitate the sale, BAe said it was forming a company called Corporate
Jets, which would incorporate its business aircraft activities. These employ
about 1,200 people at Hatfield and Chester.
Corporate jets have been one of the most profitable businesses in the
group's commercial aircraft operations. But BAe has been reluctant to commit
itself to the investment needed to develop a new range of business jets.
Faced with a squeeze on resources, BAe said it had concluded it was in the
best interests of the company and the division to offer a majority stake to
a partner.
City analysts said BAe would find little difficulty in selling control of
the business because several international aerospace companies are seeking
to consolidate their position in the corporate jet market.
They said a 51 per cent stake in the new company could fetch about Pounds
125m.
This would represent about half the value of the corporate jets BAe expects
to deliver to customers this year.
BAe produces the eight-to-10 seater 125 family of medium-sized twin-engine
corporate jets and has 45-50 per cent of the world market for this type of
aircraft.
Since the first version of the 125 was produced 28 years ago, BAe has sold
816 business jets. Recently, it has had to consider investing in the
development of new aircraft instead of relying on derivatives of the
original 125 airframe.
Faced with a squeeze on its resources, in the past 12 months, BAe has opted
to sell majority control of its corporate jet business to a partner that is
prepared to invest in the future development of aircraft.
Kleinwort Benson is advising BAe on the sale and search for a suitable
partner. Companies expected to show interest include the French Dassault
group, Gulfstream and Raytheon-Beechcraft of the US. All three
unsuccessfully bid for Cessna, the corporate aircraft manufacturer which the
US General Dynamics group sold for Dollars 600m (Pounds 340m) to Textron.
BAe has embarked on a substantial rationalisation of its commercial aircraft
operations, which lost Pounds 56m last year.
Apart from the sale of the corporate jet business, it is also looking for
partners for its loss-making regional aircraft activities.
The company intends to focus its longer-term commercial aircraft operations
on its 20 per cent stake in the European Airbus programme.
Details, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920411

