FT924-1078

FT  19 DEC 92 / Property: A more complex cowboy - Because of its
cross-border nature, the timeshare industry is particularly difficult to
clean up


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


DIANA Hanks is on the telephone in the Timeshare Council's basement office
in Buckingham Gate, steering yet another caller away from potential
disaster.
'The company is registered in Gibraltar? I think that speaks for itself,'
she says. Apart from inquiries from would-be buyers and sellers of
timeshare, Hanks, the council's consumer services manager, deals with
complaints about the behaviour of some of the industry's shadier operators.
On an average day, the council, which represents the acceptable face of the
timeshare industry, deals with 23 complaints.
Last October, a new Timeshare Act came into force, giving buyers 14 days to
withdraw from contracts and claim their money back. The act, however,
provides a remedy for only one of the timeshare industry's many abuses:
high-pressure selling. And that remedy is available only to those who
conclude timeshare contracts in the UK. The council estimates that 75 per
cent of contracts are concluded while the buyers are on holiday abroad.
The council aims to improve timeshare's reputation - not an easy task. When
the Office of Fair Trading earlier this year revoked the consumer credit
licences of six companies associated with Club Riviera, one of the UK's
leading timeshare groups, Simon Clarke, a director, did not think the image
of the business would suffer. 'Being in the timeshare industry alone is as
bad as you can get,' he said. 'In terms of public awareness, you don't have
good timeshares and bad timeshares, you just have timeshares.'
Club Riviera's application to join the Timeshare Council has been refused.
Tom Critchley, until recently the council's chairman and now its European
affairs specialist, concedes that timeshare is a difficult business to clean
up. 'Cowboy housebuilders, doubling glazing and insurance salesmen - to some
extent, they've been seen off. But timeshare has the complexity of its
cross-border aspect. You might have a German developer selling to the
British in Spain. The legal structures are widely different.'
Of the complaints that the council receives, 90 per cent concern alleged
crookery in Tenerife. One of the most common types of sharp practice is
perpetrated on people who already own timeshare.
Typically, the timeshare owner is in Tenerife on holiday. He is invited to
visit a resort which, he is told, is superior to the one he is in. He visits
it; it is. A salesman tells him: 'You paid Pounds 5,000 for your timeshare.
We can get you Pounds 7,500 if you want to sell it. This place will cost
Pounds 7,000.'
All the customer needs to do is pay a deposit of 20 per cent. He hands over
Pounds 1,400. His old timeshare is never sold. He does not pay the balance
of the Pounds 7,000, but the salesman would have been in trouble if he had.
On a typical day, the salesman might take 20 per cent deposits for the same
apartment in the same weeks from five different people.
In spite of experiences such as these, the British are big buyers of
timeshare, although the recession has recently led to a fall in sales. When
the OFT investigated timeshare two years ago, most owners said they were
happy with what they had bought. Among continental Europeans, timeshare is
gaining popularity.
What is the attraction? Timeshare owners say the quality of the
accommodation and facilities is often far superior to that available at
hotels. Those who go back to the same place every year say they know what
they are getting, with no nasty surprises such as all-night discotheques and
crowds of rowdy post-adolescents.
Another advantage, surprising perhaps to the uninitiated, is the choice that
timeshare offers. Some buyers of timeshare never visit the resort in which
they have bought their weeks. By becoming members of exchange companies,
they can swop their weeks for time in resorts all over the world.
Some owners believe their timeshare is a good financial investment. It is
not. Buyers of timeshare, even from highly respectable companies, have
nothing like the protection offered to a purchaser of a package holiday. If
you buy a holiday from a member of the Association of British Travel Agents
(Abta), you are fully protected if the travel company collapses. The
Timeshare Council takes up complaints against member companies but does not
monitor their finances and offers no compensation if they go out of
business.
The OFT report said timeshare did not compare favourably with the cost of
taking a series of annual self-catering holidays of a similar standard.
Timeshare buyers were also committing money they might need in the future if
they suffered changed circumstances, such as redundancy.
Champions of timeshare reject this view, arguing that it has the financial
edge over annual holidays because timeshare can be resold, whereas money
spent on holidays cannot be recovered.
But even while arguing that timeshare is cheaper than paying for holidays
each year, the industry's advocates agree that no one should buy timeshare
purely as an investment. When property was still an attractive proposition,
some thought that by buying timeshare they were investing in bricks and
mortar. This is not the case. Timeshare is merely the right to use
accommodation for a specified number of weeks each year.
The value of timeshare falls by 40 per cent or more as soon as it is bought
because a large proportion of the initial price goes towards paying the
resort developer's marketing costs. Peter Lewis, managing director of
PrimeShare, a large resale company, says timeshare does not regain its
original price until five years after purchase.
This means that before buying timeshare it is worth seeing what is available
from a resale company. Again, however, it pays to be cautious. Buying from a
resale company, as opposed to a resort developer, does not secure protection
by the new Timeshare Act, even the contract has been concluded in the UK.
This is because private vendors are not covered by the act and the resale
company is merely acting as their agent. Make sure the resale company offers
a 14-day cooling-off period.
Also ensure it intends to put your money in a designated account, supervised
by an accountant or qualified professional, until the transaction is
complete. Never deal with a resale company which is not a member of the
Timeshare Council.
In these recessionary times, it is not only buyers who are interested in
timeshare resale. Many existing owners are keen to sell. Some have received
calls asking whether they want to sell. If, as an existing owner, you get
such a call, ask for the name and telephone number of the company and say
you will call back when you have established that it is a member of the
council.
You will probably not hear from the company again. The chances are it has
obtained your name and number in an underhand fashion. The council has
received complaints about companies taking registration fees from existing
owners of up to Pounds 175 for each week owned, and failing to do anything
to achieve a sale.
The Timeshare Council, 23 Buckingham Gate, London SW1E 6LB. Tel:
071-821-8845.

The Financial Times


London Page X

921219

