FT923-15366

FT  02 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tories face rebellion on stamp duty


   By ALISON SMITH


THE government is facing a possible backbench rebellion when the Labour
party uses next week's finance bill debate to propose an extension of the
eight-month 'holiday' on stamp duty.
Several senior Tory MPs, including some former ministers, have put their
names to a Commons motions calling for a temporary continuation of the
scheme or the abolition of the tax.
In total, the two motions have so far been signed by 62 MPs, and the number
of Tory signatories is well above the government's majority of 21.
Labour frontbench spokesmen said yesterday that the opposition would propose
keeping the concession in place for a further six months beyond the present
deadline of August 19.
Labour argues that ending the concession would have a negative effect, even
though the scheme has not really worked in reviving the housing market or
construction industry so far.
The move will hearten Labour MPs disappointed that they have so far caused
the government few tactical difficulties at Westminster, in spite of the
Tories' reduced majority.
Even if some Tories stop short of defying the whips, the debate is expected
to embarrass the government by highlighting the lack of recovery in the
housing market.
The government's decision to lift the point at which the 1 per cent levy
becomes payable, from Pounds 30,000 to Pounds 250,000, was announced in
December as part of the government's measures to help home buyers.
One government whip admitted that Labour's decision might cause some
difficulty, although he thought the whips had managed to persuade some of
the Tories who had signed the motions.
Sir Malcolm Thornton, Tory MP for Crosby, has made clear that he will press
for a statement of intent from the government before the Commons disperses
for the summer in a fortnight's time.
Discussion of the finance bill in committee finished yesterday, and it is
due to be debated by the Commons as a whole early next week.
MPs who argue for a continuation of the scheme point out that as it has not
worked yet, the cost to the Treasury has been less than the Pounds 420m
estimated when the concession was announced.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920702

