FT924-8125

FT  12 NOV 92 / Hungary to take arms in debt deal


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


   BUDAPEST


HUNGARY has agreed to take military equipment and spares worth Dollars 800m
in part settlement of Russia's Dollars 1.7bn debt to the former Warsaw Pact
country.
The Budapest government is also considering buying Russian fighter aircraft
to shore up air defences whose vulnerability has been exposed by frequent
violations of its airspace by the Yugoslav air force.
The decision was announced during the first official visit to Hungary by Mr
Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president.
Russia and Hungary also settled another contentious issue by agreeing to
drop claims against each other dating back to the stationing of Soviet
troops in Hungary.
Mr Yeltsin renounced Russian demands for compensation for its investments in
the military bases vacated by the Soviet army when it left in June 1991. In
return Mr Jozsef Antall, the Hungarian prime minister dropped demands that
Russia should pay for the environmental damage caused by Soviet forces.
Budapest also promised to send medical supplies worth Dollars 10m to the
Russian army and examine ways of helping Russia to house troops previously
stationed in Hungary.
Both sides have moved quickly to settle their financial disputes, which are
a legacy of their communist past, in order to put future commercial
relations on a fresh footing.
They are keen to stimulate bilateral trade, which grew by 28.8 per cent to
Dollars 2.28bn in the first three quarters of this year after falling by
more than 50 per cent in 1991.
Mr Yeltsin, who visited Budapest on his way back to Moscow from his visit to
London, drew another line under the past by condemning the Soviet
suppression of Hungary's 1956 uprising.
The Russian president underlined the apology by visiting the grave of Mr
Imre Nagy, the executed leader of the short-lived revolutionary government.
He also handed over classified KGB documents about the events of 1956.
Mr Yeltsin said he hoped that Russia and Hungary could put their 'mutual
bitter past' behind them and begin relations on a 'fresh sheet'.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921112

