FT922-13365

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Industry leaders welcome decisive result


   By Our Industrial Staff


ANXIETY at the prospect of a Labour administration, which reached such a
pitch last week that even some of the Tories' most senior industrial
supporters were resigned to defeat, faded yesterday.
There was also relief that the uncertainty which would have accompanied a
hung parliament had been avoided. In addition, there was a sense of excited
surprise that the Tory win was so convincing.
Sir John Banham, director-general of the Confederation of British Industry,
said: 'Of all the possible outcomes this was the best possible result for
British business.'
Sir Denys Henderson, chairman of Imperial Chemical Industries, said: 'We
welcome the fact there has been a clear result which helps to remove
uncertainty and allows business to plan more constructively in what is still
a very difficult world environment.'
There is a widespread belief in business that the political uncertainty of
the past few months over the timing and outcome of the election had held
back recovery. So will the Tories' decisive win clear the path out of
recession or is it so deep rooted that Britain will remain in depression?
Relief that Labour had not won was based on more than executives' panic
about their personal tax bills. Companies in sectors such as cars, retailing
and construction had feared that a mixture of higher taxes for the better
paid and higher interest rates would have scuppered recovery.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders said: 'With the recent
reduction from 10 to 5 per cent in special car tax, followed now by the
removal of political uncertainty, the motor industry looks forward to a
major improvement in new vehicle sales.'
The impact on investment is likely to be mixed. About a third of companies
in the FT-Mori poll of executives conducted during the election said they
would invest less under Labour. But most large companies, such as GKN, the
motor components group, say their investment plans are so long term a change
of government would not have affected them.
The most immediate benefits should come through a restoration of consumer
and business confidence, especially if the Tory victory leads to an interest
rate cut but executives were cautious about how much of an effect this would
have.
Mr Martin Taylor, chief executive of Courtaulds Textiles said: 'There is an
awful lot of middle-class money that has been hoarded in the run up to the
election. There could be a consumer boomlet, which may ignite a recovery.'
The building industry let out a collective sigh of relief.
The Building Employers' Confederation said: 'We were looking for a clear
result rather than anything else. We are going to go on pressing for an
increase in spending by local authorities from council asset sales receipts.
With a clear result and a Conservative win we would hope that people who'd
been holding back on projects would now come forward.'
Mr Ian McAllister, chairman of Ford GB, said the company was holding by its
earlier forecast of a 4 per cent to 7 per cent increase in new-car sales
this year to 1.65m-1.7m.
Yet with much of the rest of Europe facing recession and slower growth in
the Far East, recovery will take more than a Tory win. Business has been so
worried by the threat of Labour's tax plans that it has ignored the risk
that fiscal pressures may force the Tories to consider raising taxes. In
spite of the win, industry will be looking to Mr Major to change the style
of government's approach to business, by offering more direct support,
particularly for exports.
Mr Alan Sugar, chairman of computer group Amstrad, summed up the mood: 'It
is a great victory for good old-fashioned common sense. But the new
government should listen a bit more to what business has to say and the
recovery will depend on much more than a national sigh of relief. Lower
interest rates, low inflation and the encouragement of enterprise through
low taxation are all crucial.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920411

