FT924-5955

FT  24 NOV 92 / British tourism and the faulty towers of policy: The
industry which employs more than any other in the UK is also one of the most
neglected


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


A recent BBC Television South West news programme was full of economic
gloom: the region's workforce was among the lowest-paid in the country; a
local Conservative MP was seen leaving the Department of Trade and Industry
in London, having requested that the area be granted special economic
assistance, and there was film of a march in support of out-of-work miners.
The programme then struck a more optimistic note. Two local companies, which
were surviving the recession and continuing to employ 40 permanent staff,
had been voted the best in their field by an annual national guide. A BBC
reporter and crew were sent to report.
Instead of coming to praise these two businesses, the report tried to bury
them. Taking the word of three people in the street - two pensioners and a
young man - the reporter attacked the managers for charging prices which she
described as 'vaguely obscene' in a recession and offering customers the
opportunity for self-indulgence when others were losing their homes.
The two managers, it seems, had chosen the wrong field of activity as far as
many in the UK are concerned. They were in tourism: one a hotel, the other a
restaurant. They had compounded their initial mistake by being successful.
In other European countries and the US, neither would be seen in this light.
Instead, they would be praised for creating jobs, maintaining standards of
excellence and, in the US in particular, for converting the occasional
visitor into a regular customer. The UK's baffling attitude towards what
Americans call the 'hospitality industry' could be one reason for the BBC
reporter's criticism. But now, as unemployment seems to be rising
inexorably, is it not time to support an industry that is creating jobs,
boosting local communities and projecting a positive image of Britain?
Tourism is now the UK's biggest employer. There are 1.6m involved, including
the self-employed - more than in the National Health Service or the
construction industry since contraction took hold in the past two years.
During the 1980s the industry created an average of 44,000 jobs a year.
Worldwide tourist spending, including tourism in the UK, totalled Pounds
26bn last year and the future looks promising. By 2000 tourism is likely to
be the world's largest industry, according to the National Economic
Development Council's report, UK Tourism Competing for Growth.
Yet who speaks for this industry at the highest level of government? As Mr
Michael Heseltine, the president of the Board of Trade, presides over the
disappearance of more than 30,000 mining jobs, who in the cabinet is
highlighting tourism's creation of a like number of job opportunities?.
Sadly no one. Since the Conservatives came to power in 1979 the tourism
portfolio has fallen into the hands of many different secretaries of state
and ministers (including two in the House of Lords) in three different
departments - Trade, Employment and now National Heritage. The tourism
industry would feel less aggrieved and neglected if it could find at least
one enthusiastic supporter at cabinet level.
Mr David Mellor, the former heritage secretary, failed to provide the same
support for tourism that he offered opera or football. The chancellor's
Autumn Statement provided only a small increase in the grant to the British
Tourist Authority which very effectively waves the flag overseas for
Britain's 18m visitors. The spending plan, however, cut the grant to the
English Tourist Board which looks after tourists in the UK.
Mr Mellor's successor, Mr Peter Brooke, in his keynote speech to the Tory
party conference, blamed most of the industry's problems over the summer on
the weather, choosing to ignore an overvalued pound which not only put many
foreigners off but also sent many Britons scurrying abroad for their
holidays.
The one man in the department who seems to recognise the importance of the
industry is Mr Brooke's deputy, Mr Robert Key, but he does not have a seat
in the cabinet. Mr Key has recommended that all government policies,
including transport and training, take tourism into account because of its
importance to the economy.
There is undoubtedly a structural problem for the government in coming to
grips with tourism. The industry is highly fragmented, comprising many small
companies, often family run and therefore unlike other big employers. Nor is
its workforce heavily unionised, giving it a relatively low profile despite
the industry's size. Tourism is also partly to blame for its own lack of
representation, as it has long failed to speak with a united voice.
But now that the overriding concern of government is with jobs and growth,
these matters must be overcome. One of tourism's strengths as a job creator
is that it has knock-on effects throughout the local community. When
Gidleigh Park - the prize winning hotel in Chagford, Devon, which was
subject to the BBC report - is busy, it creates a further 11 part-time jobs,
more work for local businesses and extra demand for village shops. (The
hotel suffered a 25 per cent drop in turnover this year as a result of the
strength of sterling, but expects to do better now that the pound has
weakened.)
The Carved Angel, the prize-winning restaurant, keeps numerous Devon farmers
and suppliers busy. But more significantly, visitors drawn to Dartmouth by
the restaurant also go to other restaurants in the town during their stay.
The other advantage of tourism is that, while the creation of jobs in
manufacturing industries depends on winning back export markets - and it is
unlikely that competitors in Europe, the US and Japan will just sit back and
watch - jobs in tourism could materialise more quickly, given the right
encouragement.
Establishing a ministry for tourism would be a start. That would not only
encourage those already in the industry, but could attract new investment
and, with it, create new jobs. It would also show the government's
determination to no longer treat tourism as a second-class industry.
Britain could also follow the example set by the Hungarian government which
has re-opened - with the aid of foreign capital - the famous Gundel's
restaurant in the heart of Budapest as a showcase for its market economy.
Indeed, the UK Department of the Environment owns the site for what could be
the capital's most stunning restaurant - on the Serpentine in Hyde Park.
However, the restaurant will close in December with the loss of 60 jobs
because antiquated park bye-laws forbid taxis dropping off customers in the
evening; it has had to survive on daytime trade.
It is hard to imagine this happening in New York, Paris or Rome. Sadly, this
is yet another wasted employment opportunity. British tourism, however,
could provide many others if only the government gave it the leadership and
encouragement to do so.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921124

