FT922-7123

FT  20 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Western gold mine output nears
a plateau


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


WESTERN MINE gold production is 'edging towards a plateau if not a peak,'
according to the annual survey of the market by Gold Fields Mineral
Services.
Mine output was up by only 2 per cent in 1991, the lowest increase for the
past 10 years. Nevertheless it was still at a record 1,782 tonnes.
The slowdown in the rate of increase reflects 'the increasing difficulty of
attracting finance for marginal properties and the depletion,
rationalisation or closure of some older mines,' the report says.
The total world supply of gold fell for the first time since 1983, to 2,815
tonnes from 2,913 tonnes in 1990. The fall reflects a decline in supplies
from the former communist bloc (from 425 tonnes in 1990 to 226 tonnes), and
a lower level of hedging by producers.
The impact of forward sales and gold loans - put at a net 40 tonnes -
'declined sharply last year owing to the combination of low spot prices, a
less attractive forward price, due to lower interest rates, and an absence
of price spikes'. The lack of demand for gold loans 'resulted in a net
pay-back of loans from new production rather than a net draw-down of new
loans'.
Central banks' net sales of gold were 105 tonnes, compared with net
purchases of 66 tonnes in 1990. But a bigger shift in the market occurred in
the private sector, which offloaded 241 tonnes. The selling included bullion
and coins from Europeans, as well as sales from stocks held in Europe on
behalf of Japanese and Middle Eastern investors.
On the demand side, jewellery fabrication rose by 4 per cent to 2,111 tonnes
and a new record 'in spite of the impact of recession.'
The report cites stockbuilding by distributors and retail outlets in Europe
and the Middle East, as well as a rapid rise in demand from the newly
prosperous China.
Other areas of demand, including electronic, dental and industrial uses,
remained largely unchanged. However, total hoarding of gold in Latin
America, the Middle East and Far East declined.
The report wonders whether 'the behaviour of bar hoarders in Asia is now
becoming more similar to that of Western investors, with a falling price
promoting disillusioned sales rather than bargain hunting purchases'.
The gold price averaged Dollars 362.26 an ounce, 6 per cent down on 1990 and
the lowest real level since the 1970s. Among factors behind gold's fall were
the decline in global economic output for only the second time since the
Second World War, the rapid resolution of the Gulf war and the easing of
political tension with the demise of the Soviet Union.
The outlook should be more positive, with more than a third of production
unprofitable and consumer spending and inflation near cyclical lows. But if
economic recovery is weak, additional gold sales could be prompted, keeping
the lid on prices for some time.
Gold 1992. Pounds 50. Gold Fields Mineral Services, Greencoat House, Francis
Street, London SW1P 1DH.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920520

