FT924-11522

FT  26 OCT 92 / Plea on emerging economies


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


BETTER co-operation is needed between export credit agencies, private
lenders and investors if developing countries and those of east and central
Europe are to meet their huge requirements for new infrastructure in the
1990s, according to the Washington-based Institute of International Finance
(IIF).
The institute, which speaks on behalf of international banks, said both
private and official lenders would also have to re-examine lending criteria
and develop new financing and risk-sharing techniques, particularly since
many developing countries were privatising state-owned enterprises.
The need to address these issues was especially urgent because of the sharp
rise expected in the 1990s of investment spending in developing countries.
The IIF's proposals, which stem from a study of banks, corporations, trading
companies and insurance groups, suggest that:
Export credit agencies should establish guidelines to extend, where
necessary, grace periods before loan repayments start coming due and the
payback periods for loans. Current maximum terms are insufficient for
projects where economic returns are only made over a longer period. More
flexibility should be introduced for interest payments, currently payable on
a strict semi-annual basis, while agencies should allow their guarantees to
be securitised by banks and transferred to others. Agencies should develop
new forms of support for banks as fixed-rate lenders by recognising the role
of interest rate swaps and other derivative products in the markets.
Agencies should standardise cover to allow easier negotiation of credits for
projects where companies from more than one country are providing goods,
services and products.
Agencies should be willing to provide increased political risk insurance.
Greater standardisation of premium rates among export credit agencies is
required.
National bank regulators should apply more equal treatment of transactions
guaranteed by export credit agencies, and adopt a more flexible attitude to
the provisions required.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921026

