FT923-10805

FT  28 JUL 92 / International Company News: Australian mines cut holdings in
Pasminco


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


NORTH Broken Hill Peko (North) and CRA, the Australian mining groups,
yesterday announced the partial unwinding of their aggregate 80.6 per cent
shareholding in Pasminco, the lead and zinc group.
Pasminco also warned its net loss for the year to end-June will be higher
than the 1990/91 net loss of ADollars 47m (USDollars 35.3m), in spite of
significant cost savings.
North and CRA said they would reduce their 40.3 per cent shareholdings in
Pasminco to 20 per cent and 31 per cent respectively. Both said they would
maintain shareholdings of at least 19.9 per cent for two years.
The shares were placed with brokers in London and Australia at ADollars 1.33
a share, compared with Friday's closing price of ADollars 1.56. The sales
will yield a book profit of ADollars 195m for North and ADollars 89m for
CRA.
North and CRA said they would jointly provide a subordinated shareholder
loan facility of ADollars 100m to relieve pressure on Pasminco to strengthen
its balance sheet by disposing of assets. The share sales signal the end of
the joint commitment to Pasminco by North and CRA, which formed the company
in 1988 by merging their lead and zinc mining and smelting interests.
However, CRA indicated it may move to take control of Pasminco at a later
date. The group said it had reduced its shareholding to 31 per cent only to
avoid being required to consolidate Pasminco into its group accounts.
Pasminco's profit warning follows a net loss of ADollars 34m for the six
months to December, which increased to ADollars 118m after redundancy costs
of more than ADollars 2m and a write off of ADollars 81m on the Elura mine
in New South Wales.
In its fourth-quarter production report, Pasminco said it continued to
operate at a loss in the second half, although the loss was primarily caused
by depressed metals prices in the first three quarters.
The group said the bottom line loss for the full year would include a
ADollars 12.5m settlement with the Australian Taxation Office, which will be
treated as an abnormal item.
Pasminco said production of refined lead and zinc rose 3 per cent over the
year, exceeding the record production achieved in 1990/91. But mine
production was lower, largely on a fall in activity at Elura.
The group said it was still trying to sell Elura and its smelter and
alloying plant in the UK, as part of a debt reduction programme. But it said
the sales would be deferred if 'the present difficult market conditions'
made it impossible to achieve sales at acceptable prices.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920728

