FT924-7996

FT  13 NOV 92 / Opposition presses PM on Iraqi exports issue


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


MR John Major was thrown on to the defensive yesterday as opposition leaders
pressed him to reveal how much he knew of arms-related machinery sales to
Iraq and when he first became aware of them.
His claim at question time that the 1985 government guidelines may not have
been breached by UK exporters provoked gasps of disbelief in the Commons.
Under persistent questioning from Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, the
prime minister conceded that he had met Mr Alan Clark in 1990 with Sir Robin
Butler, the cabinet secretary, to discuss newspaper reports that
arms-related exports to Iraq were taking place. But, he insisted that Mr
Clark, then defence minister, had dismissed as 'totally false' reports
alleging he had advised companies to conceal arms-related equipment sales.
Mr Major said Mr Clark had taken a similar position in his written testimony
to the Matrix Churchill trial. It was only when the former minister gave
oral evidence he had had 'any reason to believe' otherwise, he added.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, said Mr Major had substituted an
explanation 'with a smokescreen and scapegoat'. Referring to a letter he
received from Mr Major on December 6 1990, Mr Ashdown last night said the
documents revealed in the trial included one, dated June 1990, which
discussed machine tools being 'used for munitions manufacture'.
The memo, from Lord Ridley, then trade and industry secretary, to Baroness
Thatcher, then prime minister, was copied to a key cabinet committee on
which Mr Major sat as chancellor.
One seasoned Whitehall observer said it was more than possible that, when
chancellor, Mr Major's private office did not draw his attention to the
memo.
But he added that, given the 500 pages of civil service and ministerial
discussion of the issue released by the court, it is less likely that Mr
Major was kept 'out of the loop' when he became prime minister.
In a written reply to Mr Ashdown on this point, Mr Major yesterday insisted
that his December 1990 letter stated the Matrix Churchill case was sub
judice and he could not comment on it.
Mr Ashdown has since pointed out that breaches of the guidelines by other
companies were covered in the memo. 'The clear message of the prime
minister's letter to me of 6 December 1990 was that the rules were being
observed and that, with the possible exception of the firm under Customs and
Excise investigation, no machine tools were exported from Britain to Iraq
and subsequently used to produce lethal defence equipment,' he said. 'This
is now known to be incorrect and it seems clear that the government and the
prime minister knew so at the time.'
Final case fails, Page 7
Embassy faces questions, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921113

