FT924-8181

FT  12 NOV 92 / Arts: Friends, and technology, in search of utopia - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


PETER'S FRIENDS (15) Kenneth Branagh
SNEAKERS (12) Phil Alden Robinson
LONDON FILM FESTIVAL
Peter's Friends is The Cherry Orchard crossed with The Big Chill and set
deep in 'Loves, darlings]' country. As his five best friends from university
converge on Peter's place in reel one - Peter is Stephen Fry, his place is
his late Dad's stately home - one fears a nuclear explosion of chumminess.
'Pe-ter, Pe-ter, Pee-tah]' screams Emma Thompson's ageing flower child:
hug-hug, kissy-kissy goes everyone else (Kenneth Branagh, Hugh Laurie,
Imelda Staunton, Alphonsia Emmanuel); and the whole cast is in danger of
being embraced to death before crossing the front doormat.
One is surprised the film was not called The Big Meltdown and set to songs
by Ivor Novello or the Cambridge Boating Club. In the event it was directed
by Kenneth Branagh, co-written by American comedienne Rita Rudner with her
husband Martin Bergman, and the main music you hear is gusts of audience
laughter punctuating the tie-in 1980s hits.
This is the old story about the reunion that sows disunion. Gathered into
the bosom of the past - they have not met since giving a disastrous cabaret
before Peter's pater ten years before - the old friends start shucking off
their new relationships. Branagh's Hollywood wife Rita Rudner is a
pixie-faced health freak sent packing by well-wined British sodality.
Sex-mad Miss Emmanuel loves and loses her two-week Lothario Tony Slattery.
And of course the only ex-varsity pair married to each other (Laurie and
Staunton) overcome the emotional scars of a recent bereavement - a twin that
died soon after birth - to deepen their union.
We cringe at the message these subplots spell: better the buddies of our
youth than the interchangeable bedmates of mature years. Such youthist
twaddle would have us all leaping back into our university photo albums
crying 'Where did we go wrong?' But at best Peter's Friends is better than
its message. Indeed it is like one of those coach trips where though the
guide keeps asking you to look out of the right window you find just as many
interesting things on the left.
Each character is allowed his or her moment of sublime crack-up followed by
(even better) the dustclouds of the ridiculous. Love-smitten Slattery breaks
off with his wife by phone; then, rebuffed by Emmanuel, frantically rings
his young son back to mediate a reconciliation. Rudner sits in her bedroom
baring her sense of social exclusion - 'I'm stuck down there with the cast
of Masterpiece Theatre' - then hops down to the pantry hours later to pig
out on dinner leftovers. And Branagh has a glorious scene of drunken venom
followed by a mazy, equally glorious aria of drunken apology.
If it is not Chekhov it is a good English equivalent. And if it is not The
Big Chill - well, actually it is better than The Big Chill. Lawrence
Kasdan's influential comedy of reunited thirtysomethings was stiff with
statements about the Meaning Of The 1960s. Peter's Friends, when not
corseting itself with overemphatic nostalgia, is lithe with non-didactic
charm. It also marks the point at which an entire mini-generation of TV
comics - Fry, Laurie, Slattery - make their convincing jump into straight
acting under the Svengali tutelage of K. Branagh.
'People hire you to break into their places to make sure people can't break
into their places?' asks the bank clerk in Sneakers. 'Yes' says Robert
Redford's winning smile.
After nurses and welfare workers, the most useful people in the world are
minor characters who tell us what the main characters are up to. In Phil
Alden Robinson's hi-tech caper Redford leads a group of professional
computer hackers hired by a dubious government agency to find a vital black
box. This McGuffin - as Hitchcock dubbed any object custom-made to be fought
over in a movie - gives its owner tap-in power over everything from banks to
air traffic control to government departments. Soon it is leading the cast
Pied Piper-style through a maze of fraud, murder, espionage and world
domination plans: these last hatched by - whom else when we need
burning-eyed monomania? - Ben Kingsley.
You could call Sneakers a Peter's Friends for plot-mad Hollywood. Redford
and his team of fellow forty/fiftysomethings Sidney Poitier, Dan Aykroyd and
David Strathairn - with River Phoenix as token youngster and Mary McDonnell
as token moll - are 1960s survivors in search of a 1990s mission. The Cold
War is over, but the catarrh of conspiracy delirium lingers: allowing
Robinson and co-scenarists Lawrence Lasker and Walter F. Parkes (who penned
that seminal computer caper WarGames) to make Sneakers a delicious
postmodern parody of films like Three Days Of The Condor and The Parallax
View.
This is a world with no easy international enmities to concentrate the mind,
and no easy utopias in technology itself. The best scenes show the thrill
and the fallibility of the hi-tech age: an earpiece-prompted scam by Redford
that gets hilariously out-of-sync, a heist that defies every security system
but human error, a 'perfect getaway' in which the only available driver is a
blind man.
If Robinson's last comedy-elegy to a world of vanished ideals, Field Of
Dreams, was a mixed artistic crop - part wry, part corn - Sneakers is all
crackling shoots of irony, grown from the fertile ground of pre-millennial
anxiety. And no one handles the ironic mode better than Redford: the cocked
quizzicality, the lightning tics of despair or self-deprecation, the sense
of a golden boy lost in the engulfing glitter of another techno-dawn.
The 36th London Film Festival pounds on. Are you attending as regularly as
you should be? If not, the coming week may tempt you with its rollercoasting
programme of new and old, domestic and exotic films. The range is from 1990s
Hong Kong melodrama (Stanley Kwan's Actress) to 1940s Hollywood musical (On
The Town in pristine print) via American independents (Susan Seidelman),
prize-winning Italian neo-realism (Gianni Amelio's The Stolen Children),
Siggraph computer animation and collector's-piece Tinseltown documentary
(Music For The Movies: Bernard Herrman).
All movie life is here, and some human life to go with it. Personal
appearances are promised from actor Nicolas Cage and directors Alan Rudolph
and J. Lee Thompson.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921112

