FT921-3943

FT  12 MAR 92 / London South Africans speak with one voice, one accent


   By GORDON CRAMB


POLICE crush barriers were still at the ready outside the South African
embassy in London's Trafalgar Square, scene of countless anti-apartheid
demonstrations and a long-running picket. But yesterday all voices spoke in
unanimity as tourists and expatriates from that country streamed in to vote
in next Tuesday's referendum on political reform.
It is one of 215 South African missions around the world where voting has
been taking place yesterday and today in the whites-only poll called by
President F W de Klerk. Completed ballot papers will go by diplomatic bag to
Pretoria for counting along with the rest next week.
According to Mr Kent Durr, the country's ambassador to Britain, at least one
voter had flown in from a North Sea oil platform. 'A majority of one is
sufficient in this referendum, so any vote could be decisive,' Mr Durr
insisted.
Although Mr de Klerk will be looking for a rather clearer endorsement to
proceed to a non-racial government, the views of voters in London yesterday
will not displease him.
From student-scruffy to the besuited, the message was the same. A
businessman, who stepped from a Rolls-Royce, did not want to be identified
but had come 'to make sure Mr de Klerk gets his mandate'.
Mrs Glynda Jacobs, another of Britain's 40,000 or so South Africans of all
races, is planning to return at the end of the year when her diamond trader
husband's contract term expires. But she 'wouldn't like to go back if the
'Nos' get in'.
Strict eligibility rules stumped most of the South African cricket team,
currently wowing Australia in the World Cup, as they realised they had left
at home the voluminous identity document needed, along with a passport, to
cast a vote. Others were undeterred. In London Mr Sean Wheller, 25, said he
would arrange with his parents to courier the so-called 'book of life' to
him overnight.
Those without passports were being issued them instantly by Mr Durr's
consular team. And there were others, disenfranchised for more traditional
South African reasons, who came none the less. One black woman dallying
briefly at the entrance said: 'I just came to hear that wonderful South
African accent.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920312

