FT923-6381

FT  25 AUG 92 / Personal View: Careful therapy in the special case of Russia


   By JOHN WILLIAMSON


President Boris Yeltsin is the first democratically elected leader in
Russia's history, and a leader of proven courage. His government represents
by far the best chance that Russia has of realising its dream of becoming a
political democracy with a prosperous market economy. The west has an
overwhelming interest in seeing Russia fulfil this dream, given that the
alternatives are internal splintering, or a new authoritarianism, or a
frustrated nationalism, or some combination of these.
The Group of Seven leading industrialised countries is surely worrying about
how it can help Yeltsin's regime. The G7 should not confine its thoughts to
financial help. An invitation to enlarge the G7, with a suitable reminder
that this is a club of democracies, could give Russian pride a boost.
Nevertheless, it is no use pretending that Russia can be helped on the
cheap. It is desperately short of foreign exchange. The west has made
provision for Dollars 24bn (Pounds 12.3bn) in one form or another. One may
regret that this mostly consists of credits on commercial terms, which
threatens to intensify Russia's long-term debt-servicing problem.
While money is essential, no one imagines any longer that problems can be
solved just by throwing money at them. We have entrusted the International
Monetary Fund with the responsibility of judging whether policies worth
supporting are in place. We have a duty to discuss how the IMF should
discharge this responsibility.
The IMF is currently dealing with three separate pots of money: a Dollars
1bn first credit tranche drawing, a Dollars 2bn-Dollars 3bn standby drawing
from the higher credit tranche, and a Dollars 6bn stabilisation fund.
The first Dollars 1bn will be released essentially on the basis of past
actions  - the price liberalisation of January, and the efforts to reduce
the budget deficit, the exchange rate unification in July, and the
'nationalisation of the rouble' which addresses at least one dimension of
the problem of establishing monetary control  - plus a declaration of future
good intentions.
First credit tranche drawings have traditionally not carried high
conditionality, and that seems appropriate here. It provides a modest
goodwill gesture.
The stabilisation fund will, appropriately, be released only after Russia
has in place the conditions that would allow stabilisation. It should be
released before the exchange rate is stabilised, so as to enable Russia to
nudge the rouble up to a level worth stabilising, rather than stabilise an
undervalued rate. And it would be silly to insist that any drawings would
have to be repaid within 90 days, for that would emasculate the fund's
usefulness.
The immediate issue concerns the standby. It would be wrong to abandon the
conditionality that has traditionally applied to such drawings because
'Russia is a special case'. It is of course true that Russia is a special
case  - as indeed is every case the IMF has to deal. In principle the IMF
allows for this by tailoring each programme to the particular needs of the
country involved, and in practice it gets closer to that ideal than its
critics acknowledge (which is not to claim that it leaves them no
ammunition).
So what should be the right measures to incorporate in a Russian programme?
It should not be a programme for or against 'shock therapy'. Russia received
a shock when prices liberalised last January and it cannot be unshocked now
by reimposing price controls or increasing the budget deficit.
Nor should the programme commit Russia to a specific target for the rate of
inflation. The IMF game of demanding a commitment to an unrealistically low
rate of inflation and then forcing any responsible country negotiator to
demand a higher inflation target is counterproductive. Policymakers do not
have the tools to fine-tune the rate of inflation and the bickering gives
the public the impression that their authorities are half-hearted inflation
fighters.
Nor should the IMF insist on precipitate liberalisation of energy prices. It
was important that energy prices be raised substantially, as has already
been done. And it is important that the public know that they will
ultimately be raised to international levels. But there was a respectable
case for raising energy prices gradually.
Finally, the programme should not focus on privatisation. The Russians are
pushing ahead on that front faster than many had expected, and the IMF lacks
expertise that could help them to do it better.
The main focus of the IMF programme should be on averting the terrifyingly
real threat of hyper-inflation. Despite the fall every month since January,
monthly inflation is still well into double digits; inflationary
expectations are out of control; and there is no incomes policy. Against
this unfavourable background, the budget deficit started to widen ominously
again in the second quarter; massive new bank credits are being injected
into the economy in the (forlorn) hope of rolling back the vast
inter-enterprise arrears that emerged earlier this year; and the rouble has
fallen sharply again on the foreign exchanges.
Monetary policy offers scope for constructive policy initiatives. The
inter-bank settlement system has almost broken down. The very real problem
of inter-enterprise arrears needs to be tackled, though by consolidating (or
even forgiving) the debts and tightening future budget constraints rather
than by injecting new bank credits. Real interest rates are still sharply
negative and need to be raised, if necessary by indexing some financial
obligations.
Unfortunately these imperatives sound like a declaration against the
powerful pressure group of managers that has emerged in Russia. The managers
are demanding new credits and subsidies to prevent what they see as the
danger of the destruction of the industrial base. But it is quite wrong to
regard this as a nomenklatura opposition out of sympathy with the movement
towards a market economy. There are at least important parts of the
managerial group that realise that budget constraints have to be hardened,
that parts of industry need to be closed down, and that hyperinflation would
be a disaster.
Does the IMF possess the skills needed to act as foreign midwife for an
authentic Russian programme that will command domestic consent? Or is Russia
perhaps enough of a special case to justify asking a senior economic
statesmen to head a special mission that would draw skills from a wider
pool? The stakes are too high to allow that question to be answered on the
basis of not offending institutional pride.
The author is a senior fellow, Institute for International Economics.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920825

