FT921-660

FT  27 MAR 92 / 'Clot-busters' found less safe than 30-year-old heart drug


   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor


TWO heavily promoted new 'clot-busters' are a less safe treatment for heart
attacks than a drug introduced 30 years ago and cost five to 10 times as
much, according to a clinical trial said by the organisers at Oxford
University to be the largest in medical history.
Results of the Isis-3 trial, involving 46,000 heart attack patients in 20
countries, are published today in the Lancet, the British-based medical
journal. They are likely to make a big impact on the highly competitive
market for clot-dissolving drugs.
They show that streptokinase, whose patent protection has long expired,
saves lives as effectively as its two high-tech competitors, Apsac and tPA,
made by the Anglo-American SmithKline Beecham, and Genentech of the US
respectively. When combined with aspirin, all three drugs cut heart attack
mortality by half.
'But streptokinase is safer, with both tPA and Apsac causing significantly
more strokes from bleeding into the brain,' Isis-3 concluded.
Genentech has most to lose from the survey. Last year's sales of tPA (trade
name Activase) were worth Dollars 195m (Pounds 112.7m) - 38 per cent of the
company's total revenues. Its share of the US market for clot-dissolving
drugs fell from two-thirds to half, after preliminary results from Isis-3
were released a year ago.
The full report today emphasises more strongly the increased risks from tPA
and Apsac. According to Dr Rory Collins, Isis-3 co-ordinator, US hospitals
could save more than Dollars 100m and prevent as many as 400 strokes a year
by prescribing streptokinase instead of tPA.
But Mr Kirk Raab, chief executive of Genentech, said yesterday: 'We continue
to believe that the Isis-3 findings are irrelevant to our product and to
standard prescribing patterns for thrombolytic (clot-dissolving) therapy in
the US.'
Genentech and SKB say Isis-3 did not test their products under appropriate
clinical conditions.
According to SKB, Eminase - its trade name for Apsac  - saves lives because
it can be given to patients more quickly and easily than streptokinase.
Genentech points out that the tPA used in Isis-3 was not Activase but a
version made by Wellcome of the UK. Although Wellcome abandoned its tPA in
1990 after a court ruled that it infringed Genentech's patent, the US
company says the two are not clinically identical.
Genentech is paying Dollars 55m to support another clinical comparison
called Gusto, with 40,000 patients, which will compare Activase and
streptokinase.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920327

