FT921-3754

FT  12 MAR 92 / UN spurns Iraqi plea on sanctions


   By MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS, UN Correspondent


   NEW YORK


THE UN Security Council yesterday flatly rejected Iraq's claim that it had
honoured its obligations under the Gulf war ceasefire terms and the US and
Britain again raised the possibility that force might be necessary to compel
it to comply.
In Washington US President George Bush said he would 'contemplate all
alternatives' to force Iraq to destroy its dangerous weapons. 'There will be
no compromise on the part of the US with full compliance with the UN
resolutions,' he said.
At the United Nations his words were echoed by Sir David Hannay, British UN
ambassador, and by his American counterpart, Mr Thomas Pickering. They were
speaking at a meeting of the UN Security Council, attended by Iraqi deputy
prime minister Tariq Aziz, at which Baghdad was accused of trying to outwit
and sometimes harass UN teams sent to find and scrap its weapons of mass
destruction.
Mr Hannay said force was used to drive Iraqi troops out of Kuwait 'because
Iraq miscalculated and believed that this council was bluffing'. He said he
hoped Iraq would 'not again miscalculate'.
In his hour-long address to the council, Mr Aziz said Iraq was 'no longer in
possession of any weapons, munitions or major or minor systems' prohibited
by UN resolutions, and asked how long the council would maintain the
crippling economic embargo imposed on his country after its August 1990
invasion of Kuwait.
'The question constantly asked by 18m Iraqis, together with millions more
honest free people in the world, is: for how long will this iniquitous siege
continue to be imposed upon Iraq?' Mr Aziz said.
Minutes after the Security Council gathered in extraordinary session
yesterday, Mr Diego Arria, chief delegate of Venezuela and current
president, read an 11-page list of Iraqi transgressions.
Drafted privately by the 15 members, this again demonstrated the remarkable
cohesion that has marked the council's handling of the Gulf crisis since
Iraq invaded Kuwait.
The UN council concluded that 'Iraq has not fully complied with the
obligations placed on it' but welcomed this opportunity to air the problem.
Mr Aziz, leading a 14-member team he termed a goodwill mission, sat
stone-faced in a reserved seat near the council's horseshoe table as Mr
Arria read the document.
Emphasising the inferior role accorded to him in the council proceedings, he
was made to deliver his statement only after speeches from all the council's
members.
The council said Mr Aziz's claim that innocent women, children and old
people were suffering 'very, very bad effects' from continued sanctions was
belied by Iraq's refusal to sell Dollars 1.6bn of oil under special UN
authority, with Dollars 1bn of the proceeds permitted to be used for
humanitarian needs.
Mr Aziz's plea was also undermined by a warning from Saddam Hussein, Iraq's
leader, early today that he would not tolerate polls planned for next month
by Iraq's Kurdish minority for a new parliament unless they cut links with
Western countries who are protecting them from his army.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920312

