FT922-4148

FT  06 JUN 92 / Grindlays sets aside Pounds 77m


   By RICHARD WATERS and R C MURTHY


   BOMBAY


ANZ Grindlays, the Australian-owned bank, yesterday bowed to a request from
the Reserve Bank of India, the central bank, to set aside more than Rs4bn
(Pounds 77m) to cover its potential exposure to the Bombay securities
scandal.
However, Grindlays, India's biggest foreign-owned bank, continued to deny
any liability to repay the money, which is being claimed by the National
Housing Bank, itself a subsidiary of the central bank.
Grindlays said it had told the central bank that it would 'take such steps
as are required to ensure that sufficient resources are available to meet
any liabilities that are determined without prejudice to (the bank's) rights
and contentions'.
According to the Reserve Bank, Grindlays paid five cheques from the National
Housing Bank, totalling more than Rs4bn, into a current account it ran for
Mr Harshad Mehta, the broker at the centre of the affair, even though the
cheques were made out to Grindlays itself.
The bank claims that it acted in line with normal practice in Bombay's
interbank markets.
Mr Mehta yesterday appeared before magistrates in Bombay charged with
funnelling bank money illegally into the Bombay Stock Exchange, along with
nine others.
This followed two more arrests earlier in the day, of Mr C L Khemani, deputy
managing director of the State Bank of India, and an assistant manager from
the NHB.
'This is the biggest ever fraud committed in this country,' the prosecutor,
Mr MP Johari, told a packed courtroom as Mr Mehta made his first court
appearance.
Hinting at the possibility of more allegations to come, Mr Johari said that
illegal stock dealings uncovered by investigators were only the tip of the
iceberg.
All the accused were remanded in police custody for 14 days.
Meanwhile, Standard Chartered, which the central bank says has an exposure
of Rs10.55bn in the affair, is understood to have been in talks throughout
the week to recover assets from brokers who received the money.
The negotiations are so far believed to have been unsuccessful, and the bank
is coming under increasing pressure to take legal action to recover assets -
a step that could involve it in a lengthy dispute through India's
notoriously slow judicial system.
Mr R Janakiraman, the central bank deputy governor whose investigation has
revealed that Rs30.8bn in all was diverted from the banking system, said he
had traced the money into the accounts of various brokers.
Mr Janakiraman has not yet discovered how the money was used, but said in an
interview yesterday that he believed very little, if any, of the money had
been taken out of the country.
Mr S Venkitaraman, central bank governor, said: 'We are acting on some
leads, and feel confident we will be able to recover assets.'
He denied putting pressure on Grindlays to set money aside because he wanted
to protect his own subsidiary, the National Housing Bank, but accepted there
was a potential conflict of interest in the central bank owning and
regulating banks.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920606

