FT922-7101

FT  20 MAY 92 / Armenia 'annexing' part of Azerbaijan


   By JOHN LLOYD and REUTER


   BAKU


FIGHTING between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces is now going on in or
around four key towns on Azerbaijani territory, according to a senior
Azerbaijani politician.
Mr Niazi Ibragimov, a deputy chairman of the Azerbaijan Popular Front, said
last night that Armenia was 'annexing' major parts of Azeribaijan territory
and that 'the world community must know what is happening - it has
encouraged it to happen.'
The escalation of the fighting over the past few days has raised the
conflict between the two Caucasian republics to a level of virtual war, with
the smaller Armenian republic attacking strongly on two fronts.
Mr Ibragimov said that a land corridor between Armenia and the
Armenia-dominated enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan was now under
Armenian control and that Sadarak on the north-east of the Azerbaijani
autonomous republic of Nakhichevan - which is between Armenia and Turkey -
was last night being hit by rockets.
'All of the fighting is now on Azerbaijani territory - at Agdam (to the east
of Karabakh), Fizuli (to its south), Lachin (to its west, and to the end of
the Armenian corridor) and Sadarak. The Azerbaijani population of Karabakh
has been partly destroyed, partly made refugees. And the world's press and
governments go on babbling about the plight of the Armenians in Karabakh.'
The Popular Front has now taken political control in the Azerbaijani capital
of Baku, with the election on Monday of Mr Isa Gambarov, a deputy chairman
of the Front, as speaker of parliament and acting president. Mr Ibragimov
said presidential elections were planned for June 7 'unless the situation in
Baku is destabilised', with parliamentary elections within the year, under
the same conditions.
The republic, with 7m population, is potentially rich in oil in offshore
deposits now being prospected by a group of western oil companies.
An Amoco representative in Baku said last night that the leaders of the
republic's oil and gas corporation remained in place, and he expected them
to continue to do so.
Mr Ayaz Mutalibov, the former communist president who briefly took power
last Thursday was, according to unconfirmed reports, in a Moscow military
hospital last night after fleeing Baku from a military airfield. Mr
Ibragimov said he did not expect any attempt at a further coup from Mr
Mutalibov's supporters.
The Popular Front, a secular force created by intellectuals four years ago,
and favouring closer relations with Turkey, now controls half the 50 seats
in the Meijlis, or National Council of the republic.
He said Russian intelligence services had collaborated in the attempted
rehabilitation of Mr Mutalibov last week because Russia believed he would
have sought closer relations with the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Azerbaijan, with four other CIS members, refused to sign a pact on
collective security in Tashkent last Friday. Armenia, with Russia, was among
the six which did sign.
Turkey yesterday warned Armenia of the consequences of its 'aggression and
expansionism' following intensified fighting, Reuter reports. The US also
condemned the escalating violence but avoided taking sides.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920520

