FT922-4204

FT  06 JUN 92 / How To Spend It: Enquire within


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


A READER rang me this week. She had looked everywhere for plain,
old-fashioned wooden doorknobs and been unable to find them.
Her request seemed as innocently simple as AA Milne's 'Could we have some
butter for the royal slice of bread?' but just as mysteriously difficult to
deal with.
Knobs & Knockers was one company which I suggested. No, she had tried it and
it was unable to help. John Lewis, the department store? Well, it had some
in pale wood, not what she had in mind. And so on - until I hit upon
consulting The Ideal Home Design Sourcebook by Barbara Chandler.
There, tucked away in chapter eight, was everything one needed to know about
doors and door furniture. A single telephone call to Comyn Ching, 19 Shelton
Street, London (tel:071-379-3026) listed as just one of the sources but
chosen because of its reputation, revealed that it did 'just four styles . .
. including some old ones.'
All this is just to illustrate what an immensely useful directory The Ideal
Home Design Sourcebook is. Anyone who has ever done up a house knows that
the ardent restorer always gets notions, some sensible, some quirky, about
what is required to bring the house to life. Some are easily found, some
take days of tracking down. Whatever you have in mind the book should help.
Whether you are looking for blue glass cellars for antique salt and pepper
holders, for non-slip underlay for rugs, for a pair of precious wrought-iron
gates, old timber to do up a country cottage or plain built-in cupboards,
this book should help make it easier.
It seems to cover almost everything the new home-owner or restorer could
want - from new sources of brand-new fitments and furniture, to craftspeople
who will make to special commission. There are arcane specialists, dyers,
gilders, conservationists, thatchers and framers.
I can see this book saving most of us hours on the telephone. The addresses
have been acquired and collated during Barbara Chandler's years as a
journalist in the home interiors and design field. For just Pounds 9.95 you
buy access to a journalist's most precious possession - her contacts book.
The book can be bought from branches of Waterstone. Call, or ring
081-503-0589 and quote your credit card number. It is obtainable by mail
from: Calmann King, PO Box 666, London E15 1DW. Send a cheque for Pounds
9.95 made out to Calmann King.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

920606

