FT922-7224

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (7): Barcoded for
speedy recognition - Tracking technology is becoming increasingly
sophisticated


   By JANINA WALKER


IN AN industry where speed and reliability are vital, courier and express
operators' consignment monitoring would make Arnold Schwarzenegger's tracker
robot Terminator feel at home.
Automatic identification technology, which can pinpoint a parcel in a
network, whether it is travelling to Telford or Timbuktu, has always
provided customers with reassurance that the carrier is in control. The
trend is towards enhancement of this system.
Millions have been spent in this and other information technology (IT)
areas, as companies seek to gain the technological edge in a competitive
industry squeezed by recession.
Tracking and tracing is a simple idea. Consignments are given a unique
barcode by which they can be followed through a distribution system.
Mick Linsell, systems director of the top player in the UK express parcel
market, Royal Mail Parcelforce, describes barcoding as 'the integral
efficiency product'.
Parcelforce, which claims a 30 per cent share in the market, has just
invested Pounds 3m in an international distribution centre, one component of
which is interfacing with track-and-trace systems.
A further multi-million pound investment is planned for an new automatic
sorting centres in the UK, which will integrate track-and-trace using the
barcode technology.
'My personal view on track-and-trace in the domestic operation is that
consignments should be delivered so quickly you don't have time to find out
where they are,' said Mr Linsell. 'The trend is not away from
track-and-trace, but the enhancement of it - more is being done with the
barcode information, and we are getting more functions out of our investment
and there are huge incremental benefits in speed and reliability.'
Another UK domestic parcel operator, Parceline, is investing Pounds 2.5m in
IT, including the integration of parcel tracking and billing operations.
Parceline's hub and technical services manager, Chris Ogg, said: 'Added
value through technology, which gives the comfort factor to customers, is
becoming a major issue as operators are fighting for the same clients in a
similar market.
'We have witnessed an emphasis on confirmation on proof of delivery
information, and are bolting on technology to our track-and-trace systems to
deal with it. One major advance is that we now have the ability to give full
image reproduction of a consignment for POD purposes.'
DHL is investing Pounds 7.5m in IT in the UK this year. It currently has
EasyShip On Line - a tracking and tracing advance for high-volume shippers,
which means these customers can now trace worldwide movement of consignments
from their own offices.
'Most customers are saying now they want to track more pieces, and they want
information on them more quickly,' said Charles Brewer, after-sales manager,
DHL International (UK). 'There is more anxiety in business in this current
economic climate, and demands are higher than in the past.
'The comfort factor is still very important for customers, especially when
they are involved in the just-in-time method of operation, which involves
regular stocking of empty shelves.'
DHL is also looking to another track-and-trace advance, which has nothing to
do with sophisticated technology - improvement in personal service. In
November, the company introduced a 24-hour, seven-days-a-week tracking and
tracing service, which means it can contact international colleagues to get
immediate information on a consignment.
Mr Brewer said the company was also recruiting staff with foreign languages,
to reduce the margin of error when tracing consignments overseas.
UK player Securicor Omega Express, which delivers 1.5m parcels a week, has
completed the first phase of a five-year Pounds 25m investment in IT, which
includes enhancement of tracking-and-tracing technology. Here again, the
comfort factor comes into play, in the form of Signline, a nationwide
confirmation-of-delivery system based on scanning the barcodes on all
consignments which customers ring in to use.
The company's systems manager, Phil Whitlock, commented: 'Without
technology, a carrier is going to lag behind. The main impetus is for
carriers to communicate billing and receiving.'
Australian express giant TNT is also re-equipping systems within the UK
operation, at a cost of between Pounds 2.6m and Pounds 3m.
TNT Express UK's general manager, domestic development, Nigel Barton, said:
'Not only are we bolting on to our track and trace, we are completely
re-writing our systems.
'What we are doing effectively, from a commercial point of view, is adding
value to get a competitive edge. Reliability is the key. . . The systems
also enable us to monitor our own internal quality, which is extremely
important if we are to give the best service to our customers.
'There is certainly more and more demand for information as companies look
to operators as an offshoot of their own business, rather than just a parcel
carrier. Customers tend to regard us as their own fleet.'
British Rail Red Star express parcel division spent Pounds 750,000 on a
special system, which gives customers the technology to track their own
consignments' progress through the distribution chain.
The system - known as TRAC - is PC-based and provides customers with a live
on-line link to the Red Star Parcels' mainframe computer. It gives on-line
proof of delivery, and generates an invoice and manifest. It is currently
being used by high-volume customers, which include IBM, and is updated every
three months at the cost of Pounds 15,000.
IBM's storage services manager, Brian Fisher, said the company had been
using Red Star for a number of years, and the paperwork system used before
TRAC had been messy.
'It has certainly tightened things up, and the additional control it gives
us, of knowing where a parcel is, is a positive advantage,' he said. 'We use
Red Star for overnight emergency service, which means it is vital for
customers to know where their consignment is, if for some reason it does not
arrive on time.
'We look to our carriers to give us a good service, and this is certainly an
enormous leap forward in those terms.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920520

