FT922-4266

FT  06 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Heron's property values reduced by Pounds
300m


   By JANE FULLER


BANKERS to Heron International, Mr Gerald Ronson's property and finance
company which is seeking to reschedule Pounds 1bn of debt, heard yesterday
that Pounds 300m had been knocked off the value of the group's property
portfolio by the latest survey.
The 82 banks received a report from KPMG Peat Marwick, the accountants,
which included a Pounds 1bn valuation of Heron's worldwide property
portfolio. This compared with a Pounds 1.3bn valuation as part of an earlier
report by Price Waterhouse, which is advising Heron.
The lower figure was produced by Debenham Tewson & Chinnocks, which looked
at the portfolio about a month later than the valuers working on Heron's
March 31 snapshot. The firms which produced the earlier survey included St
Quintin and Richard Ellis.
It was the collapse in Heron's estimated net assets to Pounds 115m by the
end of March which put it in breach of banking covenants and precipitated
the attempt to reschedule Pounds 1bn of the group's Pounds 1.45bn debt.
About Pounds 450m of Eurobonds are included in the restructuring. Following
defaults, winning the support of the bondholders is one of the main hurdles
for the proposals. They will receive information from the KPMG report, which
recommends a controlled disposal of the investment property portfolio.
Heron had already warned bondholders not to take any hasty action because
'in the event of a liquidation, it is estimated that the group's liabilities
would exceed assets'.
Leaving aside the fire-sale conditions which it is trying to avoid, Heron
said yesterday that it stood by the Pounds 1.3bn valuation and it did not
believe it had negative net worth.
'We remain committed to securing a successful outcome of the rescheduling of
our debt, leading to payment in full for all our creditors over time.' It
expected to complete the restructuring negotiations by the autumn.
The banks, which have granted Heron a standstill agreement until the end of
June, were said to be not particularly surprised at the lower valuation. It
would be taken into account in discussions with the company, as would KPMG's
recommendation of a controlled disposal, which echoed that of Price
Waterhouse.
The gap between the two valuations was said to reflect the difficulty of
valuing property in the current market. The difference in timing, bearing in
mind the continuing deterioration of sentiment as the Olympia & York crisis
deepened, was one of the factors.
The five banks on the steering committee dealing with Heron Barclays,
National Westminster, Bank of America, Royal Bank of Canada and Chemical
Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920606

