FT924-6095

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (11): Tri-national heritage -
Mulhouse, the industrial heart of Alsace


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


SINCE the late 18th century, Mulhouse has variously been part of
Switzerland, Germany and France, a heritage which has left deep traces in
the form of an eclectic way of life. Today, a casual visitor, arriving at
Mulhouse-Basel airport - which straddles the Swiss frontier and is jointly
managed with the Swiss authorities - can be forgiven for wondering which
country Mulhouse is in, writes William Dawkins.
Mulhouse city dwellers, like other residents of Alsace, speak of the rest of
France as if it were another country, calling it simply 'the interior.'
Their local newspapers are in French and German and 35,000 Mulhouse
residents - nearly 15 per cent of the population - cross the German border
to go to work every day, in search of higher wages across the Rhine. Few
German workers come the other way, into France, though Mulhouse does boast a
community of German companies.
The city practises Swiss-style environmental policies, with a recently
launched programme to collect household waste in recyclable plastic bags. It
holds regular joint municipal planning sessions with Freiburg, its nearest
German neighbour. It also boasts positively Teutonic labour relations
stability, with one notable exception: the strike at the local Peugeot plant
three years ago.
'Traditionally, we are an attractive centre for German companies who want to
get into the French market, with all its special characteristics. We are
also attractive to international companies who see this as a good base from
which to serve northern Europe without having to set up in Germany,'
explains Mr Laurent Kammerer, head of the mayor's private office.
The city has a plentiful pool of labour though city officials do complain of
a skills shortage. This is partly because of a fast-growing immigrant
population of nearly 18 per cent, many of whom have been attracted by the
local car industry. A rise in the National Front vote, to 23 per cent in
Alsace generally in the last regional election, could be a worrying
consequence. However, city officials attribute this more to regional
dissatisfaction with the centralising Paris bureaucracy than to social
tension.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921123

