FT922-4032

FT  08 JUN 92 / Boost for Maxwell pensioners: Up to Pounds 5m aid planned by
government as DTI considers investigation


   By RALPH ATKINS


TEMPORARY financial help, worth up to Pounds 5m, for those pensioners worst
hit by the raiding of pension funds belonging to Maxwell companies will be
announced by the government today.
As Mr Peter Lilley, social security secretary, prepares to unveil a lifeline
for some Maxwell pensioners, plus an independent review of UK pension law,
it has emerged that the Department of Trade and Industry is considering its
own investigation into the affair.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, may appoint inspectors
to look for possible breaches of company law in areas of the Maxwell empire
not already subject to inquiries by the Serious Fraud Office.
The government's announcement of financial help coincides with a large-scale
lobby by Maxwell pensioners at Westminster today. Early indications were
that the cash would help calm the political protests that have grown since
the discovery that more than Pounds 400m was missing from pension funds of
companies controlled by the late Robert Maxwell.
'This 'drip feed' is what we were pressing them to do,' said Mr Frank Field,
the Labour MP for Birkenhead who has helped to co-ordinate the pensioners'
campaign.
Mr Kenneth Trench, chairman of the Maxwell Pensioners Action Group, said the
package 'is no way going to meet the requirements of the 32,000 pension
scheme members who have been plundered'.
The announcement is an acknowledgment by the government of a responsibility
to the Maxwell pensioners. However, Mr Lilley will stress that the cash
injection will be strictly limited, probably lasting less than a year.
That may allow time for the completion of an investigation by the Investment
Management Regulatory Organisation (Imro), but the government will not make
any pledges of further help.
Mr Lilley will argue that there is a moral obligation on banks holding the
pension funds' assets - about Pounds 200m is understood to have been
identified so far - to repay the sums, in spite of bankers' claims that
payments were received in good faith.
He hopes that some, if not all, of the funds provided by the social security
department, in agreement with the Treasury, will be recouped.
It remains unclear how many pensioners will benefit immediately from the
cash. Initially it will be targeted at pensioners whose pensions have been
stopped, such as the 240 covered by the Headington Pension Plan, or reduced,
such as the 5,000 under the MCC works scheme.
There was no indication yesterday that the government was prepared to help
towards the legal costs of the Maxwell pensioners. Labour is to press for
the implementation of legislation which would make pensioners creditors of
pension funds, increasing their rights for compensation.
Amid a welter of government inquiries into Maxwell companies, an
inter-departmental committee has been set up to co-ordinate efforts to trace
cash missing from pension funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920608

