FT924-913

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (6): Focus is on
multi-media - Consumer electronics


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


VISITORS to the Information and Communications System Centre built by
Matsushita, the world's largest consumer electronics maker, are greeted in
the atrium by bowing clerks at an information booth, a waterfall and an
entrance to a high-tech 'vision presentation auditorium' shaped like the
mouth of a cave.
The building, located in south Tokyo, is like a huge glass and stone pyramid
and is a great monument of the late eighties when Japanese companies raised
easy cash during the height of the bull market. But it is also a symbol of
Matsushita's ambitions to embrace multi-media and 'systems integration', a
key theme for all Japanese electronics and computer companies.
Sharp, the consumer electronics and office equipment maker, and Fujitsu,
Japan's largest computer maker which owns ICL, also recently announced
completion of their multi-media research and development centres, which
stand side by side in Chiba prefecture, east of Tokyo. Sharp's Y40bn
Multimedia Systems Research and Development Centre has 21 floors,
symbolising the company's focus on the 21st century.
In its Y32bn centre, Matsushita displays personal computers and work
stations which combine telephones, cameras and screens. Television
conferences conducted at an individual's own desk are also possible using
the futuristic technology. Matsushita's ultimate goal is to provide
'environment integration' which allows office workers to work and
communicate when and wherever they please.
Yet, despite their great investments, the electronics makers only have vague
concepts of integrating various technologies. The companies realise the vast
possibilities of combining computer hardware with speech, music, graphics
and still pictures, but they admit difficulties with real applications.
Mr Atsushi Asada, vice-president of Sharp, says: 'We know the multi-media
industry will grow as large as Y60,000bn in the next century, but nothing
concrete has come out yet.'
The main problem Japanese companies face is the lack of technology to
develop software. Thus Japanese computer makers are sitting on the sidelines
watching out for software development by US computer makers. 'We are waiting
for standardisation,' says Mr Asada.
Last month, American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), the US
telecommunications company, announced it would develop personal
communicators based on its new 32-bit microprocessor chip. The pen-point
personal communicators will allow users to talk and exchange facsimile and
electronic mail messages via land-line and wireless telecommunications
media.
The product will rival the Newton palm-top, a pen-point terminal under
development by Apple Computer of the US. International Business Machines and
Apple have joined forces to develop standards for multi-media products
ranging from personal computers to consumer electronics and communications
technology.
Meanwhile Intel and Microsoft, two leading US software concerns, have also
announced plans to co-operate on multi-media development. Microsoft's Video
for Windows, which enables users to combine and edit digitalised pictures,
is a rival product to Apple's software for the Macintosh computer.
While Toshiba and NEC have decided to team up with AT&T, and Sharp with
Apple, important software development is led by US software houses.
'Japanese companies won't be able to do much with their hardware until the
software is ready,' says Mr Steve Myers, electronics analyst at Jardine
Fleming Securities.
The venture into the multi-media industry comes at a time when Japanese
electronics manufacturers are desperate for a new hit product. However, at
the same time, the companies are seeing a sharp decline in the domestic
economy and are facing heavy falls in profits.
Matsushita saw its consolidated pre-tax profits for the interim term to
September fall 65 per cent, while that of Sony declined 61 per cent.
Japanese companies are uncertain if a recovery in domestic demand is on the
near horizon. Heavy depreciation costs of capital investments made in the
eighties are squeezing profits. 'Things were different when we were at the
planning stage,' says Sharp.
Mr Tsuzo Murase, vice-president at Matsushita, says that the investments
were made for the customer. 'We're not spending money for ourselves,' he
says. Matsushita claims that its new centre has everything a customer
seeking information and communications applications needs.
The companies try to justify heavy expenditure on the buildings, as they
claim the high-tech appliances and systems in their 'intelligent buildings'
are marketable. Sharp's building, for example, offers a range of
applications from a toilet which switches on automatically when a person
walks in, to a global teleconference network and to liquid crystal displays
in elevators. 'It's a place where we can test out new ideas,' it says.
Matsushita's building offers its workers a cashless cafeteria, where
personal identification cards are used to pay, and 'intelligent' air
conditioning which can be controlled by the same identification cards, to
suit individual needs. 'The whole building and its operations will start
yielding a profit in 10 years,' says Mr Murase.
While not all industry observers are sceptical, most wonder if Japanese
companies sitting on the sidelines will have the creative edge. Mr Jeremy
Marks, analyst at Barings Securities in Tokyo, says that considering the
successes of Nintendo and Sega Enterprises, the video game makers,
multi-media is definitely a high-growth area. 'But to succeed it has to be
very high quality and lots of fun.'
As to what lies beyond video games and television telephones, Mr Asada of
Sharp says: 'This is a long-term project. We are trying to anticipate and
prepare for the lifestyles in the next century.'

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921221

