FT923-6317

FT  25 AUG 92 / Treasury urged to give Pounds 2bn salvation injection


   By PETER MARSH


THE Treasury should consider injecting Pounds 2bn into the economy to lift
output and employment over the next year, the National Institute review
says, Peter Marsh writes.
This call from one of Britain's leading economic think tanks will add to
pressure on Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, to use government measures to
hasten a recovery.
According to the institute, policies such as an increase in public-sector
capital spending or a temporary reduction in value added tax would help to
head off the possibility of a 'protracted recession'.
It adds: 'Demonstration of the willingness and the ability to intervene in
this way would help to rebuild the confidence of industry, and also to help
reconcile public opinion to the constraint of continued exchange rate
mechanism membership.'
The institute supports Mr Lamont's refusal to consider a devaluation of
sterling within the ERM, a measure some government critics believe would
permit a large cut in interest rates and so help an upturn.
'We do not accept the argument that recovery is possible only if interest
rates are cut sharply, or only if the pound is devalued,' the institute
says.
Among measures suggested by the institute to buoy the economy are loans to
housing associations and other housing bodies to increase the supply of
rented homes, and the deferral of tax payments by companies.
To keep neutral the overall effect on government borrowing, the institute
says the Pounds 2bn injection into the economy this financial year should be
countered by moves to tighten fiscal policy by an equivalent amount during
the two succeeding years.
In the absence of moves of this sort, the research body says the outlook is
gloomy. On current policies the economy will contract 0.5 per cent this
year, after a 2.5 per cent fall last year. Boosting demand through a Pounds
2bn fiscal package would increase output by 0.75 of a percentage point this
year, the institute says.
With an imminent reduction in Germany's high borrowing rates unlikely, the
scope for a cut in the UK's 10 per cent base rates during the rest of the
year is 'minimal'. Export growth will be constrained by the weak
international economy.
Consumer spending will remain depressed, partly because of the effects of
the large fall in personal wealth triggered by reductions in house prices.
Real net housing wealth - the value of the housing stock less outstanding
mortgage debt - fell 24 per cent between the peak in the third quarter of
1989 and the first quarter of this year.
As for next year, the institute expects a modest recovery with output rising
by 1.7 per cent, though unemployment will continue to rise to 3m by the
final quarter. Headline inflation as measured by the retail prices index is
likely to decline to 3.6 per cent by the end of this year and 2.8 per cent
by the end of 1993.
Over the next year, the outlook for spending by companies may 'now be rather
brighter' than for spending by consumers, the institute says. Many
businesses are benefiting from higher productivity among employees sparked
by lower wage inflation, together with a reduction in debts. However,
business investment is expected to remain depressed, with capital spending
by manufacturers likely to fall more than 9 per cent this year, and remain
flat next year.
National Institute Economic Review. 2 Dean Trench Street, London SW1P 3HE.
Annual subscription Pounds 70 (UK), Pounds 85 (overseas).

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920825

