FT923-6354

FT  25 AUG 92 / Technology: Respect for the golden oldies - Technically
Speaking


   By LOUISE KEHOE


AMONG the rising stars of the high-technology field, the grey hairs of
experience seldom command respect. Indeed, several of the most celebrated
achievers of the information age are remarkable for their youth.
Steve Jobs co-founded Apple Computer at the tender age of 20. Bill Gates,
the software billionaire, is only 36 and Scott McNealy, the president of Sun
Microsystems, has turned 37.
Their companies, along with many others in growth segments of the computer
industry, are imbued with a culture that reflects the youth of their
founders. They are supremely confident and scorn the formality of more
mature businesses. While by no means all of their employees are fresh faced,
the average age is seldom much higher than that of the chief executive.
In part, the predominant role of young men in high-technology industries can
be explained by the fast pace of innovations that give young engineers, just
out of university with knowledge of leading-edge technology, an advantage
over their older colleagues whose formal education is rapidly outdated.
At its best, the youthful spirit of segments of the high-technology industry
gives them energy and drive. At its worst, however, the industry culture
harbours subtle age discrimination.
Too often, young executives will say that they have to avoid hiring
individuals with more than a few years' experience at an 'old line' computer
company, claiming that such people are likely to be stuck in their ways.
In effect, this limits the opportunities of those who in mid-career hope to
join a company with stronger growth prospects.
By not offering pension plans, companies can also effectively select only
those young enough, or rich enough, not to worry about retirement.
Nevertheless, experienced and older executives should play a valuable role
in young companies. In the US, for example, many venture capitalists have a
long career in high-technology behind them. Having recorded their own
achievements and made their own mistakes these veterans are well placed to
offer counsel to the next generation of industry entrepreneurs.
They also provide fledgling companies with valuable contacts, opening doors
that might otherwise be closed to newcomers.
In the UK, this valuable source of knowledge and experience is
less-frequently tapped. However, a new network of independent consultants
aims to make the talents of some of the industry's more senior, yet hardly
old, citizens available to companies.
CH Business Development, founded by Tim Wickes, a veteran of high-technology
marketing, has established a register of consultants for use by
information-technology users, suppliers and service companies.
'Two of the main qualifications that we look for in potential team members
is sound business experience in executive 'hot-seats', integrity and plenty
of 'grey hair',' says Wickes.
It is often easier for a managing director to accept advice from a seasoned
consultant than from a team of bright young business graduates, Wickes
suggests.
Robin Laidlaw, formerly director of information technology at British Gas,
is one of the management consultants on the CH list. 'Our approach,' he
explains, 'is to be an extension of the chief executive's office. Most chief
executives wish to review how their organisations should reflect such things
as technology changes. However, in today's demanding environment where the
day-to-day pressures are so great, there is often too little time for
adequate strategic thinking.'
Whether as a consultant, a venture capitalists or a non-executive director,
the older industry executive has much to offer. To ignore this source of
expertise would be a detriment to the entire computer industry.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920825

