FT921-3767

FT  12 MAR 92 / Accountancy Column: Lighting the hidden side of directors'
reports


   By ANDREW JACK


THE RECENT storm over political donations made in the 1980s by Polly Peck
International, the collapsed fruit to electronics group, failed to highlight
one vital issue: whether it is time for the annual directors' report to
receive far greater scrutiny.
It was widely reported that Mr Asil Nadir, chairman of PPI, had contributed
funds to the Conservative party. Touche Ross, which has had partners working
on the administration of the group since October 1990, confirmed that it had
unearthed payments from companies within the group.
Mr Chris Patten, Conservative party chairman, said that Pounds 440,000 had
been received via Mr Nadir. Even Mr Nadir, through a statement from his
solicitors, confirmed that he had donated the money to the Conservatives and
appeared to express surprise that those payments made through PPI companies
had not been disclosed in the accounts.
While some commentators swiftly called for the return of the money, and
others questioned the ethics of political parties receiving large
contributions from any one individual or organisation, few addressed the
lack of disclosure of the contributions in the company's accounts, and why
this had gone unnoticed.
Political embarrassment there may have been. But under current legislation
the donation of funds by companies to political causes is not illegal. The
only law in question is the 1985 Companies Act, which requires the
directors' report to list the sums and the recipients of any donations to
political or charitable causes above Pounds 200.
PPI's reports for the periods in question are blank. The accounts for 1989,
for example, discuss Pounds 485,000 given to charities 'particularly upon
the needs of children and young people in the community who are
underprivileged or chronically ill'. It then states simply: 'There were no
political donations.'
Stoy Hayward, auditors to PPI, would not comment on the episode. But the
Companies' Act appears to place the onus for disclosure on the directors of
a company rather than its auditors. 'In respect of any failure to comply . .
. every person who was a director of the company immediately before the end
of the relevant period is guilty of an offence,' it states.
Auditors, the Act continues, must report on the accounts of both
subsidiaries and the group company where one exists, including the balance
sheet and the profit and loss account.
The existing auditing guidelines from the Institute of Chartered Accountants
in England and Wales explicitly reflect this legislation, and seem to
exonerate Stoy Hayward from any blame. 'The auditor has no statutory
responsibilities in respect of items in the directors' report which in his
opinion are misleading but not inconsistent with the financial statements,'
it says.
The auditor's report in every company annual report makes the same point.
The statement appears after the directors' report and refers only to the
accounts, contained on subsequent pages. The 1989 PPI version, for instance,
begins: 'We have audited the financial statements set out on pages 31 to 55
in accordance with auditing standards.' The directors' report is on pages 27
to 29.
Undisclosed donations each year for a few tens of thousands of pounds in a
company with PPI's turnover are hardly likely to be judged material. They
are therefore not likely to be judged 'inconsistent' with the accounts, and
the auditors would not be obliged to highlight the failure to disclose these
political contributions even if they did manage to detect them.
So who is responsible for verifying the contents of the directors' report,
for both PPI and in general? The Department of Trade and Industry says
Companies House, based in Cardiff is responsible for examining accounts, and
is able to impose fines for any which are found lacking.
Companies House states that it fined 1,864 directors from 1,284 companies
during the last financial year for failing to file accounts on time, and has
recently announced stiffer penalties for this offence to begin in July. It
says it can also take action where there is incomplete information, such as
the omission of the auditor's statement or the balance sheet.
But it has no record of any occasion on which a company had been fined for
failing to disclose - or for inaccurately disclosing - information in the
directors' report. It says that its thrust is ensure compliance, not to
punish errors.
Companies House argues that it has no staff to examine reports for evidence
of abuse. 'We accept all the information that is given to us in good faith,'
says one senior official. He points out that there are about 1.1 million
'live' companies on record, most of which file annual returns, and the
average report is probably examined for 'one-and-a-half to two minutes'.
The same message - that there is no systematic monitoring of reports - comes
from the Department of Trade and Industry, with which Companies House works
closely. 'We don't have a pro-active role,' says a DTI official. 'Accounts
are taken as being correct. Shareholders, creditors and investors can bring
things to our attention. We rely on informants.'
If PPI was an isolated incident, the importance of non-disclosure in a
directors' report might be of questionable importance. But it is not. The
accounts for the year to June 30 1991 of Sovereign Leasing, a leasing
company now owned by Z-Landerbank Bank Austria, for example, reveal a
similar episode.
The directors' report describes a detailed investigation into the company
carried out as a result of substantial losses made during the financial
year. As a result, it says, 'the new management discovered that a donation
of Pounds 100,000 to the Conservative Party made in 1990 was not recorded as
an expense in last year's accounts. The expense is therefore included in
this year's accounts.'
But the issue goes far wider than non-disclosure of a few political
donations and whether these particular companies should be fined.
Governments over the years have placed increasing emphasis on the provision
of information in annual reports outside the scope of the accounts and
therefore beyond the scrutiny of an auditor.
Some impinge directly on the financial affairs of the company, including the
requirements for a review of the business and its future developments,
expenditure on research and development, post-balance sheet events, and the
directors interests including share options. Others are designed to reflect
wider social concerns and objectives, like policies on employee
participation, the disabled and health and safety at work - as well as
donations.
There is no sign of the demands for this type of information drying up. Even
in Tuesday's budget proposals, the chancellor called for large companies'
annual reports to publish details of how quickly they pay their bills, to
give potential suppliers warnings of late payers. These figures will
presumably become yet another new section in the directors' report.
It may be that shareholders and others with interests in or knowledge of a
company should be more vigilant about the information they are given.
Perhaps auditors should be required to examine the directors' report in more
detail, or the government should institute spot checks to verify the
figures. What is the point of requiring more information to be disclosed if
no one checks on its quality?

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920312

