FT922-13492

FT  11 APR 92 / UK Company News: Chelsea football club may face winding-up
order


   By JANE FULLER


CABRA ESTATES, the heavily-indebted property company, has warned that
Chelsea football club may be wound up as part of its efforts to force the
club either to buy its west London ground or leave it.
Chelsea did not come up with the Pounds 22.85m purchase price for the
Stamford Bridge ground by Thursday's deadline, set as part of a contract
backed by recent High Court and Court of Appeal rulings. The club has said
it intends to appeal to the House of Lords, but Cabra said yesterday this
did not entail delaying the completion date.
If a winding up order is granted, a court-appointed liquidator would sell
Chelsea's assets, including players, to pay off creditors of which Cabra is
the largest.
However, negotiations have continued on the sale of SB Property, the
subsidiary that owns Stamford Bridge, to Chelsea. It is understood that Mr
John Duggan, Cabra's chairman, will meet Mr Ken Bates, Chelsea's chairman,
on Sunday. Both sides were making positive noises yesterday about the
possibility of a deal being struck.
Early this week Cabra turned down an offer from Chelsea which was believed
to include the payment of up to Pounds 13m cash and the settlement of
inter-company debt. One sticking point has been that Cabra was not convinced
that Chelsea had access to sufficient funds to do a deal. Yesterday, it said
there was some indication that the money might be available.
Another possible route to a deal would involve Chelsea paying, say, Pounds
13m cash and relieving Cabra of its obligation to pay Fulham football club
roughly Pounds 8m to leave its Cravan Cottage ground to clear the way for
redevelopment. Both Fulham and Chelsea have said they would be happy to
share the Stamford Bridge ground.
The relationship between Mr Bates and Cabra has been complicated by his
Pounds 3m purchase of a 29.6 per cent stake in the property company, through
an investment vehicle called Vanbrugh. This has enabled him to call for an
extraordinary general meeting, notice of which is due to go out to
shareholders next week. One of the EGM proposals is to oust Mr Duggan as
chairman.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920411

