FT921-15241

FT  11 JAN 92 / Russia threatens to halt interest payments on debt


   By JOHN LLOYD, ROBERT PESTON and DAVID WALLER


   MOSCOW, LONDON, FRANKFURT


RUSSIA shocked western bankers yesterday when it announced that it wanted a
deferral of interest payments on Dollars 84bn (Pounds 46bn) of debt owed by
the former Soviet Union to commercial banks and western governments.
Mr Georgy Matiukhin, chairman of the Russian central bank, said Russia would
seek the deferral when it met a steering committee representing commercial
banks in Frankfurt on Tuesday.
The committee, chaired by Mr Christian Vonz of Germany's Deutsche Bank, has
calculated that the Commonwealth of Independent States would have to find
Dollars 6bn in order to pay debt commitments from the beginning of December
1991 to the end of March. 'They would need to find Dollars 18bn for the
whole of 1992,' a banker added.
The commonwealth groups 11 of the 15 republics of the former Soviet Union.
Russia has assumed responsibility for most former Soviet debt.
A committee member said he was disappointed that Mr Matiukhin should have
aired the matter in public before talking to the committee. 'The
commonwealth has said nothing to us directly on deferring interest
payments,' he added.
Bankers are unlikely to agree to a formal moratorium on interest payments.
'That would be highly unusual,' a banker said. However, in practice banks
may have no choice.
A German banker said he was surprised at the threat to suspend interest
payments, given that only last week the commonwealth reached an agreement
with 17 creditor nations to suspend principal payments on official debt.
'There was no suggestion then of a problem on interest payments,' he said.
Mr Matiukhin said that, if foreign banks and governments did not understand
the Russian position, it would have to 'declare our Vnesheconombank
bankrupt'. The former Soviet foreign trade bank has been taken over by
Russia.
His comments underscore the gravity of the situation confronting Russian
authorities, struggling to stabilise finances in the face of falling
revenues, trade and currency wars between the republics and rising
inflation.
German banks have the biggest exposure to former Soviet debt. They are owed
more than Dollars 20bn, although only an estimated Dollars 5bn is uninsured
against loss by official agencies. The Bank of England calculates that UK
clearing banks and Moscow Narodny Bank - based in London but owned by the
commonwealth - are owed Dollars 3.5bn, of which Dollars 3bn is insured by
the UK Export Credits Guarantee Department.
Page 2
Kazakhs threaten to form their own forces
Ex-Soviet republics agree to cut arms

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920111

