FT923-10782

FT  29 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Bush backs Nafta despite widespread public
opposition


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT Bush yesterday defended the planned North American free trade
agreement (Nafta) between the US, Canada and Mexico, saying he would not
'back down' in face of widespread public opposition and Democratic demands
for changes in the proposed draft.
'Trust me to do what is right for America and what's right for the future,'
he said. Speaking at the White House before a group of Hispanic businessmen,
who are expected to support Nafta, Mr Bush said agreement was very close,
but 'nobody is going to turn this one into a political football'.
Clearly, that is what is happening. On Monday, the Democrats began a
co-ordinated assault on the proposed pact on grounds the current draft did
not protect workers and environment enough.
Congressman Richard Gephardt, House majority leader, warned the
administration to write strong protective clauses into the pact and set up a
specific funding mechanism (he proposed a cross-border tax) for worker
retraining. Otherwise Congress would write it into the implementing
legislation.
Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee who portrays
himself as 'an agent of change', supported Mr Gephardt's position, urging 'a
new course' in trade agreements, rejecting 'the outdated rhetoric' of both
free traders and protectionists.
Senator Max Baucus, chairman of the Senate trade subcommittee, called on the
administration to slow the pace of the talks to ensure adequate
environmental protections were included. Senator Lloyd Bentsen, influential
chairman of the Senate finance committee, yesterday said any agreement 'must
be accompanied by a firm commitment to take appropriate steps to deal with
 .worker retraining, environment protection and border infrastructure'.
Mrs Carla Hills, US trade representative, defended the agreement but
acknowledged 'we'll have a heck of a sell' in explaining Nafta's merits to
the US people at a time of high unemployment. But she strongly opposed as
'bad economic policy' a cross-border tax. The trilateral talks restart in
Washington today.
Progress had been made in cars and agriculture, she said, but 'gaps'
remained in both areas and in the investment, services and market access
sectors. Mexico is reported to have withdrawn its insistence on continued
protection for its car and car parts industries beyond 10 years. Mrs Hills
said a final deal could come in the next 10 days. But getting a
notification, including private sector reports, to Congress, would take some
time.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920729

