FT921-12057

FT  29 JAN 92 / Business and the Environment: Tourists urged to tread green
path


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


Those striving for the label of Environmental Correctness should spend their
summer holidays in Benidorm rather than hiking through the Himalayas.
Taking small groups of tourists to 'unspoilt' destinations can be
environmentally far more damaging than taking hundreds of thousands of
visitors to a resort with a well-developed infrastructure, according to the
environmental charity Ark.
Ark says that the very appeal of 'unspoilt' destinations 'lies in their
ecological fragility: the subliminal sales pitch is 'experience the coral
reefs before they are destroyed'. Destroyed by tourism, that is]'
In any event, 'eco-tourism' to remote destinations accounts for a minute
percentage of holidays taken abroad, Ark says. Anyone thinking of mounting
an environmental campaign aimed at the tourist industry needs to focus on
the holidays taken by the majority of travellers.
Ark is pitching its message at everyone travelling through Manchester
Airport this summer and all 2.5m package tourists flying on Britannia
Airways during 1992. The Britannia passengers will be shown a 90-second
video encouraging them to save water and show some respect for the local
culture of the resort they are about to visit.
Tourists departing from Manchester Airport will be given a glossy magazine
which looks like a holiday brochure, but which asks readers questions such
as whether they have 'ever rolled over luxuriously in the hot sand only to
feel the warm squidgy-ness of old chewing gum welded to your chest?'
The video and glossy magazine are part of a Pounds 75,000 Ark campaign which
is subsidised by Thomson (the UK's largest holiday company and owner of
Britannia Airways), Manchester Airport and the European Commission.
Roisin Orosz, Ark's campaigns director, argues that focusing on
holiday-makers rather than hotel owners or package tour operators is likely
to be the most effective way of making the tourist industry look after the
environment.
'I feel it's not an industry that will respond well to pressure group
tactics. Tourism is a demand-led industry. There is very little
environmental legislation covering tourism, but it will react very fast to
any consumer shift,' she says. If the customers demand facilities more in
keeping with the local environment and culture, the industry will provide
them.
'We have to get tourists on our side. We have to use psychology,
advertising, marketing - all the techniques that are used to get people to
change their attitudes and behaviour. A lot of Spanish resorts are becoming
aware of their tacky image. Without changing it they can see their star
waning.'
An example of the marketing tactics used by Ark is that the glossy magazine
has a cover price of 40p. Nobody will be asked to pay for the publication;
Ark simply believes if that people think they are getting magazines of some
value for nothing the publications are less likely to be thrown away at the
airport or holiday resorts. Later this year Ark plans to begin distributing
a children's activity pack on the environment.
A further plan is for a national opinion poll on tourists' attitudes towards
the areas they are visiting. The poll will not deal directly with
environmental issues. Instead, it will try to assess travellers' perceptions
of the cultures of the countries in which they take their holidays.
The thinking behind the poll is that the more tourists understand and
appreciate the places they visit the more likely they are to want to
preserve the natural, cultural and architectural environment. 'There is a
fear about holidays which makes us want to recreate our own culture when we
go abroad,' Orosz says.
She believes, however, that the more people travel, the more secure they
feel and the readier they are to involve themselves in cultures other than
their own. 'Tourists have come of age. Simply going abroad is not enough
anymore,' she says.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920129

