FT923-6529

FT  24 AUG 92 / Management: Redefining the three Rs - American employers are
becoming more demanding of their workers


   By JOHN GAPPER


Two things are clear in the debate over the quality of American workers. The
first is that employers are worried about the abilities of their employees;
the second is that they are not sure what is wrong. 'They do not know what
the hell they are talking about. That's the problem,' says Arnold Packer,
director of a government inquiry into the skills that employers demand from
workers.
Even employers agree with that criticism. 'Most employers are not very
sophisticated about what they want from workers. They only know it when they
see it,' says Renee Lerche, Ford's manager of employee development.
Corporations complain of a range of problems from literacy and numeracy, to
poor reasoning ability, and difficulty in working in teams.
Such complaints are not prompted by falling skills standards among
employees. The young workers about whom employers worry have on average
achieved more at school than those they accepted without complaint in the
1970s. Average scores in the Scholastic Aptitude Test for school-leavers
rose in the 1980s after falling in the previous two decades. The problem
comes from changing employer demands. Two trends in skill demands can be
distinguished:
One trend is a growth in demand for more highly-educated workers - in
particular a boom in middle-level technician jobs such as paralegals (legal
assistants) and medical technicians. There is expected to be a 76 per cent
growth in the number of paralegal jobs in the US between 1985 and the turn
of the century.
Stephen Barley of Cornell University says this shift is caused partly by
aspects of managerial work being given to technical support workers, and
partly by mechanisation in plants and offices. This cuts the number of
low-skilled jobs but requires more technicians to supervise machines. Most
of these new technical jobs require further education for a two-year degree
at an institution such as a community college.
A second trend is broader requirements for workers with basic levels of
education. An example is the entrance test for workers at New United Motor
Manufacturing (NUMMI) in Fremont, California. Although NUMMI does not
require assembly workers to have high school diplomas, it tests recruits on
their ability to work together by asking them to take part in mock group
discussions about production problems and planning.
This shift in skill requirements has several strands. One is the increased
need for problem-solving: devolvement of authority to lower levels in
organisations demands greater intellectual skills in entry-level workers. A
second strand involves attitudes. The belief that applicants lacked the
attitude to adapt to the workplace was easily the most common complaint by
employers in a 1990 National Association of Manufacturers survey.
Peter Cappelli, co-director of the National Centre on the Educational
Quality of the Workforce at the University of Pennsylvania, argues that the
requirement for employees to work in teams means that organisations are more
concerned about workers being disciplined and committed to achievement. 'If
you reduce supervision and monitoring, bad work attitudes tend to show up
more clearly,' he says.
Such changing needs for workers with high school education can be seen by
looking at training and re-education programmes run by US companies over the
past five years. Large employers including Polaroid and Digital Equipment
have spent considerable sums upgrading the skills of adult workers. They
have been prompted by both skill shortages, and a tradition of investing in
current workers rather than hiring others.
Such employers have been forced to define more precisely what they now want
from workers. This has happened at Polaroid's camera assembly plant in
Norwood, Massachusetts. Two hundred and twenty assembly line workers there
have just completed courses in reading, writing and arithmetic.
Many of the workers involved in what Polaroid calls the hardware apprentice
programme are first generation immigrants from Haiti or the Cape Verdean
islands. The change in work organisation required them to work happily
together and take responsibility for quality control on their section.
Managers estimate the jobs now require formal education probably only
equivalent to the sixth grade level - the standard of an intelligent
12-year-old.
Yet Polaroid believes it would have been impossible to ask the employees to
work successfully in teams and solve basic assembly problems if they had not
taken the lessons. Jim Mahoney, the plant's manufacturing manager, says the
assembly line job in its new form needs workers to make presentations and
participate in team meetings. 'Without the education, it would simply have
been a waste of time to send them on team-building courses,' he says.
Acquanetta Farrell, Polaroid's director of technology readiness, argues that
public schools are now failing to prepare students for even the most basic
jobs. 'In the classroom, they are told to sit down, fold their hands and
shut up. Then when they leave we suddenly ask them to work together in teams
and participate in making things run,' she says.
Digital Equipment has had a similar experience at its software manufacturing
plant in Westminster, Massachusetts. As part of a switch to team working,
employees from engineers to shopfloor workers have been offered re-education
in the past four years. The company believes the gains from this are hard to
quantify, but it has improved quality and output at the same time as cutting
the workforce from 830 to 690.
'People have much more confidence and sense of self-control and leadership,'
says Barbara Sinisgalli, the plant planning and development manager. She
argues that there is a strong correlation between the level of education and
the ability to work with other people and contribute to innovation and
quality improvement.
The result of experiments such as those at Polaroid and Digital is that many
US corporations are now questioning whether US high schools could provide
better basic education for work. Employers in some school districts have
started trying to define better the requirements of new jobs. Fort Worth
Independent School District in Texas has carried out extensive job analyses
in local companies to find out what pupils should be taught.
The biggest federal effort has been the Secretary's Commission on Achieving
Necessary Skills (Scans) inquiry, headed by Packer, which issued its final
report in April. The inquiry concluded that employees now had to have the
ability to work with others and analyse information, in addition to basic
thinking and reading skills. It found that teaching methods in most US
schools were ill-suited to produce these new abilities.
Packer argues that the broader range of skills needed by employers means
workers need to be taught how to analyse and debate in high school, and not
just in colleges. But he does not underestimate the size of the challenge
this presents to educators. 'We are asking everyone to re-examine something
they thought was settled long ago,' he says.
The author is a Harkness Fellow of the Commonwealth Fund, New York. This is
the second in a series of articles on US education and training. The first
appeared on August 17

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920824

