FT922-4433

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (10): Catalogue of absurdities -
Patti Waldmeir visits a Karoo town where race is a tortured subject


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


CARNARVON, at midday, is a bleak and blighted place. On the hot pavements of
this remote Karoo town - set in what novelist Alan Paton describes so
evocatively as 'a semi-desert land of space and freedom, of heat and rock
and thorn' - jobless Coloured (mixed-race) labourers idle away the day, in
listless conversation.
White matrons pass them, dressed in the outdated fashions of South Africa's
rural heartland, before entering the cool interior of the Middle Karoo
Co-operative or the Multisave grocery. With the practiced evasion taught by
apartheid, they ignore the glances directed at them from pavement and kerb.
The new South Africa will be a long time coming to Carnarvon.
'In an area like this, I don't see how apartheid can be removed, because
people are so far apart,' says Dominee Arnie Leeuwenink, pastor of the Dutch
Reformed Mission Church, which administers to the town's coloured
population. Like every other institution in South Africa, the church has
separate branches for whites, coloureds and blacks. In Carnarvon, the white
and coloured churches are almost side by side: the coloured church (which
serves a population of 7,500) is cramped and tiny, dwarfed by the solid
edifice which serves the 800 whites.
Pastor Leeuwenink, who is white, tells a sad tale of racism in Carnarvon.
Though the church has decided in principle to integrate, he speaks wistfully
of a plan for a joint choral evening, which never seems to get off the
ground, and notes that when a few coloured students visited the white church
last year, some parishioners left in outrage to join a white-separatist
splinter church. Pastor Leeuwenink and his wife are shunned by most of the
town's whites, because they occasionally dine with their coloured
parishioners; he was detained for 45 days in 1986 as a 'communist'.
Indeed, the history of Carnarvon provides a catalogue of apartheid
absurdities rivalled by few towns in South Africa. Unusually for the Karoo,
which was originally populated by light-skinned Bushmen and Hottentots,
Carnarvon was founded as an African town, settled by Xhosa tribesmen from
the Eastern Cape.
History is flexible here: some say they were rewarded with farms at
Carnarvon because they fought on the side of white settlers in the Eastern
Cape, others that they were sent thousands of kilometres away to the Karoo
to get rid of them. Local historians also disagree on how the African
farmers lost their land: either it was stolen from them by whites, or they
sold it because they failed to farm it profitably.
Either way, Carnarvon started out as a town of whites and Africans. Yet
there is no African township in Carnarvon today: indeed, thanks to
apartheid's lunatic system of race classification, there are no Africans.
There are only Coloureds, the mixed-race group which is one rung above the
African on the apartheid ladder; coloureds live in better houses, go to
better schools and receive higher state pensions than Africans.
This is not due to wild miscegenation between Carnarvon's whites and
Africans (though illegal inter-racial sex was not uncommon). It resulted
from the actions of Mr Andries Boezak (sic), grandfather of anti-apartheid
campaigner Allan Boesak, who was charged with registering births in the
local magistrate's office. Mr Boezak, an educated man who captained the
Carvarvon cricket team in the days before apartheid, wilfully reclassified
blacks as coloureds, with no racial basis for the decision, to flout
apartheid and to ensure that the blacks of Carnarvon were not deported (as
millions were from the rest of South Africa) to a new Xhosa homeland in the
Transkei.
So when residential segregation was introduced in the 1950s, Carnarvon had
only white and coloured areas - there were no blacks, so there was no black
township. But even this threw up its own anomalies: for there was one
prominent family of Indian shopkeepers in town, but no Indian residential
area.
Apartheid deemed that the only solution was to force the Ahmed family to
move several hundred kilometres to the nearest Indian settlement. They
fought the decision in the courts, and were granted an indefinite permit to
reside in a coloured area. They outwitted apartheid, and went on to buy most
of the retail businesses in town, including that bastion of Afrikaner
business, the Middle Karoo Co-operative. And, as a final ironic twist, young
Goolam Ahmed recently purchased a homestead outside Carnarvon from a farmer
who left town to join an all-white colony nearby.
Against that background, it is small wonder that race is such a tortured
subject in Carnarvon. Integration has finally begun: since residential
segregation was abandoned last year, some 15-20 coloured families have
bought houses in the former white area. But the move was driven by
economics, not a spirit of reconciliation: the dwindling white community,
which has lost jobs due to recession and drought, could provide no buyers
for the homes, which sold at R20,000-R30,000, a fraction of their former
value.
The municipal swimming pool, too, is no longer segregated - though locals
disagree on why it is not in use. Mayor Hennie Jacobs says there is no
water; township residents believe there is a more sinister reason.
Young Koos, a coloured township activist, concedes that residential
segregation has gone, but says inter-racial relations remain the same. 'The
heart of the Boer (Afrikaner) must change,' he insists.
That, says Dominee Leeuwenink, may take a long time. 'South Africa without
apartheid will definitely be a better place, but the damage done by
apartheid is so great that it may not seem so,' he says regretfully. 'It's
like the Israelites looking back and saying it was better to be slaves in
Egypt. There's a lot of moving through the desert yet to come.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

920605

