FT922-478

FT  27 JUN 92 / The Long View: Botching the insurance job


   By BARRY RILEY


ONE DAY soon you may get a shock when you find you cannot renew your
insurance at any price. It has happened to a lot of people already, though
maybe not down your street.
This week, uncharacteristically, the dull business of insurance has been
making headlines. Lloyd's of London duly declared its much-leaked loss of
just over Pounds 2bn for the 1989 three-year account. Not to be outdone, the
companies which make up the membership of the Association of British
Insurers declared an aggregate 1991 trading loss of Pounds 3.3bn on general
insurance; in the UK last year insurance companies paid out Pounds 1.30 in
claims and expenses for every Pounds 1 of premiums.
As a reflex action, insurance men argue that premiums must rise. Yet it does
not appear that slow premium growth is really the problem, for premiums
climbed by 18 per cent in the UK last year.
The other solution to the problem is that claims should fall. Indeed they
should, say the insurers, and they present the problem in terms of fraud,
which will be highlighted in a forthcoming advertising campaign. That
conveniently, they hope, shifts the blame on to the policyholders rather
than the insurers. But it seems to me that the role of insurance must be
more fundamentally questioned.
We come here to the problem of moral hazard. This is not just a question of
the dodgy repairman's 'insurance job' on to which all kinds of extras are
loaded, or the attitude of the Scottish freezer-owner - unkindly singled out
by the ABI - who claimed for 93lb of ruined food when the freezer in
question would only hold 45lb.
The influence of insurance is more pervasive. Insured assets are less
carefully looked after. Consumers have filled up their homes with goods and
bought expensive cars on the basis that the risks of theft or fire could be
covered. Parking a car is a little like leaving Pounds 10,000 in cash in the
gutter, protected only by a flimsy lock. Businesses have sunk billions into
often unguarded premises. It has amounted to a huge investment in the raw
material for crime, which indeed has become a growth industry: the BIA says
that domestic crime claims were up 75 per cent in 1991.
Insurers weep crocodile tears at the growth of claims, but the truth is that
in normal circumstances bigger claims lead to a bigger insurance industry -
unless, of course, the claims start getting out of hand. Even worse than
fraudsters, from this point of view, are predatory US lawyers who have
driven up legal settlements beyond the imagination of Lloyd's underwriters.
But then, the insurance industry has never appeared to have a very sure
management touch. I have always wondered at how badly the big listed
composite companies have performed in stock market terms. The composite
insurance sector index has badly underperformed the All-Share Index in the
30 years it has been calculated - only one or two dead-beat sectors like
engineering and motors have done worse over that timespan. And insurance,
remember, is actually a growth business.
Now the insurance industry is trying to impose its own corporate governance
system, featuring apparently out-of-touch chairmen and large numbers of
ineffective non-executive directors, on the rest of British industry. But
the British insurance companies which used to to be world leaders are now
retrenching and struggling; as for Lloyd's, the Continental reinsurance
groups will surely prosper as Lime Street's capacity is savagely cut back.
An important factor in the poor showing of the composites is that the
industry has simply not been able to handle the shift from a cartelised
structure with a rates 'tariff' to a competitive system. Return on capital
has taken a back seat as managers have chased market share. Insurance
companies have hoarded and then squandered shareholders' capital which could
not be profitably invested in the business.
Competition has had another important effect. Whereas with the cartel
cross-subsidy was rife there has subsequently been a chase after good risks
and an ever-increasing segmentation of the market. It has reached the point
where bad risks are being priced out of the market, or perhaps turned away
point blank. If this simply applies to flashy sports cars perhaps little
harm will be done, except to Porsche or Lotus. But in other cases there
could be dangerous social implications. What happens if an old-age pensioner
in an inner city area cannot obtain household cover? And if the government
decides that people should be entitled to drive a car at the age of 17, is
it right that the insurance companies should, through penal loading,
effectively impose an age limit of 25 instead?
If insurance becomes too expensive you have to change your lifestyle. In the
South of France big houses are surrounded by barbed wire and vicious dogs.
Drivers in Italy are forced to remove their car hi-fi units and carry them
around after they have parked. Those American lawyers may have done a
splendid job for their existing clients, and are no doubt now licking their
lips at the prospect of tobacco company suits, but future victims may find
themselves uncovered. Indeed, in some of these corporate liability cases
insurance is almost becoming counterproductive, because lawyers go most
eagerly after the parties that they know have cover.
Perhaps the US is demonstrating the reductio ad absurdum of the insurance
concept. Insurance companies - and poor old Lloyd's Names - have funded the
huge escalation of claims and court awards. It is not yet as bad in the UK.
But insurance companies have got to abandon the idea that they can simply
keep jacking up premiums and they must refine their ideas about what
constitutes an insurable risk.
We may have to learn not to tuck quite so many frozen TV dinners away in the
freezer.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920627

