FT924-6420

FT  21 NOV 92 / Pessimistic companies cut back on investment


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


JAPANESE companies are making deeper than expected cuts in investment as
they become pessimistic about the economic outlook, according to a clutch of
official figures released yesterday.
The Ministry of Trade and Industry reported that a survey of 1,808
businesses in October found investment would fall by 3.9 per cent in the
financial year to next March. A similar survey in March this year forecast
that investment in the following 12 months would fall 1.4 per cent.
Meanwhile the economic planning agency published its closely-watched index
of leading economic indicators, which suggests the economy will contract for
at least another three to six months.
Miti said companies were becoming increasingly cautious about investment as
the economic downturn gathers pace. A big fall in consumption means that
inventories of unsold products are still growing despite deep cuts in
production.
The cuts in investment will be particularly pronounced among manufacturers.
Manufacturing companies expect to cut investment this year by 11.9 per cent.
In the electronics and motor industries the cuts will be about 16 per cent.
In March the companies had forecast an 8.9 per cent cut in manufacturing
investment.
The contraction in investment is gradually spreading to non-manufacturing
sectors such as retailing. Non-manufacturing companies forecast a 1.9 per
cent cut in investment; earlier they forecast a 3.4 per cent increase.
The report said companies were cutting investment in all areas which did not
directly contribute to improvements in short-term profits. Even previously
sacrosanct areas such as research were being cut as well as investment in
labour-saving machinery.
Investment in the next financial year is expected to be a further 1.5 per
cent down on this year, according to the report. However, most companies
said they could not predict their plans because the economic situation was
so uncertain.
Household consumption, especially of consumer goods such as electronics, is
still stagnant, according to a household spending survey. Spending rose 0.8
per cent in September from the same month last year, according to a survey
by the Management and Co-ordination Agency.
Despite the recent pick-up in housing starts, sales of household items such
as electrical appliances were 11.6 per cent down on last year, while
spending on transport and communication was 10 per cent lower.
However, Japanese families are still spending heavily on what they regards
as necessities, such as their children's education, which enjoyed a 14.5 per
cent rise in expenditure.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921121

