FT924-11439

FT  26 OCT 92 / Salomon urges KIO to find partner


   By PETER BRUCE


   MADRID


THE KUWAIT Investment Office (KIO) has no legal obligation to support its
troubled industrial holdings in Spain, according to a report to the KIO by
Salomon Brothers, the US investment bank.
The KIO has since acted on the report, opting for a form of restructuring
for its Spanish holding company, Grupo Torras, but ignoring a central
suggestion that it should bring in a part-er for Torras, or liquidate it.
Salomon said that 'considering that KIO is not a management company . . . if
KIO is unable to find a suitable partner who can progressively take control
. . . over time the group should be eliminated.'
The report is one of a series of investigations initiated by the new
management at the KIO in an increasingly acrimonious effort to discover how
Dollars 4bn invested by the KIO in Spain since the mid-1980s was managed by
their predecessors.
Salomon said that at June 30 this year, Grupo Torras had a negative net
worth of Pta58.06bn (Dollars 430.3m). The report outlined three possible
strategies for Torras: Bankruptcy and receivership, which would cost the KIO
Pta70bn;
Maintaining the group (except Ercros chemicals and Bures textiles) which
would cost Pta163bn in new cash and Pta153bn in loan conversions;
Restructuring, under which Bures and the Prima property group would receive
no support and some smaller companies would be sold. This would cost
Pta116bn in new cash and loan conversions of Pta151bn.
Torras has opted for the third strategy. Although it is ignoring Salomon's
advice to find a partner for the holding company, Torras is looking for
partners for Torraspapel, a paper company, and the Ebro foods group.
Debt to KIO is being converted into equity and about Pta40bn is being pumped
into Torraspapel.
Salomon Brothers said it was clear that 'in many instances very high prices
were paid for the acquisition of the businesses (in the Torras portfolio) -
such that economic returns were probably never possible in these cases.'
Prima 'cannot continue to operate in its present form because it is
financially insolvent and has no net worth.' Details, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921026

