FT921-1355

FT  25 MAR 92 / Azeris are on move towards war footing


   By REUTER


   BAKU


AZERBAIJAN, rocked by setbacks in its fight with Armenia, moved yesterday
towards putting itself on a war footing to retake the disputed enclave of
Nagorno-Karabakh, Reuter reports from Baku.
Azerbaijan's new leadership, backed by the nationalist opposition, told an
emergency session of parliament that only militarising the entire society
could reverse the republic's declining fortunes inside Nagorno-Karabakh.
It demanded special powers to subordinate industrial production and fiscal
policy in the former Soviet republic of 7m people to the creation of a
20,000-man army capable of re-establishing control over the predominantly
Armenian-populated enclave.
'All plants and enterprises must go on to a military regime,' the acting
president, Mr Yagub Mamedov, told legislators. 'We must be strict and demand
discipline in the republic. This is the only way to repel the aggressors.'
The ministers of defence and interior affairs echoed that call. Others
sounded the alarm for a witchhunt, demanding the names of officials
responsible for recent setbacks in the field.
'No state in which there is no discipline can win a war. All the mechanisms
of state must work for victory,' said Mr Tair Aliyev, the interior minister,
a former deputy police chief in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Parliament was later to consider a proposal by the opposition Popular Front
to abolish the presidency and create a coalition government with the former
communists. Under the plan, security policy would be completely in the
Front's hands.
Mr Mamedov said talk of military preparations did not mean Azerbaijan was
insisting on a military solution. Iran, Turkey, the United Nations and other
international bodies are pursuing a political settlement.
But the message from the provisional government was clear. Any talks had to
be held from a position of strength. 'We must all concentrate on the
creation of a national army. Now, this is question number one,' Mr Mamedov
said.
His predecessor was forced out largely for failing to create an adequate
armed force capable of protecting the Azeri minority in Nagorno-Karabakh.
That policy exploded last month with the capture by Armenian irregulars of
the strategic Azeri-populated town of Khojaly. Baku says more than 1,000
Azeri civilians were slaughtered, a charge Armenia dismisses as wildly
exaggerated.
Whatever the number, it is clear that Mamedov and his allies are determined
not to make the same mistake.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

920325

