FT922-4193

FT  06 JUN 92 / Books: Blues in the Pacific


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


TRANSIT OF VENUS: TRAVELS IN THESOUTH PACIFIC by Julian Evans Secker &
Warburg Pounds 16.99, 277 pages
PILGRIM OF THE VOID by Kenneth White Mainstream Pounds 14.99, 254 pages
PRE-publication hype is getting more and more serious. Nowadays, books have
to be garlanded with pre-pub quotes. You know the sort: 'The best book on
Corgi breeding I have ever read' - Queen Elizabeth II; 'A wonderful
introduction to developing your personality. Invaluable bedtime reading' -
John Major.
The pre-pub quote that accompanies Transit of Venus is from Norman Lewis, no
less. Lewis is in the premier division of travel writers. 'Transit of Venus
is the best book about the South Seas I have ever read. Julian Evans is the
Robert Louis Stevenson of the post-nuclear Pacific,' he says.
Post-nuclear Pacific? Robert Louis Stevenson? Mid-way through the book, I
thought that Lewis had flipped; by the end, I was happily changing my mind,
for Julian Evans builds his story well and is a meticulous, vivid writer -
reminiscent of Lewis himself.
Evans starts in Sydney. He goes to New Caledonia, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga,
Tuvalu, Kiribati and finally the Marshall Islands, including the military
base at Kwajalein and the island ghetto of Kili. By the time he reaches the
Marshalls he is close to despair, and little wonder. In the Marshalls,
everyone sleeps with everyone, gets syphilis, gets treated, sleeps with
everyone else again.
The Marshallese, says Evans, do not see the point of contraception, so the
president had imported 15m tonnes of California's domestic garbage to create
lagoon landfills - 'a brilliantly simple scheme in which the government
would be paid Dollars 140m by grateful waste disposal companies and
potentially end up doubling the land area of Majuro island . . . in 10 years
time he would be able to say he was president of the biggest garbage dump in
the Pacific.' This is a bleak book. Robert Louis Stevenson or not, Evans is
honest and shrewd: a first-rate reporter.
Pilgrim of the Void is not an easy read, but perhaps the fault is mine.
Kenneth White, says his publisher, was born in Glasgow, settled in France in
1967 and holds the chair of 20th century poetics at the Sorbonne. He has won
prizes, and is an expert on post-modernity, but can't be all bad.
Pilgrim of the Void starts in Hong Kong, moves to Macao and Taiwan, then
Thailand and Japan. Here is a typical passage (the author is taking a train
from Kowloon to Shatin, to visit the 10,000 Buddha Temples): 'There was a
little beauty in the carriage, one of these beauties that grace South China,
only 16 years old, the kind of girl described in the beautiful Cantonese
phrase ham bao doi fong (flower blossom waiting open). Ah yes, lovely,
perfect loveliness - ni ho lei, little girl, ni ho lei, ni ho lei], shall I
say it a hundred times under my breath, like a prayer?' Either this is a
reasonably good travel book, or else a load of tosh. I expect I read it too
quickly. I will now read it slowly.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920606

