FT924-12211

FT  22 OCT 92 / World Trade News: US airlines threaten to sue over BA deal


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


THE three biggest US airlines yesterday threatened legal action if the Bush
administration approved British Airways' Dollars 750m acquisition of a 44
per cent stake in USAir without securing greater access for US carriers into
the UK market.
The warning reflected growing concern on the part of American Airlines,
United Airlines and Delta Air Lines that Washington is seeking a hasty
agreement with the UK over a new aviation pact to clear the way for the
BA-USAir deal.
The US carriers say the BA deal breaches foreign ownership rules for US
airlines by giving BA virtual control of USAir. BA has vigorously defended
its proposed deal, insisting it complies with all US regulations.
Mr Stephen Wolf, chairman of United Airlines, was expected to voice his
concerns to Mr Andrew Card, the US transportation secretary, who held talks
with Mr John MacGregor, UK transport secretary, in London yesterday.
The US government is understood to be keen to reach an agreement with the UK
during this round of talks.
The US appears to have moved closer to the UK position by agreeing to phase
in open skies between the two countries.
The big US airlines argue that their government should first secure a
balanced open skies agreement with the UK before allowing BA to invest in
USAir.
'The issue is not that we oppose the BA deal: all we want are the same
benefits which BA will be getting,' a US airline official said.
The preferred solution for the big three US carriers is for immediate and
total liberalisation of air services between the UK and US. But in the event
of a phased liberalisation, the US carriers also want the BA-USAir
transaction to be phased.
This would involve imposing limits on the deal which would be gradually
lifted as liberalisation increases in the US-UK airline market.
The US airlines are also calling for the removal of restrictions on access
to London Heathrow airport in last year's bilateral agreement; the same code
sharing ticketing facilities which BA gained in the 1991 agreement; and
rejection of a UK proposal to establish a dispute procedure in any new
liberalised aviation regime which the US regards as another effort to
re-regulate the market.
The US carriers have also been worried by a US government offer to allow BA
rights to operate services from the US to third countries.
Despite the lobbying from the big three US carriers, the Bush administration
appears intent on resolving the BA issue before the November 3 election. It
feels the deal could help secure jobs and the future of USAir, the country's
sixth largest carrier.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921022

