FT924-8325

FT  11 NOV 92 / Money Markets: Revised view on rates


   By JAMES BLITZ


DEALERS in the sterling cash market remained firmly convinced yesterday that
there would be a base rate cut before the end of the week, but the view that
it would be in the order of 200 basis points seemed to be losing its
adherents, writes James Blitz.
A cautious correction in the sterling markets was matched in German money
markets, where the December Euromark futures contract fell back 10 basis
points at one stage from its opening level.
Again the market remained convinced that there would be an official cut in
rates, but the scale and timing remained in doubt.
After considerable bullishness in sterling cash on Monday, the market
appeared a good deal more tame yesterday. Six-month money, for example, had
been down at 6 1/2 per cent at the start of yesterday's trading, but soon
firmed back to 6 5/8 per cent. The December short sterling contract slipped
4 basis points to a close of 93.58. Three-month money remained unchanged at
around 7 per cent.
Dealers were more biased towards a smaller rate reduction because of
sterling's fall to a five-year low against the dollar on Monday afternoon.
A front page news story in the Financial Times, suggesting that Mr Norman
Lamont had let it be known that he was not contemplating a 2 per cent rate
cut, was also quoted by traders as a reason why views had been changed.
The cash market again suffered the liquidity problems that accompany
expectations of an imminent rate cut. The Bank of England forecast a
shortage of Pounds 1bn at the start of trading. Only Pounds 123m was removed
in the early round and late assistance was high at Pounds 590m.
In the German market, the December short sterling contract dropped to a low
of 91.42, later rising to a close of 91.45. This roughly assumes that
three-month money will be at around 8.55 per cent by Christmas, some 30
basis points below current levels.
A commercial bank dealer said this probably priced in a drop in the discount
rate, currently at 8.25 per cent, because there must be some margin between
the lower posted rate and market rate.
In the Eurodollar market, a 0.1 per cent rise in the US producer price index
helped to push the December contract up 1 basis point to 96.24 in the late
European afternoon.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

921111

