FT922-4114

FT  06 JUN 92 / Uproar at Earth Summit over US memo leak


   By DAVID LASCELLES and CHRISTINA LAMB


   RIO DE JANEIRO


THE US, already branded as the villain of the Earth Summit, was deeply
embarrassed yesterday by a leaked memorandum to the White House about an
attempt to 'fix' one of the central documents before the conference.
The memo, written by Mr William Reilly, the administrator of the US
Environment Protection Agency and leader of the US delegation, created a
diplomatic uproar and provided stark evidence of the divisions within the US
administration over the summit.
It was sent to the White House in an attempt to persuade the administration
to soften its opposition to a key treaty to protect the 'biological
diversity' of plant and animal life on the planet.
But the language Mr Reilly used, and a reference to the involvement of
Brazil in behind-the-scenes moves, caused it to backfire.
The memo, copies of which were circulated to the press in Rio, begins: 'As I
indicated last night, Brazil has offered to try and fix the biodiversity
convention so that the US could sign it. I have serious doubt whether the
Brazilians can get others to accept a fix, but I have indicated a
willingness to let them try.'
The memo went on to suggest wording that might have been acceptable to the
US. But it also pointed out that the chances of success were remote because
the wording of the treaty had already been agreed. The document was being
signed last night.
Mr Reilly defended the memo as an attempt to explore all possibilities even
though it was unlikely that a fix could be reached before the deadline.
He added: 'It is most unfortunate that someone within our government chose
to leak information about these most important efforts - efforts that
demanded diplomatic discretion.'
Senator Albert Gore, chairman of the US Senate delegation to the conference,
described the debacle as 'unfortunate', and hit out at hardliners in the
Bush administration.
Referring to the White House refusal to agree to Mr Reilly's
recommendations, Mr Gore said: 'Once again, the principal official in charge
of US environmental policy has been overruled and this time the world is
watching.'
The decisions of the executive branch were 'hurting the ability of the US to
provide leadership,' he added.
The incident was also embarrassing for Brazil which, as host, desperately
wants a successful conference. Mr Celso Lafer, the Brazilian foreign
minister, said there had 'never been any attempt at a fix. We have been
having informal contacts with all delegations.'
Now the treaty is being signed, it is too late for further diplomatic
initiatives, even if there is the will.
However, Brazilian President Fernando Collor, who was the first to sign the
treaty, seemed to imply the possibility of a later revision of the
convention, which he described as the first step in a long road. Officials
said there might be a side commitment to revise the treaty at the earliest
opportunity.
Britain and Japan are both expected to sign the treaty next week, leaving
the US isolated in opposition.
The summit broker, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920606

