FT924-12169

FT  22 OCT 92 / Lloyds shifts on companies: Small-business customers to
receive new statement from bank


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


LLOYDS Bank will announce a revised 'contract' with its 350,000
small-business customers today to replace the statement of improved services
it published a year ago.
The bank was criticised by small-business groups for the vagueness of the
document it produced last November, when all the other large banks were
publishing codes of conduct. Lloyds refused to call its initial statement of
principles either a charter or a code.
Next month it will send a contract to each of its small-business customers.
The contract commits the bank to dealing fairly and openly with customers
and promises to provide advance warning of any changes in tariffs and terms
of borrowing.
The Forum of Private Business, a small companies' lobby group, said the
contract represented 'a giant stride towards greater transparency in the
small-business banking relationship'. It awarded the contract 90 points out
of 100, higher than any other bank has attained, which compares with the 33
per cent rating for Lloyds' earlier charter.
The contract states that from the end of next year Lloyds will notify
customers in advance about service charges. It says: 'This means you will be
given a detailed breakdown of any charges before they are deducted from your
account so that you can check them and query anything you do not
understand.' The contract explains the bank's complaints procedure from
branch level up to the banking ombudsman.
Lloyds said it had decided to revise its original statement to 'express our
commitment to our business customers in a more meaningful way'.
Mr Gerry Solomon, senior general manager of UK retail banking, said: 'We
have listened very carefully to comments from customers and small-business
groups in drawing up the new document.'
As well as setting out the bank's commitment to customers, the charter
explains the factors the bank takes into account when calculating interest
rates, and points out the need for customers to provide it with accurate and
up-to-date information on the health of their business.
The banks were urged to produce codes of conduct by Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, after criticism of their failure to cut loan rates in line with
base-rate cuts last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921022

