FT924-8266

FT  12 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Last LME sterling metal prices
to go


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


THE LONDON Metal Exchange yesterday decided to end its tradition of quoting
copper and lead prices in sterling during the twice-daily open outcry
sessions in the 'ring' and in kerb (after hours) trading. From July next
year these metals, like the other five traded on the exchange, will be
quoted in US dollars.
LME members previously had resolutely stood against this change, some
claiming trading in sterling often provided opportunities to make extra
profit from arbitrage and foreign exchange transactions.
However, minds were changed during the recent turmoil in currency markets,
which resulted in the UK's withdrawal from the European Community's exchange
rate mechanism. Dealers complained that trading virtually ground to a halt
at that time because it was impossible to convert sterling prices into
dollars on forward contracts.
After members put on pressure for the change, the LME held a poll. Dealers
said about 70 per cent of those who voted favoured trading copper and lead
in dollars and the LME board voted for the change at yesterday's meeting.
The US currency is already used almost exclusively in inter-office copper
and lead trading.
Mr David King, the LME's chief executive, said talks were going on with
members and industrial users of the exchange to find the right mechanism to
ensure an orderly transition from sterling to dollars.
Yesterday's move inevitably will increase pressure from some members for LME
copper warehouses to be established in the US. They see this as an important
step towards winning more North American copper hedging business away from
the New York Commodity Exchange (Comex). Mr King said, however, that the
currency move had no connexion with any plan to establish LME copper
warehouses in the US and added that this question had not arisen at
yesterday's meeting.
Credit Lyonnais Rouse, part of the Credit Lyonnais banking group of France,
was yesterday accepted as a ring-dealing member of the LME, taking the total
to 17. There were 29 ring-dealing members in 1980 but the numbers have
dropped mainly because of the traumas arising from the 1985 tin crisis,
which at one point threatened the very existence of the LME, but also
through mergers. The exchange recently set up a working group of
non-executive directors to study why most recent entrants have opted for
associate, rather than ring-dealing, membership.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921112

