FT921-4015

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Departmental Government Statements): Mixed
approach to sales of gilts will continue - Bank of England


THIS NOTICE sets out the framework within which the Bank intends to conduct
sales of gilt-edged stock in the year ahead, in accordance with the full
fund objective.
The Budget indicated that there will be an increased contribution to funding
in 1992-93 from the various instruments of National Savings, which will
complement the gilt-edged sales programme.
In parallel, in its operations in the gilt-edged market, the Bank will
continue to utilise the diverse range of instruments and selling techniques
which have enabled funding in that market to be carried forward successfully
in the past year.
As last year, the Bank envisages combining a programme of gilt-edged
auctions with continuing official sales of stock 'on tap' on the secondary
market. The main features of this mixed approach to gilt-edged funding are
described below.
In the past year gilt-edged auctions were held at roughly two-month
intervals through the year.
Experience with these auctions indicates that the auction process is
effective in providing the backbone of funding without creating market
disturbance.
Accordingly, the Bank proposes to continue in the coming year with a similar
programme of auctions.
Each auction may be for an amount of Pounds 2bn-Pounds 3bn (or somewhat
larger if market conditions warrant), and the programme of auctions is
likely to account in total for rather more than half of the total
gilt-funding requirement.
The auctions will be conducted on the same basis as those in the past year
ie stock will be auctioned on a bid-price basis, open to all comers, with
provision for non-competitive bids of up to Pounds 500,000. The stock
offered may be a new stock or an additional tranche of an existing stock and
may be in either fully or partly-paid form. Auctions will extend over the
full maturity range.
This programme of auctions will be combined, as last year, with continuing
sales of stock by the Bank 'on tap' on the secondary market through its
day-to-day operations with the gilt-edged marketmakers.
'Tap' sales may take the form of stock from holdings in the Issue
Department, or of packages of tranchettes (or a single, larger tranche) of
stock created and placed in the Issue Department.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920311

