FT922-7107

FT  20 MAY 92 / Lamont vows to defeat inflation: Government and Bank stress
price stability as centrepiece of economic strategy


   By PETER NORMAN and EMMA TUCKER


THE GOVERNMENT and the Bank of England yesterday served notice that the
battle against inflation, far from being over, would remain the centrepiece
of their economic strategy amid signs that Britain's longest recession since
the 1940s is coming to an end.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, told the annual dinner of the
Confederation of British Industry that Britain should aim to match Japan's
inflation performance, which is around 2 per cent, if it wants to be 'a
first-rank commercial power'.
His theme was echoed in the latest Bank of England quarterly bulletin, which
yesterday warned that there was 'no room for complacency' about the UK's
inflation performance.
The Bank urged the government to take 'firm control of public expenditure'
as part of a strategy for price stability.
The twin warnings from the chancellor and the Bank are a clear signal that
the government intends rigorously to control the pace of Britain's economic
recovery and the fall in interest rates.
The Central Statistical Office disclosed that manufacturing output grew by
0.3 per cent in the first quarter of the year, compared with the previous
quarter, fuelling hopes that the recession might soon be over. The increase
came after six quarters of falling output.
However, overall industrial production, comprising manufacturing and energy
output, fell by 1 per cent in the latest quarter, dragged down by a sharp
drop in energy production during the mild winter.
The decline in overall industrial production will probably mean that first
quarter non-oil gross domestic product figures, due to be published on
Friday, will show a fall for the seventh successive quarter.
However, both the Treasury and the Bank of England were cautiously upbeat
about the economy.
The Treasury said that yesterday's figures suggested that 'the fall in
manufacturing output may have ended and growth will become firmly
established during 1992' while the Bank commented that 'the prospects for
recovery now appear better than for some time'.
In his speech to the CBI, however, Mr Lamont said underlying inflation in
the UK was 'still too high' in spite of the progress made in bringing the
annual rate of retail price inflation down to 4.3 per cent.
He said that sterling's entry into the exchange rate mechanism of the
European Monetary System required a 'sea change in attitudes to inflation in
Britain'. Devaluation was not an option, so high pay increases would
'translate directly into a loss of competitiveness and hence of market
share, profits and jobs'.
In a move that could prove significant in the long term, the chancellor
yesterday ordered the government's retail prices index advisory committee to
review the way housing costs are treatedin the retail prices index. He said
the government:
Aimed to keep downward pressure on inflation by intensifying competition in
the economy. 'We will continue to look to the regulators and increased
competition to bring pressure to bear on privatised industries and keep
prices down,' he said.
'Must put the firm control of public expenditure at the heart of economic
policy'. He warned that public sector pay awards must not be allowed to run
ahead of what was justified by the need to recruit, retain and motivate good
quality public servants.
Was firmly committed to meeting the strict economic convergence criteria of
the Maastricht treaty on economic and monetary union. That would mean firm
budget discipline, membership of the narrow bands of the ERM and bringing UK
inflation and interest rates 'in line with the best in Europe'.
But he appeared to damp expectations that UK rates might fall below those in
Germany. 'Those who argue that we could have had lower interest rates
outside the ERM seem conveniently to forget that only for four months in the
1980s did the UK have lower rates than Germany.'
But the Bank is giving thought to the possibility of UK rates falling below
German levels. This would be likely in the event of German rates rising and
would depend on Britain's counter-inflation policy and commitment to the ERM
parity of DM2.95 enjoying high credibility in markets.
Bank shows optimism, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920520

