FT921-11685

FT  30 JAN 92 / Greenspan sees more growth in second quarter


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE US economy remained flat in the fourth quarter of 1991, but Mr Alan
Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, said he still expected
growth to pick up in the second quarter.
Figures yesterday from the Commerce Department showed that US gross domestic
product grew at an annual rate of 0.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of last
year. During the full year, however, the US economy contracted by 0.7 per
cent, shrinking for the first time in nine years.
Mr Greenspan told Senate banking committee confirmation hearings into his
re-appointment that the economy was not declining, merely flat. He
acknowledged, though, that there was 'no bounce.'
Arguing that lower interest rates were beginning to take effect on the
economy, by allowing consumers and businesses to borrow more cheaply, the
chairman also urged Congress not to indulge in tax cuts or spending
increases that would increase the federal budget deficit.
The estimated annual growth rate of 0.3 per cent in the fourth quarter,
subject to two subsequent revisions, reflected a surge in exports and
greater home construction, offset by weakness in consumer spending and
business investment.
The Commerce Department said personal spending fell at an annual rate of
Dollars 9.0bn in the fourth quarter, having risen by Dollars 18.8bn in the
third; non-residential fixed investment fell by Dollars 3.1bn after a
Dollars 4.8bn drop in the third quarter.
Net exports of goods and services provided most of the buoyancy in the GDP
numbers, having grown at an annual rate of Dollars 22.8bn in the fourth
quarter after a decline by Dollars 18.8bn in the third.
Economists cautioned, however, that the breakneck pace of US export
expansion might be difficult to sustain because of the weakness in many
overseas economies.
Mr Greenspan defended himself for not having acted sooner to stimulate the
economy, warning senators that the Fed was constrained in cutting its own
short-term interest rates by the need to keep long term interest rates down.
He acknowledged the US economy was suffering from 'a severe bout of
disinflation', but said the Fed's decision in December to cut its discount
rate by a full percentage point to 3.5 per cent 'should be sufficient.'
The chairman's comments triggered a sharp fall in US government bond prices,
as investors concluded he was unlikely to lower interest rates further, at
least for several months.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed 47.18 points lower at 3,224.96, on
volume of 247m shares on the New York Stock Exchange. The US Treasury
30-year bond lost more than a point to 102 7/8 , to yield 7.75.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920130

