FT922-4200

FT  06 JUN 92 / Property: American homes with plenty of horse sense / Taking
a canter through Kentucky's blue grass country


   By DAVID HOPPIT


KENTUCKY is famous for its Derby, its bourbon and its wide open countryside,
yet about half of its 3.6m residents live in urban areas. Many are quick to
proclaim with pride that they are within a day's drive of 70 per cent of the
US population.
The Kentucky Derby is the high-point of the year, but it is not only
thoroughbreds that are held in high esteem; Arabs, trotters, quarter horses
and plain, honest-to-goodness Dobbins are cosseted and cared for by doting
owners.
About 35 miles north east of Churchill Downs, where the famous race is run,
a Miami developer named Alec Courtelis has indulged his passion for
'Arabians,' as they call them in Kentucky, by acquiring 5,400 acres of
farmland which should become the centre of the equine universe. He calls it
L'Esprit. It is close to a town called LaGrange, where trains still run
along the main street.
This is the famous 'blue grass' area, so-called because of the tiny blue
flower that colours the grass in early spring. There must be a few blue
chips around here too, for Arab stallions such as Alladin, in the Lasma
centre, the horse-breeding holy of holies, are valued at up to Dollars 20m
(Pounds 11.1m).
The estate is immaculate; 'Dollars 500 fine for littering' proclaims a sign
on the approach road. Even the flowers and brilliant white dogwood seem to
know their place. Some 11 miles of new roads wind through the 70 designated
plots, 123 miles of neat black three and four rail fences surround
well-tended paddocks. (Lucky the man with the creosote contract here.)
L'Esprit is a good place to rear and train horses; it is also one of the
best places to raise a family or to retire - school buses deliver their
charges right to the front gate. In a national survey, the Association of
Retired Persons put this corner of Kentucky among the top places for quality
of life (little crime, plenty of culture, low cost of living).
The 70 plots on L'Esprit vary in size from 10 to 700 acres - they call them
'horse farms' out here. All planning consents have been obtained and all the
'farms' have direct access on to a network of 25 miles of bridleway which
wind through woodland - and past 88 ponds, providing plenty of water for the
paddocks.
Prices of plots in the current phase are between Dollars 80,000 and Dollars
375,000. Building costs, according to the London agents, Pearsons, are about
Dollars 70 a square foot. Thus, a substantial house with swimming pool could
be built for about Dollars 150,000 (Pounds 83,300).
Often the Georgian and colonial style houses appear prosaic beside the grand
homes of the horses: high, black-roofed barns capped with spires and cupolas
to draw fresh air through the building are embellished with arches and
decorative windows.
Although Kentucky has suffered less than most states in the recession,
progress at L'Esprit has not been rapid, and several of the farms are now on
the market. The immense sale ring and facilities are in place, and very
grand they are too, but the training centre, steeplechase track and country
club have still to be built. However, the developer can point to Dollars 30m
'up front' commitment already.
Interest is coming now from beyond the shores of the US, with several buyers
coming from Europe and Canada. Kentucky-born Steven Cauthen, who won the
Derby 14 years ago, is advising the developers.
Buying procedures are simple and inexpensive. Legal costs amount to about
Dollars 5,000. When selling, the local estate agent (realtor) will charge
between 6 and 10 per cent. Annual outgoings include real estate tax (about
Dollars 2 per Dollars 1,000 dollar value) plus local home tax and a charge
of about Dollars 18 a month for garbage collection.
European marketing, by Pearsons of Dover Street, London, will include
promotion at many of Europe's top race meetings this summer, including
today's Oaks, at Epsom, next week's French Oaks at Chantilly and the Irish
Derby at The Curragh.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920606

