FT922-13290

FT  13 APR 92 / A self-righteous orgy of purging the perks: Public anger
over the privileges enjoyed by American government officials


   By JUREK MARTIN


In 1977, when he first came to Washington as President Jimmy Carter's press
secretary, Jody Powell was asked if he intended to have a portable phone
installed in his car, a decrepit VW beetle. 'Nah,' he drawled, 'it couldn't
stand the extra weight,' and everybody laughed.
Nobody is laughing now at the weight that is dragging Washington's name
through the mud. The debate is over whether 'this town' (local cave dwellers
never call it anything else) is so stuffed to the gills with the perquisites
of office that it has lost all touch with the reality that is the lives of
average Americans.
This kind of puritanism is not exactly new. Sherman Adams, President
Eisenhower's right hand, had to resign for accepting a free fur coat; the
G-man himself, J Edgar Hoover, got into deep trouble for having free window
valances installed; and the fall of John Sununu, President Bush's White
House chief of staff, was pretty much determined when it became known last
year that he used government aircraft as lesser mortals might taxis.
Some administrations have tried to set an honourable example. Mr Carter, for
example, stipulated economy-class air travel. But the sight of Paul Volcker,
the then chairman of the Federal Reserve, miserably curling his
six-and-a-half-foot frame into a back seat, unlit stogie in hand, while on
missions to save the dollar did not have the desired effect. Others have not
even bothered; the 'sleaze factor' was notorious in the Teflon Reagan years,
even to the point of the First Lady soliciting contributions for the upkeep
of her ballgowns.
But this year the unpopularity of 'this town' in the nation knows no bounds.
Add to this some vicious election-season partisan politics and there emerges
the extraordinary spectacle of a self-righteous orgy of purging the perk. It
should be funny, and sometimes is, if it were not taken quite so seriously.
Congress is the most defensive because it has seemed to be the main
offender, as anyone listening to a radio phone-in programme realises within
three minutes. In the wake of revelations that the House bank never bounced
cheques, and of charges that its post office delivered cocaine more
efficiently than letters, all the little things that make the congressional
life a touch easier are under scrutiny. They include subsidised restaurants,
hair cuts and gymnasia, free potted plants and subscription drugs, gratis
parking at the Capitol and at local airports, the fixing of any tickets, and
wholesale price gifts and knick-knacks.
In the aggregate, and excepting the abuse of the House bank, they do not
appear to amount to anything that is not commonly provided for executives in
the corporate sector, including the media. But abuses have inevitably
occurred; last year, for example, it emerged there were Dollars 300,000 in
unpaid bills owing at the House restaurants, which is a little steep for a
canteen.
Any increase in the salaries of Congress, which decides its own pay,
invariably invites public criticism. At Dollars 129,500 a year now, these
are not bad by national standards, except that many members have to support
homes both in Washington and their own constituencies, which explains why
this year an abnormal number are retiring to go out and make real money. The
lobbyists and lawyers with whom they routinely mingle in this town are
usually paid a lot more.
Tom Foley, speaker of the House, finally decided he had had enough of these
assaults on an institution he loves so much. His counter-attack is that
people in glass houses (Republicans and the White House, not, of course, the
public) should not throw stones. He chose not to stoop so low as to take
away the free car from his chief congressional tormentor, Newt Gingrich, the
Republican whip (at least not yet, though if Mr Gingrich goes on much more
about 'institutional corruption' he will be lucky to find a rack for his
bicycle). But in ordering an investigation into the perks enjoyed by the
executive branch it looks as though he does not intend to spare even the
president.
Mr George Bush's perks are not insubstantial, as a recent Washington Post
article pointed out. They run to a Dollars 7.26m annual operating budget for
the White House itself, covering nearly 100 domestic employees - including
five florists, spending Dollars 200,000 a year on displays, and five
calligraphers, presumably deciphering the presidential scrawl. There is also
in the official residence a bowling alley, cinema, swimming pool, putting
green (Vice-President Dan Quayle recently had a high-tech version with
variable breaks installed in his mansion), tennis courts, a basketball court
and a horseshoe pit; and a free box at the Kennedy Centre for the performing
arts.
There is Camp David and there is, of course, Air Force One (there are
actually two of them, specially modified Boeing 747s) and a constant supply
of helicopters, which is the most seductive of all. When asked what he would
miss most on ceasing to be president, Lyndon Johnson wordlessly waved an arm
at the helicopter pad on the White House lawn.
Mr Foley's more tangible target is the staff of the executive branch and
indeed it appears that, outside the cabinet, senior officials enjoy a range
of privileges pretty similar to those of Congress. Among them is the
provision of home-to-office limousine services for nine White House
heavyweights. Unfortunately for Mr Foley, it transpired that this privilege
had been authorised (surprise, surprise) by Congress itself.
Also under the gun are frequent flyer programmes. Congress last year
specifically allowed its members and staff to use mileage accrued on
official business for their personal use, on the grounds, possibly now
questionable, that this was the norm in the private sector. The executive
branch, it appears, has no policy governing frequent flying and, if it had,
you can be sure Mr Sununu would have used it to the hilt. Congress, however,
has been obliged to put limits on the outside income its members may earn in
honoraria; curiously, a federal judge last month ruled that the ban on civil
servants supplementing their incomes in this way was unlawful.
This fixation with perks, while the stuff of good 'n' dirty politics,
completely misses the point. There is something wrong with the governance of
America, but it is not simply because those who govern have grown fat and
greedy. The root causes are complex, but must include the unrealistic
personal standards asked of public figures and the decline in the
controlling influence of the two main parties. The two have led to the
absence of leaders of quality and a fragmentation of the body politic.
As Senator Warren Rudman, the New Hampshire Republican, explained when he
bowed out last month, the system is not working and real issues are being
ducked. If it were, and they were not, no one would be wailing over free
potted plants and floral displays.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920413

