FT922-7334

FT  19 MAY 92 / World Trade News: Denmark-Sweden ferry link-up is agreed


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


THE European Commission yesterday cleared a link-up between ferry companies
operating a busy short sea-crossing between Denmark and Sweden, but promised
to watch the companies' pricing policy on the service.
It is the first time Brussels has ruled on such a case in the ferry
industry, using special rules on the application of EC competition law to
the sector.
The precedent will be examined by main operators on other short-sea routes,
for example, Sealink Stena Line and P&O, across the English Channel. In
March, the UK Department of Trade and Industry refused to let P&O merge its
Dover-Calais services with those of Sealink, ahead of Channel tunnel
competition.
The Commission said it would allow Danske Statsbaner and Statens Jarnvager,
the Danish and Swedish rail and ferry monopolies, to pool their ferry
operations with those of Scandinavian Ferry Lines on the crossing between
Helsingor, north of Copenhagen, and Helsingborg, Sweden.
Brussels found the agreement would curb competition between the companies,
but said the disadvantages would be outweighed by travellers having a more
frequent service on new, large-capacity ferries, with lower costs. The
Commission will monitor the joint services to check savings are reflected in
prices.
Brussels argued the companies were competing not only with one another on
the Helsingor-Helsingborg crossing, but with ferries on other routes between
Germany, Denmark and Sweden. Under the original agreement, they would
automatically have operated joint services on new routes between Sweden and
Denmark, but to avoid future curbs on competition, the trio have been forced
to drop that clause.
The Commission said its decision only referred to the supply of ferry
services, not touching on the market for harbour services, which are often
provided by ferry operators and could be used to restrict competition from
competing ferry companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920519

