FT922-7317

FT  19 MAY 92 / Lloyd's agents may back plan to help Names


   By RICHARD LAPPER


SUPPORT for a deal to help Names suffering worst in recent losses at Lloyd's
of London is growing among the agencies that organise the insurance market's
syndicates and handle the affairs of Names.
Mr Paul Archard, chairman of the Lloyd's Underwriting Agents Association,
which represents more than 100 agents, said: 'There is no doubt in my mind
that a large majority of agents think there ought to be a plan.' At a
meeting today, the association will consider a series of ideas, including a
cap on some of the losses already suffered by Names - the individuals whose
assets back underwriting at the market.
The meeting will also examine progress made by Lloyd's in implementing
various recommendations of the Rowland task force, which in January
completed a review of business practices at the market.
The task force was led by Mr David Rowland, chairman of Sedgwick
international insurance brokers. It advocated the creation of a cap on
Names' losses from next year onwards but rejected retroactive action on
legal as well as practical grounds.
Subsequently, however, as the scale of losses faced by Names on catastrophe
reinsurance syndicates in the 1989 and 1990 years has become clear, there
has been a rethink.
Although many Names unaffected by losses oppose helping finance any rescue
plan, agents are confident that their objections can be overcome, especially
if others in the market are persuaded to contribute to such a fund.
One prominent members' agent said: 'There will be a rescue scheme. Names
will accept the idea provided that agents and brokers are also putting their
hands in their pockets.'
Within the market, some agents who were initially sceptical about a deal for
the hardest hit Names are being won round to the idea. Mr Nigel Rogers,
managing director of the Octavian Group agency, said that the idea had
initially received 'a mixed response from the market' but that support was
growing. He added: 'I hope a successful proposal is formulated. I believe it
to be in the market's interest."
Some agents fear that unless a scheme is put in place Lloyd's may not
survive. One agent said: 'There is now a widespread view that there has to
be a settlement. Otherwise litigation will smother the market.' Lloyd's is
likely to insist that, in return for help, Names would have to agree to
solve any disputes through arbitration.
In a separate development, it emerged yesterday that solicitors acting on
behalf of the Feltrim Names Association are expected to issue protective
writs this week on behalf of 872 Names who were members of the syndicate in
its 1987 underwriting year.
Mr Colin Hook, chairman of the Feltrim Names Association, said a number of
events that may have contributed to the syndicate's heavy underwriting
losses occurred in 1986. Unless the protective writs were issued, potential
litigation would be time-barred.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920519

