FT921-15228

FT  11 JAN 92 / Finance & The Family: Play your (credit) cards right - Some
tips for those who live and shop abroad


   By DAVID BARCHARD


IF YOU want to go shopping across the globe, but pay for what you buy in the
UK, there are few payment instruments as convenient as a Visa or MasterCard.
A UK Visa credit or debit card holder, for example, can use his or her Visa
card in 9.3m retail outlets across the world.
In addition, most developed countries now have extensive networks of cash
machines from which you can draw money from a UK bank account.
Their obvious convenience means that UK Visa cards or MasterCards are
increasingly used by expatriates as well as tourists.
Barclaycard, the largest UK card issuer with 8m credit cards and 4m debit
cards, says that it has about 150,000 expatriate cardholders. Almost all
these people were existing Barclaycard customers who happen to have moved
abroad to live or work.
'There isn't much advantage for anyone who isn't a UK bank customer to hold
one of our cards, as opposed to that of the bank of the country they live
in, because they would have to pay in sterling and they could have
difficulty getting foreign currency converted,' says a Barclays spokesman.
If you do plan to use a credit card regularly abroad, there are points to
bear in mind. One is that you should have the card before you leave the UK.
If you do not, you may well find it difficult to get one.
An overseas Weekend FT reader writes that he has applied for a card to
several of the UK card issuers who offer low interest cards or those without
annual charges, but they all turned him down.
The main reason why banks would do this is that if you are not already a
current account customer and live overseas, they have little or no hold on
you if you chose not to pay your debts.
'Credit card debt is always the first debt people walk away from,' says one
of the 'Big Four' clearers.
A second reason is that if you are resident abroad, you do not have a recent
UK credit record which will enable a bank to see what sort of risk you are.
You may be able to get over this problem if you are an existing current
account customer of a bank, or if you open a current account and keep a
fairly large sum of money in it.
Some banks - Lloyds, for example - will not issue their credit cards to
people, even if they live in the UK, unless they are existing customers of
the bank.
There can be other problems. If you are resident abroad, you will have to be
periodically issued with a new card and you will of course have to pay your
bills each month.
That means that there must be certain minimum standards of postal
communication between a customer and bank. Even in the advanced industrial
countries this cannot be taken for granted.
You may find it difficult to get a card issuer to send you a card if, for
example, you live in a country with a poor postal service and high levels of
fraud, such as Italy.
Barclays and other large issuers keep lists of 'no-go' countries for the
card business. Lists change from day to day and some UK postal districts are
also on the black list.
You may find it easier to persuade a card issuer to send you some cards
rather than others. Debit cards and gold cards seem, in different ways, to
be more vulnerable to abuse than straightforward credit cards.
Bear in mind that with sophisticated card fraud now worldwide, there are
additional risks. If a dispute between you and your card issuer arises, it
may be harder to resolve from abroad and you may find that legal rights are
affected by overseas status.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920111

