FT923-10838

FT  28 JUL 92 / Technology: Lack of vision leaves venture research at risk -
Technically Speaking


   By BY CLIVE COOKSON


One of the past dec-ade's most imaginative corporate research programmes is
in danger of dying for lack of interest from industry.
Venture Research, as it is called, was set up and funded through the 1980s
by BP, the UK oil company. It tries to seek out the world's most creative
university scientists - and to support pioneering proposals that fall
outside the scope of the normal sources of research grants.
On a budget of less than Dollars 5m a year, the programme has supported 26
Venture Research fellows working in physics, chemistry, biology and
engineering. Their achievements include important new ways of carrying out
chemical reactions, streamlining mathematical arguments, and understanding
the way genetic material is arranged in cells.
In 1990, BP decided that it could no longer afford to support Venture
Research, though it is maintaining current grants until the last ones run
out next year. The company, however, helped Don Braben, the programme's
founder, to set up Venture Research International.
That was meant to be a consortium of half a dozen corporate sponsors, each
covering a different industrial sector: for example, electronics, food and
agriculture, chemicals, pharmaceuticals and engineering. Together they would
provide a 'ring of covered waggons' around Venture Research, to pick up
anything produced by the scientists that was worthy of commercial
exploitation.
Unfortunately, Braben has not yet persuaded enough companies of the merits
of venture research to get the consortium going. So far only Sony, the
Japanese electronics company, has made a clear commitment of support, but it
insists that at least two western companies must agree to join. The
recession has been a handicap, but Braben has also been hindered by BP's
short-sighted refusal to make any further commitment to the enterprise.
Time is now beginning to run out. If the programme is not re-established
soon, and moreover on a long-term basis, it will lose its sense of identity
and the community of venture researchers, which has so far shown strong
loyalty, will begin to fall apart.
Warning, Overset column There is still hope. Earlier this month, Courtaulds,
the UK industrial materials manufacturer, invited a group of venture
researchers to a conference at its Kenilworth training centre with a dozen
of the company's senior R&D staff.
The experience demonstrated firstly that the academic scientists are keen to
explain their work and build up contacts with industry - and secondly that
their fresh approach can make a worthwhile contribution. The Courtaulds
staff said afterwards they had found the meeting highly stimulating and had
picked up several good practical ideas.
Braben is now lowering his sights in order to keep Venture Research alive.
Originally, he had been asking companies to subscribe Dollars 1m a year to
join. Now he is prepared to accept much smaller contributions  - as little
as Pounds 100,000 - to attract medium-sized European companies, such as
Courtaulds, as well as global giants like Sony and BP.
The track record of Venture Research so far suggests that companies buying
in would get a good direct return on their money, though the nature of the
enterprise makes the outcome completely unpredictable.
The spin-offs are already worth much more than BP's total investment; they
include a widely used enzyme-based diagnostic test and a new system for
making left-handed and right-handed forms of molecules that can exist as
mirror images. There are also the intangible benefits which industrial
researchers derive from contact with academics who are exploring beyond the
boundaries of conventional scientific thought.
Venture Research is cheap by the standards of contemporary science, because
projects are in new fields in which competitive work has not yet pushed up
costs. They tend to rely on the imagination of the scientists more than on
expensive equipment.
On the whole, UK companies contribute rather little to university science
compared with competitors based in other countries. Venture Research would
provide an excellent means for a few of them to do more. How about it,
British Aerospace, GEC, ICI, Unilever, Glaxo?

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920728

