FT923-15476

FT  02 JUL 92 / FT Law Report: Restitution claim can go ahead


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


SECURITIES AND INVESTMENTS BOARD v PANTELL
Court of Appeal:
Lord Justice Neill, Lord Justice Scott, and Lord Justice Steyn:
June 12 1992
A SOLICITOR who is knowingly concerned in his client's illegal financial
services transactions can be ordered by the court to take steps to restore
innocent investors to their pre-investment position or to remedy their
situation though he received none of the invested sums and was not party to
the transactions, provided the order is intended to effect, and might be
reasonably capable of effecting, restitution or a remedy.
The Court of Appeal so held when dismissing an appeal by solicitors as
third, fourth and fifth defendants from a decision (FT, August 9 1991) of
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson, vice-chancellor, refusing to strike out the
claim against them in an action by the Securities and Investments Board
against Pantell SA and others.
The facts set out in the judgment were as alleged by the SIB, and for the
purposes of the striking-out application were assumed to be correct.
LORD JUSTICE SCOTT said that from about April 1988 to March 1989 Pantell, a
Swiss company, carried on unauthorised investment business in the UK.
In the course of that business Pantell distributed false and misleading
advertisements and made unsolicited telephone calls to persuade persons in
the UK to purchase shares in a Utah company, European American Corporation
Inc (Euramco).
The solicitors acted for Pantell.
Carrying on unauthorised investment business in the UK was a contravention
of section 3 of the Financial Services Act 1986. The publishing of
misleading advertisements contravened section 47. The advertisements had not
been approved of by an authorised person, in contravention of section 57.
The sale of shares in consequence of unsolicited telephone calls contravened
section 56.
The Act not only imposed criminal sanctions for contraventions, but also
provided remedies for investors who entered into share transactions as a
result.
Section 6(2) provided that if the court was satisfied a person had entered
into a transaction in contravention of section 3, it might order him 'and
any other person . . . knowingly concerned in the contravention to take such
steps as the court may direct for restoring the parties to the position in
which they were before the transaction was entered into'.
The SIB sought a remedy against the solicitors under section 6(2). It
alleged they were 'knowingly concerned' in Pantell's contravention of
section 3.
Section 61(1) provided that if there was a reasonable likelihood that 'any
person' had contravened sections 47, 56 and 57 or 59, the court might make
an order requiring him 'and any other person . . . knowingly concerned in
the contravention to take such steps as the court may direct to remedy it'.
The SIB sought a remedy against the solicitors under section 61(1), alleging
they were 'knowingly concerned' in Pantell's contraventions of sections 47,
56 and 57.
The solicitors denied they were 'knowingly concerned', but contended that
even if they were, on the true construction of sections 6(2) and 61(1) the
SIB was not entitled to the relief claimed. They asked for an order that the
action against them be struck out.
Sir Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson V-C dismissed the summons.
The solicitors' case was based upon the undisputed fact that none of the
payments made by the investors were made to them. The vice-chancellor
concluded that receipt of the money by the person 'knowingly concerned' was
not a necessary precondition of a restitutionary order under section 6(2),
nor of a remedial order under section 61(1). The solicitors appealed.
Mr Sumption for the solicitors submitted that the relief claimed under
sections 6(2) and 61(1) could not succeed, since it was a claim for
compensation for loss and there was no jurisdiction to order compensation
for loss against persons 'knowingly concerned'. He said the orders sought
were not restitutionary, because the solicitors had received nothing from
the investors and so had nothing that they could restore.
While orders made under section 6(2) and section 61(1) must be restricted to
their proper restitutionary purpose, it was not right to emasculate the
restitutionary remedy available against persons 'knowingly concerned' on the
ground that they were not liable to be subjected to compensatory remedies.
The precondition of an order under section 6(2) was that a person had
transacted in contravention of section 3.
The purpose of an order under section 6(2) must be to restore parties to the
transaction to the position in which they were before it was entered into.
So an order ought not to require a contravenor to repay the purchase price
of shares unless there was also provision for the return of the shares by
the investor.
Provided the precondition was met, the only limitations on the type of order
that could be made under section 6(2) that were justified by the statutory
language were that the order must be intended to restore the transacting
parties to their respective former positions and that the steps directed by
the order to be taken must be reasonably capable of doing so.
Subject to those limitations there was no reason why restrictions should be
placed on the type of order that could be made under section 6(2). The width
of the statutory language, 'such steps as the court may direct', was
striking and there was no good reason why it should be restricted. Nor did
the statutory language warrant any distinction between the type of order
that could be made against the contravenor and the type of order that could
be made against a person 'knowingly concerned'.
The fact that a person 'knowingly concerned' had not received anything under
the transaction did not restrict the court's power to make a section 6(2)
order against him.
Each investor must be willing that there should be a rescission of the
investment transaction in question, and be willing to return any shares or
money he had received under the transaction.
Similar points arose in relation to section 61(1).
There were two relevant preconditions before an order 'to take steps' could
be made under section 61(1).
One was that a person had contravened one of the statutory provisions
referred to in subsection (1)(a). It was alleged that Pantell had
contravened sections 47, 56 and 57. The second precondition was that there
were steps that could be taken for remedying the contravention.
The court was empowered if those two preconditions were satisfied, to make
an order for 'such steps as the court may direct' to 'remedy' the
contravention. The steps directed must therefore be intended to remedy, and
be reasonably capable of remedying, the contravention.
Subject to those limitations as to purpose and effect, there was no reason
to place further limitations on the steps the court could direct to be taken
under section 61(1).
In the light of that analysis of sections 6(2) and 61(1) it was not a valid
objection to the SIB's case that the solicitors had not received any of the
investors' money.
Orders under the sections should be directed to restoring not only investors
but all parties to their former positions, and not to a class but to
individual transactions. A restitution order could not remedy a section 57
contravention.
The appeal was dismissed.
LORD JUSTICE STEYN concurring said that the genesis of the provisions was
the widespread belief that operations of share-pushers were damaging the
integrity of the markets and contrary to public interest. Share-pushing
operations were only made possible because of the assistance of third
parties, such as bankers, accountants and solicitors.
'Knowingly concerned' was not defined. Mere passive knowledge would not be
sufficient. Actual involvement in the contravention must be established.
LORD JUSTICE NEILL agreed with both judgments.
For the solicitors: Jonathan Sumption QC and Leslie Kosmin (Barlow Lyde &
Gilbert).
For the SIB: David Oliver QC and Thomas Lowe (Booth & Blackwell.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920702

