FT924-8294

FT  12 NOV 92 / Gibraltar ready to push for self-rule within EC


   By TOM BURNS and JOE GARCIA


   MADRID, GIBRALTAR


BESET by Euro-scepticism at home and Euro-impatience elsewhere in the
Community, the UK government could probably do without another battle over
Europe with its own crown colony of Gibraltar.
Yet Mr Jose Bossano, chief minister of the Rock at the tip of Spain, will
insist in talks with Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign Secretary, in
London today that Gibraltar is the '13th member of the EC' and opposes any
increased interference by London in what it claims are its domestic affairs.
Mr Bossano is determined that his demands for self-determination within the
Community should not be brushed under the table by the UK Foreign Office.
'If the British government attempts to dictate to us, it will lead to a
major confrontation,' Mr Bossano said before leaving for London.
The core of the problem is that Gibraltar's 15-member House of Assembly has
introduced a series of regulatory banking measures tailored to meet Brussels
directives, and that Mr Bossano is aggressively marketing Gibraltar as a
tax-efficient rival to Luxembourg within the Community.
The Foreign Office view is that, with the onset of the Community's single
market, the UK, as the member nation, is responsible for the compliance by a
dependent territory such as Gibraltar with EC directives. Accordingly, it
will be London that will regulate in Gibraltar, not Mr Bossano's executive.
Mr Bossano has passionately embraced Europe as a replacement for Empire,
having watched virtually all the British presence, save the governor,
withdraw from Gibraltar. The dockyard that used to refit the Royal Navy was
closed in the 1980s and the last UK ground forces left last year.
The stand taken by the pugnacious former trade union official, who was
overwhelmingly elected for a second term earlier this year by the Rock's
14,000 voters, could be embarrassing for Britain.
Mr Bossano argues that the UK government, while preaching the virtues of
subsidiarity to its European partners, finds itself practising quite the
opposite when it comes to Gibraltar. However, Mr Bossano will again be told
during the London talks that the Rock is only in the Community because it is
a UK colony and there is consequently 'no future' for his 13th member
pretensions.
Mr Bossano directly challenges this. He argues that Gibraltar, by
implementing EC directives on its own initiative, has effectively acted as a
member of the EC in its own right.
He echoes a virtually unanimous view among the Rock's business community:
that Gibraltar can only be competitive within the EC if it regulates its own
affairs.
However, his battle for Gibraltar's self-determination within the EC is
unacceptable to the Spanish government as well.
Under the terms of the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht by which Spain ceded Gibraltar
to the British Crown, the Rock is either a colony or it is returned to
Spain.
Spain has adamantly refused to allow any development that would bolster the
Rock's self-reliance. Spanish pressure has recently been highlighted by the
Madrid government's opposition to the inclusion of Gibraltar as a European
entry point under single market legislation.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

921112

