FT923-6473

FT  24 AUG 92 / International Capital Markets: Stock-picking, a computable
art


   By ANTHONY HARRIS


I SPENT an instructive morning last week at a portfolio management pitch by
a very blue-blooded New York bank. It was impressive. These people claim to
have made stock-picking a computable art. Computable, because it is highly
systematic; an art rather than a science, because the aim is shrewdly
modest: 'To get it a bit less wrong than the others.'
To judge by the results, they get it very significantly less wrong. Could
one ask for more?
Well, yes; but before we get to the ungrateful bit of this column, the
system deserves serious attention. It rests on a large force of analysts, as
you might expect; but analysts with a difference; both in approach and
motivation.
The approach rests on an effort to measure the underlying long-term trend of
earnings, as much as five years ahead; this should give a more objective
measure against which to judge price than the normal historic or one-year
prospective price-earnings ratio. The result cannot be guaranteed to be
superior, but the method certainly generates non-consensual judgments. One
for the long view.
How far is this due to superior science (five-year projections are tricky,
to put it mildly) and how far to different motivation? Brokers' analysts no
doubt struggle to be objective, but essentially they are part of the sales
force: their findings are useful to the firm only when they provoke action.
'Buy', by all means; 'Sell', if that is the way the cookie crumbles; but
'Hold' earns no commission.
For the portfolio manager, on the other hand, 'Hold' is the ideal finding.
It can't come up all the time, because prices change much more than
prospects.
Indeed, so far as this search for underlying value is successful, it will
lead to active trading as the market catches up; so this is not the passive,
widows-and-orphans style of cautious choice and an annual review (which can
also be highly successful).
This is, as it were, active long-termism; the reviews are monthly. (Anything
more frequent tends to beat the water into a foam.)
The portfolio analyst has another advantage: he can give proper attention to
small companies, where the market liquidity may be too small to offer much
business to a serious broker. If you analyse the research brokers put out,
you will see that smaller companies only get fitful attention, at best.
You might conclude that the fund manager has a natural advantage over the
brokers' man; but why, then, does the average manager trail the index?
He is not pressured into short-termism by the needs of the fund; but a
quarterly review seems to produce the same result. And in any case, no
individual record can get round the fact that successful stock-picking is by
definition a minority knack. If we could all do it, there would be no buying
opportunities.
If all this meant only that most fund managers were destined to fall short
of their ambitions, we could write it off to institutional arrangements,
which could be improved, or human nature, which cannot. But the trouble is
that stock-picking is not only usually ill-done; it is habit-forming.
Those who spend their lives brooding over lists forget the big picture. And
the big picture is that over the past five years any likely share portfolio
 -even the one we were inspecting with some wonder - would have
under-performed a simple switch into bonds.
Hindsight, the frustrated equity man will mutter. But it is not. The bond
strategy is not known as the Norwich Union view for nothing.
Cash has also been pretty rewarding in this country, though not in the US.
But getting a confirmed equity man even to consider the alternatives is next
to impossible especially if he has just spent a morning being shown that
somebody is managing to do the job better than he does.
Investment managers (and their committees) should, then, spend a little time
in this sad holiday break wondering not just if they could pursue whether
their present efforts amount to more than making the best of a bad job.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920824

