FT921-1121

FT  25 MAR 92 / International Bonds: Eskom returns to market with five-year
DM300m deal


   By SIMON LONDON


ESKOM, the South African electricity utility, yesterday launched its first
public issue in the international bond market since 1985, raising DM300m,
five-year funding in a deal lead-managed by Commerzbank.
The bonds were sold mostly to retail investors in continental Europe,
following the pattern of other recent issues by South African borrowers.
The deal is the fourth since South Africa returned to the public bond market
last September and follows D-Mark and Ecu issues by the government and a
DM200m issue in February by the Development Bank of Southern Africa.
The return of South African borrowers to the Euromarket has not been without
controversy: in November, the Independent Development Trust, a cross-party
health, education and housing charity, postponed a Dollars 200m deal
following opposition from the African National Congress.
Bankers said yesterday the referendum of white South Africans this month,
which resulted in a vote in favour of political reform, would encourage
wider international participation in future bond issues.
The syndicate of 23 banks participating in yesterday's deal was dominated by
German firms.
Among the non-German participants were Standard Chartered, Paribas, Credit
Lyonnais, Credit Commercial de France, Union Bank of Switzerland, Swiss Bank
Corporation and Kredietbank.
When the government launched its DM400m, five-year issue in September, only
three non-German banks participated: Paribas, Swiss Bank Corporation and
Kleinwort Benson.
The Eskom paper carries a full government guarantee, a policy which is
likely to continue in future issues by South African borrowers. The 10 per
cent bonds were issued at 101, to yield 150 basis points more than German
government bonds. The governments D-Mark issue was launched at a spread of
175 basis points more than bunds.
Part of the proceeds of yesterday's issue will be used to refinance an
outstanding DM150m deal which falls due on April 1, said Mr Mick Davis,
chief financial officer.
The remainder has been swapped into rand, although at a rate no better than
Eskom can achieve from the domestic South African bond market, Mr Davis
added.
Eskom has another DM100m issue falling due on September 15. Mr Davis said
this would be refinanced with another international issue, although the
company may issue in the Ecu or Eurodollar markets next time.
Other South African borrowers in an unofficial queue to launch international
bonds include Transnet, the transport group, and the Office of Post and
Telecommunications, both of which have outstanding foreign currency bonds
maturing later this year.
Elsewhere, the poor tone of government bond markets continued to deter
potential Euromarket borrowers.
Syndicate officials said intermediaries and investors were focusing on the
outcome of this week's US Treasury refunding operations before committing
funds to the market.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920325

