FT924-11395

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (18): Hopes remain long-term - Leslie
Colitt examines prospects for trade with eastern Europe


   By LESLIE COLITT


ALTHOUGH Germany's historically-close trading links with Russia and Ukraine
have suffered, German companies are preparing for the time when the
republics of the former Soviet Union will again be able to buy their goods
and know-how on a large scale.
The composition of Germany's flourishing trade with the Russian Empire
before the First World War was remarkably similar to that of recent years:
Russian oil, lumber and other raw materials in exchange for German
machinery.
After 1945, Soviet-occupied East Germany was forced to pay nearly Marks
100bn in reparations to Moscow and to re-orient its entire production to
satisfy Soviet industrial demands. West Germany became a leading supplier of
higher technology products and Moscow's largest Western trading partner.
The extent of East Germany's dependence on the Soviet market is shown by the
trade statistics in 1990. East Germany exported goods worth DM17.8bn to the
Soviet Union - 47 per cent of total East German exports - and imported
DM9.1bn - 40 per cent of imports. Nearly 500,000 East Germans depended
directly or indirectly on sales to the Soviet Union which bought 30 per cent
of East German machinery and vehicles and 17 per cent of electrical
engineering products.
The Soviet Union also relied on East Germany for items such as large factory
fishing vessels, harbour cranes, body presses for car factories, cable
machinery as well as long-distance railway passenger cars.
East German imports from Moscow consisted of oil and gas which, along with
coal, iron and other metals, supplied more than 80 per cent of consumption.
West Germany's trade with Moscow was, by comparison, insignificant to the
German economy as a whole but of considerable importance to Moscow for key
items such as chemical plants and large-diameter seamless pipe for natural
gas pipelines.
In 1990, West Germany exported DM10.4bn to the Soviet Union - 2 per cent of
total West German exports - and imported DM9.1bn - 2 per cent of total
imports.
United Germany's trade with the Soviet Union last year was hit full square
by the inability of Moscow to pay Deutsche Marks for east German goods.
German exports plummeted by 35 per cent to DM18.2bn and imports fell 20 per
cent to DM14.6bn. The collapse continued this year, with trade in the first
six months falling by nearly 30 per cent.
Desperate calls came from BDI, Federation of German Industry, and DIHT,
German Chamber of Industry and Trade, for the German government to provide
barter trade guarantees to help revive German trade with the CIS successor
states.
Germany's Hermes export credit guarantees of only DM5bn for trade with CIS
this year were taken up largely by east German companies but Russia and the
other republics were unable to provide workable counter-guarantees. Trade
virtually ground to a halt.
Mr Otto Wolff von Amerongen, head of German industry's Eastern Board of
Trade, even advocated using roubles to finance trade with the CIS. The
roubles earned by German companies would be subsequently used for
investments in Russia and the other republics as well as purchases of
commercial properties he suggested.
Mr Arkadi Volski, the influential head of the Russian Industrialists
Federation, proposed using barter and clearing arrangements to overcome
payments problems during a visit to Berlin.
He said the former Soviet Union had 56,000 items of machinery and equipment
from former East Germany which had broken down or were about to do so
because of a lack of spare parts.
One dramatic example was the large industrial presses from Erfurt in every
Russian car and truck factory which were in dire need of repair.
Most of the giant former East German Kombinate which sold between 40 and 60
per cent of their products to the Soviet Union have lost virtually the
entire business. Only for a few is there a shimmer of hope that the CIS
market will revive in time to make a difference to their parlous balance
sheets.
Carl Zeiss of Jena, once east Germany's most prestigious optical and
precision engineering producer and a leading supplier of the Soviet defence
and space industries, said the Russian Government had ordered DM180m worth
of Zeiss products and placed them on a priority list. Queries had gone out
for an additional DM100m in Zeiss products.
But the Russian government was still unable to guarantee any of the payments
so that this year Zeiss expected to sell only DM750,000 in products to
Russia.
As a result, Zeiss' total turnover would be DM150m instead of the DM200m
expected earlier.
Deutsche Waggonbau (DWA), Germany's largest producer of rolling stock with
five factories in east Germany, has DM2.2bn in orders from Russia and other
CIS republics for its long-distance passenger carriages and freight cars.
This represents 70 per cent of DWA's output and is covered by Hermes export
credit guarantees and payment guarantees by the Russian Government. More
than half of the exports this year were paid for by mid-year but it was
highly uncertain whether the bills would continue to be paid.
Daimler-Benz and other large west German companies whose sales to the
ex-Soviet Union were never of vital importance, are taking a long-range view
of trade prospects with CIS.
During a recent swing through the central Asian republics of CIS by DB's
chairman, Mr Werner Niefer - one of the few to the area by a prominent
Western industrialist - DB signed a letter of intent with Uzbekistan that it
would explore possibilities to jointly produce 'several hundred thousand'
four-wheel-drive vehicles annually in the central Asian republic.
Turkmenistan expressed interest in assembling three-axle Mercedes trucks and
Mr Niefer signed an agreement with Kazakhstan for the delivery of several
thousand cars and trucks.
DB discovered to its relief that payments problems were 'unexpectedly small'
as the central Asian republics had oil, gold and other natural resources to
sell.
Possibilities for co-operation in aerospace were also sounded out by DB as
Kazakhstan has a factory producing passenger aircraft but is lacking modern
engines.
Mr Niefer rounded out his tour of the former Soviet Union in Russia where DB
plans to deliver the production line for the model 0303 bus which has been
phased out in Germany and is to be produced at a newly-built factory near
Moscow.

The Financial Times


London Page X

921026

