FT924-6056

FT  24 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tories battle to limit Iraq damage


   By DAVID OWEN and RALPH ATKINS


MR MICHAEL Heseltine sought yesterday to head off a Labour assault on the
government's role in the exports-to-Iraq affair by insisting it had faced
'conflicting interests' between helping UK companies and stopping Saddam
Hussein's arms build-up.
His remarks came as Mr John Major disclosed that he saw a minute in August
1990 - after Iraq invaded Kuwait - about potential exports to Iraq by
companies including Matrix Churchill that needed to be stopped. He was
chancellor at the time. The embargo was imposed the same month.
Mr Major also confirmed, in a letter to a Labour MP, that he had known in
October 1990 about the Customs investigation into the company.
Also underlining how Mr Major's involvement in the affair will remain a
focal point at Westminster, Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader,
accused him of 'dereliction of his responsibility' for saying he had not
known about changes to the export guidelines made since 1988.
In a letter to Mr Ashdown, the prime minister said: 'I was not a party to
those decisions and I had no reason to know about them.'
Mr Ashdown said that Mr Major had implied he did not know about the changes
on November 12 - when the prime minister had also written to him about the
affair and when details of the changes were beginning to emerge in
newspapers.
In the Commons, Mr Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, emphasised
the comparatively minor nature of Britain's role in supplying defence
equipment to Saddam Hussein in the late 1980s.
'In interpreting policy guidelines, judgments had to be made about British
contracts for British factories, offering British jobs, in circumstances
where other people in other nations were queueing up to fill those orders if
we didn't,' he maintained, in an increasingly self-assured address delivered
to a noisy Commons.
Out of Dollars 11.3bn of contracts concluded by Iraq for the import of
defence equipment between January 1987 and August 1990, British companies
won just Dollars 200m worth of business, he said.
The speech came as Mr Alan Clark, the former trade minister at the centre of
the affair, said on BBC television: 'I'm not particularly bothered about who
we are trading with, providing the industrial and labour consequences in
Britain are favourable.'
Accusing Mr Robin Cook of quoting selectively, Mr Heseltine asked what
credence could be given to the shadow trade and industry secretary's
allegations if he 'cannot even quote accurately from government documents'.
Mr Heseltine defended the action of himself and three other ministers in
signing public-interest immunity certificates to prevent confidential
government documents being used as evidence in the Matrix Churchill trial.
He 'would not have acted' in the way he did unless he had been 'absolutely
satisfied' that the judge would make available those documents or parts of
documents necessary for the course of justice.
But he avoided answering a question put to him repeatedly by Mr Neil
Kinnock, the former Labour leader, about whether he knew when he signed the
certificate that one of the men on trial had been forwarding information to
the security services.
He sought to undermine Labour charges that the government had not merely
armed Saddam's forces but also paid for the privilege by disclosing that
Iraq took up medium-term credit facilities from Britain in respect of only
Dollars 54.3m worth of military goods between 1983 and 1989 - a figure that
'did not include armaments of any kind'.
Opening the debate, Mr Cook said Mr Major approved a new credit facility to
Iraq in 1987 when he was chief secretary to the Treasury.
'I am sure no one showed him the letter of November 1987 from the Export
Credits Guarantee Department, which said a notional 20 per cent had been set
aside for military business,' he said, in a slighting reference to what he
called the prime minister's 'nobody told me' defence.
He said a Commons written reply from the Department of Trade and Industry
confirmed 'there is Pounds 830m outstanding on which the ECGD might be
invited to honour guarantees in respect of exports to Iraq.'
The Labour party's motion charged that the conduct of ministers in the
matter had been 'inconsistent with the security of British troops, with open
government, and with the just administration of legal process'.
It was defeated by 310 votes to 265, a government majority of 45.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921124

