FT921-397

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (19): Time
for boldness - and caution - John Authers examines some complexities and
pitfalls of becoming a Lloyd's member


   By JOHN AUTHERS


WHAT do you have to do to become a Name at Lloyd's?
After the events of the last few months, this question sounds like a joke.
With so many members of Lloyd's seemingly desperate to leave, and losses
running at record levels, this does not look like the time to join.
Most professional advisers who assist investors in dealings with Lloyd's
seem to accept this. While there is so much uncertainty, and confidence is
at such a low level, those who are in any doubt at all should stay out of
the market.
However, for the bold, there are two broad reasons why this could be a good
time to enter:
The Task Force Report, would, if enacted, take away unlimited liability,
arguably the single greatest deterrent to Lloyd's membership.
Many expect the market to stage a recovery this year, while the losses for
1989, still unravelling, should soon become more clear, and probably
represent the worst that Lloyd's will have to bear.
Becoming a Lloyd's Name would look much more attractive if it meant sharing
in a profitable market, with a lid on the total risk taken.
In good times, membership of Lloyd's is still attractive, because it allows
people effectively to use their money twice - they take the underwriting
profit if there is any, while they are free to derive income from
alternative sources with the capital they use to back their membership.
Provided the market avoids its current losses, deciding whether to become a
Name is best approached as a problem of personal financial planning.
Mr Edmund Wood, a partner with BDO Binder Hamlyn, the accountancy firm,
says: 'You need to have a reasonably secure source of income and earnings,
and you also need to have easily disposable capital.'
But he goes on to caution that some people are too rich to become Names. The
benefit of being a Name is that it can utilise assets to produce an extra
source of income, at the cost of added risk.
Those who are already comfortably off, and are utilising their assets to the
full, need not bother. The less wealthy, with a greater need of income,
should consider membership more closely.
This is most likely, according to Mr Clive Scott-Hopkins, director of the
independent financial adviser Towry Law, for people who have particularly
illiquid assets which are difficult to exploit, such as farmland. This does
not, of course, apply for farmers who need the land as their prime source of
income. He also suggests that Lloyd's membership is most appropriate for
people who may just have retired, and want to make up the shortfall in their
earned income.
Mr Robert Saunders, an adviser on Lloyd's with the private bank Smith &
Williamson, differs slightly from this - he suggests that Lloyd's is
probably better for younger people, who still have the chance to earn more
money to make good any losses they make. Otherwise, except in the case of
readily disposable land, he suggests assets to back Lloyd's investment
should be readily disposable, and should not constitute business assets.
Mr Scott-Hopkins also suggests that it would be a mistake to include one's
house in these calculations - the membership is a way of deriving income
from an under-exploited asset. Such assets should also be disposable -
unlike houses. Thus it could be most appropriate for people with land valued
at Pounds 250,000 or more, which they could countenance losing.
Potential Names must still therefore be called 'wealthy' by any criterion.
Mr Wood suggests that they should be able to fund reasonably substantial
losses for two or three years without it affecting their way of life. Few
can say this.
Further, he suggests that there is little point in underwriting for the
minimum amount, of Pounds 250,000. This limits gains while still exposing
investors to the full, unlimited, liability. He therefore suggests
underwriting a minimum of Pounds 400,000 or Pounds 500,000.
However, if the proposal to limit liability to the total amount underwritten
is enacted, this would act as a strong incentive for Names to take on rather
less risk.
There are other tax-planning measures which can effectively limit the
liability for married couples, thanks to the introduction of independent
taxation for husband and wife. Mr Scott-Hopkins suggests that couples should
rearrange their assets so that one has only Pounds 250,000 to his (or her)
name. This should not include the house.
This partner then becomes the Lloyd's Name, and has effectively limited his
or her liability to exactly Pounds 250,000. This measure plainly requires an
advanced level of trust, but as most potential Lloyd's Names should be
around retirement age, when relationships are relatively stable, this should
not represent too great a problem.
If, as is likely, the Name is only a basic rate taxpayer, this means that
there are less taxes to pay on any profits, which makes the deal more
attractive.
A final financial problem is that, in the early years, Names will not have
been able to build up adequate reserves to fund any losses. This means that
stop-loss insurance, which is now not as good a deal as it once was, could
make sense.
Once an accountant has confirmed that Lloyd's membership makes financial
sense, the sad story of the current litigations shows that it is vital to
take independent legal advice. Mr Richard Astor, a barrister who has written
a legal guide to Lloyd's membership, says that Names have a duty to seek
full, frank, expert, neutral, independent legal advice. This provides a
valuable legal defence against the problems which can emerge later, and
proves that Names have taken due care in entering their commitment.
Having taken professional advice, you need to choose syndicates.
Effectively, this usually boils down to choosing a member's agent, who can
then gauge the profile of risks and liabilities you are prepared to take on.
Accountants should be able to put you in contact with a 'beauty parade' of
member's agents. Mr Saunders suggests that would-be Names should contact at
least three agents for a breadth of choice. Some are more independent than
others, and there are also differences in the strength of their contacts
with underwriters and brokers.
Finally, one should act soon, although irrevocable commitments can be
avoided until November 30. Sponsorship and application forms must be
submitted by the end of August.
Details of members' agents and all charges and paperwork involved are
available on request from Lloyd's.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920330

