FT924-6487

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (5): Reform plan outlined by Salinas -
Politics


   By DAMIAN FRASER


THE PAST electoral year has been a difficult, even turbulent, one for
Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party. The ruling party lost the
gubernatorial election in Chihuahua and municipal elections in Baja
California. Even worse, its sitting governors in Tabasco, Jalisco and
Michoacan resigned under intense opposition pressure.
The resignations followed those last year in Guanajuato and San Luis Potosi
after the opposition cried electoral fraud. They brought the number of
non-elected interim governors appointed by President Salinas since coming to
power to 17, out of 31 states. More than half of Mexico is now ruled by
unelected governors, or the equivalent.
The routine of election and post-election protests has left almost no-one
satisfied, and brought pressure on the government to achieve consensus on
the rules of the electoral system, and for political reform. As Mr Sergio
Aguayo, a political scientist and president of the Mexican Academy of Human
Rights, says: 'Elections used to give ritual blessing to the PRI candidate,
and so were relevant. But now they are becoming irrelevant to resolving
political problems.'
From the government's perspective, the demonstrations have damaged the
credibility of Mexico's electoral process and tarnished the international
image of the Salinas presidency. The governors' resignations have divided
the rank-and-file of the PRI, and strengthened the opposition.
Four years into his administration, Mr Salinas has set out the government's
approach to political reform. He wants to make the PRI a more modern
political party, and there will be legislation to make electoral conditions
fairer for all political parties.
The president said in an interview that the reform of the PRI 'has not
finished, it has to go further', echoing the views he gave at a widely
publicised breakfast with 650 leaders of the PRI in late October. Then, he
made it clear that the old rules had to change, and the party had to abandon
past practices. Mr Salinas said the PRI had to change further its internal
structure, ideology, candidate selection and finances.
But it remains unclear whether Mr Salinas will give the PRI any power to
select candidates, including the president, or any influence on government
policy. Without such authority, it is doubtful whether the PRI will become a
modern political party.
In his November state-of-the-union address - a three-point plan for
political reform that would set a ceiling on electoral spending, make party
finances more transparent, electoral authorities more independent and give
fairer access to media - the president said the new electoral legislation
would be negotiated between the political parties. It is still uncertain
what, if any, agreement will be reached.
Government officials say the legislation will be introduced after April next
year. According to one, 'they will set the rules of the game for political
competition for the 1994 presidential elections'. The legislation will give
more public money to the parties, and make donations less dependent on their
popular vote; establish tight rules on the amounts that individuals and
organisations can contribute to campaigns; compel parties to publish party
finances; give each political party similar television time; and give
parties the right to veto officials from the Federal Electoral Institute.
If the left-wing Party of Democratic Revolution fails to endorse the
government-inspired electoral reform, the PRI is likely to settle, as in the
past, for agreement with the centre-right Party of National Action. The
leadership of the PAN is ready to negotiate with the PRI, in part because it
has been a beneficiary of the political reform. It now has three governors,
and controls over 100 municipalities.
But the PAN has to tread carefully as nine leading members - including a
former presidential candidate - have already resigned from the party because
of its pro-government stance. In an open letter the leaders wrote: 'The
party has acted not as an opposition party but as one more sector of the
system.' However, Mr Luis H. Alvarez, president of the PAN, said they
resigned in 'frustration' at not winning internal votes.
The government is likely to meet practically all the PAN demands, in part to
avoid what it fears above all - an opposition unity candidate for the 1994
elections, possibly under the leadership of Mr Jesus Silva Herzog, former
finance minister under President Miguel de la Madrid. The PAN has shown no
interest in backing such a candidacy in the past, but if negotiations with
the PRI were to break down, that could still become a possiblility.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921120

