FT924-6410

FT  21 NOV 92 / Lloyd's offers new measures to Names


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S OF London announced new moves yesterday to help pave the way for an
ambitious negotiated settlement of legal actions by aggrieved Names,
underlining a mood of conciliation at the insurance market.
A six-month moratorium covering 3,000 Names is to be extended to a further
196 against whom Lloyd's has served writs to recover debts. Lloyd's
announced the moratorium - during which Lloyd's will take no action to
recover debts - earlier this month.
Separately, solvency rules, which govern the amount of money Names must
deposit with Lloyd's in order to continue underwriting, are to be relaxed to
enable tax rebates due to Names to be taken into account. At least 1,000
Names might benefit from the measure, which has followed negotiations
between Lloyd's and the Inland Revenue.
Mr Peter Middleton, chief executive, said both measures were designed to
'lower the temperature' at the market, and followed talks this week with
leaders of action groups of Names. Mr Middleton hopes negotiations designed
to achieve an 'arbitrated settlement' of the various legal actions between
Names and their agents could begin by as early as mid January. Lloyd's
'wanted to avoid three to four years of litigation. The primary
beneficiaries (would be) lawyers,' said Mr Middleton, who took over as chief
executive two months ago.
Last month Mr Middleton announced the formation of a working group of market
professionals and Names to examine ways errors and omissions underwriters
(which insure underwriters and agents against the cost of legal awards for
negligence) might contribute to a settlement.
A separate working group is examining the difficulty of open years, which
emerge when syndicate managers are unable to close years of account because
of uncertainty over the size of future claims.
Names have welcomed the move. Mr Alfred Doll-Steinberg, chairman of the
Gooda Walker Action Group, described the measures as 'superb' and said the
measures might defuse tension. He said Gooda Walker Names would reinforce
existing powers to take legal action when they meet on November 30, but he
is enthusiastic about the prospects of an agreement. 'We've got to offer
something in return,' he said.
Mr Christopher Stockwell, chairman of the Lloyd's Names Associations Working
Group, said he was 'delighted that Lloyd's is serious about talks. It is
clear that Peter Middleton will do all in his power to bring about a
settlement of Lloyd's historic problems.'
Mr Val Powell, of the Association of Lloyd's Members, said the moves would
'give breathing space to consider other ways out of the problem'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921121

