FT922-13342

FT  11 APR 92 / Inflation rate down to 4% last month


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


THE inflation rate fell last month to 4 per cent from 4.1 per cent in
February, according to figures released yesterday by the Central Statistical
Office.
Behind the change was a relatively large rise between February and March in
prices of petrol and certain types of retail goods, in spite of reductions
in mortgage-interest payments and the prices of seasonal foods.
The overall increase in the retail prices index (RPI) between February and
March was 0.3 per cent. That pushed the index to 136.7 in March, after 136.3
in February, based on a figure of 100 in January 1987.
The change in the RPI in the year to March was 4 per cent, higher than the
3.8 per cent expected in the City. In the year to February, the RPI rose by
4.1 per cent.
The relatively big month-on-month change may be a sign that extra demand is
pushing up prices, an indicator of a hesitant revival in economic activity.
March was the third consecutive month in which the year-on-year rate had
failed to show a rise. In December the figure was 4.5 per cent.
Underlying inflation, as measured by the RPI, excluding mortgage-interest
payments, showed an increase from a year-on-year rate of 5.6 per cent in
February to 5.7 per cent in March. That figure has hovered between 5.6 per
cent and 5.8 per cent for the past five months.
Higher demand was reflected in a 1.5 per cent increase during the month in
prices of clothing and footwear, and a 1 per cent rise in prices of
household goods such as furniture and electrical appliances. The price
increases came after a winter of slack demand which had propelled retailers
into extended price-cutting.
The price of four-star petrol rose by 4p a gallon during March to Pounds
2.19. Together with price rises for used cars and spare parts, that pushed
up motoring costs by 1 per cent for the month.
The upward pressure on the RPI was constrained by a 0.9 per cent fall in
housing costs between February and March - due mainly to a fall in mortgage
payments as the average mortgage rate declined by 0.4 percentage points to
11.1 per cent.
Between February and March, prices of seasonal foods fell by 1 per cent,
thanks mainly to a drop in prices of fresh fruit.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920411

