FT922-610

FT  26 JUN 92 / OECD Economic Outlook: Industrial world set for slow growth
 -Unemployment forecast to stay high - No fall likely in European interest
rates


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


HIGH European interest rates and weak demand in the US and Japan will
constrain economic growth across the industrialised world this year,
according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
In its latest Economic Outlook, published yesterday, the Paris-based body
says non-residential investment in the OECD area will be flat this year
compared with 1991, while unemployment will stay high.
The group, which represents 24 leading industrial nations, says OECD-wide
company profits will probably expand 'more modestly' over the next few
years, compared with the faster pick-up after the previous period of slow
world growth in the early 1980s.
Helped by a sluggish recovery in the US and weak inflation in many nations,
'growth (in the OECD) should gradually accelerate in the coming months', but
at a slower rate than that expected by the organisation in its last Economic
Outlook, published last December.
With short-term interest rates across Europe influenced by the tight
monetary policy of the Bundesbank, 'there is little prospect that current
high real rates of interest (in Europe) will come down'. That could be
'burdensome' for those European countries - which include Britain, France
and Italy - where activity is weak and inflation low.
While many European nations are hemmed in on borrowing rates, constraints on
European fiscal policies linked to the Maastricht agreement reduce the
opportunity to promote growth through increases in public spending or tax
cuts.
In the US, the poor state of government finances which allows little room
for tax cuts, together with weak construction activity, will lead to demand
staying 'relatively weak' in the near term, the OECD says.
Meanwhile, in Japan, 'extremely slow money growth and the persisting
weakness of asset prices could delay the pick-up in activity'.
According to the report, the OECD economy should expand by 1.8 per cent this
year after 1 per cent in 1991. Last December, the organisation's economists
projected 1992 growth of 2.2 per cent.
Even though for the OECD as a whole 'recession has been avoided' over the
past year, growth is likely to be held back by the high debts built up
during the 1980s.
Spending by many consumers and businesses has been curtailed by their desire
'to strengthen their financial situation further before increasing their
expenditure, while financial institutions and banks may have become more
cautious in their lending'.
The OECD is relatively bullish about prospects for next year, when it
expects growth across the region to reach 3 per cent. But several worries
remain:
Further reductions in inflation are necessary in many countries, especially
in Germany. That could imply tight monetary policies 'that could restrain
demand in the short term'.
The efforts to bring down debts rather than to increase spending 'may have
further to go'. By reducing sales of goods and services and further damping
investment, this could hold back economic activity for some time.
Businesses and households remain cautious in many nations - partly because
of fears about unemployment and the general economic outlook.
Uncertainties about the outcome of the Uruguay Round of world trade talks,
may be further holding back growth.
There is a danger that, should Japan's trade surplus continue to grow, some
nations could restrict Japanese imports so 'hampering free international
trade and hence economic performance'.
The report reckons that the position of the OECD's estimated 30m unemployed
people (7.5 per cent of the workforce) 'is likely to improve only very
slowly'. Even though the rate for the whole of the OECD may fall next year,
for Europe the unemployment rate is expected to rise slightly in 1993 to 9.5
per cent.
Partly due to the large numbers of people out of work, pressure on wage
rates is likely to be modest, which could be one factor aiding growth.
Another is the generally favourable outlook for world trade, which is
expected to 'expand briskly' over the next 18 months, at annual rates of up
to 7 per cent.
Much of this is related, the report says, to strong demand in the former
communist nations in eastern Europe and in east Asia.
In particular, 'producers in both Japan and west Germany may seek to divert
output to foreign markets as domestic demand picks up only slowly'.
In other highlights, the OECD says:
OECD governments are likely to push up borrowing as a percentage ot total
output to 3.25 per cent this year, more than 0.75 percentage points higher
than last year. Most governments were unable to meet targets for debt
reduction last year, largely because of pressures on spending and weak
revenues related to the world economic slowdown.
Cash savings in the OECD resulting from reduced spending on defence after
the demise of Soviet communism will be 'modest in macroeconomic terms'. Even
though defence spending as a proportion of output is expected to decline
over the next five years in many OECD nations, the reductions are expected
to be significant only in the US and Germany, with smaller cuts in France,
Britain and the Netherlands. 'The net impact on aggregate demand and
employment. . . . is likely to be small, although the geographic
concentration of defence procurement industries may lead to severe local
labour-market problems in some cases.'
More efficient pricing mechanisms for air, land and water would increase
incentives to conserve such such resources and help safeguard the
environment. 'There is increasing recognition that greater reliance on
economic instruments - such as charges, taxes and tradeable permits  - can
lead to environmental problems being solved at lower costs,' the report
says.
Output by the newly industrialising nations of eastern Asia is likely to
increase this year by about 7 per cent for the fourth year running. The OECD
also expects inflation in these countries - South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong,
Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia - to fall back after rising last year.
A collapse of trade among the newly independent republics of the former
Soviet Union is a 'serious risk', putting a question mark over economic
prospects for the region.
OECD Economic Outlook No. 51; OECD Publications Service, 2 rue Andre-Pascal,
75775 Paris Cedex 16, France; or HMSO; Pounds 13.50, Dollars 24, DM43,
FFr110.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
WORLD GROWTH OUTLOOK
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
GDP year on year % change
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                     1991      1992      1993
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
US                   -0.7       2.1       3.6
Japan*                4.5       1.8       3.1
Germany**             3.1       1.3       2.3
France                1.3       2.0       2.6
Italy                 1.4       1.5       2.1
UK                   -2.2       0.4       2.6
Canada               -1.5       2.3       4.3
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920626

