FT922-4570

FT  04 JUN 92 / International Bonds: Swedish borrower postpones launch of
Dollars 500m issue


   By SIMON LONDON


TURBULENT conditions dissuaded borrowers from launching new issues in the
international bond markets yesterday and caused the postponement of at least
one substantial Eurodollar deal planned for today.
The Swedish national housing association, SBAB, decided not to launch a
Dollars 500m five-year bond issue. Nomura International, which had a mandate
to lead-manage the issue, said the borrower was unwilling to launch a new
issue against a background of volatile Scandinavian financial markets.
However, syndicate officials are expecting a number of substantial new
issues in US and Canadian dollars over the next few days.
Ontario Hydro announced plans to launch a global bond issue of at least
CDollars 1.5bn. The final terms and maturity were still under discussion
yesterday, but the deal will be joint lead-managed by Merrill Lynch, Goldman
Sachs, Nomura and Wood Gundy.
Other regular borrowers - including Finland - are also looking to raise
substantial funds from the Euromarket, with most favouring large,
dollar-denominated issues.
Meanwhile, Isveimer, the Italian development bank for southern Italy, became
the latest financial institution to raise floating-rate funding in the
Eurodollar sector.
The borrower launched a Dollars 125m three-year paper which pays 40 basis
points over the six-month London interbank offered rate. Wholly underwritten
by Credit Suisse First Boston, bonds were re-offered to investors at a fixed
rate of 99.66 and were held at this level until late afternoon.
Banco de Credito Nacional (BCN) became the latest in a line of Brazilian
banks to tap the Eurodollar sector, raising Dollars 60m two-year funding in
a deal lead-managed by Chase Investment Bank.
The bonds pay a semi-annual 10.5 per cent coupon and were re-offered to
investors at a fixed price of 99.06, where the yield was 10.94 per cent. At
launch, this was around 540 basis points more than the yield available on
three-year US Treasury notes.
Even by the standards of Latin American borrowers, the paper offered an
enticingly high yield. Bonds issued by other Brazilian banks yield around 10
per cent or less in the secondary market. BCN is one of the larger Brazilian
commercial banks, with assets of around Dollars 2.9bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

920604

