FT922-650

FT  26 JUN 92 / The Property Market: Common pursuits - UK surveyors'
overseas expansion


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Whenever the British property industry has ventured overseas, it has been
enthusiastically cheered on from the sidelines.
In 1961, for instance, the Investors Chronicle magazine declared: 'Clearly
our property groups will colonise on a tremendous international scale . . .
the British property man has no peer.'
Three decades on and a similar view still prevails. 'There are only a few
sectors of UK business left that can claim to be world leaders. British
surveyors . . . should be added to this select group,' according to the the
Chartered Surveyors Survey, published by the Economic Development Briefing
last year.
Unsurprisingly, these sentiments are echoed throughout the industry. Mr
Michael Aukett, chief executive of Aukett, a firm of architects which opened
a Geneva office in 1989, says: 'We are five years ahead of Europe in terms
of business parks and office parks.'
Mr John Pelling, president of a pan-European association of building
surveyors states: 'In the UK, building surveyors are recognised as having
expertise on problems of existing buildings and refurbishment. Continental
Europe lacks that body of expertise.'
Spurred on by their growing self-confidence and the approach of the single
European market next year, the number of UK professionals working in
continental Europe has risen sharply in the past few years. A plethora of
alliances and mergers has emerged in recent years, adding to the handful of
British property-related companies that are already long-established on the
continent.
But, like the Investors Chronicle's comments of 30 years ago, the
expectations of some of the British firms moving into continental Europe are
over-optimistic. For sure, some companies would probably benefit from a more
cautious approach. In most property markets, local operators rarely give
ground to interlopers. The UK property industry, is no exception. For all
its sophistication, the UK sector has more than its share of parochial and
idiosyncratic elements, which often make the skills of British property
professionals difficult to transfer to the continental market.
This problem of incompatibility is being compounded by the impact of
recession, which has checked the momentum built up in recent years for
European expansion.
Demand for UK surveyors' services in Europe has fallen by 14 per cent in the
past two years, though it still outstrips 1990 levels, according to the
Chartered Surveyors Survey.
This downturn may ultimately unravel the weaker alliances that emerged
during the buoyant late-1980s.
However severe its impact, the recession is unlikely to force a rout on the
scale of the cuts experienced in the early 1970s following the oil price
increases. On that occasion most advisers and developers who had gained a
foothold in continental Europe beat a retreat back to the UK.
In spite of these setbacks, property-related professions will continue to
train their sights on Europe, convinced that this is where their future
lies. A report on the future of the surveying profession commissioned by the
Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors last year, said: 'The UK market
must be seen in the context of that for Europe as a whole. . . With the
increasing breakdown of barriers it will be necessary to look upon Europe,
as a whole, as part of our domestic market,' it said.
Against this backdrop, the inroads made by UK surveyors in continental
Europe have still been modest. Just 0.6 per cent of UK surveyors' Pounds
900m annual fees in 1991 were earned in continental Europe, according to the
Chartered Surveyors Survey, while only one per cent of the members of the
Royal Institute of British Architects (Riba) have branches in continental
Europe. And out of Riba-affiliated architects' total fee income of Pounds
1.25bn in 1991, just over half the Pounds 50m earned overseas was from
Europe.
Hit by recession, property-related professionals will find it tough to
regain the momentum for expansion ahead of the barrier-free single European
market. At least architects' skills are mobile; some of Britain's best-known
architects have enviable international reputations, such as the Richard
Rogers Partnership, which designed the Pompidou centre in Paris.
The surveying profession for its part must overcome some daunting obstacles.
First, there is the problem of nomenclature: the term 'surveyor' is barely
recognised outside the UK. Moreover, UK surveyors often do not have a
professional counterpart in continental Europe where the role of a quantity
surveyor, for example, is often undertaken by an architect.
Quantity surveyors have little currency in Germany, for instance, where they
are only employed on 5 per cent of projects, says Mr Alan Baker of Gleeds',
a firm of quantity surveyors with an office in Germany. 'Some (architects),
perhaps understandably, initially see us as undermining their role . . .
others have always seen the cost control function as a necessary
inconvenience and are happy to hand over responsibility to us.'
The lack of uniformity in surveying qualifications throughout Europe is
another problem for UK firms setting up overseas. The Paris office of Gleeds
is run by Mr Jean-Pierre Pajon, who is bilingual and has worked as a
quantity surveyor in both France and the UK. This combination of language
and technical skills is rare. 'Our main difficulty is that we can't transfer
London staff and French people don't have the quantity surveying training,'
he says.
For UK firms, entering a new market also means getting to grips with
different planning, legal and architectural conventions. 'Shoe horning our
system onto their system doesn't work,' says Mr John Gregory, a partner of
Gleeds.
'The lesson is that every country is different. One must not go into a
country and upset the status quo and disrupt what they have done for
generations,' says Mr John Bryden of Gardiner & Theobald, a firm of quantity
surveyors.
In time, the differing practices in Europe may converge, possibly under a
common EC-inspired code.
An increasing flow of planning initiatives in coming out of Brussels, rather
than Westminster, says Mr Tony Baldry, UK environment minister. This should
aid harmonisation of skills and qualifications. 'EC involvement in planning
and development has been likened to an incoming tide. That tide shows no
sign of ebbing,' says Mr Baldry.
In a move designed to influence the debate on harmonising practices, the
Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) is opening an office in
Brussels in the autumn. RICS is concerned that well-organised and large
pan-European groupings of, for instance, lawyers and management consultants
will - through lobbying - exert a disproportionate influence on setting new
standards and codes of practice. Surveyors, because of their traditional
lack of natural alliances in continental Europe, could be left out in the
cold, RICS fears.
The institution's goal is to ensure that surveyors play a leading part in
harmonising practices within Europe's property industry. 'We are trying to
position UK chartered surveyors as leaders,' says Ms Marianne Tisser, head
of the European section of RICS.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920626

