FT922-13406

FT  11 APR 92 / Face to face with the real Soweto: A guided tour of the
township


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


EVERYONE knows what Soweto looks like: a tangled mess of squatter shacks
where armoured cars loom in the background and Zulus prance around waving
spears. Right?
Certainly, television news programmes portray South Africa's largest black
township - with a population of 3m  - that way. Pictures like that make
news. But for the businessman or tourist who finds himself in Johannesburg
for a few days, there is a different vision in store.
Jimmy's Face to Face Tours*, run by the ebullient Jimmy and his side-kick
Oupa, will take you to Soweto in comfort and relative safety for a
three-hour tour costing R55 (Pounds 11). They will collect you from your
hotel - late, true to African tradition  - and catapult you down the Golden
Highway toward the South Western Township (So-we-to) of Johannesburg. You
will travel in a 'combi,' or 'black taxi,' the vehicle which takes hundreds
of thousands of Sowetans the 30km to work in white Johannesburg every day.
Your first view of Soweto will come from a pedestrian bridge over the Old
Potch road, one of only a handful of access routes to the township: the
planning authorities limited entry points so that Soweto could be sealed off
for security reasons in an instant.
Even on a warm summer day, when no one is burning coal or wood for heat, a
pall of smoke hangs over the township. Residents burn malodorous soft brown
coal for cooking, and for heating in winter; it gives Soweto a distinctive
smell and blocks out the sun on really bad days. At night, it refracts the
light from headlamps, leaving visibility poor and creating an air of mystery
and danger.
From the bridge on a bright day, though, Jimmy will show you the treeless
expanse which is Soweto. He promises you the bad, the ugly, the good and the
beautiful about his township. And he answers questions like: 'Why is Soweto
so dirty?' (not that any white tourist would dare ask him such a question,
but he volunteers unasked).
There is a lot of vacant land, he says, which residents use as a dumping
ground; local council officials embezzle funds for refuse removal, which is
erratic at best; and hawking and other forms of informal economic activity
(the kind which prevails in Soweto, where formal retailing was illegal until
recently) create a lot of rubbish. Also, Soweto is overcrowded, with several
structures - the traditional 'matchbox' houses, outside rooms and garages -
wedged on to every tiny plot.
But Jimmy does not focus on the squalor, nor the smoking rubbish tips which
can be seen at most street corners. He is proud of his township. He points
out that there are 23 millionaires in Soweto (Jimmy appears to be well on
his way to that status himself); and Oupa takes us to surburbs such as
Beverly Hills and Diepkloof Extension where multi-story homes, which would
qualify as mansions in any white suburb, are crowded on to the postage-stamp
plot.
Oupa points out the improvements residents have made to their homes:
additions, extensions, fancy front doors, small gardens, burglar bars. He
does not want visitors to think the township stews in its squalor; Sowetans
work hard to improve their surroundings.
Jimmy points with pride to the colourful Shangaan tribeswomen who hawk at
the roadside. They wear layers of extra cloth around their hips to simulate
the plumpness favoured by African men. We cruise past a handful of formal
retail outlets: in spite of its size, Soweto has almost no restaurants,
supermarkets or department stores because apartheid did not permit them.
Oupa points out scores of spaza shops where residents sell cool drinks,
maize meal, cigarettes and other essentials from their front room or garage.
We see barbers, tailors and mechanics plying their trade on waste ground by
the side of the road.
The climax of the tour is Jimmy's home in posh Diepkloof Extension, where he
boasts he bought his 1,000 sq metre plot for R5,000. With his Gauguin print
on the wall, extra-large TV and elaborate drinks cabinet - plus a stool made
from the foot of an elephant, complete with toe nails - Jimmy clearly had
made it into the Soweto bourgeoisie.
Face to Face with Soweto includes no armoured cars or warlike Zulus, and
relatively few squatter shacks. It is not a whitewash, though - just a view
of Soweto's complexity, beyond the cliches.
*Jimmy's Face to Face Tours, run from the Carlton Hotel, Johannesburg. Tel.
011-331-6109.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

920411

