FT923-9627

FT  04 AUG 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: Not all brute force and ignorance -
Weightlifting is full of surprises


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


WHEN the men in leotards stepped up to the platform the other evening,
dusted their hands with talc and tightened the belts around their waists, I
expected a show worthy of a circus.
Weightlifters, after all, are the strongest men in the world, the kind of
physical oddities commonly found in the company of bearded ladies and
two-headed calves. I anticipated bulging muscles, heaving shoulders and
quivering biceps - a show of brute strength. A show is what I got, but not
the one I expected. Weightlifting is full of surprises.
My first surprise was that muscles, shoulders and biceps were not what I
ended up goggling at. It was faces. The event was the final for lifters
weighing up to 100kgs - some of the heavy boys of the sport  - and so a lot
of muscle was on display. But the struggle recorded in the lifters' faces
was compelling. Their features form a record of intense struggle,
determination and anguish.
Every weightlifter has a different set of facial contortions, vocal
expressions and body mannerisms registering the tremendous depth of power
being summoned.
Denis Garon of Canada, for example, contemplates his weights with pursed
lips and a long look of intense concentration before a lift. When the moment
of effort comes, the tendons in his neck stand out like tent ridge-poles,
his forehead takes on the appearance of a corrugated iron roof, his mouth
opens wide and a tiny, strangled 'Ah]' escapes.
Japan's Yoshimitsu Nishimoto, on the other hand, remains serene and
Buddha-like throughout his performance. He gazes at the audience
impassively, throws an inscrutable glance at his weights, and then without a
flicker of emotion goes to work, raising 165kgs of steel over his brush-cut
head.
For sheer spectacle I liked Waldemar Malak best of all. A crop-skulled
22-year-old Pole with a raw, farm boy's face, he treats the barbells like a
personal enemy.
He comes on to the platform forcing short, sharp breaths of air through
clenched teeth. He growls at the audience, growls at his weights, mutters
Polish imprecations, and then with a tremendous 'Yaaaaagh]' drives the
barbells into the air, turning the colour of a good Polish beet in the
process.
Such aggressiveness pays off: Malak won a bronze medal, lifting a combined
total in the snatch and clean-and-jerk events of 400kgs. Two Unified Team
lifters, Russian Victor Tragoubov and Ukrainian Timour Taimozov, took gold
and silver respectively with combined lifts of 410kgs and 402.5kgs.
My second surprise was that weightlifters do not look the way I thought they
would. Bulging, rippling muscles - like walnuts stuffed into a condom, as
Clive James once remarked - are not in great evidence in weightlifters. They
are the trade-mark, rather, of the cosmetic body-builder.
Weightlifters do have tremendous muscle power, but not where you might
think. It is not the arms, shoulders or torso that do most of the
weightlifter's work - their main task is holding the barbell in place once
it has been raised.
By far the greatest part of the power that drives a 200kg barbell from the
ground into the air over a weightlifter's head comes from the quadriceps in
his thighs. Iraq's Nazar Kadir has quadriceps so big they bulged a good inch
or two out over his elastic knee supports. Frenchman Francis Tournefier
looked as if he has had metal bars surgically inserted under the skin of his
thighs.
Another surprise was that weightlifting is not a matter of brute strength
alone, nor even a question of technique added to strength. A good part of
the weightlifter's skill is cerebral. Not all weightlifters read Proust, but
behind the contorted faces and tremendous physical effort lies great mental
discipline.
My final, and perhaps biggest, surprise came after the event was over. At a
press conference I asked gold medal winner Tragoubov what his feelings were
about Andrew Saxton, the British weightlifter who would have been competing
against him that evening had he not been withdrawn for the use of
performance-enhancing clenbuterol.
To the champion it was all news; until that moment he had not heard of two
British weightlifting drug disqualifications in Barcelona. None the less, he
rallied to Saxton's defence. It was distressing to hear such news, he said,
but perhaps there had been some mistake.
What has provoked scandal, shame and endless moral navel-gazing in Britain
has caused little disturbance elsewhere. In most foreign newspapers, the
withdrawal of Saxton and Davies has earned a line or two at the bottom of
the inside sports page. In weightlifters' locker rooms at Barcelona, it
seems, it has not even caused a ripple.
The truth is that in the weightlifting world drug abuse is commonplace, as
the 1988 Seoul Olympics showed. The Soviet Union's Aleksandr Kurlovich not
only won a gold medal in the super-heavyweight class, but set an Olympic
record. He had previously been arrested in Canada for importing steroids,
banned, then reinstated.
His two main competitors at Seoul, another Soviet and a Bulgarian, withdrew
from the competition, presumably because of last-minute fears of improved
drug-testing techniques. When two Bulgarians were subsequently discovered to
have used steroid-masking diuretic drugs, the Bulgarians withdrew their
entire weightlifting team from the Seoul Olympics.
Seen from outside the UK, the British weightlifters' withdrawal is,
unfortunately, a comparatively minor affair. Nor are the days of drug abuse
in the sport over. Not long before the Barcelona Olympics began, Wally
Holland, president of the European Weightlifting Federation, expressed his
concern over the use of a new generation of performance-enhancing drugs.
This is a sport full of surprises. The most disturbing is that such
temptations continue to make strong men weak.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920804

