FT921-3734

FT  12 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Azerbaijan expects to climb oil
reserves league


   By JOHN LLOYD


   BAKU


LEADERS OF the Azerbaijani oil industry believe the politically troubled,
former Soviet republic will soon have proven oil wealth equivalent to that
of a 'middle ranking Middle Eastern state'. Several billions of barrels of
reserves have already been proven by their own experts and by Western oil
companies and more is expected in the next few months.
They are calling for extensive Western investment in the industry, a big
exporter before the 1917 Russian revolution.
Mr Valekh Alekserov, deputy chairman of Azeroil, the state concern grouping
all the republic's oil-related industries, said the reserves were very big,
and 'we expect that we will know about still bigger reserves'. That was also
the view of all the oil men who came to Azerbaijan from the US, Britain and
elsewhere, he added.
Mr Alekserov stressed that the company was anxious to sign a range of
agreements with Western companies - on the basis of production-sharing with
oil companies, which would exploit the reserves, and on a joint venture
basis with industrial companies, which would modernise and develop the
potential of the enterprises, building oil platforms and making oil
production equipment.
The Azerbaijani industry supplies 65 per cent of the equipment to the former
Soviet oil industry, the biggest in the world.
Mr Alekserov said that he was now discussing with western banks and
companies the financing of an oil pipeline, probably from Baku to a port in
the Black Sea, which would allow Azerbaijan to export its own production,
which it refines in the capital but which it must send through a pipeline to
Russia. He said that he expected a decision on this 'very soon'.
A consortium including Amoco and British Petroleum is now conducting a
feasibility study on offshore exploitation, which Mr Alekserov said should
be completed 'in the first half of the year'. He also said that a separate
study was being discussed with BP to prove further oil deposits in a
different sector.
His bullish estimates were borne out by Western oil men in Baku this week,
who talk in the same terms as he does about the potential for offshore
production in the Caspian Sea but with the important proviso that
legislation is soon put in place to protect foreign investment. Another is
that the government - at present a caretaker one following the resignation
of President Ayaz Mutalibov last week - will assure investors of its
support.
However, Mr Alekserov dismissed such fears, saying that 'the government here
did not interfere with us and will not interfere with us. They know that
they cannot develop any policy which runs against the interests of oil
production here. Everyone here understands that they must act in this way if
we want to co-operate with other countries and with foreign companies'.
He admitted, however, that while some legislation had been put in place,
more needed to be passed to bring the framework of law up to international
standards.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920312

