FT924-7990

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement: Decision to scrap special car tax wins
approval - Warning that cost of abolition may be recouped in next year's
Budget


   By KEVIN DONE and JOHN GRIFFITHS


SPECIAL car tax was abolished with effect from midnight last night, in
effect cutting new car prices immediately by around 4 per cent. The price of
a typical family saloon costing Pounds 10,000 should fall by about Pounds
400.
The UK motor industry last night warmly welcomed the removal of the tax, for
which it has campaigned for more than a decade. But the government warned
that taxes on motoring would be raised next year to pay for the abolition.
The removal of the car tax will cost around Pounds 100m in the remainder of
this financial year and Pounds 750m in 1993-94, Customs and Excise said
yesterday.
'This should be recouped within the 1993 spring Budget by raising taxes on
motoring,' it said, which suggests higher fuel duty and a possible increase
in road-fund licences.
The move, which surprised the industry by its timing, completed the process
begun in the Budget in March, when car tax was initially cut from 10 per
cent to 5 per cent.
While the removal of car tax will cut list prices for new cars by about 4
per cent, the fall in 'transaction' prices - the price which is actually
paid by the customer - could be less.
Dealers may seek to improve their margins which have been squeezed by the
recession and the impact of heavy discounting. Sales of new cars have fallen
by around a third in the last three years.
Ford, the leader of the UK new car market, said last night: 'The car tax was
having a very negative effect on car sales, and taken together the
chancellor's proposals could have a positive impact on consumer confidence.
'It is a very encouraging set of measures even if it lacks the boldness some
had hoped for.'
Ford said that the price of its 1.1 litre Fiesta LX small car would be
reduced by Pounds 348 to Pounds 8,357 and the price of a 1.8 litre Sierra LX
would fall by Pounds 525 to Pounds 12,605.
Sir Trevor Chinn, chairman of Lex Service, one of the biggest UK dealer
groups, said the abolition of special car tax would 'reinforce the
improvement' that had already been seen in the new-car market in recent
months.
New car sales had been higher year-on-year in five of the last seven months.
'If this trend is maintained new car registrations next year could well
exceed the current industry forecast of 1.6m,' he said.
'There is clearly an unfulfilled demand for new cars and the reduction in
car tax and interest rates will make it easier for both the company buyer
and private buyers to replace their cars.'
Carmakers had feared that the chancellor would wait until next year's Budget
to abolish car tax, thus depressing sales during the winter.
'There was a real risk that some buyers, aware that special car tax was
halved in the last Budget, would hold off and wait for the other shoe to
drop', said Mr Peter Batchelor, Vauxhall sales and marketing director.
He said the overall package was likely to have a significant impact in
restoring consumer confidence.
INSIDE News and reaction, Page 18 Editorial comment  Samuel Brittan  Joe
Rogaly, Page 19 Analysis, Pages 20, 21 The speech, Page 22 The grey book,
Pages 23-25 Statements, Pages 26, 27

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921113

