FT924-815

FT  22 DEC 92 / People: Promotions at M and S


Marks and Spencer has promoted Joe Rowe, Jim Benfield and Roger Aldridge,
all divisional directors and long-serving M and S men, to the main board.
Rowe, 45, made a divisional director in 1990, now in charge of poultry,
fish, meat and gifts, joined as a trainee merchandiser in 1975 from Unigate
where he had been a systems analyst and then management consultant. Most of
his M and S career spent in the food and clothing divisions, he also served
a year as Lord Sieff's personal assistant when the latter was chairman.
Benfield, 43, who has been responsible for store development and
construction services, came to the company as a management trainee in 1970.
He has been a divisional director for six years.
Aldridge, 45, an Associate of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors,
now looks after estates. He was at J Hepworth before joining M and S in
1973. He was made a divisional director six years ago.
Andy Lusher, head of store operations and property development, retires at
the end of December.
*****
Ken Schofield, MTM's chief executive, has completed the managerial
stable-cleaning and reorganisation of his troubled chemicals group.
James Friederichsen, president of MTM's US operations, has resigned.
He was the last member of the team led by Richard Lines, chairman and
founder, who resigned in March.
Schofield has simplified MTM's structure into operational units and done
away with geographical divisions. Friederichsen ran the now-closed US
headquarters in Charlotte, North Carolina, which formerly employed about 20
people.
Ken Carter has been appointed director responsible for fine chemicals, which
represents about 40 per cent of MTM's turnover. His main task, according to
the company, is to increase plant utilisation at the division's sites at
Kirkby and Rock Hill.
*****
Gregory Hutchings, chief executive of Tomkins, and Ian Duncan, finance
director, have been appointed to the board of Ranks Hovis McDougall, which
the conglomerate took over earlier this month.
Also appointed to the RHM board are Bob Muddimer and Denis Mulhall, both
members of the Tomkins management team who have been in the US integrating
the 1990 acquisition of Philips Industries with Tomkins.
Muddimer will be responsible for RHM's operational management in the UK and
Europe as group president while Mulhall will be chief financial officer.
Tony Reading moves to the main Tomkins board and will be chief operating
officer in the US. He will also have responsibility for RHM's US operations.
Malcolm Swain will take over the position of Tomkins chief financial officer
in the US.
RHM also announced the resignations of Michael Beckett and Bob Rogerson as
non-executive directors of RHM. The other RHM directors who were in place at
the time of the takeover remain on the board.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921222

