FT921-645

FT  27 MAR 92 / Government Bonds: Gilts driven down to pre-Maastricht levels


   By RICHARD WATERS and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


FUTURES-LED trading drove the UK government bond market down again
yesterday, wiping out the gains made earlier this week and putting the
market back to around its lowest levels since before the Maastricht summit
last autumn.
As in recent days, gilts opened unsettled by the latest opinion poll
results, which showed a small lead for the opposition Labour party. The
difference yesterday was a series of nervous rumours that some foreign
investors were selling gilts, and that the Bank of England had offered stock
to market makers.
Together with a poor day for other European bond markets, this pushed prices
on longer-dated bonds down by around  3/4 of a point, though some of the
losses were recovered later in the day.
The long gilt future on Liffe, which had opened at 94 5/8 , advanced to 94
15/16 early in the day, before the bad news wiped nearly a point off the
price. The Bank of England does not have any current tap stock to supply to
the market, but was rumoured to be looking to sell stock unofficially.
The fear of a greater supply of stock was stoked up by hints that some
foreign investors - recently content to wait on the sidelines for the
outcome of the general election on April 9 - had been unloading some of
their holdings.
With apparent resistance at around 94, the futures contract bounced back by
nearly a quarter of a point from its lows of the day.
In the cash market, the mark-down was reflected in longer-dated bonds, with
the 11 3/4 per cent bond due 2003/07 closing around  1/2 point lower than
its Wednesday close. Shorter-dated gilts lost little ground, with the 10 1/2
per cent bonds due 1997 losing less than  1/4 point on the day.
US TREASURY prices weakened at the long end of the maturity range yesterday
as investors swapped long bonds for shorter-dated securities.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government issue was down  17/32 at
100 1/8 , yielding 7.982 per cent. The two-year note, in contrast, was up
1/32 at 100 1/16 , yielding 5.700 per cent.
Although there was no clear cause for the rush to the short end yesterday,
investors are believed to have favoured notes over bonds because of the
belief that the economic recovery will remain anaemic for some time, and
that the Federal Reserve will, therefore, keep monetary policy relaxed for
most of the year.
Long bonds were also hit by the expected announcement of a Dollars 1bn issue
of 50-year bonds by the Tennessee Valley Authority.
The day's only fresh economic news - a 15,000 rise in weekly jobless
insurance claims - was in line with expectations and had no real impact on
prices.
INFLATION figures from two German states came in much as expected, leaving
the bund market still beset by doubts about where to look for any
improvement in the short term. The state of Hesse reported year-on-year
price rises of 4.9 per cent, against 4.5 per cent in North Rhine-Westphalia.
At these levels, analysts said, the overall rise was likely to be around the
expected level of 4.7 per cent.
Bunds remained in a narrow trading range, losing ground recovered the day
before. The yield on 10-year bonds rose from 8 per cent to 8.024 per cent on
the day, while the bund futures contract on Liffe, which opened at 87.30,
lost ground to close at around 87.37.
FRENCH government bonds tracked the German market closely as investors
awaited a cabinet reshuffle promised by Mrs Edith Cresson, the prime
minister. It seems that only the removal of Mrs Cresson herself will bring
much cheer back to the market.
Ten-year French government bonds lost ground yesterday, while maintaining a
yield spread of 66 basis points over comparable bunds.
JAPANESE government bonds moved ahead slightly, with the yield on the
benchmark no 129 falling from 5.33 per cent to 5.31 per cent on the day.
However, government bonds are expected to keep to a narrow trading range
ahead of an expected cut in the official discount rate next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920327

