FT924-8208

FT  12 NOV 92 / UK Company News: BCE looks set for a record year


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


BCE, Cable and Wireless's new Canadian partner, has a reputation at home as
a company which speaks softly but wields a big stick.
Formerly known as Bell Canada Enterprises - and no relation to the US Bell
telephone companies - BCE is Canada's biggest company. Its revenues could
exceed CDollars 20bn (Pounds 10.4bn) for the first time this year, and it is
the only Canadian group to have achieved earnings of more than a billion
dollars a year.
Net income in 1991 was CDollars 1.33bn, or CDollars 4.01 a share, from
revenues of CDollars 19.9bn. The 20 per cent stake in Mercury Communications
announced yesterday is expected to add between 2 and 4 cents a share to 1993
earnings.
The deal with Mercury reflects BCE's eagerness to return to its roots in the
telecommunications business after its patchy attempts at diversification
during the 1980s. A venture into real estate development was a costly
disaster, and it has retreated from investments in energy, pipelines and
publishing.
BCE retains a minority interest in TransCanada PipeLines of Calgary. Its
only other substantial investment outside telecommunications is now Montreal
Trust, a mid-size financial services group.
BCE's cash cow is Bell Canada, its wholly owned subsidiary which has a
virtual monopoly on telephone services to the 15m residents of Ontario and
Quebec.
BCE holds 53 per cent of Northern Telecom, a telephone equipment maker which
last year acquired Britain's STC. Nortel and Bell Canada share ownership of
Bell-Northern Research, an Ottawa-based telecommunications research and
development company.
Three years ago, BCE also acquired a 23 per cent stake in Videotron, the
British cable TV arm of Canada's second-biggest cable operator.
With the arrival of some fresh blood in recent years, BCE's top ranks now
include some of Canada's most respected executives. Its president, Mr Red
Wilson, is a former chief executive of Tate & Lyle's Canadian operations.
BCE was the envy of many a Canadian company last month when it recruited Mr
Derek Burney, Canada's current ambassador in Washington and a former chief
of staff to Mr Brian Mulroney, the prime minister.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921112

