FT924-911

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (9): Experiments for
the future / Profile of Tsukuba


   By STEVEN BUTLER


IN a sprawling complex of government buildings about an hour's drive from
Tokyo lie what the Japanese government hopes will be the seeds of Japan's
next industrial revolution.
Tsukuba is the main campus for the government's science programme. In 1991,
the government spent Y117.3bn to employ 2,526 researchers and 1,093
administrators in an effort to put Japanese science on the international
map.
Tsukuba, and indeed the government's entire programme, is still more of an
experiment than it is the engine room of Japanese technological advance.
What Japan has rightly become famous for has been making a commercial
success out of scientific and technical developments, many of which
originated elsewhere. Whether the government's role in bringing this about
was central or peripheral is still subject to debate. Yet whatever the
outcome of debate among academics, Europe and the US have begun to imitate
the Japanese formula in order to try to bring their own industries up to
international running speed.
What the Japanese government did was to bring private companies together in
government-sponsored programmes in order to develop 'pre-competitive'
technology, for example in semiconductors. Private companies were then able
to take advantage of the basic technology to design products and compete in
the market, in theory giving them a collective head start.
At Tsukuba, supported by the Agency of Industrial Science and Technology
(AIST) under the administrative control of the Ministry of International
Trade and Industry (Miti), the aim is to develop technology that is
somewhere between pure, basic science, and the 'pre-competitive' stage where
private industry is likely to show strong interest.
Miti officials consult industry and the scientific community and then select
research topics and allocate money to areas where they believe basic
scientific research will eventually lead - perhaps in the distant future -
to some technical breakthrough that will be useful to industry.
Increasingly, the process is becoming more open to foreign participation,
with hundreds of foreign scientists visiting each year for stays of varying
durations.
The subjects for research are broad, with institutes for mechanical
engineering, fermentation (including biotechnology), electrotechnology, and
geology. Some of the more interesting projects presently moving forward at
Tsukuba include:
Mr Gen Matsumoto, at the Electrotechnical Institute has developed a
super-high-speed video camera that can actually capture visually the
activity of the brain. With a better understanding of how the human brain
functions, scientists are hoping to build computers that can think, instead
of just compute and process data.
Mr Matsumoto spent five years on research and initially produced nothing,
but he has now perfected a camera, actually a charge-coupled device, that
operates at 0.5 milliseconds per frame.
In the past, brain researchers were forced to develop models of how the
brain functioned by attaching electrodes to animal brains and measuring the
electrical response to stimuli. Yet for practical purposes, very few
electrodes could be attached, forcing scientists to measure a highly complex
process in overly simplified form.
Mr Matsumoto's camera, however, is capable of measuring 16,000 points
simultaneously. A rat's brain is opened and treated with an
electro-sensitive dye and a brilliant picture of how information is spread
through the brain can be watched on a video tape that is slowed by a factor
of 100. Already, Mr Matsumoto says, widely accepted models of how the brain
functions have been put into doubt.
Mr Matsumoto claims that his success in developing the camera was only
possible because he had the freedom to fail for five years, without
producing anything. He doesn't believe this would have been possible in, for
example, the US.
Mr Susumu Takada has developed a super-high-speed Josephine computer that he
says is nearly ready for practical development. A Josephine computer is one
in which high speed is achieved by using circuits supercooled by liquid
helium to achieve superconductivity. Ordinary, silicon chips are limited in
speed because they produce heat - a problem that is intensified as chips
become smaller and smaller yet pack more computing power.
IBM, which had been working on the computer, gave up the project in the
early 1980s as unworkable. Rather than use lead, as IBM did, however, Mr
Takada used the rare metallic element niobiuim and was able to produce a
processor of high reliability.
'In principle, the scientific problems are nearly solved,' he says. The main
obstacle to commercial development, he believes, is the current business
environment. Other projects at the laboratories include programming for
computers to enable them to recognise human faces; hydrogen production from
light-sensitive bacteria; development of powerful robot manipulator arms
using six parallel links; and the development of robot arms with a sense of
touch and the ability to manipulate objects flexibly like the fingers of a
hand.
The main difference with government programmes in Europe and the US is that
Miti takes a more direct approach to deciding on its own what to support and
what to axe. Whether the programmes will counter an often-heard criticism
that Japanese are better at commercialising basic technology than developing
it remains to be seen.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921221

