FT923-9550

FT  05 AUG 92 / International Company News: Medal-winning run for Wall
Street - Patrick Harverson assesses the performance of US securities houses


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


IF THE US securities business was an Olympic sport, Wall Street's
performance in the second quarter would warrant a silver-medal.
A good showing, but not quite up to the sparkling gold-medal display of the
first quarter, when almost every major securities house reported record
profits in the wake of booming stock prices and huge demand from
corporations for securities underwriting services.
Not that anyone is complaining. At most firms, profits, revenues and
return-on-equity ratios were higher than in the second quarter of 1991,
while cost-containment measures introduced at the start of the decade
continued to pay off.
Total expenses, however, actually rose during the three months because of
higher performance-related compensation, itself evidence of buoyant market
conditions.
The favourable interest rate environment continued to be the key factor in
Wall Street's success. The record first quarter drew its strength from the
big cut in interest rates at the end of December.
After rates came down, investors flooded out of low-yielding, short-term
financial assets, such as bank certificates of deposit and money market
funds, and into stocks and bonds as investors went in search of higher
yields.
Although the Federal Reserve did not engineer a major cut in interest rates
during the second quarter of this year, there was sufficient follow-through
from the December policy ease to ensure that large amounts of money
continued to flow into equities between April and June.
The latest figures for net inflows to stock funds (which does not account
for direct investing in the market) show that more than Dollars 19bn was
invested in funds in the second quarter, down slightly from first-quarter
levels.
Those securities firms with a strong presence in the retail stockbroking
market - notably Merrill Lynch, Shearson Lehman Brothers and PaineWebber -
benefited most from continued high levels of individual investor interest in
the stock markets in the form of strong broking commissions.
At the same time, low interest rates have spurred Corporate America, eager
to take advantage of cheap credit, into a flurry of debt and equity issues.
This sent revenues at securities houses with big underwriting books through
the roof. In the second quarter, companies raised a record Dollars 116bn
through stock and bond sales, although there was a modest decline in the
most profitable line of business - initial public offerings (IPOs) of stock
 -which hit firms, such as Alex Brown, which rely more on IPO revenues.
Low interest rates also benefited Wall Street firms in other ways. With a
low cost of borrowing, firms have put their cheap capital to effective use
in the markets, especially in exploiting arbitrage opportunities.
Low rates have also helped keep stock markets relatively buoyant despite a
hostile economic and political environment, thus maintaining the value of
firms' securities holdings.
Also, the big gap between low short-term rates and high long-term rates
enabled firms to borrow short, lend or buy long and enjoy the wide profit
margin in between.
The undoubted star of the second quarter was Salomon in the clearest sign
yet that the giant securities house has recovered from the debilitating
effects of last year's scandal involving its illegal activities in the
Treasury markets.
Salomon posted a Dollars 647m pre-tax operating profit, the largest
three-monthly profit ever recorded by a publicly-traded securities firm.
As always, the bulk of Salomon's earnings came from proprietary trading
activities, and the firm was reportedly helped by a big derivatives-related
windfall at its foreign operations during the quarter.
The one area that is still feeling the impact of the scandal, however, is
investment banking, where revenues fell 16 per cent during the quarter
despite strong demand on Wall Street for bond underwriting, a Salomon
speciality.
There was no holding back investment banking revenues at Merrill Lynch, the
league leader in securities underwriting.
Merrill's investment banking division earned a record Dollars 399m from
selling stock and bonds and from an increase in mergers and acquisitions
activity (M&A). The rebound in M&A at Merrill, and at other firms, suggests
this long-dormant part of Wall Street's repertoire is finally coming back to
life.
Shearson Lehman, the second-largest US broking firm, also had a solid
quarter, with profits rising 37 per cent to Dollars 163m. The earnings
picture at Shearson was similar to other firms - strong proprietary trading
and investment banking revenues offsetting flat or lower stockbroking
commissions and slower IPO business.
Despite the good times, Wall Street has been cautious about boosting its
payrolls. Management is sticking with the more cost-conscious approach
adopted soon after firms realised that over-spending had eaten dramatically
into dwindling profits during the late 1980s.
Those that did take on more staff were mostly retail houses looking to boost
their broking muscle. PaineWebber was one of the biggest hirers. By the end
of the quarter the firm had 350 more brokers than a year earlier, taking the
total to 4,900.
While no one is expecting Wall Street to repeat its stunning first-quarter
performance during the second half of the year, the July reduction in
interest rates, plus recent gains in equity prices, suggest that the third
quarter should see healthy earnings at most firms.
The only real cloud on the horizon is the IPO market, which for the past few
months has been showing signs of distress.
Investors have become more choosy, and market conditions less favourable
(too many IPOs are trading below their issue price to make potential
investors comfortable). A host of planned flotations has been cancelled or
abandoned in recent months, including, last week, a Dollars 380m offer by
cosmetics giant Revlon.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920805

