FT922-3950

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (7): A raider of the City
archives - History


   By DAVID KYNASTON


MERCHANT ENTERPRISE IN BRITAIN by Stanley Chapman Cambridge Pounds 40, 339
pages
ALMOST A decade ago the publication of Stanley Chapman's The Rise of
Merchant Banking transformed the landscape of financial history. Now his
masterly survey of the mercantile sector, sub-titled From the Industrial
Revolution to World War I, and focusing on the 19th century when Britain
dominated world trade as never before or since, has done the same for
another crucial piece in the overall jigsaw.
An ingenious ransacker of often heavily-concealed archival sources, and a
renowned exploiter of the 'free market' of ideas in current research,
Chapman continues to reach parts other historians sometimes do not know even
exist.
The core of the book comprises a series of penetrating studies on specific
themes: the destructive yet cathartic consequences of the French Wars,
clearing out a whole generation of merchants while bringing in another; the
merchants and cotton brokers (mainly in Liverpool) who made their fortunes
out of the Atlantic trade; the British agency houses in India and the Far
East, whose performance was rather better than the recent indigenous
literature would suggest; the City of London's impressively large-scale
textile quarter, mainly to the north of Cheapside, before its warehouses
were bombed out of existence by the Luftwaffe; the response to the coming of
the telegraph; and the way in which, late in the century, trading
enterprises transformed themselves into British-based investment groups,
allowing the advantages of the joint-stock system without the loss of family
control.
Underlying much of Chapman's analysis is a view of British business, and in
particular the City of London, which stresses the importance of diversity -
whether ethnic, cultural or organisational.
One of his great services has been to emphasise the foreign contribution to
the City, a cosmopolitan tradition starting before Nathan Rothschild in the
early 19th century and now continuing after Siegmund Warburg in the late
20th. Many of these immigrants have merged harmoniously enough into the
'Anglo' establishment, others have not, often through their own inclination
to stay apart. There remains much to debate about 'gentlemanly capitalism',
a current favourite concept of the historical profession.
An open City is also a Darwinian City, and at any one time those engaged in
it are keenly aware - and if not, keenly curious - of the credit ratings and
general standing of their rivals and those with whom they do business. Here,
as ever, Chapman makes suggestive use of 'character books', but it is a
shame their human dimension does not come through more strongly.
Take for example the book compiled by Barings in the late 1820s on some of
the City's leading merchants shipping colonial produce to the Continent.
Cordes is 'so cautious and prudent in what he does that the writer
entertains the best opinion of him'; Lobeck is 'far too sanguine a man';
Schmaeck 'is well disposed, but has not sufficient talent'; Walfords & Green
are 'too much of Gentlemen to compete in the Market with the Industrious'.
The book also records their eventual fates. All failed except Cordes - who,
fitting his character, left merchanting altogether and turned . . .
clergyman.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920609

