FT922-3994

FT  08 JUN 92 / Serb forces prepare for final attack on Sarajevo


   By JUDY DEMPSEY and GEORGE GRAHAM


   BELGRADE, WASHINGTON


SERB militia forces yesterday were preparing to launch a sustained and final
offensive against the besieged Bosnian capital of Sarajevo as United Nations
officials tried to put the final touches to an agreement aimed at re-opening
the airport.
Large parts of the city were in flames after a weekend-long artillery and
mortar attack by Serb militia forces and the rump Yugoslav army. Thirty
people, many of them civilians, were reported killed. The airport, like
Sarajevo, has been blockaded for the past nine weeks.
Mr Cedric Thornberry, the UN's special envoy to Sarajevo, said that without
agreement on lifting the blockade, the people of Sarajevo would soon die of
starvation. They have been without supplies of food, water, electricity and
medicine for more than two months.
It will take a few days for the UN to finalise the negotiations, which
entail the deployment of 1,000 UN troops along a 10km ring around the
airport. But the talks could collapse, as have many ceasefires and
agreements.
Mr Thornberry, however, insisted the UN would keep trying. 'We must press
on. We must reach agreement,' he said.
Mr Mirsad Beserovic, a journalist at Radio Sarajevo, said: 'The Serb
irregulars know time is running out for them. This is no longer a war of
conquest by Serbia over Sarajevo. It is a war of destruction. It is pure
evil.'
Serb militia and irregulars continue to blast everything in sight. They
tried to bomb the local reservoir, the government headquarters, and every
administrative building in the city.
George Graham in Washington writes: President George Bush and Mr John Major
said they had no plans to move beyond the current UN economic sanctions
against Serbia and Montenegro. 'We stick with the sanctions, and we make
them tough,' Mr Major said after meeting Mr Bush at the president's Camp
David retreat.
Milosevic fails to convince he is powerless, Page 3

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920608

