FT921-3693

FT  13 MAR 92 / Paramount makes a pitch for the Yankees


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


FANS of the New York Yankees gave a rousing cheer yesterday as it emerged
that Paramount Communications, the cash-rich entertainment and publishing
conglomerate, was preparing to make a pitch to acquire the once legendary
baseball team.
The cheering, however, was not so much an appreciation of Paramount's
expected bid - which might total as much as Dollars 250m - as in
anticipation that Mr George Steinbrenner, the team's much-hated majority
shareholder, might finally be ready to sever his 19-year-old ties with the
team.
The 62-year-old Mr Steinbrenner - who in 1990 was banned by America's
baseball commissioner from any day-to-day responsibility for the Yankees
after allegations related to a payment he made to a gambler - is roundly
despised by Yankee fans who accuse him of letting the team stagnate amid
endless controversy.
Paramount, which is sitting on a cash balance of nearly Dollars 1bn, already
has a significant investment in the Yankees. The entertainment group's MSG
cable television sports network three years ago paid Dollars 500m for an
exclusive contract to broadcast Yankee games until the year 2000.
Paramount also owns Madison Square Garden, the site of many sports events,
as well as two of New York's champion clubs, the Knickerbocker basketball
team and the Rangers ice hockey team.
The Yankees, alas, are far from being champions. The Bronx-based team
remains both profitable and America's most prestigious baseball franchise -
it is, after all, the team that was made great by legends such as Mickey
Mantle and George Herman 'Babe' Ruth. But fans blame the imperious Mr
Steinbrenner for wreaking havoc at the club and most would be delighted to
see him sell his 55 per cent shareholding, along with 19 other minority
investors.
Mr Steinbrenner has made some 20 managerial changes at the Yankees in the 19
years since he bought the team from CBS, the television network. Mr Billy
Martin, the best known manager of the club, was fired and reinstated as
manager no fewer than five times.
In the summer of 1990 Mr Fay Vincent, the baseball commissioner, suspended
Mr Steinbrenner from engaging in day-to-day decisions after finding his
conduct to be 'not in the best interests of baseball.'
The conduct in question was a Dollars 40,000 payment made to one Howard
Spira, a gambler who was alleged to have provided Mr Steinbrenner with
damaging information about Mr Dave Winfield, a superstar Yankee player with
whom Mr Steinbrenner had feuded.
The full story remains murky, but Mr Steinbrenner is said to be determined
to get his own back against the baseball commissioner, even if this means
launching a lawsuit after selling out his majority control of the Yankees.
Mr Steinbrenner, meanwhile, was keeping a low profile yesterday. He was said
to be discussing the possible sale with his partners in Florida, where the
team is warming up for the forthcoming new season.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920313

