FT923-10959

FT  28 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Travel blues


THE LABOUR party's suggestion that the government consider compensating
those who lost money in last week's collapse of the Land Travel coach
company will receive little sympathy from the majority who take the trouble
and can afford the expense to book their holidays through better-protected
organisations.
Most holidays are sold through companies affiliated to the Association of
British Travel Agents (Abta) or other trade associations, which offer a high
level of protection to customers. Land Travel, which was not an Abta member,
was an exception.
The government insists its proposed regulations will ensure that from the
beginning of next year, all purchasers of package holidays will be as well
protected as the majority are today. In their current form, however, the
proposed regulations are unlikely to prevent future Land Travels.
The aim is to implement a European Community directive due to take effect at
the beginning of 1993. This stipulates that travel companies make
arrangements to ensure holiday makers receive compensation and can return
home if their company collapses.
The directive will not require changes to be made to the sale of air charter
holidays, since UK providers of these already have to be licensed and
arrange bonds to protect their customers. The bonds are backed by the Air
Travel Trust Fund, set up in the 1970s through a levy on holidays and
shortly to be topped up via the same mechanism.
Travel by land and sea presented the government with a more complex
challenge. Many providers of non-air package holidays are small companies; a
hotel in Scotland which also offers golf is a provider of package holidays.
It would be expensive and impractical, the government says, to license all
of these.
Abta suggested the government distinguish between holidays abroad and at
home. All companies taking travellers out of the UK should be licensed and
bonded, Abta said. A surface travel fund should be set up along the lines of
the air travel fund.
The government has now agreed to the establishment of such a fund, but
membership will be voluntary. Surface travel companies which remain outside
the fund will have to make arrangements to protect their customers. Trading
standards officers will check they have done so, but it will be difficult
for them to know whether arrangements are adequate, and there will be no
reserve fund to back them up if a company fails.
The government has reason to resist yet more molly-coddling of package
tourists. Why, after all, should package holiday makers be better protected
than those who buy pensions? But if the government is going to regulate
holidays - and the EC directive gives it no choice - surely it is better to
have a simple, universal system for holidays abroad of the kind Abta has
recommended. At least that would be effective.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920728

