FT923-6597

FT  22 AUG 92 / Victory for human ingenuity: The checkerboard battle between
God and a computer


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


IT IS POSSIBLE that at about 7pm this evening the human race will absorb a
big dent to its collective pride. That is when a draughts (or checkers)
match between the world's strongest-ever player of the game and a computer
designed to beat him is scheduled to end.
The human, Dr Marion Tinsley, a mathematics professor from Talahassee,
Florida, has been the strongest exponent of what Americans call checkers
since 1955. During that time Dr Tinsley has lost only five games.
On Wednesday, at the match venue, London's Park Lane Hotel, the good doctor
lost the sixth game of his career to Chinook, a computer programed by
Jonathan Schaeffer of the University of Alberta, Canada. Tinsley was, by all
accounts, astounded by the denouement of this game, and just marginally
consoled by the fact that he had won the only previous decisive encounter of
the best-of-40 series.
According to The Times, if Dr Tinsley does lose the match 'another fragment
of man's dominion will have been stripped away by the microchip.' Tinsley
takes the thing even more metaphysically. He is that most American thing, a
born-again Christian. 'I'm sure I have a better programer than Chinook has.
God gave me a logical mind,' Tinsley told The Independent. 'I don't want to
let my programer down, and I'm sure I won't'
I know how Dr Tinsley feels. Three years ago I challenged the world's
strongest chess program, Deep Thought, to a game. Earlier that year, Deep
Thought, programed at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh and partly
funded by the CIA, had started to beat grandmasters in tournament play.
My theory was that the chess masters were losing because they played against
Deep Thought as if they were dealing with a human. They were trying to
out-calculate the brute. And since Deep Thought assessed 750,000 positions a
second that was attacking the enemy at his strongest point. My (not very
original) theory was that one should attack at the machine's weak point -
strategy.
I took on Deep Thought by telephone. Each of us was allotted 30 minutes for
all moves. I had not played tournament chess for years, but everything
seemed to work like a charm. By avoiding violent contact, and posing only
positional rather than tactical threats, I achieved a winning position. But
then came the problem. To win even the most overwhelming position, it is
necessary to engage in some tactics. I could not find a way through, and
lost on time.
'Tough game,' said the programer down the line with the condescension
typical of a victorious human. In reality, it is no sort of triumph for a
computer to beat the mind of Dominic Lawson, although chess, with its
1,000,000,000,000,000, 000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000, 000 (or 1044)
possible positions, is hardly susceptible to the exhaustive analysis
favoured by the electronic brain. The number of possible draughts positions,
however, is thought to be no higher than the square root of that of chess,
which indicates that Dr Tinsley really is up against it.
I do not care much about draughts, and would not lose much sleep if it
became what mathematicians call a 'trivial' or solvable problem. But I would
grieve if that fate overtook chess. The game would die if grandmasters could
simply copy from the computer by rote all the best opening variations and
responses. They would themselves become enslaved by the computer's
omniscience; their artistic and creative achievements would be at an end.
Even now chess grandmasters routinely use computers in overnight end-game
analysis, and some brilliant variations attributed to certain unscrupulous
grandmasters should in fact be attributed to the mind of the machine, or
rather to that of some computer scientist in Moscow or New York. And here
lies the point which I hope will not elude Dr Tinsley, should he lose his
match against Chinook later today.
Rather than become all maudlin and apocalyptic at the thought that his
God-given brain has been bested by a soulless computer, Dr Tinsley should
use his logical mind to work out that the brain of Jonathan Schaeffer,
Chinook's programer, is no more or less a creation of God than his own
cerebral cortex. If Marion Tinsley loses the title he has held for 37 years,
he will be a victim of human ingenuity.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920822

