FT922-4372

FT  05 JUN 92 / Botnar 'renowned for his bullying'


   By KEVIN DONE


MR OCTAV BOTNAR, chairman and managing director of Nissan UK, the former
importer-distributor of Nissan vehicles in Britain, had a reputation for
bullying and 'hiring and firing people', it was alleged in the High Court
yesterday.
Mr Stan Cholaj, a former assistant managing director of Nissan UK, claimed
that in the 2 1/2 years he was employed at the company from late 1986 to
early 1989 'there were over 100 executives on the Pounds 40,000 per annum
category who were hired and fired by Nissan UK'.
Mr Cholaj is seeking damages of more than Pounds 1m from the company for
wrongful dismissal and breach of contract.
Mr Botnar, for whom an arrest warrant was issued by the Inland Revenue in
January, is giving only written evidence to the hearing. He was said by
counsel for his company to be in Switzerland.
In his evidence Mr Cholaj said that Nissan UK strategy discussions were held
each day at lunch. He alleged that Mr Botnar 'used these occasions to
humiliate employees against whom he had taken a dislike. As a result, some
directors were too terrified to attend and ate their lunch in their own
office.'
He claimed that Mr Botnar 'had a reputation at Nissan for being extremely
difficult and rude to management'.
He said that from early 1988 'Mr Botnar's conduct towards me amounted to
more than just the abruptness, arrogance and bullying for which he was
renowned.
'I became aware that Mr Botnar was displaying a hostile attitude to me which
was different from his normal treatment of senior management. I was
increasingly concerned that Mr Botnar was specifically seeking to undermine
me.'
Mr Cholaj alleged that from April 1988 Mr Botnar 'changed my instructions
whenever I was out of the building. He held meetings in subjects where I
would be directly responsible without allowing me to attend. He told
employees 'not to deal with me'. As a result, I would have to ask
subordinates what the decisions had been so that I could implement them.'
Mr Cholaj alleged that Mr Botnar had put his (Mr Cholaj's) name on a memo Mr
Botnar sent in 'intemperate' language to Mr Ian Gibson, then deputy managing
director at Nissan Motor Manufacturing UK, the Japanese carmaker's plant at
Sunderland. 'It was a deliberate ploy to upset relations with Nissan
Manufacturing and I was being used as a tool.'
Mr Cholaj said there were Nissan dealers 'who clearly did not trust Mr
Botnar and claimed that he broke promises made to them, such as DC Cook plc
and J. Martin of Edinburgh'.
He added: 'It was clear from my dealings with Mr Botnar that the
maximisation of sales is the sole basis upon which any individual is
measured (whoever they be) and he is ruthless, both with his employees and
with his dealers in pursuit of those sales.'
The hearing continues today.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920605

