FT922-4572

FT  04 JUN 92 / International Company News: BHP decision boosts Foster's
shares


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


FOSTER'S Brewing Group shares rose 8 cents to a 19-month high of ADollars
2.08 yesterday as Australian investors showed their support for a decision
by Broken Hill Proprietary (BHP) to put Mr John Elliott's International
Brewing Investments (IBI) into receivership.
Analysts said BHP's action had laid the groundwork for a significant
recovery in the value of Foster's shares, which have been depressed by the
financial instability of IBI and International Brewing Holdings (IBH), its
privately-owned parent.
BHP shares closed unchanged at ADollars 14.40, indicating that investors
believe BHP has the financial strength to carry out its pledge to stabilise
Foster's by doubling its exposure to the group to more than ADollars 2bn
(USDollars 1.53bn).
BHP appointed receivers to IBI on Tuesday after Mr Elliott failed to produce
a plan to repay its preference investment of more than ADollars 1bn.
Mr Elliott controlled 32 per cent of Foster's through IBI, and a further 6
per cent was directly owned by IBH, a private company established by
Foster's managers in 1989.
IBH acquired loans of about ADollars 2.6bn to finance the acquisition of its
Foster's shareholding, which was worth about ADollars 1.6bn when the
receivers moved in. The company was unable to meet interest payments because
of a lack of dividends on the Foster's shares, its only asset.
Mr Elliott is expected to return to Australia from New York shortly to
discuss the receivership with Mr David Crawford, the KPMG Peat Marwick
accountant who has been appointed joint receiver of IBI.
BHP is believed to be keen to develop proposals for a merger with Foster's
put forward last month by SA Brewing.
Meanwhile, BHP said talks were continuing with a syndicate of banks led by
Hongkong Bank Australia, which is owed ADollars 1.2bn by IBI. BHP has
offered to buy the debt to prevent a dispute over security which could
destabilise Foster's.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920604

