FT921-11707

FT  30 JAN 92 / Maxwell told to answer questions on pension funds


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


MR Kevin Maxwell appears to have lost his legal battle to remain silent
about the whereabouts of Pounds 450m missing from the Maxwell pension funds.
The appeal court ruled yesterday that he must tell investigators all he
knows about the funds.
The court said he could not rely on the long-established privilege against
self-incrimination to justify refusing to answer questions. These have been
put to him under the 1986 Insolvency Act by the provisional liquidator of
Bishopsgate Investment Management (BIM), which managed Maxwell pension
funds. It was clear that parliament had by implication intended the
privilege should not be available to people facing questions under the 1986
act, the court said.
Mr Maxwell claimed the right to remain silent because of the risk that he
might incriminate himself in the face of possible criminal charges.
In a separate appeal in a private action brought by Mirror Group Newspapers,
the court said Mr Maxwell did not have to comply with an order made last
December requiring him to disclose information about Pounds 170m missing
from MGN.
The action did not involve legislation in which parliament had expressly or
by implication removed the privilege against self-incrimination. It had long
been established in English law that a person facing possible criminal
charges could rely on privilege to avoid answering questions that might
incriminate him, the court said.
The court refused both Mr Maxwell and MGN leave to appeal to the House of
Lords. Last night Mr Maxwell was still considering whether to apply directly
to the law lords for leave to appeal.
The appeal judges also refused to suspend a High Court order made last year
requiring him to answer the provisional liquidator's questions, pending the
outcome of any law lords hearing.
Mr Maxwell, who also faces questioning by a Commons select committee on the
same matter, refused to comment. Mr Monty Raphael, his solicitor, said:
'Obviously Mr Maxwell is disappointed with the outcome and will review his
position today.'
It also emerged yesterday that Mr Maxwell's legal battles are being at least
partly funded by a mystery benefactor. The existence of the 'funder', as he
was referred to in court, came to light in an affidavit of means.
AN EARLY sale of Mirror Group Newspapers was ruled out last night by
administrators to the late Mr Robert Maxwell's private interests. Mr John
Talbot, one of the administrators, said Mr Maxwell's 51 per cent stake was
not for sale at present.
Lombard, Page 19
French investment, Page 21
Lost appeal, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920130

