FT924-765

FT  22 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Adam may take legal action against KPMG
Peat Marwick


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


ADAM & CO, the private Edinburgh-based bank which lost more than twice its
capital in unauthorised foreign exchange dealing, is contemplating
litigation against KPMG Peat Marwick, its auditors who were replaced at the
annual meeting yesterday by Ernst & Young.
Sir Charles Fraser, chairman, said the bank had been advised that there was
a prima facie case against Peat Marwick in whom the board had lost
confidence. 'I don't think anyone would be surprised that (litigation) is a
possibility,' he said.
In September Adam & Co revealed that it had lost Pounds 21m in irregular
operations on behalf of a client by two foreign exchange dealers in its
London branch. Although the bank's Pounds 10m capital was wiped out, it was
immediately rescued by Mrs Francoise Schlumberger Primat, a 75-year-old
director and principal shareholder who injected Pounds 21m.
Although two foreign exchange dealers have been sacked no one has left the
board as a result of the affair and shareholders re-elected it at
yesterday's relatively peaceful meeting.
But Mr David Simpson, general manager (investment) of Standard Life which is
a shareholder in Adam & Co, questioned at the shareholders meeting whether
it was right that the bank's senior management should remain in place after
the loss.
The annual report, he said, stated that 'the basis of the problem (leading
to the loss) lay in the expansion into an area of business with which
management was unfamiliar, as a result of which the correct controls for
that particular business were not put in place at the time.'
He also quoted a letter which Peat Marwick sent to shareholders in which it
said 'it now appears that (Adam & Co's) control mechanisms over foreign
currency transactions were not properly operated by management.' In previous
years they had recommended strengthening controls. 'These recommendations
were accepted but not fully implemented,' Peat Marwick wrote.
Sir Charles said the bank rejected what Peat Marwick was saying but did not
elaborate on the dispute. He said those responsible for the running of the
bank had to stay in office to help it and its shareholders in their
predicament.
He said that Mr James Laurenson, deputy chairman and managing director, and
any other directors, would have resigned if the report into the affair which
the bank commissioned from Price Waterhouse had so recommended.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921222

