FT922-4050

FT  08 JUN 92 / International Company News: Banc One to buy Key Centurion
for Dollars 536m


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


BANC ONE, the fast-growing Ohio-based commercial banking group, is to
acquire Key Centurion of West Virginia in a stock deal worth Dollars 536m.
The purchase of the 54-branch bank, which represents Banc One's sixth
acquisition of the year, will bring the group's total assets to Dollars
75bn, more than double their level at the start of last year.
The rapid growth of the bank, which has made a dozen small to medium-sized
acquisitions over the past 18 months, is as striking as its ability to avoid
the large loan write-offs and other difficulties experienced by much of the
US banking industry.
Under the leadership of Mr John McCoy, chairman and chief executive, Banc
One has been concentrating on a conservative lending policy in the retail
banking sector and has maintained a return on assets that is among the
highest in US banking.
Last year Banc One bucked the national trend by turning in a 25 per cent
increase in net profits, to Dollars 529.5m.
After the Centurion deal, which will add Dollars 3bn of assets, Banc One
will control 58 separate banks with more than 1,300 branches in 12 states.
As such the bank is taking advantage of gaps in state banking laws to become
one of the most geographically diversified of US banking groups.
Mr McCoy said in an interview at the weekend that Banc One had made 109
acquisitions since 1967. He stressed the focus on retail-oriented bank
acquisitions that allow Banc One to achieve a leading market share in each
region in which it has expanded.
Although Mr McCoy's management is admired by many, the ambitious expansion
of Banc One, which only two months ago did a Dollars 1.2bn stock deal to
acquire Valley National Bank of Arizona, has drawn criticism from fellow
bankers.
'I think McCoy has done a terrific job of building up Banc One, but I worry
that he may be doing too much,' said the chief executive of a New York bank.
'They have a lot on their plate now. It would not surprise me to see them
developing a hiccough at some point,' commented Mr Dan Martin, a banking
analyst at Standard & Poor's, the rating agency.
Mr McCoy responds to such concerns by stressing his acquisitions have mainly
been of banks with healthy balance sheets and that he has never acquired a
bank more than a third the size of Banc One.
He also notes that unlike most US banks, Banc One has an unusually low
proportion of property lending, which is roughly 13 per cent of the bank's
total loan portfolio, or half the average of many bigger banks.
'Nobody had to call us to ask how much loan exposure we had to Olympia &
York. We are focused on retail banking,' he said.
The Centurion deal is unlikely to cause any problems, according to S&P. This
is because the West Virginia bank is very liquid, with a Dollars 1.4bn loan
portfolio and Dollars 3bn of total assets.
A recent study by Salomon Brothers concluded that despite the speedy growth
in assets, the recent acquisitions are unlikely to cause a 'material
impairment of earnings'.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920608

