FT921-3946

FT  12 MAR 92 / Baltic shipyards count cost of Treuhand deal: The economic
and political aspects of the rescue of an ailing industry


   By LESLIE COLITT


EAST Germany's crisis-racked shipbuilding industry was granted a new lease
of life this week but on a greatly reduced scale.
Six thousand east German shipbuilding workers who occupied the shipyards for
two weeks converged yesterday on the state parliament of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern in Schwerin to vent their anger over the sale by the
Treuhand agency of the industry's core to two European shipbuilders.
Shipbuilding is the sole industry in the east German state of
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern on the Baltic Sea, a rural region whose agriculture
is in equally serious trouble. The fate of the east German shipbuilding
industry raised a political storm between two of the partners within the
Bonn coalition government, the Christian Democrats and the liberal Free
Democrats, over the issue of state aid to ailing industries. It also
threatened to break up the ruling coalition in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern which
mirrors that in Bonn.
East Germany's shipbuilding industry was largely created after 1945 to build
ships for Moscow as part of war reparations. It was the largest exporter of
ships to the former Soviet Union, which accounted for 80 per cent of the
industry's orders. The industry employed nearly 45,000 workers in 1989.
Fewer than 20,000 workers remain and roughly half of these jobs are expected
to be axed in the next two years.
Fifteen gleaming new ships ordered by Moscow, which is unable to pay for
them, lie moored at the Warnow and MTW shipyards in Warnemunde and Wismar on
the Baltic coast.
The undelivered vessels, symbols of a debt-ridden industry, are costing the
German taxpayer DM300,000 (Pounds 104,000) a day in maintenance and
insurance charges. Built to the buyer's specifications, they are virtually
unsaleable in the west.
The shipyards, grouped in the Treuhand-owned Deutsche Maschinen- und
Schiffbau (DMS) holding company in Rostock, managed to land western orders
for 60 new ships in 1990. But productivity in east German shipbuilding is
still low by western and far eastern standards and the orders will not stem
the losses.
The Treuhand was determined to sell as much of the industry as it could to
private buyers. Mrs Birgit Breuel, Treuhand president, says she believes
only private investors can successfully restructure the former state
companies.
Any agreement on the sale of the shipyards would include state subsidies and
will have to be examined by the European Commission. The Commission has said
a restructuring plan will have to aim to make the industry competitive by
the end of 1993, when all Community subsidies are due to end.
The deal announced this week is a compromise solution after the failure of
an earlier plan in which the Treuhand would have retained a large stake. It
follows feverish negotiations involving the Treuhand, Chancellor Helmut Kohl
and key federal ministries, the state government in Schwerin and the IG
Metall union.
Vulkan of west Germany is buying 100 per cent of the MTW shipyard and the
Rostock engine company, while Kvaerner of Norway is to get the Neptun-Warnow
shipyards. The Treuhand says it is in talks with western companies for the
sale of the industry's other two shipyards.
Mrs Breuel, who believes the deal will win Commission approval, said it was
the best possible solution under difficult political circumstances and
suggested she believed the EC would approve the deal.
A week ago, the Treuhand was still considering a rival package. Vulkan
originally offered to buy a 51 per cent share in the MTW yard along with the
Rostock diesel engine company and the Neptun-Warnow shipyards. This was
backed by all sides in Germany - the CDU-led coalitions in Bonn and in
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern state, as well as the shipyard workers. However,
Brussels signalled doubts because of Treuhand's involvement.
Yet even the revised formula, sharing the core of the industry between the
two buyers, means the Treuhand will be paying several billion D-Marks in
subsidies. The agency will assume more than DM1bn in debts, several hundred
million D-Marks to pay for environmental restructuring to meet west German
standards, and it will take on losses from current sales amounting to about
DM1.6bn. The Treuhand will also spend DM900m modernising the shipyards
before the sale.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920312

