FT924-6040

FT  24 NOV 92 / Bonn U-turn on intervention: Pact near to avert east German
industrial collapse


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THE German government, opposition and trade unions appear headed towards
agreement on long-term state intervention to prevent the complete collapse
of east Germany's former industrial heartland.
The deal would be the core of a 'solidarity pact' between the government and
unions, as well as employers and the 16 federal states, involving a
commitment to wage restraint from trade union leaders.
Agreement on such a pact could provide just the sort of indicator demanded
by the German Bundesbank as a precondition for any significant further
reduction in interest rates.
Mr Bjorn Engholm, leader of the opposition Social Democrats (SPD), had more
than an hour of talks with Chancellor Helmut Kohl yesterday at which demands
for an interventionist industrial policy topped the agenda.
Emerging later, he welcomed the government's change of heart on industrial
policy. 'I am pleased that the government is apparently seriously planning
no longer to abandon heavy and core industries, but to salvage them,' he
said.
However, he said he still differed with the chancellor on the timing of any
tax increase to finance the extended burden of eastern subsidies. 'We differ
by around 24 months,' he added.
Mr Kohl has promised that there will be no new tax rises before 1995 - after
the next general elections.
The aim now is to keep key industries going in eastern Germany, even if the
Treuhand privatisation agency fails to sell them off to the private sector
in the next 12 months. At present, there are about 3,200 such companies on
the Treuhand books, and investment from the west is slowing markedly.
Such a policy would amount to a significant reversal of government strategy
in the east, and an important victory for the trade unions to present in
exchange for wage restraint. The government has until now insisted that
companies unable to be privatised would have to close.
The change in direction was confirmed yesterday by Mr Jurgen Mollemann, the
economics minister, who is immediately responsible for subsidy programmes in
eastern Germany.
In a radio interview after talks among leaders of the ruling coalition on
Sunday night, he said the government was determined to prevent the
'de-industrialisation' of the region.
'Companies which cannot be privatised at the moment, but which it is clear
could be salvaged, will be kept alive over an extended period with
government funds so that the industrial core is not lost,' he said.
The policy switch was also confirmed by Mr Peter Hintze, secretary-general
of Mr Kohl's Christian Democratic Union (CDU), who said there was agreement
in the party leadership over the proposal that 'industrial cores' in east
Germany be preserved.
The unions, led by Mr Franz Steinkuhler of IG Metall, the engineering
workers' union, and Mrs Monika Wulf-Mathies, of the oTV public sector
workers' union, have demanded key industries should be defined according to
their sector and regional importance.
They conducted several rounds of secret talks with the chancellor before
details emerged last week.
Before Mr Engholm went in to yesterday's talks with Mr Kohl, his SPD party
declared a new industrial policy in the east was top of its agenda.
Party secretary, Mr Karl-Heinz Blessing, said: 'Whole branches are
threatened, like engineering and the textile industry. We cannot expect new
private investment in the new Lander in significant amounts.' He quoted the
example of Mercedes-Benz' recent decision not to go ahead with a DM1bn
(Pounds 400m) truck plant south of Berlin.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921124

