FT923-10835

FT  28 JUL 92 / Arts: Lessons drawn from history - Drawing in Bologna
1500-1600


   By SUSAN MOORE


ONE OF the most extraordinary features of the Renaissance in Italy is the
emergence of distinctive regional styles of painting and drawing. Among
these local schools the Bolognese only achieved the highest distinction with
the rise of the great triumvirate of the Carracci - Annibale, his brother
Ludovico, and their cousin, Agostino. This loan exhibition, Drawing in
Bologna 1500 - 1600 at the Courtauld Institute Galleries in London, the
fourth in a series of drawings shows organised by Sotheby's, ends where most
would begin.
Its finale concerns the early years of the Carracci in Bologna, before
Annibale's move to Rome and the classical triumph of the Farnese Gallery.
The main event allows a number of little - known artists to take the
spotlight. However, its fascination comes not so much from what it can teach
us about a neglected period of art or about the forerunners of one of the
greatest of painters, but because it reveals quite how unexpected and
exciting drawings can be.
Again and again it demonstrates how indifferent painters can turn out to be
distinguished, even influential, draughtsmen. Moreover, it highlights how
the medium of drawing allows a far greater freedom and spontaneity than is
ever available to a painter. A case in point is the substantial sheet - on
the evidence of this exhibition at least, there was no shortage of paper in
16th century Bologna - by Girolamo da Carpi.
Although as a rule hardly the most inspired of artists, he shows the flight
of Daedalus and Icarus against a romantic landscape with a memorably evoked
expanse of water. He has washed the paper a pale sepia to create a mid -
tone, and then added darker brown as well as white heightening to broaden
the tonal range, giving depth to the foliage, the landscape and to the
portentous clouds above the doomed Icarus. Pen is employed sparingly for the
figures, but it is these fluid ink washes that create an effect of real
poetry.
The visual qualities and technical range of these sheets more than outweigh
the undeniably recondite function of this show. Groups of drawings by, say,
Francesco Primaticcio and Bartolomeo Cesi reveal their mastery of red chalk.
The former favours a pinkish prepared ground for his graceful draped male
figure, the latter chooses blue paper of the kind first found in Venice for
his delightful study of a boy playing a viola da gamba. Neither is
especially prolific or celebrated as a painter, but they are both wholly in
their element on paper.
The exhibition also highlights the unpredictibility of the relationship
between an artist's way of drawing and way of painting. While there are many
artists - and the Flemish - born Denys Calvaert is the prime example here -
whose artistic personality remains the same whatever the medium, there are
others who seem to undergo a sea change.
There is considerable disagreement concerning the authorship of the
paintings variously given to Pellegrino Tibaldi and Nosadella, for example,
yet their drawing styles are quite distinct. Bartolomeo Passerotti is
another of these split personalities. Most of his paintings are not that
dissimilar from other late-Mannerist productions by the likes of Samacchini
and Sabatini - not the comic double act their names imply - but his drawings
are radically different.
Executed in a boldly hatched pen and ink technique, they are inspired by the
work of the Florentine Baccio Bandinelli, but go much further in their
freedom of touch. Three are particularly fine. One from Christ Church,
Oxford, is a preparatory study for a painting of the Adoration of the Magi,
in which the normal sequence of execution has been inverted.
Renaissance art treatises from Alberti onwards invariably recommend that
figures be studied in the nude and only then draped; it is evident here that
the nude studies came second.
There is every reason to believe that the study of the human figure from
life, which was one of the great revolutions of the Carracci academy, was
needed. Yet the way in which they - and Agostino in particular - used the
pen is inconceivable without the example of Passerotti.
His other great appeal is an eccentric fascination with low life, which
anticipated the genre studies of the Carracci. Hideous kissing couples,
slavering in a manner worthy of late Picasso, exotic animals and peoples,
are among the quirkiest of the period.
By the mid century Bologna had become a centre of scientific study, and
Passerotti's scrutiny of the more grotesque aspects of the natural world was
prompted by the explorations of his friend, Ulisse Aldrovandi, the noted
naturalist.
Here a splendidly repellent pair of demons, one all but concealing the
other, and an enchantingly flamboyant heraldic dragon, represent this side
of his art.
With the latest drawings - at least in this inevitably selective showing -
the honours are fairly evenly divided. The Carracci are rivalled if not
surpassed by the extravagant black chalk male nudes and boldly washed sheets
by Pietro Faccini. He is a Second Eleven painter but an unforgettable
draughtsman. You only have to look ahead to Guercino - who makes the first
team but arguably also excels on paper - to witness the effect a minor
master like Faccini can have.
The exhibition continues at the Courtauld Institute Galleries, Somerset
House, until August 31

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920728

