FT922-432

FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: Alive with the sound of music .. - Off the Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


TOMORROW the Heritage Secretary David Mellor will join a sing-in at Clapham
Common, watch marching bands in the Mall, and end the day in Birmingham with
the CBSO. His number two, Robert Key, will be singing a West Country ballad
in Salisbury before moving on to a Jose Carreras concert in Bath.
This is not the usual weekend over-time of our arts supremos. This is their
contribution to National Music Day. It is big of them, really, since the Day
was the inspiration of the previous Arts Minister, Tim Renton, whose work
Mellor is studiously dismantling. Renton had been sold he idea by Mick
Jagger who, in his turn, bought the concept from Jack Lang, the French
Minister of Culture. Jagger will be strutting his stuff tomorrow at the
Hammersmith Odeon while Renton will be ballooning hither and thither before
finally descending on Carreras in Bath.
Compulsory music for all is perhaps more suited to continental taste than
British, but with Pounds 100,000 of Government money and sponsorship by
Carling and Coca-Cola, Music Day is taking a hold on the national
consciousness. In all there will be over 1,500 events, ranging from a
multi-thousand voice rendition of The Messiah at Olympia to a thousand pub
singalongs orchestrated by Carling.
The only part of the arts world playing the Day fairly diminuendo is the
Arts Council. True, its Secretary General Anthony Everitt will be opening a
cornucopia of jazz, blues and busking in his local Essex village of
Wivenhoe, but the chairman of the Council, Lord Palumbo, will be mute. But
then the Arts Council has never liked initiatives that come from alternative
arts bodies.
The management, soloists, chorus and orchestra of the Royal Opera House,
Covent Garden leave all their worries about diminishing audiences,
sponsorship shortfalls and re-development delays behind them next week as
they fly off to Japan to perform three Mozart operas at the Asahi Beer
Festival.
This is the first major overseas tour by the opera company for six years and
is nicely copper bottomed, sponsored by both RTZ and Asahi, and bound to
bring back a profit. It is another example of the first law of arts funding:
if the Government will not provide more money, talk to a Japanese
businessman.
The trip to Japan is timely. The Royal Opera House has just formed a joint
company with Pioneer, the giant electronics company, which will lead to
around 20 Covent Garden productions being retained for posterity on CDV, the
new technique which brings video to the compact disc. The first production
to be recorded is Domingo's Otello in October. It is wonderful for Pioneer,
which is desperately short of desirable products to market alongside its new
equipment, and quite nice for Covent Garden, which in the past has never
quite managed to get the reproduction of its repertoire to work as well as
expected.
Business is getting no better for the dealers in modern art, and in their
idleness all the talk is of the next gallery to go belly up. It is brave,
then, of Bonhams, which has never managed to make much of a mark in this
area, to recruit a bright young expert who will be holding her first auction
on July 16. Claudia Wolfers has the right sort of pedigree. Her father David
runs the New Grafton Gallery and she learned the ropes at Agnew's.
Her main objective has been to put such low estimates on the works on offer
that private collectors will feel silly if they do not start buying again.
For example, 'The Little Brown House' by Christopher Wood carries a low
estimate of Pounds 6,000. It had hung on a dealer's wall for ages priced at
Pounds 14,000.
Around 40 per cent of the lots come from dealers desperate to raise money to
pay off bank overdrafts, including stock from two more galleries which have
recently thrown in the towel - Trinity and Red Square, which specialised in
Russian art. Holding distress sales for dealers seems to be the main growth
area in the auction market.
The two opening lots are paintings by Jack Yeats and Ben Nicholson, both
estimated at around Pounds 30,000. The Nicholson abstract has a nice
history. Its unlikely home since it was painted has been 'Mandalay', the
Cornish house rented by Daphne du Maurier and the atmospheric backdrop to
her novel Rebecca. The Nicholson hardly inspired her - she had tucked it
away face down, an unromantic intrusion of modernism.
I do not know the going rate for a bust of Norman Lamont but I doubt whether
it currently approaches Pounds 800,000. That is the price Sotheby's is
hoping for on Thursday when it offers for sale a sculpture of an Egyptian
chancellor. Senbef was in charge of the accounts around 650 BC and did such
a good job that the Pharoah had a portrait of him modelled and inscribed
'sole beloved companion.'
It is regarded as one of the most sensitive and finely crafted works of
antiquity and if it makes its target will establish a record price for any
Egyptian antique. It will also have proved a good investment. It sold in
1979 for just Pounds 68,000.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920627

