FT924-8211

FT  12 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Receiver expected at Barrett


   By ANDREW BOLGER


HENRY BARRETT Group, the Bradford-based steel and industrial fasteners
group, has joined the list of small late-eighties stock market stars to
crash to earth.
The shares were suspended at 7p yesterday, valuing the group at Pounds 3m,
compared to a peak of Pounds 110m in 1989.
The company asked for the suspension at 8.50am, pending clarification of its
financial position.
No statement was forthcoming yesterday, but the appointment of a receiver is
expected today.
Henry Barrett, which employs about 750 people, grew rapidly after flotation
in 1987.
It benefited from the last construction boom and bought 13 companies in an
attempt to diversify away from the inevitably cyclical core business of
steel stockholding and making steel-framed buildings.
The group's problems were precipitated by the collapse in demand for
steel-framed warehouses and out-of-town stores from retailers such as MFI
and Texas Homecare.
And the acquisitions programme meant that the group entered the downturn
with a heavily-geared balance sheet.
Although most of the companies concerned have since been sold, the group was
heading for a loss this year and in July said its debts stood at Pounds 18m.
The diversification was masterminded by Mr Stuart Greenwood, then finance
director, who departed two years ago to join Spring Ram Corporation, the
Bradford kitchens and bathrooms group, as main board director.
The collapse is a cruel blow for Mr James Barrett, 37, and his brother, Mr
Richard Barrett, 35, who helped buy out the 48 per cent of shares held by
family members and bring the company to market.
The brothers, who respectively manage the stockholding and construction
divisions, are great-great-grandsons of the founder, Henry Barrett, who
started in 1866 as an iron merchant,
The company had been trying to reduce its working capital and improve
efficiency under the chairmanship of Mr Donald Parvin, a former chief
executive of Matthew Clark, the mechanical and electrical engineers. Mr
Parvin became chairman last December and assumed an executive role in July.
The group had been making some progress, but it is understood that an
unexpected problem exhausted the patience of its banks, led by Barclays,
which were increasingly alarmed by the trading outlook.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921112

