FT924-11379

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (11): Plethora of
indices at hand - Barry Riley discusses benchmarks and measurement


   By BARRY RILEY


   TRADITIONALLY most


if not all - fund managers have performed better than the average, and have
been more than happy to provide figures to prove it. But the age of
statistical sleight-of-hand may be passing, with the advent of more rigorous
measurement techniques and the increasing tendency for clients to set very
specific performance benchmarks.
Investment authorities around the world have recently been attempting to
clean up performance measurement standards. In the US, for instance, the
Association for Investment Management Research has established so-called
Performance Presentation Standards, which will become effective at the
beginning of 1993. And in the UK a voluntary Pension Fund Investment
Performance Code has been introduced by the National Association of Pension
Funds and other trade bodies, effective from the middle of this year.
A plethora of indices is available to provide the benchmarks against which
portfolio performance can be measured, but just two series of equity stock
indices dominate the picture for global equities.
The older series, the Capital International indices sponsored by the New
York investment bank Morgan Stanley, is especially well-entrenched among
American funds and consultants. A more recent and easily available rival is
part-sponsored by the Financial Times, the FT-Actuaries World Index series
which appears daily in the FT. It is also backed by another US investment
bank, Goldman Sachs, and by the UK's County NatWest.
These global indices are constructed on a building block basis, so that
individual country indices - there are 24 in the FT-Actuaries series - are
combined to create various regional, continental and global benchmarks.
Common principles include capit-alisation weighting, so that the indices
track actual portfolio behaviour, and some regard to the availability of
individual stocks to international invest-tors, who in some countries face
restrictions on what they can buy.
There are also national and international bond indices, notably the Salomon
Bros World Government Bond Index. Other leading broking houses produce their
own indices - such as the series of Global Benchmark Bond Indices produced
by Union Bank of Switzerland.
Even in the esoteric world of bond indices, however, there are
controversies. Salomon has upset some bond managers by this month including
Italy in its world index, because some doubt whether Italian debt can any
longer be regarded as of high quality.
The use of equity indices can be controversial, too. Some prefer a quite
different approach to the benchmark problem, which is to compare a fund's
performance with that of competitors with a similar investment objective.
This is very common with British pension funds, for instance, which are
routinely measured against the average or median fund.
Mr Dugald Eadie, chairman of the Edinburgh-based World Markets Company,
perform-ance measurement specialists, explains that balanced funds investing
in different types of assets cannot be compared with any single index. Also,
sponsors often want to know how much risk their fund managers are taking.
'The peer group approach allows a measurement of risk around the index,' he
says.
But specialist funds invested in one particular asset class are more
suitable for measurement against an index-related benchmark.
There have, however, been problems in the past with indices applying to less
efficient stock markets subject to distortions.
Japan is the best example, where principal sectors such as financials (and
until recently the telephone company NTT) have been difficult or impossible
for international funds to invest in.
During a particular year the foreign managers have therefore tended either
all to underperform or outperform an index such as TOPIX. The peer group
approach can therefore be more satisfactory.
But there can be conceptual problems when benchmarks are tailored too
specifically to the requirements of fund managers.
Mr John Clamp, chief executive of another UK-based performance measurement
company, Combined Actuarial Performance Services (Caps), points out that
British pension funds tend to be dissatisfied with a straightforward World
ex UK benchmark for inter-national equity portfolios. 'For certain funds the
view is being taken that the spread of the world index on a market
capitalisation basis is incorrect,' he says.
This is because British pension funds usually have a lot more invested in
Continental Europe than, say, in Japan, although capit-isation weights would
suggest the reverse.
Therefore a customised peer group benchmark is calculated by Caps, using
individual country indices weighted by the geographical split of the average
pension fund.
Timeliness, however, can also be a factor in the choice of benchmark,
according to Mr Eadie.
'Index benchmarks are available very quickly, within two days of the end of
the quarter,' he says. 'Peer group averages may take many weeks.'
In the UK pension fund industry, according to Mr John Clamp, there is in
practice roughly a 50-50 split between index-related and peer group
benchmarks.
Meanwhile, more and more indices are being created, and increasingly
sophisticated benchmarks are being devised. In the US there are large cap,
mid cap and small cap indices and managers are also categorised according to
growth, value and many other styles.
Consultants are designing benchmarks on a mix-and-match basis, and they can
be individually tailored for a whole range of specialist managers mandated
by a pension plan. Such capitalisation-segmenting indices have now appeared
in the UK with the publication of new FT-SE indices such as the Mid 250.
The question, however, is whether complex benchmarks based on a variety of
sources will actually help clients, or whether the trustees and other
sponsors will end up being bamboozled: 'It's a very real danger,' admits Mr
Clamp.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921026

