FT922-4354

FT  05 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Maxwell MPs to inform ombudsman of
DTI role


   By ALISON SMITH


MPs CAMPAIGNING on behalf of the Maxwell pensioners will submit to the
parliamentary ombudsman that the Department of Trade and Industry knew that
the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation (Imro) felt unable to
carry out its duties adequately but did not take full account of those
concerns.
The MPs are preparing the submissions after a statement from the ombudsman,
Mr William Reid, making clear how far his jurisdiction extends in the
context of the plight of the Maxwell pensioners.
Mr Reid said that he was not able to entertain complaints against the
Securities and Investments Board or Imro.
He added, however, that if there was evidence that the DTI had ignored
representations about the adequacy of regulations, then that might be
something he could consider.
Any evidence that the DTI's licensing of London Bishopsgate Investment led
to losses by the pensioners could also be considered.
His clarification was welcomed by Mr Richard Page and Mr Frank Field, the
joint chairmen of the all-party group campaigning on behalf of the Maxwell
pensioners, as a helpful move forward. Mr Page said that members of the
group would be drafting submissions that addressed the specific points
raised.
Mr Michael Meacher, the shadow social security secretary, said that Mr
Reid's statement might well be of assistance to the pensioners and their
representatives.
His Labour-sponsored debate in the Commons next Tuesday will focus on the
need to implement part of the Social Security Act 1990, which provides for
pension schemes where the liabilities exceed the assets to be regarded as
creditors of the parent company.
In the Lords yesterday, Lord Henley, a junior social security minister, said
the government was 'very actively considering' implementing the provision.
He warned, however, that powers were limited and offered no guarantee of the
return of missing assets.
The pensioners' campaign group has written to the 398 MPs who have
constituents caught up in the Maxwell affair, urging them to support early
implementation of the section.
Mr Meacher will also concentrate on the need for immediate help for the
Maxwell pensioners through enabling funds to continue paying pensions while
the assets are being pursued.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920605

