FT921-15357

FT  10 JAN 92 / Loser in ports bid challenges Rifkind


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


THE EMBARRASSING furore over the first trust port privatisation grew
yesterday as another of the frustrated bidders for Tees & Hartlepool
protested to Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the transport secretary, about the outcome.
Maritime Transport Services, which operates the Thamesport container
terminal on the Isle of Grain in Kent, has written to Mr Rifkind saying it
does not understand how it lost to a rival bidder when it offered the
highest price.
Tees & Hartlepool Port Authority, which refereed the auction, astonished the
ports industry last month by selecting Humberside Holdings, the second
highest bidder, instead of either the highest bidder or the hotly tipped
management-employee buy-out team.
A cross-party delegation of MPs led by Mr Stuart Bell, the Labour MP for
Middlesborough, is seeking a meeting with Mr John Major, the prime minister,
claiming that the port authority's evaluation of the bids was defective.
One of Mr Bell's concerns is that Humberside Holdings promised the port
authority's board a seat on the new company's board if its bid succeeded. Mr
Bell feels this could lead to a conflict of interest.
Mr Geoffrey Parker, MTS's chairman, said yesterday that a meeting with
Department of Transport officials had 'increased rather than defused the
confusion felt by the company and its backers', which include County
NatWest, the merchant bank, and Legal & General, the insurer.
'Our original reaction of being gracious losers in a fair fight has since
been transformed into concern and dismay that the evaluation process now
appears to have borne little relation to the published criteria,' he said.
MTS's stance increases the pressure on Mr Rifkind to overturn the port
authority's decision. The buy-out team has threatened to seek a judicial
review if he fails to do so.
The issue will come to a head in the Commons next week when MPs are asked to
approve an order pro-viding for the government to claw back a proportion of
any property profits made by Humberside Holdings after the sale.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920110

