FT922-4430

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (11): Back in the global fast lane -
Post-sanctions trading partners now focus on subsidies and tariffs


   By PHILIP GAWITH


THE PAST two years have seen South Africa's re-integration into the
mainstream of world trade proceed at a dizzy pace. The list of inward- and
outward-bound trade missions is endless and civil servants who used only to
dream of international visitors now complain at their frequency.
Perhaps the best measure of the speed of the whole process is that South
Africa has already reached the stage where the privileges of access have to
be balanced by the duties of conforming to international trading norms.
During the sanctions era the country's political laws attracted attention. A
signal measure of progress is that South Africa's trading partners are now
starting to focus on such relatively banal matters as trade subsidies and
tariff policy.
Although some countries and organisations, and states and municipalities in
the case of the US, still maintain sanctions, that era, for all practical
purposes, is over. The repeal of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act (CAAA)
last July in the US was the main domino to fall. The other important
developments were President F W de Klerk's visit to Nigeria in April,
effectively signalling South Africa's full acceptance into Africa, and the
easing of attitudes by the Scandinavians, the most uncompromising in their
anti-apartheid stance.
Although the great flurry of business and political visitors testifies to
the changed position, trade figures are less startling due mainly to the
depressed state of the world economy which has dampened export
opportunities, thus preventing the emergence of any obvious sanctions
dividend. The value of South Africa's merchandise exports grew by 8.5 per
cent in 1991, while their volume rose by 3.5 per cent.
While much, correctly, is said about the potential of African markets for
South Africa, its main trading partners remain the world's largest economies
 -Germany, Japan, the US, the UK and Italy. The pattern in all cases is
familiar: South Africa exports commodities to these countries, often of a
strategic nature - gold, coal, vanadium, platinum, ferrochrome - and imports
manufactured goods. Trade with these countries dwarfs trade with Africa
which was estimated at R10bn in 1991. South Africa's total visible trade in
1991 was R114bn.
Deepening its exposure in these existing markets will, however, increasingly
go hand-in-hand with entry into new markets where incremental growth
opportunities lie. The opening up of new markets coincides with a shift in
the composition of South Africa's exports. The strategic nature of many of
South Africa's exports meant that they were largely untouched by sanctions.
The growth opportunities are in those areas where South Africa has not
traditionally exported - manufactured goods, and increasingly services,
especially to Africa, but also to East and Central Europe and to the Far
East. A high proportion of South Africa's manufactured exports are sold to
African countries and South African exports to Africa grew by 40 per cent in
1989 and 22 per cent in 1991.
This trend is already evident in the trade figures. Export of manufactured
goods increased by 21 per cent in 1991, following a 19.5 per cent increase
in 1990. The period 1987-1991 saw manufactured goods as a percentage of
total exports increase to 18.5 per cent from 13.5 per cent. The fact that
this performance correlates closely with world economic growth over the same
period casts doubt on the extent to which trade sanctions really affected
South Africa.
This judgment is endorsed, at least in the case of the US, by Mr Don
Steinberg, counsellor for economic and commercial affairs at the US Embassy.
He notes that the CAAA only applied in areas that were relatively
insignificant in value terms, such as textiles and fruit. Last year
bilateral trade between South Africa and the US was Dollars 3.8bn,
consisting of Dollars 2.1bn US exports and Dollars 1.7bn South African
exports.
Mr Steinberg points out that, notwithstanding sanctions, South Africa
accounts for almost half of all US exports to sub-Saharan Africa and a
similar portion of all non-oil imports from Africa by the US. It can
reasonably be assumed that the pattern is similar for South Africa's other
main trading partners. The year 1990's figures of visible trade show South
Africa's main trading partner was Germany, with trade of Dollars 4.9bn,
while the US, Japan, Italy and UK were all in the Dollars 3.5-Dollars 3.9bn
bracket.
Two major disadvantages which confront South Africa as a trading nation is
that it does not belong to any trading bloc and, according to Mr Wim Holtes,
chief executive of the South African Foreign Trade Organisation, 88 per cent
of its exports are long-distance. Mr Derek Keys, the minister of trade and
industry, has said he considers it a priority to achieve some sort of trade
agreement with the European Community. The few trade agreements are with
countries in the region and countries in East and Central Europe which, in
the post-Communist era, were as desperate for friends as was South Africa.
It is clearly also in South Africa's interests to develop its neighbouring
market. Three problems, however, prevent any quick realisation of this
ambition: lack of finance to pay for goods on the part of South Africa's
neighbours; lack of suitable goods in those countries which South Africa
wants to buy; and the problem of 'giantism' - South Africa being perceived
as an imperialist power intent on dominating its neighbours.
South Africa's return to the international fold, and its own economic needs,
are also focusing attention on the country's tariff structure. The external
catalyst comes in the form of the Uruguay Round of GATT. South Africa has
made an offer which, when implemented, will involve a gradual reduction in
ad valorem duties to a maximum of 30 per cent, while the number of tariff
lines bound against increase will rise by 42 per cent to 57 per cent of the
total 11,000-12,000 tariff lines. Mr Gerhard Breyl, deputy director-general
of the department of trade and industry, says South Africa's ability to
effect more dramatic reductions is limited by its membership of the South
African Customs Union (South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and
Swaziland) whose other members want high tariffs to protect infant
industries.
The internal impetus for tariff reform is the government's acceptance of the
need to shift the economy from an inward to an outward orientation to boost
growth. The Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) produced a report in
1990 which recommended that import duties be lowered substantially, but in
tandem with other steps by government, such as a lowering of income tax,
reduction of the import surcharge and lower inflation and interest rates,
which would give local companies a fair chance of competing in international
markets. Revenue constraints on government, however, have prevented it from
delivering the fiscal side of this deal, and this clearly impacts on the
pace at which tariffs can be reduced.
Though Mr Keys talks of a 'strongish anti-subsidy feeling in government',
free market critics are scathing of the government's unwillingness to go the
Argentine route and effect overnight, drastic tariff reductions. Mindful,
however, of unemployment already at high levels, the government is not
prepared to engage in disruptive tariff reduction that risks aggravating
this problem. Mr Keys says such a fundamental shift in industrial
orientation takes time and requires training programmes and a social
security net which South Africa lacks. 'It just doesn't seem responsible to
me' (a wholesale tariff reduction).
Mr Keys argues that South Africa is anyway not a high tariff country. He
says tariffs are generally low, with high peaks in certain areas where
formula duties, which rise automatically as the price of the import rises,
apply. He says the revenue raised from tariffs on imports is about 6 per
cent of their total value.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920605

