FT921-15530

FT  09 JAN 92 / Letter: A drastic, but workable way to create a market
system in Russia


   From Mr BRINSLEY BEST


Sir, John Lloyd's article (December 31) on the freeing of prices in Russia
calls the measure 'a cruel necessity'. He also states that prices are
'certain to rise by threefold or more' as a result.
Even so, Yeltsin's price liberalisation need not fail. At the start of
'perestroika', the black market was not all that significant. By 1988, it
was estimated to be about 100bn roubles out of total household disposable
income of about 560bn roubles. This would be about 20 per cent of the value
of sales and less than 10 per cent of the volume at then prevailing price
differentials.
In 1991, the value of black market sales could be about 25 per cent of total
consumer expenditure, and perhaps a little over 10 per cent of volume, the
total of which may have declined through shortages.
Rampant inflation is not inevitable. If the two-tier market is abolished
then the average price for the two markets should prevail. After some
adjustments, perhaps to soften the blow for the 'mafia', ordinary prices
might rise by about 20 per cent, while falls of between 40 and 60 per cent
should be seen in prices charged on the black market.
This all assumes the renewed assertion of control over the printing of
roubles. This done - and automatic inflation adjustment of certain wages
stopped - the rouble could quickly rise on the free market, thus reducing
the utility of the massive amount of hard currency already in circulation,
estimated at USDollars 20bn, or about 2,000bn roubles at the free market
exchange rate, compared with the official figure of annual disposable income
in 1989 of 652bn roubles.
Ukraine's and other republics' objections to all this are quite
understandable. At end-September 1991, the price of beef and eggs and many
other foodstuffs on the free market in Moscow was two to three times higher
than in Kiev or Voronezh. Tomatoes and certain fruits cost about four times
more in Moscow than in the Caucasian republics.
Price liberalisation in Russia will automatically attract more produce to
Moscow and St Petersburg, even through the 'official' channels, to the
extent that transport permits. In addition, if Russia controls the printing
presses, it can deny roubles to other republics, thus making it difficult
for them to buy their own produce. Hence, the urgency which Ukraine attaches
to introducing its own coupons and, eventually, currency.
Yes, the measures may seem cruel, but they are a long way from the forced
confiscation of food from the countryside under 'war communism', and from
collectivisation. Though drastic, they may prove to be the only workable and
humane solution to avoid social unrest and to build a genuine market system
in the shortest time, provided those on the lowest incomes are assured
supplies.
Brinsley Best,
9 Rue Bergere,
75009 Paris, France

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920109

