FT921-15408

FT  10 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Negotiations to reopen on
Kambalda nickel mine


   By KEVIN BROWN


WESTERN MINING Corporation, the Australian mining group, yesterday said it
planned to reopen negotiations with the Australian Workers' Union on the
future of its Kambalda nickel operations in Western Australia, which the
company has threatened to scale down.
WMC also said it had withdrawn about 100 redundancy notices due to take
effect today to demonstrate good faith in advance of a discussion of
unspecified 'initiatives'. A further 50 redundancy notices expected to be
issued today will be delayed.
The group said in November that it would not proceed with a proposed
ADollars 105m expansion of the Kambalda operation because of the refusal of
the union to accept proposals for continuous mining. However, it is believed
to have agreed to reopen negotiations after managers had a meeting with Mr
Ian Taylor, the deputy premier of Western Australia, earlier this week.
WMC wants to increase deep mining at several mines in the Kambalda area,
where it produces around 35,000 tonnes of nickel a year. The project was
part of a ADollars 400m (Pounds 160m) spending programme intended to
increase the group's total nickel output to 65,000 tonnes a year from
53,000.
However, the group says expanded deep mining cannot be competitive unless it
is accompanied by seven-day working, which it has been trying to introduce
for more than a year. The company claims the union is responsible for
'months of obstruction, strikes and divisive behaviour' at Kambalda.
The project appeared to be progressing well earlier this year when WMC was
given approval by the Induistrial Relations Council to move from five-day to
seven-day working. However, it was postponed last month after the state
government delayed the implementation of changes to the Mines Regulation Act
needed to allow continuous working.
WA is the only Australian state where continuous seven-day working is
forbidden by law.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920110

