FT923-9616

FT  04 AUG 92 / Disarray deepens in Bush camp: President forced to disown
senior aide's savage attack on Clinton


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


THE DISARRAY in President George Bush's re-election campaign deepened
yesterday as he was forced to disown a senior aide's savage, personal attack
on Mr Bill Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee.
A White House spokeswoman, travelling with the president in Georgia, said Mr
Bush was 'very upset' that Ms Mary Matalin, his political director, had
released a venomously worded document on Sunday which virtually accused Mr
Clinton of marital infidelity, among other sins. Ms Matalin had apologised
to Mr Bush for having overstepped the mark, the spokeswoman said.
Ms Matalin herself issued a statement that was barely an apology at all. She
merely regretted possibly leaving the impression that she had violated Mr
Bush's proscription on personal attacks, but added that she stood by her
criticism of Mr Clinton for 'unprecedented hypocrisy' and for disparaging
'in the most egregious and personal terms the president of the United
States'.
Until yesterday, it had appeared that Mr Bush's previously confused campaign
was finally beginning to take shape, with the president adopting a
relatively high road, attacking Mr Clinton only on policy issues, while his
surrogates went for the personal jugular.
Ms Matalin had been joined in this task by Mr Marlin Fitzwater, the White
House press secretary. However, Mr Bush's disavowal of their unrestrained
approach may be no more than a temporary tactical retreat. It is still
expected that the presidential campaign will get dirty again in the three
months to go before election day.
The particular bone of contention was a 'news release' issued by Ms Matalin
in the form of a series of questions for Mr Clinton.
The last question read: 'Which campaign had to spend thousands of taxpayer
dollars on private investigators to fend off bimbo eruptions?' This was a
reference to a newspaper report that Mr Clinton had brought back a former
assistant to check the stream of allegations purportedly being peddled to
the tabloid press from women claiming to have had affairs with him.
Another passage ran: 'We respectfully request you and your fellow Democrat
snivelling hypocrites read our lips; shut up and sit down so we can get back
to more highlights of the Clinton record.' Mr Fitzwater's principal target
has been Senator Al Gore, Mr Clinton's running-mate, describing him as 'Mr
Sell-out America' for having criticised the president's performance at the
Rio environmental summit.
Then, last week, another spokesman commented on the fact that Mr Gore and
his family had taken counselling after their son was nearly killed in a car
accident, by saying: 'Real men don't get on the couch.'
How the low road plays with the electorate is anyone's guess. It is possible
that Americans are now more concerned with improving their own lives than
with revelations about another 'smoking bimbo', but if Mr Bush continues to
trail badly in the polls, it is hard to believe his campaign will not
resuscitate the 'character' issue.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920804

