FT921-450

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Political leaders lose the limelight - Media
Watch


   By IAN HARGREAVES


THIS WAS the week a frustrated media stormed the platform of a dull election
campaign and seized the microphones from the politicians.
Surrounded by cameras, Mirrorman interviewed Expressman. The editor of The
Independent coyly declined to be pressed further. Mr Kinnock's press officer
made an emotional address. If Jennifer's ear didn't ache before, it must be
throbbing now.
All the serious papers, of course, found it a shocking distraction from the
important issues facing Britain. Then they piled into the fray - it's not
just the voters of Great Grimsby who were tiring of an election composed
entirely of debates about tax tables.
Political experts say that anything which puts health in the headlines helps
Labour, which all goes to show how little the media affects public opinion.
Polls regularly show strong public opposition to the government's health
service reforms, even though all the daily broadsheets think Labour would be
wrong wholly to reverse them.
As for the whodunnit, the Tory tabloids were loud and vicious, News at Ten
boldly said the Conservatives had come off best on day one and the Guardian
assailed Roy Hattersley, shadow home secretary, for double standards. 'Will
Mr Hattersley now propose privacy legislation to prevent the identity of
5-year-olds in Labour party broadcasts from being revealed?' the paper
asked.
Into this chaos an ancient knight did stride: it was Sir Robin Day's turn to
interview the prime minister, for Thames's This Week. Sir Robin could not
have looked more uncomfortable as he reshuffled his cue cards to lead in
with questions on what he called 'this wretched row'.
By the time the interview reached the important issues facing Britain, it
had lost pace and direction. Sir Robin is no longer match-fit for this sort
of thing, but his regular spots on BBC Breakfast News with Norman Tebbit,
Denis Healey and Lord Jenkins offer one of the campaign's few oases of
crafted political discourse.
The best-conducted big television interview so far was that between David
Dimbleby and Paddy Ashdown on Panorama this week. Dimbleby's opening
strategy for the interview - to identify the fact that the sweet-smelling
Lib Dems are the highest tax party in this election - was delivered with
impressive precision.
An altogether different technique was at work when Brian Walden met John
Major last Sunday. Walden had decided that Mr Major will always meet
reasoned inquiry with plodding, reasoned response and set out instead to
extract emotion. The prime minister refused to apologise for the poll tax or
to express personal grief at the plight of the unemployed. It was like
watching killer bees buzzing around the head of the man smoking the Hamlet
cigar. I thought Mr Major was badly stung.
On the whole, though, Mr Major has given a prodigious number of interviews
and made few errors. Mr Kinnock's minders will be nervous as he faces Walden
on Sunday, Dimbleby on Monday and Day next Thursday.
Don't worry if you're bored by all this. The viewing figures for Week One of
the campaign show that, as usual, TV news is less watched in elections than
at any other time. Which leads me to Des Wilson.
Mr Wilson, who calls himself the Lib Dems' general election director (others
call him, through gritted teeth, Mr Ashdown's deputy), is angry that his
party has not been getting its theoretically allotted 28.5 per cent of
airtime. In a letter to The Independent, he lamented this media squeeze. But
he noted that - in spite of this neglect - polls show Mr Ashdown has been
the campaign's most effective leader.
Think again, Mr Wilson - you have accidentally discovered the secret of
success. Keep your man off television and win the election. Leave the podium
clear for journalists.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920328

