FT923-6520

FT  24 AUG 92 / Arts: The Provoked Wife - New End Theatre, Hampstead


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


SIR John Vanbrugh (1664-1726) was the architect of Castle Howard and
Blenheim. He also wrote a number of plays, of which The Relapse with its
memorable character of Lord Foppington, previously Sir Novelty Fashion, and
The Provoked Wife remain the best known.
The Relapse was performed first - at Drury Lane in 1696. The Provoked Wife
was performed next, but may have been written earlier - possibly when the
young Vanbrugh was a soldier-prisoner in the Bastille. Nobody is quite sure
about the origins of the play.
Anyway, both works are among the best of English drama. The Provoked Wife is
playing now at the New End Theatre in Hampstead.
As a play, it declines as it goes on, but does so from a very high level.
The subject is what to do about an unsatisfactory marriage at a time when
the divorce laws were considerably less flexible than today. Vanbrugh's
conclusion seems to be that there is nothing very much that can be done, at
least until the law is reformed, but there are nevertheless some wonderful
lines and situations along the way.
Sir John Brute (played by John Ashton) confesses at once that anything
touched by his wife turns him off.
Lady Brute (Corinna Richards) sacrifices some of the sympathy she might
deserve by openly admitting that she married him only for money. Provoked by
Sir John's debauchery, she sets off in pursuit of an affair of her own.
There is also a sub-plot. Lady Fancyfull, the female equivalent of Lord
Foppington in The Relapse, believes that she is the greatest beauty in
London and is teasingly wooed by the handsome, but poor, Heartfree. 'Your
vanity, madam,' he tells her, 'I take to be about eight degrees higher than
any woman's in the town.'
Plot and sub-plot, servants and mistresses, all eventually come together as
Heartfree falls for Lady Brute's niece, Bellinda.
But forget about the structure. The Provoked Wife is one of the few English
sexual comedies, past or present, where the bulk of the dialogue takes place
not between male and female, but instead with men talking to men and women
to women.
The best example is Lady Brute talking frankly to Bellinda (Caroline
Lintott) about how to woo men. There is also Carol Holt's Lady Fancyfull
talking to her French maid (Adrienne Swan) who replies mainly in French and
has a more worldly attitude than the English.
The male discussions are pretty open as well, not least between Heartfree
and Constant (Jon Harris) who has been wooing Lady Brute for two years
without success.
The difference between the two of them, Heartfree tells him, is that 'I
persuade a woman she's an angel; she persuades you she's one.'
Apart from the comedy and farce, there is a serious play trying to get out
which must have had an influence on, among others, Oscar Wilde. The writing
is fine throughout; almost architecturally so.
The original text was subject to some censorship. In his main drunken scene,
when he was taken before the magistrate, Sir John was dressed as a parson. A
version appeared later with him dressed instead in his wife's gown. This
revised version may have removed some clerical satire, but it provides more
recognisable humour. The later version is rightly played here, though
neither has a great deal to do with the theme.
At the end, the Brutes come together again, but it remains ambiguous whether
they will stay so, or indeed whether Constant will give up his pursuit.
Production is by Tina Marshall and direction by Jonathan Best. The set is
almost bare, but the absence of trappings takes nothing away from the play.
Earlier this year, I praised Pirandello's As You Desire Me at the same
venue. If this standard is maintained, the New End Theatre will be catching
up with the Bush and the Gate as small theatres that must be watched.
New End Theatre, Hampstead until September 13. (071) 794 0022

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920824

