FT921-14305

FT  16 JAN 92 / Bush promises reform of health care: President admits errors
on economic forecasts as he hits campaign trail


   By LIONEL BARBER


   EXETER, NEW HAMPSHIRE


PRESIDENT George Bush hit the campaign trail in New Hampshire yesterday with
a pledge that his State of the Union address to the US Congress later this
month would include details of a comprehensive plan to reform health care.
Mr Bush, seeking to reverse the slump in his popularity, said the plan would
be part of a growth package to revive the US economy, but he vowed to avoid
'quick fix solutions' and to focus instead on long-term measures to promote
investment.
'Stay tuned,' said the president during his whirlwind one-day trip to the
state where he faces a critical first primary election test on February 18.
Mr Bush had hoped to defer unveiling proposals for health care reform until
after the November election, but the Democrats have turned it into a big
campaign issue.
Mr Bush has been wounded by criticism that he is paying too much attention
to foreign affairs and not enough to problems at home, such as the 35m
Americans who have no health insurance.
Without offering details of his plan, Mr Bush said it would not lead to
increased federal spending on health care entitlement but would 'bring
protection' to Americans without insurance. One option believed to be under
review is a health care tax credit for lower income groups, with a means
test applied to wealthier Americans.
Mr Bush tried to respond to his critics yesterday, casting himself as a man
of the people and not the patrician portrayed by Mr Patrick Buchanan, his
Republican opponent in the New Hampshire primary.
Mr Buchanan, a former speech writer to presidents Nixon and Reagan, is a
rightwing pugilist who seems to be drawing support in this fiscally
conservative state.
During his face-to-face meetings with voters yesterday, Mr Bush ate plenty
of humble pie as he heard criticism about his handling of the economy.
Although he stressed that interest rates were low and said this would boost
the economy, he admitted he had made mistakes in forecasting an early
turnround.
'I will accept the blame,' he said, though quickly adding that 49 out of 50
blue-chip economists had also made the same mistake last year.
The economic downturn has left New Hampshire as one of the hardest-hit
states in the union. More than 50,000 jobs have been lost over the past
three years, virtually tripling the unemployment rate. Five of the top banks
have failed, corporate bankruptcies have soared and property prices are
barely two-thirds of their value in 1988, when the state was booming.
Mr Bush started the day at Pease air force base, which is scheduled for
closure with the loss of more than 3,000 jobs.
Speaking to hand-picked business leaders, who did not include any
minorities, the president played the role of local boy made good, reminding
his audience that he had gone to school in neighbouring Massachusetts and
that his summer home was in Maine.
Bush's Gulf irritant, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920116

