FT924-8212

FT  12 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Hambros down 33% as investment profit dips


   By JOHN GAPPER, Banking Correspondent


HAMBROS, the merchant bank and financial services group, yesterday reported
a 33 per cent fall in interim profits after the contribution from direct
investments dropped sharply.
Pre-tax profits for the six months to September 30 fell to Pounds 25m
(Pounds 37.6m). The interim dividend is maintained at 4.2p, payable from
earnings per share of 8p (12.6p).
Investment profits were pulled down from Pounds 9.8m to Pounds 1.7m by what
the bank described as a lack of selling opportunities in a subdued market,
and by the sale in March of a shareholding in CE Heath which means the
insurance broker's accounts were no longer consolidated.
A slower-than-expected launch of Hambro Guardian Assured Care, a managed
care business, contributed to a Pounds 2.5m pre-tax loss in miscellaneous
investments.
The banking division made profits of Pounds 37.3m (Pounds 40.5m), reflecting
a rise in half-year provisions for loans to Pounds 9m. The loan provision
for all of last year was Pounds 13m.
Mr Charles Hambro, chairman, said banking activity and profits had held up
well both at home and abroad. There had been 'particularly strong
contributions' from treasury, capital markets and asset finance.
The bank said it was encouraged by a recent rise in loan activity, and the
fact that only Pounds 1m of the loan provision had been set aside for
non-payment of interest. It had noticed a recovery of customers' ability to
make interest payments.
The loss on retail financial services, largely the Hambro Countrywide estate
agency chain, rose to Pounds 4.6m (Pounds 4.1m). Central finance charges and
overheads rose to Pounds 9.4m (Pounds 8.6m).
Profits for the full year may depend on whether the bank completes a
proposed flotation of Hambro Legal Protection by the end of March. Analysts
said they expected a successful flotation to realise an investment profit of
at least Pounds 10m.
Ms Alison Deuchars, analyst at Smith New Court, said she believed investment
profits were likely to recover in the second half, and Hambros would make
full year pre-tax profits of Pounds 67m, giving diluted earnings per share
of 22.9p.
The shares initially fell to 230p but recovered to 235p, still down 9p on
balance.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921112

