FT921-14053

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): British Airways seeks single-union
deal


   By ANTHONY MORETON, Welsh Correspondent


BRITISH AIRWAYS is seeking a single-union deal for the maintenance base it
is building for Boeing 747 Jumbo jets at Cardiff Airport.
The company said yesterday it had been talking to a number of unions but 'a
decision is not yet imminent'. The unions include the AEU engineering union,
thought to be the front-runner, and the TGWU and GMB general unions.
BA is to move all maintenance work in the UK on its Jumbo fleet from
London's Heathrow Airport to Cardiff next year. The company is building a
Pounds 70m plant which will employ 1,200 people and is on target to open in
April next year.
The AEU has already signed several single-union deals in Wales including one
with Sony when the Japanese company set up its television plant at Bridgend
in 1974.
BA is expected to start recruiting staff towards the end of this year and
would want to have the union agreement in place by then.
For the past 20 years unions in Wales have taken a progressive attitude
towards single-union deals. Mr Simon Jones, research officer of the Welsh
TUC, said in Cardiff yesterday: 'Nearly all the big inward investment
projects on greenfield sites in Wales are now single-union agreements. Wales
is further ahead in this area than any other part of Britain.' Other
single-union deals have been concluded by Toyota at its engine plant on
Deeside, and at Hoya Lens and Continental Can, both based in Wrexham, Clwyd.
A police sergeant yesterday told an industrial tribunal he was overlooked
for promotion four times because of his colour.
Sgt Raham Khan, 36, a policeman for 16 years, said he was ignored in favour
of less experienced and less qualified candidates. Mr Rodney Ferm, for
Pakistan-born Sgt Khan, told the Leeds hearing the officer had never been
racially abused during his career in the West Yorkshire force.
West Yorkshire Police deny racial discrimination.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920117

