FT924-8126

FT  12 NOV 92 / Georgians look to Shevardnadzeto save them: The former
Soviet foreign minister now has the authority to rescue his nation from
chaos


   By STEVE LEVINE


IN the volatile republic of Georgia, where almost every man carries a gun,
Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, the newly confirmed leader, is about as democratic
in the western sense as one can find. Simply put, everyone has a say, but in
the end Mr Shevardnadze's decisions prevail.
The former Soviet foreign minister is consolidating power in his native
land. After winning a popular mandate in October, he was declared head of
state by parliament last week and given presential-style powers. He retains
his formal title of chairman of the parliament. He has since hand-picked a
speaker and a prime minister.
For the last eight months, Mr Shevardnadze had chaired a four-man ruling
presidium created in the wake of the civil unrest which wrested power from
Mr Zviad Gamsakhurdia, Georgia's first democratically-elected president. Mr
Shevardnadze had operated largely under the steam of his international
prestige. Georgians listened to him, but he possessed little actual
authority.
The legitimisation of his power comes at a crucial time. Georgia's internal
troubles are spreading beyond its borders. It is caught up in numerous small
wars that have broken out throughout the Caucasus region, including southern
Russia.
Now that he is in charge, Mr Shevardnadze will have to answer for problems
that have gone unaddressed. First, the republic's economy is collapsing: 700
out of 1,200 factories employing more than 100 workers have closed. Hopes
for economic recovery have been dashed by the growing civil unrest which has
pitted the republic's ethnic minorities against its government.
The war with separatists in the breakaway Black Sea region of Abkhazia has
stopped the flow of industrial supplies and food along the main rail line
from Ukraine and Russia. The key natural gas line from Russia, which runs
through the warring republics of North and South Ossetia, at the northern
edges of Georgia, has been blown up repeatedly.
Because of this, the government expects state revenues to reach only half
the Rbs26bn budget this year. Many state employees have not been paid for
months because the government cannot afford to buy enough rouble notes from
the sole printing plant in Russia. The government has no money to buy
natural gas or petrol for the winter, and Georgia's Orby airline operates
only when it can find fuel.
For ordinary Georgians, the crisis is acute. While Tbilisi residents stand
in late-night bread lines, 125,000 tonnes of US and European wheat are held
up in Georgia's main sea ports because of inadequate unloading equipment.
The situation will only improve when Georgia's military conflicts are
resolved. Its attempts to crush Abkhazian separatists damaged the republic's
relations with Russia after the Georgian government accused Russian troops
stationed there of supporting the separatists.
The deterioration in Abhkazia has marred Mr Shevardnadze's image as
peace-maker. But the former Communist Party chief of Georgia has also had to
deal with the strong-willed nationalism of Mr Tengiz Kitovani, the defence
minister. The two men have often been at odds over how much force to use to
quell the separatist aspirations of the republic's minorities.
Mr Shevardnadze, with his newly-acquired status, should be able to stem the
influence of his overly nationalist colleagues.
He will also have to control the armed civilian groups that roam the
capital, Tbilisi, and the countryside. Most of these groups grew out of the
movement that removed Mr Gamsakhurdia. In the western city of Zugdidi,
robbery is so common that even police race through treacherous sections of
highway to avoid bandits.
The fighting and criminality have kept away the foreign investment that
Georgian economists say the republic needs to survive. 'Western businessmen
were waiting for the election. Now they're waiting for peace,' said Mr Gia
Tsagareli, deputy chairman of the state committee on foreign relations.
Discussions with the International Monetary Fund have produced no results
yet as the government is unable to define a sound economic programme.
Georgians do not underestimate their problems. If anything, they engage in
endless self-criticism and in-fighting. Most seem to agree, though, that Mr
Shevardnadze is the only way out of their seemingly intractable morass.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921112

