FT923-9654

FT  04 AUG 92 / International Company News: Seoul clears the lines for
mobile phone explosion - John Burton looks at the consortia vying to
challenge a state-owned monopoly and the potential market


   By JOHN BURTON


ONE of three South Korean consortia, each supported by foreign partners,
will be selected this month to compete against Korea Mobile
Telecommunications Corporation (KMTC), one of the country's most profitable
companies, in the country's lucrative mobile telephone market.
Competition between state-owned KMTC and a private operator is expected to
lead to explosive growth of South Korean mobile telephone services. Turnover
is expected to reach USDollars 3bn by 2000, up from Dollars 300m this year,
as the number of subscribers climbs to 4m from 200,000 now.
The earnings performance of KMTC indicates the potential rewards the Korean
cellular phone market could offer. Established in 1984 as a state monopoly,
KMTC ranked seventh in terms of profits among listed Korean companies last
year, with earnings of Won42.7bn (Dollars 54.2m), and sixth in terms of
sales growth, with turnover increasing by 105 per cent to Won147.3bn.
KMTC's high profit margins reflect its ability to share administrative costs
with state-run Korean Telecom, which holds 65 per cent in KMTC. But its
profit-to-sales ratio of nearly 30 per cent will shrink as it increases
research and development and capital investments, and it cuts charges
because of increased competition.
The predicted increase in mobile telephone use is like-ly to benefit foreign
telecommunications equipment suppliers because South Korea lacks the
necessary technology. AT&T and Motorola of the US now provide the switching
equipment. Motorola is a leading supplier of handsets, while its Korean
rivals, Samsung Electronics and Hyundai Electronic Industries, assemble
cellular phones from imported components.
The ability to transfer foreign technology will be an important factor in
determining which consortium will be chosen by the Ministry of
Communications (MoC) to operate the country's second mobile telephone
network. The winning consortium will also be expected to help fund the MoC's
Won72.2bn research on mobile telecommunications.
More advanced digital mobile telephone technology is needed to replace the
current analog system. This will improve the performance of the mobile
telephone network and relieve a threatened shortage of circuits in Seoul by
1994, when the second network starts operating. Cellular telephone
connections are difficult in mountainous South Korea, with only one out of
every three attempted calls being completed.
The participation of foreign companies, which can have a maximum
shareholding of 33 per cent in a consortium, will bolster the financial
ability of their Korean partners to build the second cellular network, which
will cost at least Dollars 1.3bn. There are seven foreign telecommunications
operators taking part in the bidding, including British Telecom and
Vodafone.
Banks, usually barred from taking direct shareholdings in Korean companies,
are being allowed to participate in the consortia to increase their
financial strength.
The MoC banned Korean telecommunications equipment manufacturers from
heading any consortium on anti-trust grounds, although they may have minor
shareholdings. The domestic companies leading each of the consortia are
limited to 30 per cent stakes.
However, it may not be technological and financial factors alone which
determine which consortium will win the contract. The political opposition
contends that President Roh Tae Woo's outgoing administration is using the
mobile telephone contract to reward companies supporting his party in this
election year.
Most observers were not surprised when Sunkyong, the country's
seventh-largest business group, and Pohang Iron & Steel Company (Posco), the
leading national steelmaker, were recently selected as finalists for the
franchise out of six contenders. Both have close ties with the government.
One of the sons of Mr Chey Jong-hyon, Sunkyong chairman, is married to the
daughter of President Roh. Mr Park Tae-joon, Posco chairman, is one of the
three co-chairman of the governing Democratic Liberal Party.
'It would be embarrassing if either of them won because it would appear to
confirm charges by our opponents that political favouritism is involved. But
the truth is that they are also probably the best qualified companies in the
competition,' said a government official.
A preliminary evaluation of the competing consortia announced last week
found Sunkyong to be most qualified in financial and technical terms,
followed by a group led by the Kolon business group and Posco.
A second evaluation this month will examine the construction and
installation proposals of the three groups before a final decision.
Sunkyong's Greater Korean Telecom consortium is led by Yokung, its oil
refining subsidiary, supported by state-run Korea Electric Power and Korea
Long-Term Credit Bank. Lucky-Goldstar, which manufactures telecommunications
equipment, is also affiliated with this consortium.
Its foreign partners include mobile telephone operator Vodafone of the UK,
GTE of the US and Hutchinson Telecom of Hong Kong. Sunkyong has also been
gaining experience in managing cellular telephone systems by participating
in a joint venture with US Cellular in the US.
Posco, in which the government holds 35 per cent, views cellular
communications as part of a diversification strategy, which includes
expanding into the semiconductor and specialty chemicals sectors. It is
seeking the contract through its Posdata subsidiary, established in 1989 to
develop communications technology and computer software.
Posco is supported by several of Korea's biggest conglomerates, including
Samsung, Daewoo, and Hyundai. Its foreign partners in the New Century
consortium are Pacific Telesis, a US Baby Bell, and Mannesmann, a German
private mobile telephone network operator.
The Kolon consortium is being supported by British Telecom and Nynex,
another Baby Bell operating in New York.
The selection of Kolon as a finalist was surprising, because Toray, the
Japanese textile group, is the largest shareholder in Kolon Industrial, the
textile subsidiary heading the bid, with a 17 per cent stake.
The South Korean government is sensitive about Japanese ownership of
strategic businesses due to its colonial history.
The three consortia recently eliminated from the mobile telephone
competition included: Dongbu, linked with Bell Atlantic; Tongyang with US
West; and Ssangyong, Korea's fifth-largest business group, supported by
Swedish Telecom and Southwestern Bell of the US.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920804

