FT924-845

FT  22 DEC 92 / Rao survives Ayodhya no-confidence vote: Disillusionment
over India's handling of the temple crisis may hinder economic reforms


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL and SHIRAZ SIDHVA


   NEW DELHI


MR PV Narasimha Rao, India's prime minister, yesterday survived a
parliamentary no-confidence vote called over his handling of the Ayodhya
mosque crisis.
The militant Hindu Bharatiya Janata Party, the main opposition party which
organised the rally at which the mosque was destroyed, failed to persuade
other political groupings to support its call for the prime minister's
resignation. MPs of the ruling Congress (I) party and its left-wing allies
rallied around Mr Rao.
The no-confidence motion against the government, put to the vote after a
noisy four-day debate, was defeated 334-106, with 47 members of the National
Front abstaining.
Congress MPs were generally unimpressed by the prime minister's performance
in the debate, in which he denied the government had failed to do enough to
protect the mosque from destruction by Hindu militants. Mr Inderjit Gupta, a
Congress party member, publicly criticised Mr Rao during the debate over the
arrest of Mr LK Advani, the BJP leader and leader of the opposition, who is
being held in police custody on charges of fomenting inter-racial hatred.
Some Congress members voiced their doubts privately, saying the prime
minister had said nothing about one central issue  - the proposed rebuilding
of the mosque and the future of the makeshift Hindu temple which the
militants erected on the disputed site.
MPs felt Mr Rao had done enough to quell any immediate attempts to unseat
his government but had failed to reimpose his authority on the party. Such
lukewarm support for the prime minister could hamper his efforts to
implement firm policies to cope with the aftermath of the Ayodhya crisis and
with other challenges, including the future of the country's economic
liberalisation programme.
Mr Rao described the demolition of the Ayodhya mosque as a tragedy, an act
of betrayal and vandalism. The destruction had been pre-planned, he claimed.
Mr Rao announced increased financial compensation for the families of the
1,200 people killed in the nationwide riots following the mosque's
destruction. He urged restraint on the use of religion in parties' electoral
platforms, a clear reference to the BJP's espousal of Hinduism, though he
did not name the party.
Failure of the no-confidence motion had been expected. Shares rose sharply
yesterday after two weeks' sharp decline. The Bombay Stock Exchange's
30-share index soared 65.21 points to 2,542.10.
Mr C. Rangarajan yesterday took over as governor of the Reserve Bank of
India from Mr S. Venkitaraman, whose two-year term was clouded by the Bombay
securities market scandal. The bank was widely criticised over its
supervision of the market. Mr Rangarajan was deputy governor of the bank for
10 years before leaving for a spell at the government's planning commission.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921222

