FT924-8199

FT  12 NOV 92 / Lautro imposes record fine on Guardian Royal Exchange


   By JOHN AUTHERS


LAUTRO, the life assurance regulator, yesterday fined Guardian Royal
Exchange Pounds 100,000, the biggest penalty it has yet imposed.
GRE, a composite insurer, had failed to monitor two agents tied to selling
its life products exclusively, Centrust and Coventry Investment Group, in
the three years to February 1991. Both companies are now out of business,
and investors are claiming compensation. The proprietor of Coventry
Investments, Mr John Steel, received a 2 1/2 -year prison sentence for
misappropriation of investors' funds. Centrust's proprietor, Mr Jake
Reynolds, was arrested in Cromer, Norfolk, on Tuesday. He is being
interviewed by police in Norwich and has not been charged.
Lautro's previous highest fine, of Pounds 80,000, was levied last week on
London & Manchester Assurance, also for problems monitoring its tied agents.
However, Ms Julia Liesching, Lautro's chief policy and administration
officer, denied that there had been any toughening of the regulator's
stance. She said that procedures had been improved, and the disciplinary
process had speeded up, leading to a faster resolution of cases.
Mr Peter Buckell, a spokesman for the Centrust Investors' Action Groups,
said he was pleased the fine had been levied, but disappointed Lautro had
not used its power to demand that compensation be paid to investors. He also
regretted that Lautro had taken so long to act. A group of Centrust
investors would take legal action against GRE, he said.
Ms Jean Eaglesham, head of money policy for the Consumers' Association,
welcomed the trend towards stiffer penalties from regulators. She said:
'Certainly Lautro is looking a lot more effective than it did a year ago.
The trend is right. Whether it is enough is another matter.' She said other
regulators had not been as strict.
GRE said yesterday: 'Major changes have been made to our control procedures
and we make great efforts to ensure that we provide appropriate monitoring
of all appointed representatives.'
It has not appointed any new tied agents for 18 months, and has cut its
total number of agents from 900 to about 500.
So far, the company has offered Pounds 164,000 in compensation to 30
Centrust clients, and another 20 claims are being processed.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921112

