FT922-611

FT  26 JUN 92 / Rabin firm over violence in Gaza and West Bank


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   JERUSALEM


SIX people - three Israelis, one of them a soldier, and three Arabs - were
killed in the West Bank and Gaza Strip yesterday.
The deaths came as a sharp reminder of the simmering violence in the
occupied territories just two days after the Labour party won a general
election with the promise to speed Middle East peace talks.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, the Labour leader, who is preparing to build a coalition
which he will head as prime minister, told a meeting of Labour's executive
committee he would deal with those who 'murder and incite' with force.
'Anyone who thinks a government headed by us will not deal with terror in
all its forms is making a bad mistake,' he said.
His comments echoed the tough stance he adopted against the Palestinian
uprising, or intifada, as defence minister in the late 1980s.
The death toll yesterday was the biggest in one day in the occupied
territories for months. The soldier and the Palestinians died in a gunbattle
in the West Bank, the army said. In the Gaza Strip, two Jewish vegetable
merchants were stabbed to death.
Mr Rabin was pressed yesterday by Meretz, the pro-peace minority party which
is set to be Labour's main coalition partner, to speed the process of
forming a government.
Meretz leaders expressed irritation that Mr Rabin, who is anxious to
minimise right-wing opposition to his peace policies, was seeking to broaden
the coalition by including at least one religious party.
He is also waiting for the final official election results to be published.
Inclusion of the army vote could produce a marginal adjustment of the
distribution of seats which Mr Rabin wants to take into account before
starting coalition negotiations.
Mr Moshe Arens, outgoing defence minister, announced meanwhile he was
quitting politics. Mr Arens had been thought to be a key contender to
succeed Mr Yitzhak Shamir as Likud leader. Mr Shamir has already indicated
he will quit the leadership in the wake of Likud's election defeat.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920626

