FT924-8142

FT  12 NOV 92 / Top officials will face tougher ethics curbs


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


GOVERNOR Bill Clinton is expected to require members of his new
administration to sign some of the most exacting ethical restrictions yet
imposed on US government officials.
The president-elect could announce the ethical guidelines, which will
include tough constraints on the kinds of lobbying activities political
appointees may engage in after they leave office, in the Arkansas state
capital of Little Rock, today.
The announcement of the ethics rules would be the first substantial act Mr
Clinton has taken since he won the presidential election last week, and
would precede the announcement of any of the nominations to serve in his
cabinet.
Mr Warren Christopher, director of the Clinton transition team, said last
week that the ethics rules would be the strictest yet seen; the Washington
Post reported yesterday that top administration officials would be
prohibited from lobbying their former agencies for five years after they
left office, and would be banned for life from representing foreign
governments.
Cabinet officials are at the moment prohibited from representing foreign
governments or lobbying their former department for one year after leaving
office.
Irritation at the influence of Washington lobbyists over the campaigns of
both President George Bush and Governor Clinton was a prominent and popular
theme in the campaign of Mr Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire whose
independent candidacy won 19 per cent of the votes in the election. Mr Perot
himself has been a frequent and successful user of the services of the same
Washington lobbyists.
Incoming US presidents oversee sweeping personnel changes in the federal
government. Over 1,700 jobs are listed in federal rule books as subject to
presidential appointment, and overall some 3,000 political appointments are
made. Mr Clinton's new ethics rules, are expected to apply only to the top
tier of these appointees.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921112

