FT921-15519

FT  09 JAN 92 / EBRD sees rise in E European deals


   By RICHARD WATERS and REUTER


THE European Bank for Reconstruction and Development yesterday predicted a
steady flow of big equity investments in eastern Europe in the coming weeks
as it completed its second substantial transaction in Czechoslovakia since
the start of the year.
The latest investments, in Ceskeslovenske Aerolinie, the state airline, and
Cokoladovny, the country's largest food producer, bring to four the equity
investments made by the development bank.
However, it said previous delays in approval by the Czech authorities had
been overcome, and substantial equity investments in the country were likely
to be completed at the rate of one or two a month in the first months of
this year. The bank said it was reviewing 15 Czech investments in the
aerospace, petrochemicals and pulp and paper industries, among others.
Other substantial projects throughout eastern Europe, among 150 under
consideration at the bank, were also expected to be completed shortly.
Mr Ronald Freeman, vice-chairman of the EBRD in charge of investment
banking, said the average size of the 14 investments by the bank was Ecu20m
(Pounds 14.3m), but added: 'We expect the size to increase.'
Each of the latest equity transactions has been made in partnership with
large western companies - Air France in the case of CSA, and Nestle, the
Swiss-based foodmaker, and BSN, the French biscuit manufacturer, in the case
of Cokoladovny.
However, Mr Freeman said these did not provide a blueprint for future
investments.
In both cases, the EBRD expects to lend further money to the companies
concerned. 'It is quite likely they will want to leverage up,' said Mr
Freeman. The EBRD looks poised to treat the former republics of the Soviet
Union as members, according to a senior official.
Mr Sylvia Jay, head of the bank's political unit, said the bank was not
dealing with completely new membership in the case of the former Soviet
Republics and so the emphasis would be on continuity of membership, Reuter
reports.
'We've had some informal confirmations from individual republics that they
wish to continue membership - only Russia has given a formal confirmation,'
Mr Jay added. The former Soviet Union had a shareholding of 6 per cent in
the bank.
Joint bid for Czech food group, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920109

