FT921-15555

FT  09 JAN 92 / Lamont rejects pleas for Budget boost


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


MR NORMAN LAMONT, the chancellor, yesterday held out the prospect of a
cautious Budget, rejecting pleas from the Trades Union Congress and the
Confederation of British Industry for immediate fiscal boosts to the
economy.
Mr Lamont insisted at a meeting of the National Economic Development Council
in London that upsetting the balance of the Budget in the medium term would
risk a build-up of problems for ensuing economic growth.
Reporting on the meeting, Mr Walter Eltis, director-general of the National
Economic Development Office (Nedo) quoted the chancellor as saying: 'The
Budget should be balanced in the medium term over the cycle as a whole, and
we should not start the recovery by getting the Budget wrong.'
Mr John Edmonds, general secretary of the GMB general union, said the
chancellor's position was in opposition to those of the TUC and the CBI.
Both bodies, he said, were in broad agreement for the first time for years
over measures to help economic recovery.
The measures included more funds for Training and Enterprise Councils
(Tecs), tax concessions to stimulate investment and bringing forward
government spending on transport infrastructure.
The CBI said its proposals could be implemented in the short term without
being detrimental in the long term.
Mr Lamont agreed there was a need for corporate and public investment, but
stressed that the government's medium-term objective had to be tight control
of public spending combined with a balanced Budget.
He added that the government's policies would not have been different had
its forecasts on the economy's performance been more accurate.
Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, also attended the
meeting and stressed the need for a 'nine-year recovery' rather than a
two-year boom that had to be stopped.
There was agreement from all sides at the meeting that Britain should stay
in the ERM with the pound pegged at its current level.
Letters, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920109

