FT924-8205

FT  12 NOV 92 / GPA bank debts increase by Dollars 1.7bn


   By ROBERT PESTON and ROLAND RUDD


GPA GROUP has drawn Dollars 1.7bn (Pounds 1.1bn) on its two main banking
facilities since March 31, leading to a sharp increase in its overall
indebtedness.
This increase in the aircraft leasing group's bank debts will come as a
surprise to some of its 73 banks when they meet on November 23 in London to
hear details of its financial restructuring proposals.
GPA has two main banking facilities: a Dollars 2.17bn corporate credit
facility and a Dollars 1.19bn associated companies long-term credit
facility. In its last set of accounts, GPA said that at March 31 the company
had drawn Dollars 1.397bn from its corporate facility and Dollars 110m from
the associated companies facility.
However, leading bankers to the group said yesterday that the corporate
facility is now virtually fully drawn and the associated companies facility
is 90 per cent drawn.
GPA Group has had to increase its bank indebtedness to pay for aircraft it
has contracted to buy from manufacturers.
It also has a Dollars 325m interim financing facility, which was undrawn at
March 31. This facility has also been used, so the total increase in GPA's
indebtedness since March may approach Dollars 2bn.
Bankers are expecting GPA to ask for a deferment of principal repayments on
these three main facilities.
The Dollars 325m facility is due to be repaid in spring 1994. On the
corporate credit facility, a 'balloon payment' of 61 per cent of the
principal is due to be repaid in September 1996. Some 61 per cent of the
principal on the associated companies facility falls due a year later.
On these three main facilities, 15 international banks each have an exposure
in excess of Dollars 75m. Of these six are Japanese.
Banks with the biggest exposure include Citicorp, the US's biggest bank,
Toronto Dominion Bank of Canada and Mitsubishi Trust and Banking Corporation
of Japan. Citicorp said its exposure was less than Dollars 250m. Swiss Bank
Corporation is also understood to have an exposure greater than Dollars
100m.
The UK banks with the biggest exposure are NatWest, with around Dollars 70m
and Barclays with less than Dollars 50m.
Bankers expect GPA to ask for waivers on its borrowing covenants which
stipulate it should maintain three financial ratios at certain levels. These
ratios are a measure of its financial strength. Bankers expect GPA to breach
these covenants because of a decline in profit projections.
A waiver of the covenant clauses would require the agreement of two thirds
of the banks.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921112

