FT921-14208

FT  17 JAN 92 / Australian jobless at post-war high


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


AUSTRALIA'S unemployment rate rose to a post-war record of 10.6 per cent in
December, increasing pressure on the troubled Labor government to take
urgent action to stimulate the economy.
The government statistical service said the number of unemployed increased
to 910,300 from 900,700 in November, when 10.5 per cent of the workforce was
unemployed, also a post-war record.
However, the gloomy message about the continued fragility of the economy was
tempered by a rise of 39,200 in employment which provided some hope that the
jobless total may be close to peaking.
The unusual increase in both the employment and unemployment totals was
caused by an increase from 63 per cent to 63.3 per cent in the participation
rate, which measures the proportion of the workforce which is working or
actively seeking work.
Mr Kim Beazley, the employment minister, said the figures indicated that the
employment level had stopped falling. Leading indicators released by the
employment department also suggested that further large declines in
employment were unlikely.
However, the government is still expecting unemployment to reach 10.75 per
cent later this year. Some independent economists believe unemployment will
peak at 11 per cent and remain above 10 per cent until next year.
Mr Paul Keating, the prime minister, said the unemployment rate was 'far too
high,' and promised that an economic statement planned for late February or
early March would 'turn it around'.
Mr Keating replaced Mr Bob Hawke as prime minister last month after pledging
to 'get the economy moving again' following flat or negative growth in seven
of the last eight quarters.
Business leaders have told Mr Keating the economy is in even worse shape
than the official figures suggest, and are pressing him to deliver a
significant fiscal stimulus. Trade union leaders also want a relaxation of
fiscal policy.
Economists expect a package of measures designed to stimulate private sector
investment and finance government infrastructure projects, probably worth
between ADollars 1.5bn (Pounds 610m) and ADollars 2bn.
Mr Ari Ben-Menashe, an Israeli who claims to have been a middle-man in
secret negotiations between the US and Iran, has been ordered to leave
Australia by the end of the month.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920117

