FT921-1461

FT  24 MAR 92 / Survey of Employee Ownership (3): Perks for the board -
Executive Incentives


   By ANDREW JACK


AT A packed annual general meeting last November, frustrated shareholders
unanimously voted down a proposal from their board to introduce a share
option scheme for senior managers and executive directors of the company.
This was not a typical meeting of normal shareholders in an ordinary
company. It was the AGM of Manchester United, which counts large numbers of
football fans among its shareholders. But it does illustrates the growing
frustration being expressed with the nature of executive incentives.
'There was a fair amount of dissatisfaction with the board,' says Mr David
Craddock, a supporter of the club who stood up at the meeting to oppose the
scheme. 'I felt it was outside the spirit of the flotation, which was to
spread share ownership more widely.'
He is a member of a share option scheme himself, and argues that the board
should come back at the next AGM and propose a scheme which applies to all
employees of the club.
'If there is an executive scheme, it should be very closely linked to the
performance of financial factors  .. and how the team performs,' he says.
'Football operates in a perfectly competitive market. There is a price for
failure.'
He suggests that any rewards should be linked to factors such as attendance
at matches, and how well the football club performs each season.
Mr Craddock's criteria may be harsh, but the message is a common one:
shareholders are becoming restless with the liberties taken by their boards
over remuneration.
'There is increasing emphasis that share options should be
performance-related,' says Mr Brian Freeman, managing director of Stoy
Benefit Consulting.
Mr Hugh Turrall-Clarke, a partner with the executive benefits services group
of Price Waterhouse, says there is a growing feeling that executives have
been seen to make a great deal of money from options, unrelated to their
company's performance. In addition, many critics suggest that managers
should not simply have an incentive geared to the upside of a company's
performance.
Incidents including the 'super share options' arranged for Sir Ralph
Halpern, former chairman of Burton, which were valued by one estimate at
Pounds 7.1m in the late 1980s, have hardly helped the case of directors,
particularly at a time of economic downturn.
A study produced by the London Business School last year showed little
evidence that senior executives were manipulating their performance-related
pay schemes unfairly to receive additional rewards.
But it found few companies which voluntarily disclosed sufficient
information to allow the formulae for calculating their bonuses to be
understood. The academics were unable to probe as thoroughly as they would
have liked as a result. Such concealment is unlikely to endear itself to
shareholders.
Mr Freeman says the introduction in 1984 of discretionary share option
schemes went against the grain of previous schemes, which were targeted at
all employees.
Discretionary schemes, differentially helping directors, were given a
further boost in the 1991 Finance Bill. The chancellor of the exchequer
allowed executives to take a 15 per cent discount off the market price at
the time the option was granted. The only condition was that there should
also be an all-employee scheme in place.
The aim was at least in part to boost wider share ownership. The result was
considerable concern that directors would again be in a position to benefit
more than their employees.
Both the Association of British Insurers and the National Association of
Pension Funds frowned on the initiative. The ABI produced guidelines late
last year which placed strict limits on its use.
It argued that the effect would be to increase the cost of options to
existing shareholders, and created divisions between directors now eligible
for the discount and those who previously had to pay the full price on the
options.
As a result, it recommended that such options could only be taken up after
five years, rather than the more typical three. It added that the discount
should in any case apply only to a maximum of one quarter of the total
number of shares allocated under the scheme.
This advice came on top of earlier notes, stressing that there should be a
limit on the maximum participation by an individual, and suggesting that any
discretionary option should be linked to performance, and not granted unless
the company's earnings per share had grown by at least 2 per cent above
inflation.
The weight of the ABI guidelines has meant the 15 per cent discount has
barely been taken advantage of. 'The ABI has pretty well killed it with its
requirements for performance-linking,' says Mr Turrall-Clarke. 'Its
influence is quite strong. You don't go against it without thinking pretty
carefully.'
Theoretically, Mr Freeman argues it might be better if options could be
matched to individual performance, rather than general company-wide
objectives. At the moment, he says the scheme is open to abuse, with options
sometimes given to 'blue-eyed boys'.
Even when earnings per share is used as a yardstick, he argues that the
figure can be increased by 'good luck and good planning' more than the
contribution of an individual. It gives little reflection of the
contribution made by the managing director of a small subsidiary within a
group, for instance.
He suggests that, ideally, executive options should be tied to personnel
policies, job evaluation and formal appraisal systems. He also welcomes the
trend towards remuneration committees and - not surprisingly - to outside
advisers.
Despite the limited efforts at reform, Mr Freeman argues there is still
generally little opportunity for shareholders to object. 'Shareholders have
been remarkably docile,' he says. 'In far too many companies executive share
options are left in the fiefdom of the directors. It's very feudalistic.'

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920324

