FT921-14043

FT  17 JAN 92 / Management (Health at work): Ashes to ashes as smoking bites
dust - Diane Summers investigates the trend among employers to free their
premises of the dreaded weed


   By DIANE SUMMERS


Two weeks into the new year and many aspiring non-smokers are still fighting
to kick the weed. Others have given up the struggle - at least until next
January.
Quitting smoking at a corporate level requires even more planning and
consistency. Companies wanting to introduce a no-smoking policy among their
workforces are most likely to succeed if they consult their employees,
rather than just confiscating all the ashtrays one Monday morning. Two
events in particular this week have renewed interest among UK employers in
the subject of workplace smoking policies.
First, the Health and Safety Executive published a consultation document on
Tuesday making clear that employers will have to provide special rest rooms
for non-smokers from the end of next year in order to comply with a European
directive. The new rules could prompt many employers to ban smoking
altogether.
Second, at an industrial tribunal in Glasgow, a nursing auxiliary claimed
constructive dismissal over her employer's smoking ban.
Mary Dryden told the tribunal that she could not endure eight hours at work
without a cigarette and therefore had to leave her job. When Greater Glasgow
Health Board banned smoking on its premises last summer, it did not provide
rooms for smokers, or leave enough time for Dryden to go out for a cigarette
during her breaks, the tribunal heard.
The move to no-smoking workplaces has been marked in recent years, with up
to one-in-five companies now operating anti-smoking policies. Midland Bank
is the latest large employer to announce a ban for its 45,000 staff in
nearly 2,000 branches from the spring. Other employers, either with total
bans or severe smoking restrictions, include IBM, Marks and Spencer and the
Inland Revenue.
This trend is being driven by changes in attitudes to smoking in public
places, but also by employers' fears of future liabilities for damage to
workers' health through passive smoking.
There has yet to be a claim for damages in a British court arising out of
passive smoking, but Ash, the anti-smoking group, said yesterday that it
would be seeking counsel's opinion in the next few weeks with the aim of
bringing a case under common law, or through the Health and Safety at Work
Act. According to David Pollock, Ash director, passive smoking court cases
in Australia have led to widespread workplace smoking bans.
Whatever motivates an employer to act - and the pressure is as likely to
come from employees as from management - there are several pitfalls on the
way to implementing a no-smoking policy.
According to a survey carried out by Incomes Data Services, the employment
research group, most organisations go through the following stages on the
way to banning or restricting smoking:
Consultation with the workforce - an essential first step in preventing
mutiny, or worse, by nicotine addicts. Surveys, ballots, questionnaires,
meetings and negotiations with trade unions or staff associations are all
methods of gauging opinion and are likely, says IDS, to show a surprisingly
high level of enthusiasm, even from smokers themselves.
British Gas in Wales provides a typical example of what a company might
expect from a poll of employees: 34 per cent thought smoking should be
banned at work altogether, while 53 per cent were in favour of restrictions.
Degrees of restriction need to be decided. A total ban on smoking throughout
a building is unambiguous but is tough on smokers. Only an ex-addict can
appreciate the resentment that a total ban is likely to engender among
smokers.
Ash itself argues for the more humane 'sin bin' solutions, where smoking is
allowed only in designated - ideally separately-ventilated - areas. The
Financial Times is an example of an employer that has taken this route: its
sin bins on each editorial floor are the setting for some unlikely
alliances.
Phasing-in of policies. The gradual introduction of smoking restrictions, or
at least a period of warning (Ash recommends a 12-week implementation
period) will help to avoid resentment and legal problems, says IDS.
At Cambridge University Press, for example, a smoking ban was brought in
during four months, with smoking prohibited first before 10.30am, then
before noon, 2pm, 4.30pm and, finally, throughout the day.
Helping employees to give up the weed. There are considerable cost benefits
to employers in having workforces that do not smoke - either at home or at
work.
Most companies with no-smoking policies also offer employees help with
giving up permanently. For example, the Automobile Association distributes
Health Education Authority literature, and South Derbyshire Health Authority
gives staff time off for special 'stopping smoking' classes. IBM even offers
acupuncture and hypnotherapy as well as counselling and classes.
All this is old hat in the US, where no smoking offices are the norm. In
most Californian offices, you would no more think of lighting a cigarette
than spitting on the floor. In most of Europe, by contrast, smokers take
their rights so seriously that they may not take kindly to efforts by their
employers to help them quit.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted). Photograph
(Omitted). Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted). Photograph Put out
that light, smoking bans, commonplace for years on trains and buses, are now
moving into the workplace (Omitted).

920117

