FT923-10977

FT  28 JUL 92 / Regulator to probe power prices


   By JULIET SYCHRAVA


PROFESSOR Stephen Little-child, the electricity regulator, has written to
National Power and PowerGen, the privatised electricity generators, asking
them to explain why electricity prices have risen sharply since May.
The move could lead to a full investigation of electricity prices, and might
end with the two generators being referred to the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission.
Prof Littlechild's move comes after large electricity consumers from the
Major Energy Users Council, a lobbying group, complained in May that
electricity prices were too high.
Prices in the electricity pool, or wholesale market, rose from around 1.9p
per unit in March to around 2.3p in May, June and July, large users
complained. They alleged that the increase occured because the two
generators were bidding the price up.
'The bid prices were going up when the coal price was dropping,' said Mr
John Topliss, chairman of the council's electricity group. 'They bore no
relation to the underlying costs. Our impression was they were winding the
price up.'
Prof Littlechild, who last investigated pool prices in September, will now
give the generators time to explain the increase.
If they do this successfully, the issue may go no further. But if the
regulator is not satisfied, he will order a full inquiry into the pool,
similar to the review he published last December.
At that stage, he said it was too early to say if the pool price was too
high or too low. But he is likely to make a clear decision this time, and if
he decides it is too high, he would not rule out a referral to the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
The council said it would welcome this outcome. 'We'd like them to be
referred, then they would probably be split up and there would be more
competition,' said Mr Topliss.
Both generators acknowledged that they had received a letter from Prof
Littlechild, but said they believed a full inquiry was unlikely.
'The market conditions are now supporting higher prices,' one generator
said, explaining that pool prices were still much lower than contract prices
 -which are around 2.6p per unit for a large customer and 3p for a domestic
user. This was too low for them to recover their costs, the generators said.
Some regional electricity companies said they were aware of the review, but
had not yet been consulted.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920728

