FT922-7186

FT  20 MAY 92 / Management: Making a strong case for getting physical -
Health Check


   By Dr MICHAEL MCGANNON


When I ask managers about the importance of exercise, most acknowledge that
physical activity can be beneficial, but the vast majority - more than three
out of four - view it as optional. Even managers who are committed to health
often have a hazy understanding of the basics of fitness.
Whenever a crunch comes at work and the schedule becomes too tight, exercise
is the the first activity to go. In fact, physical activity is even more
essential to your well-being than brushing your teeth. An extra drink or
two, a cigar or an extra few kilograms can all be forgiven. But the body
craves movement and will be unforgiving when it does not get enough.
The benefits of exercise are many. It increases bone density, reduces body
fat by increasing the use of fat stores for energy, and increases the heart
size, making it a stronger and more efficient pump. It raises the oxygen
supply to the heart by developing more capillaries and increases the number
of red blood cells which meet the higher demands of the body during
exercise.
Exercise reduces blood pressure by increasing the blood flow through muscles
and decreases the respiratory rate and the resting heart rate. It increases
the lung volumes, muscle strength and endurance. Above all it improves the
ability to deal with the stress of business life.
Your road back to physical (and mental) fitness should proceed according to
a few simple rules.
Enjoy the exercise you are doing. The obvious moral pleasure is not enough
to keep you at it.
Exercise frequently. That means about three times a week.
Exercise for a short, sustained period of, say, 30 minutes per session.
Exercise at the right intensity. Your training heart rate (THR) may be a
useful measure. To calculate it, subtract your age from 220, and multiply
this figure by 75 per cent. For example if you are 40, and fairly sedentary
your THR will be 135: (220-40) x 75 per cent.
Next, choose an activity you really enjoy - walking, gardening, rowing,
swimming - and do it three times a week for 30 minutes at 135 heartbeats a
minute.
Most people lead an active life when they are young, but as the demands of
business grow, they may find that the only exercise they get is an hour or
two of golf or tennis at the weekend - and often not even that. The
popularity of health and fitness clubs is playing an increasingly important
part in getting sedentary people 'back on track'.
If used properly, a good fitness club can help you get fit. But beware: many
managers have the membership card of a club in their wallets as their
passport to fitness, only to find constant excuses for not going.
The author is the medical director of the Insead Business Health course.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920520

