FT924-11462

FT  26 OCT 92 / Advertise for governor


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


There is one lesson from the BCCI affair that you do not need to be an
expert in financial fraud to draw. And it is this: if one body is
responsible both for monetary policy and financial regulation, both jobs
will be badly done. No-one is clearly responsible for anything because
everything is done 'together' in true British way; and whatever the
humiliation no heads roll. It is a similar mistake to having one Covent
Garden board responsible both for opera and for ballet.
So the first requirement in reforming the Bank of England is to hive off
responsibility for supervision of the banks and the financial system from
monetary policy, a separation that already occurs in many countries.
The next requirement is to appoint a new governor, to take over in 1993, who
is a professional. Running monetary policy is a difficult and specialist
task. Yet the candidate favoured in the betting odds is a popular merchant
banker, Sir David Scholey, chairman of S G Warburg, who knows the City well
but would never claim to be any kind of economic or monetary thinker. No
wonder a distinguished US economist, who has helped central and eastern
European countries, declined to apply for the job of chief economic adviser
to the British government, saying that he 'did not take on hopeless cases'.
When Robin Leigh-Pemberton was appointed in 1983, I wrote an article
attacking the Thatcher government for a wasted opportunity, being careful to
do so before I ever met him. Leigh-Pemberton asked what I had against him.
The answer was 'Nothing whatever.' It was just that we needed not a 'gent',
but a professional. If this was so nine years ago, how much more is it so
after recent humiliations.
Unfortunately, there is a great shortage of obvious candidates. The Bank's
internal candidate is Eddie George, the deputy governor, who effectively
runs monetary policy there. He is now less likely to get the job for the bad
reason that he is too high up to be able to shrug off the BCCI affair. I
would be in his favour if the Bank's monetary and exchange rate record were
better. But I am not one of the financial journalists who believe that the
Bank always gives perfect advice and that mistakes are always due to
ministers not taking it.
A future governor, but not this time round, may be the Bank's economic
director, Mervyn King. For he is not yet associated with enough policies or
judgments, good or bad, to assess. A once-favoured candidate is Sir David
Walker, best-known as chairman of the Securities and Investment Board, who
was a Treasury high-flier, but is now chairman-elect of Lloyds bank.
There may be people in the academic world or in the City who meet the bill.
None come to mind. It is absurd, however, to limit the choice to those known
in a small circle. Whenever Conservative ministers have asked my opinion on
people for jobs, I have replied: 'Why don't you use the markets in which you
say you believe - which in this instance means advertise?' In fact, the post
of chief government economic adviser was advertised last year; and the new
head of the Central Statistical Office, Bill McLennan, is an Australian, who
was head-hunted.
There is no reason why the new governor should be a UK citizen even if a
minor amendment is required to the Bank of England Act. I have recently been
impressed by Sweden's Bengt Dennis, who could be addressed informally in the
UK by his surname.
But probably a better choice would be Donald Brash, the governor of the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, who has been operating a form of independence
under a British-type constitution. He was appointed by Sir Roger Douglas,
the free-market Labour finance minister, with a contract to deliver stable
prices, defined as 0 to 2 per cent inflation. The contract was renewed by
Ruth Richardson, the National party finance minister - dubbed New Zealand's
Lady Thatcher - and the target date stretched slightly to 1993.
Although, contrary to City myth, Brash's salary does not depend on achieving
it, his job is on the line. With an inflation rate of 1 per cent he is well
ahead of schedule. Moreover, the recession incurred in the early years of
stabilisation is now behind New Zealand, where real gross domestic product
is on track to grow by 2 per cent this year, and 3 per cent in each of the
two following years. For what it is worth, Brash is known and popular in
London. Nevertheless one should not not prejudge the result of an open
competition.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921026

