FT921-11691

FT  30 JAN 92 / The Bush Budget: Cheney concedes ground on costly and
controversial programmes - Defence spending


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


AS THE US recession bites deeper, the clamour for a 'peace dividend' after
the end of the Cold War has grown, writes George Graham.
Mr Richard Cheney, US defence secretary, has held the line against radical
cuts in military spending. He has warned repeatedly that nuclear missiles
continue to be produced and deployed on the territory of the former Soviet
Union, and has cautioned against leaving the US with a hollow military
structure to face an uncertain future.
In his spending proposal for the 1993 fiscal year, Mr Cheney has come up
with a request for Dollars 267.6bn (Pounds 147.8bn) of budget authorisation,
cutting 7 per cent in inflation adjusted terms from the 1992 budget.
'The disintegration of the Soviet Union has reduced the threat to US
interests and eliminated the urgency for producing several advanced weapons
systems,' Mr Cheney said yesterday. 'We can now afford to be more deliberate
in the pace at which we modernise our armed forces.'
Mr Cheney has agreed to abandon some costly and controversial programmes,
such as the Seawolf submarine or the B2 stealth bomber. The nuclear arms
reduction proposals now being discussed by President George Bush and
President Boris Yeltsin of Russia offer a further opportunity to cut
spending on the strategic component of the US forces.
In particular, the Pentagon plans a new approach to defence acquisition,
concentrating on research and development and allowing protoonly when it can
be demonstrated they work and are needed. This approach could help avoid
some of the costly white elephants the Pentagon has been burdened with in
recent years, but it terrifies defence contractors, who argue that even if
military technology is preserved, the industrial base necessary for eventual
production will be lost.
The Pentagon has barely adjusted its plans for a reduced conventional force
structure since Mr Bush unveiled the Base Force concept in 1990 - after the
fall of the Berlin Wall but before Operation Desert Storm and before the
collapse of the Soviet Union.
The Base Force already envisaged a 25 per cent reduction in the US force
structure over five years.
The plan built on strategic deterrence coupled with a new effort to protect
against nuclear missiles through the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI);
forward US troop presence in Europe and the Pacific; the ability to respond
to crises such as in the Gulf war; and the capacity to reconstitute forces
in the future should some need arise.
General Colin Powell, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, argues it would
be dangerous to cut below the Base Force level of 12 active and six reserve
Army divisions, 12 Navy carrier battle groups, and 15 active and 11 reserve
Air Force fighter wings.
'The plan for downsizing and reconfiguring our forces to the Base Force
level is both prudent and fiscally attainable. Faster reductions risk
destroying the cohesion, morale and military effectiveness of today's
forces,' he warned in his 1992 military strategy assessment, issued
yesterday.
Mr Cheney describes the demands of Congress for faster and deeper cuts as
'hogwash', but the Dollars 50.4bn of savings his plan will bring over the
next five years seem unlikely to satisfy even fellow Republicans.
But Congress itself has shown reluctance to cut troop levels, in particular
reserves, which would have produced quicker spending cuts. Individual
members can be expected to fight tooth and nail to preserve weapons
programmes that are built in their districts.
AMONG programmes affected by planned budget savings are:
The B2 bomber. The Pentagon has for years demanded 75 of the stealth bombers
built by Northrop Corp in California, but Mr Cheney has now agreed to halt
the programme at 20 aircraft, saving Dollars 14.5bn (Pounds 8bn) over the
next five years.
Congress, however, may continue to demand an immediate halt to the B2,
limiting the Air Force to the 15 aircraft already under construction.
SSN-21 Seawolf submarine. With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the
Pentagon has agreed it no longer needs this new class of nuclear attack
submarine, whose prototype is under construction at General Dynamics'
Electric Boat division in Groton, Connecticut. Savings over five years
should total Dollars 17.5bn.
Comanche helicopter. This light-armed scout helicopter was under development
by Boeing and Sikorsky, but the Army will now make do with its Apache and
Kiowa fleet, upgraded with the new Longbow fire control radar system.
Efforts will be shifted to prototype development, yielding five-year savings
of Dollars 3.4bn.
ADATS missile system. The limited air threat to US ground forces from anyone
but the Soviet Union has led Mr Cheney to end the Air Defence Anti-tank
System under development by Martin Marietta in Florida.
The army will use existing Patriot, Hawk and Stinger missile systems and
develop an improved aircraft tracking system, saving Dollars 1.7bn over five
years.
Other savings should come from the cancellation of the Midgetman small
inter-continental ballistic missile, but these will be partially offset by
spending on an improved guidance system for the Minuteman III ICBM.
The Pentagon also plans to defer development of the Army's Block III tank
and the Losat infantry anti-tank weapon; forego engineering and
manufacturing development for the Amraam air-to-air missile, which is due to
replace the Sparrow; and limit spending on the Navy's fixed distribution
system underwater surveillance network to research.
The cuts spare the F-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter programme managed by
Lockheed and McDonnell Douglas's C-17 transport aircraft, and the
administration is asking for a 31 per cent increase in funding for the
anti-ballistic missile Strategic Defence Initiative to Dollars 5.4bn.
Overall, savings in programme budget authorisation for 1993-97 should total
Dollars 50.4bn, although savings in actual outlays are expected to total
only Dollars 27.4bn over the same period.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920130

