FT922-412

FT  27 JUN 92 / Rabin pledge on freezing settlements


   By HUGH CARNEGY and REUTER


   TEL AVIV, WASHINGTON


ISRAEL'S prime minister-elect, Mr Yitzhak Rabin, said yesterday he would
freeze Jewish settlements in areas of the occupied territories he does not
consider vital to Israel's security. He would also cut off state subsidies
to existing settlements beyond that available to equivalent areas within
Israel.
The Labour party leader reiterated his support for elections among
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to choose 'a body that will
serve as a self-governing authority'. Palestinians had unsuccessfully sought
a settlement freeze and such elections from the outgoing government led by
the Likud party.
Mr Rabin said he was optimistic he would be ready to present a Labour-led
coalition government to parliament when the Knesset resumes in mid-July.
Peace negotiations are tentatively set to resume in Rome at the end of July.
Final official results from Tuesday's general election showed Labour's total
in the 120-seat Knesset has slipped to 44 from the projected 45. But in
alliance with Meretz, a minority pro-peace grouping, and with the support of
small Arab parties, Mr Rabin can still command 61 seats.
Labour officials said yesterday they also expected two ultra-orthodox
religious parties to join the coalition. Likud, which won only 32 seats, is
set for opposition for the first time in 15 years.
Mr Rabin had previously said he would divert the estimated Shk3bn (Pounds
660m) the previous government spent on settlements to investment inside
Israel 'proper'. Yesterday, he said he would impose a freeze on 'political
settlements'.
He hoped this would facilitate Israel receiving Dollars 10bn in US loan
guarantees blocked because of Likud's refusal to freeze settlements.
However, Mr Rabin repeated that 'political' settlements did not include
those in the Jordan Valley, the Golan Heights or the Jerusalem area. He
would decide on his policy towards these later.
No change would be sought in the format of the current Middle East peace
negotiations, but he would change the content. He gave no details beyond
saying he supported interim arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip as
envisaged in the 1979 Camp David accords with Egypt.
Likud yesterday was digesting the decision by Mr Moshe Arens, the defence
minister, to retire from politics. He was considered a leading contender to
succeed Mr Yitzhak Shamir, the prime minister, who is also expected to step
down soon as party leader. Mr Arens' departure may improve the chances of Mr
Binyamin Begin, son of the late Menachem Begin, Likud's first leader.
The US State Department yesterday condemned the violence in the West Bank
and Gaza, in which three Israelis and three Palestinians died on Thursday,
saying that those who resorted to such acts 'at this time' could only be
seen as 'enemies of peace', Reuter reports from Washington.
Unsettled West Bank, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920627

