FT922-630

FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (9): Heading the right way - Industry


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


MR TERJE OSMUNDSEN, the deputy head of the Norwegian employers federation,
NHO, is highly optimist about his country's future. 'Norway is in much
better shape than the statistics might suggest,' he argues.
A highly articulate and persuasive champion of Norwegian mainland business,
he believes the country is heading in the right direction as it becomes more
market and internationally-minded.
Later this year, a study will be published on Norwegian industry, based on
Professor Michael Porter's theory of competitive advantage, and it is clear
already from the work done that Norway has much greater entrepreneurial
potential than might have been expected.
'Our oil and gas revenues are accelerating our transformation towards a
society of high technology and knowledge-based industries,' argues Mr
Osmundsen. 'In the last few years there has been a significant change in the
business climate, with a shift away from traditional welfare policies
towards industrial growth.'
He praises the minority Labour government for helping to stimulate the new
environment and the reform in Norway's corporate taxation which came into
force at the beginning of this year. This has cut the rate from 50.8 per
cent to 28 per cent. The marginal rate of personal taxation has been reduced
from 57 per cent to 48.8 per cent. As a proportion of gross domestic
product, personal taxation is down this year to 11.4 per cent from 12.5 per
cent and now lies around the OECD average.
Unlike many other western economies, Norway has a low level of tax burdens
on employers pay rolls. That contribution is only 16.7 per cent, compared
with 22.9 per cent as a European Community average. The net decline in
Norway's tax revenue amounts to NKr5.6bn this year, equivalent to 1 per cent
of mainland Norway's gross domestic product. As a proportion of total gross
national product Norway's total taxes amount to 44.2 per cent this year
which is 1.3 per cent lower than in 1991, and compare with the EC average of
39.9 per cent.
The modification in the output levels of carbon dioxide to bring it more
into line with the European average is also welcomed by Mr Osmundsen as a
sign that the government recognises it must respond positively to industry's
needs.
He also points to the government's greater readiness to finance profitable
infrastructure projects which make market sense, rather than meet the
political demands of regional policy, its decision to increase funding for
research and development, and to educational changes designed to encourage a
more skilled labour force.
NHO is not completely satisfied. It continues to worry about Norway's large
public sector and industrial costs, but the outlook is more promising than a
few years ago. Mr Osmundsen praises the trade unions for their responsible
attitude in pay bargaining which has helped to restore some lost
competitiveness to Norwegian companies. 'This has been an encouraging sign.
There are also signs that people are working harder,' he argues.
NHO is hopeful that Norway will benefit from its membership of the European
Economic Area from January 1993. Mr Osmundsen points out that much industry
is integrated into European markets and its increasing specialisation among
small and medium-sized enterprises in niches such as information technology
and shipping equipment should give Norwegian industry favourable
opportunities.
'Of course, we do have some sizeable problems,' he admits. 'Too many of our
companies are still too concentrated on the home market, and they have not
devoted enough of their resources to management training.'
Mr Osmundsen is also concerned at the knock-on effects of Norway's long and
deep banking crisis. The larger companies still have no difficulties in
funding their activities when necessary, but the tougher disciplines being
imposed on the banks are making it much harder for smaller enterprises to
acquire necessary capital except at exorbitantly high interest rates.
This autumn the government will unveil its proposals to abolish the
country's so-called concessionary laws that inhibit foreign ownership of
Norwegian industry, agriculture and property. It seems unlikely there will
be complete freedom in this sensitive area, but Norway will have to adjust
as part of its membership of the EEA over a two-year transition period. As
Mr Osmundsen points out, foreign companies are well based in Norway. About
30 per cent of shares on the Oslo bourse are owned by foreigners and
companies such as Asea Brown-Boveri, Alcatel and Siemens have successful
activities inside the country.
However, Norway needs a much larger flow of inward industrial investment in
the coming years which is why NHO is so favourable to the country's early
membership of the European Community. 'We need a cultural change,' declares
Mr Osmundsen. 'More companies must get into exports and find partners
abroad.'
The government may have helped to stimulate a more favourable climate for
industry but this does not mean automatic success after a long period of
decline and weakness. The restructuring of mainland industry has been slow
and painful. Mr Osmundsen believes the challenge now facing the business
community is to make a 'more aggressive response'. 'Our industrial base is
smaller now than it was a few years ago but it is also healthier.'

The Financial Times


London Page V

920626

