FT923-15568

FT  01 JUL 92 / Arts: Mike Westbrook Orchestra - Jazz


   By GARRY BOOTH


Mike Westbrook's idea of a standard is not a Monk or Strayhorn original. He
prefers to arrange a nursery rhyme for jazz and chamber orchestras combined,
or to write a moody setting for the poetry of William Blake. His latest
project, which celebrates the 200th anniversary of the birth of composer
Gioacchino Rossini, is no less ambitious or eccentric in its execution. At
Ronnie Scott's, accompanied by a disreputable looking big band which
includes a violin and an accordion, the arch-arranger tackles The Barber of
Seville, The Thieving Magpie and Cinderella with famous gusto and humour.
Bringing a 20-piece orchestra to a jazz club which has the atmosphere of a
sauna, could have been unwise, however - had it not been for the steamy
burlesque warbling of partner Kate Westbrook. With her black dress and red
gloves clasped around the mike, her sensual but not entirely serious
serenades are entirely suited to the lubricious atmosphere of Soho in
summer. Rosina was given a new persona as Berlin cabaret lieder and Figaro
himself was introduced by altoist Alan Barnes as a cheerfully swinging
'Factotum Al Bebop'. Four trumpets, their owners perched precariously on a
shelf at the back of the stage, declaimed uproariously the while.
The improvised trilling of soprano saxophones and blue bass line eventually
crowded in on the overture to the Barber and Westbrook, who has the look of
a cavity wall insulation salesman, looked on mischievously. Kate, now all in
red, proceeded to astonish a near melting audience with the endlessly
rolling r of a most unlikely and lascivious Cinderella before the orchestra
neatly segued into a militaristic marching piece taken from The Thieving
Magpie. After more dramatic snarling from Kate, Mike set the orchestra into
a gallop and the Scott Club crowd, either gasping for air or gaping with
amazement, were overwhelmed by the William Tell overture. Rossini, who
apparently relished the opportunity to stun an audience, would surely have
approved.
Mike Westbrook is at Ronnie Scott's until Saturday July 4

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920701

