FT923-6306

FT  25 AUG 92 / International Company News: Japanese insurers warned by
Moody's of challenges ahead


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


JAPANESE life insurers face significant challenges to their financial
strength this decade, warns Moody's Investment Service, the US credit rating
agency. It points to deteriorating asset quality and higher yields on
maturing policies.
The problems of Japanese life insurers, once among the most formidable
investors in the domestic and international markets, come as Japanese
financial institutions are being forced to cope with the aggressive growth
of the 1980s.
The agency said the ratings of Japanese life insurance companies were under
downward pressure in the longer term.
In the light of this Moody's said it was reviewing the financial strength
rating of three leading life insurers, Meiji Mutual Life Insurance, Sumitomo
Life Insurance, and Dai-Ichi Mutual Life Insurance, for possible downgrades
from their current ratings of Aaa.
The sharp fall in the stock market has had an impact on insurers since the
unrealised gains on their stock holdings, which served as buffers by
absorbing losses on investments, has declined sharply.
This has led them to cut sharply the level of new investments in high-risk
products, such as stocks and foreign securities.
The life insurance companies also have significant exposure to the faltering
domestic property market, through loans to corporations and non-bank
financial institutions.
In addition to their problems in the 1980s, life insurers have increased
investments in foreign securities and real estate, making portfolios
vulnerable to foreign currency movements.
The deterioration of asset quality also comes as the companies face
redemptions of the investment type insurance products with higher yields.
Moody's estimates that some Y10,000bn (Dollars 79.2bn) of investment type
products sold in the 1980s, will mature between this year and 1996. It says
that while the life insurance companies have significant liquidity and cash
flow, large fund withdrawals will squeeze profitability.
The life assurance industry, one of the country's most tightly regulated
financial sectors, also faces pressure from the deregulation.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920825

