FT923-6601

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: A chat with Mr Nissan-san - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


MONDAY'S Radio 4 Conversation Piece was better than its throwaway title
suggests, for its focus was Ian Gibson, Managing Director of the Nissan
factory in Sunderland. Mr Gibson has an open-plan office, where he works in
Nissan uniform (not an overall, even if others wear the same kit).
Some 80 per cent of his workers are locally engaged and trained; half of
them had been long unemployed or never employed at all, and all the senior
posts come from internal promotion. The trouble over the UK Nissan
distributor is an entirely separate affair. Presenter Sue MacGregor kept the
talk very interesting.
Poets and Places make a good association for Radio 4's Tuesday series, but
the places don't always live up to the poetry. Last week we had Larkin,
whose place had to be Hull, not the most romantic place in the country. Next
week we have Betjeman, paired with his holiday area in Cornwall, less
characteristic than the London suburbs.
But this week, Housman, whose verse almost sprouts from his young days among
the Shropshire lads. Presenter John Florance, with Jane Caulcott of the
Housman Society, had to open with 'the blue, remembered hills', and soon
began to match the names - Wenlock, Abdon, Ludlow, Clun, but oddly not
Bredon - with the country and its history. Of the poet himself, we were told
little - a happy childhood, later distress from his illicit affection for
Moses Jackson. The verse reading was poor.
Jackson might have taken a higher place, for many poems deal sub rosa with
Housman's liking for young farm lads and sadness at the 'laws of God, the
laws of man' that prevented its celebration. Though the incidence of suicide
in the county may not have been as high as his lines suggest, the fatal
emotions were surely his own, not those of some Shropshire Terence.
The Edinburgh Festival must compete for its place on Radio 3 with the Proms
and the Texaco Trophy matches with Pakistan, but it began well with
Schoenberg's Moses and Aaron on Sunday and Tchaikovsky string quartets the
next three mornings, wrapped around discussions between Peter Diamand and
John Drummond, both former Festival directors. The Summer Season drama goes
on, but I would rather leave it unreported.
The most interesting play I heard was Dr Barry, the first of a Radio 4
series, Who Sings the Hero?, that will tell about heroes. The week's subject
was a woman, her birth and upbringing unrecorded, who made a set of friends,
including Lord Erskine and Arthur Wellesley, so effectively as a child that
she was admitted to Edinburgh University Medical School (as a boy) when she
was 10. She pretended to be a man most of her life.
An unpopular posting to Plymouth led to an equally unpopular but more useful
posting to Cape Colony, where she reformed everything and was intimate (as
man or woman, who can say?) with the Governor, Lord Charles Somerset.
Reforms and promotions followed, until her unpopularity led to postings, and
promotions, to Mauritius, Jamaica, St Helena, Montreal. On leave from Corfu,
she visited Scutari, where she reformed, and annoyed Florence Nightingale.
In South Africa, she did a Caesarian with no anaesthetic, of which we heard
all the sounds, and had a baby of her own, though no details exist. In St
Helena she fought a duel, neither side being hit.
This was all narrated by Maggie MaCarthy in Jean Binnie's drama, with
Veronica Quilligan as Barry. Martin Jenkins directed.
Gary Lineker is one of my favourite public figures, so I naturally listened
to Radio 5's Gary Lineker's Football Night, on Wednesday, where he was a
presenter, not only for football but for athletics. So far he sounds much
like other sports presenters. Mostly I heard the commentary on the game
between Villa and Leeds; I had to wait for half-time for Lineker.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920822

