FT923-15356

FT  02 JUL 92 / Technology: Anti-noise devices drown out competition


   By LOUISE KEHOE


Looking for the quiet life? The din of the diesel engine and the whine of
the air conditioning fan can now be silenced electronically using 'noise
cancellation' technology that is rapidly finding a broad range of commercial
applications.
Electronic or 'active' noise cancellation systems analyse undesirable, low
frequency noises in a chosen environment. The noise reduction system
produces an equal but opposite wave, called 'anti-noise', which cancels out
or reduces the unwanted sound. The concept of 'anti-noise' was discovered in
the 1930s, but commercial use had to await the microprocessor and cheap
computing power used to analyse sound.
The first commercial applications of the technology are in industrial
settings. NCT Muffler of Stamford, Connecticut, a subsidiary of Noise
Cancellation Technologies, this week took its first order, for 50 electronic
silencers, which electronically silence noise from blowers, vacuum pumps,
compressors and other internal combustion engines. An added benefit of the
noise cancellation systems is that they also make the equipment more fuel
efficient and improve worker safety.
The first of NCT Muffler's silencer systems have been installed in a wire
manufacturing plant that uses industrial vacuum pumps to unload bulk product
from railway cars.
Noise cancellation may find a much broader market in the vehicle industry,
where it can be used to quieten car engines - to the benefit of those
outside and inside the vehicle. Noisy buses, trucks, farm equipment and
generators are also potentially important applications. NCT General Systems,
another subsidiary, is working on noise reduction systems for fans used in
household appliances.
The most appealing applications of this technology are being pursued by NCT
Personal Quieting. These include personal headsets that block out offensive
noise without affecting a person's ability to hear speech, warning signals
or music. Unfortunately beyond the scope of this technology, it seems, is
the ability to selectively block some voices while leaving others audible.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920702

