FT922-7150

FT  20 MAY 92 / International Company News: Setting the stage for
realignment - Paul Betts on the future of the European regional aircraft
industry


   By PAUL BETTS


Fokker, the Dutch aircraft manufacturer, is at the centre of an effort to
rationalise the European regional airliner industry. The driving force
behind the move appears to be the success achieved by the European Airbus
consortium in the large airliner business.
If a partnership involving Deutsche Aerospace (Dasa), Aerospatiale of France
and Alenia of Italy succeeds in acquiring control of Fokker, it could set
the stage for a significant realignment of the European regional aircraft
business.
It would also put pressure on other manufacturers, including British
Aerospace and SAAB of Sweden, to accelerate their efforts to find partners
or join forces with the proposed alliance between Dasa, Aerospatiale, Alenia
and Fokker.
In contrast with the large airliner industry - dominated by only three
companies (Boeing, McDonnell Douglas and Airbus) - the regional and commuter
aircraft industry includes at least nine manufacturers competing in a
cut-throat market depressed by the financial problems of smaller airlines.
With too much capacity, manufacturers have increasingly sought to
rationalise the market through partnerships and other links. Some
consolidation has already begun.
Bombardier of Canada absorbed Short Brothers of Northern Ireland and, more
recently, de Havilland of Canada, after a bid for the Canadian group by
Aerospatiale and Alenia was blocked by the European Commission.
In Europe, Aerospatiale and Alenia have pooled their resources to form the
ATR regional turbopropeller aircraft consortium, and they both joined forces
with Dasa last year to set up the Regioliner consortium to develop a new
family of regional jets.
It is this German-led partnership which is seeking to take control of
Fokker. Although Fokker has recovered from its financial crisis of 1987,
when the Dutch government stepped in to take a 32 per cent stake, few
believe Fokker can survive without partners.
The Dutch government has also made it clear on several occasions that Fokker
would need to find an industrial partner if it wanted to develop a new
aircraft. It has said it has no objection in principle to foreign interests
acquiring control of companies in which it had a stake.
However, the negotiations between Dasa, Fokker and the Dutch authorities are
understood to be difficult. Any deal is also likely to face intense scrutiny
from the European Commission on the grounds it could give the combined group
a dominant position in the market. On the other hand, France and Germany
have long argued for an industrial policy in Europe to rationalise the
regional airliner business.
What makes the situation even more complex is the intricate web of alliances
between various European companies on certain projects while these same
companies compete on other market sectors.
Dasa and Aerospatiale are both partners in Airbus, with a 37.9 per cent
stake each in the European large airliner consortium. BAe is also an Airbus
partner with 20 per cent but is in direct competition with both Dasa and
Aerospatiale in the regional aircraft market.
Alenia is an ally of Dasa and Aerospatiale, but it does some subcontracting
work for Airbus and is at the same time involved on Boeing and McDonnell
Douglas programmes. Its parent company, Finmeccanica, also own 6 per cent of
Fokker.
The heavy costs of launching a new aircraft family in a weak market, coupled
with Airbus's plans to develop the 125-seat A319 airliner (a shorter
derivative of the 150-seat A320), appears to have prompted Dasa to turn its
attention on Fokker.
Dasa, which is already co-operating with Fokker on the Fokker 100 jet,
clearly saw an opportunity to lead a rationalisation by forging closer links
with the Dutch group.
Fokker has been working on plans to develop a smaller 70-seat version of the
Fokker 100 and eventually a larger 120 to 130-seat derivative. Both aircraft
would be direct competitors to the original Dasa-led Regioliner jet family.
If the talks between Dasa and Fokker succeed, it would be likely to put
greater pressure on BAe to find a partner for its loss-making regional
aircraft operations. BAe has had contacts with Japanese manufacturers over a
possible partnership, but it would also have to consider joining the new
European grouping.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920520

