FT921-1316

FT  25 MAR 92 / Business and the Environment: Erasing the black marks - A
controversial proposal to register contaminated land


   By JOHN HUNT


The UK government's recent decision to postpone the introduction of public
registers of contaminated land has given the property industry a breathing
space for the next few months.
Local authorities were due to start drawing up the registers on April 1
under the section 143 of the Environmental Protection Act. But the industry
protested that the scheme would severely blight much building land and knock
millions of pounds off the value of property already built on such sites.
Following strong opposition the Department of the Environment will have
further consultations with the construction and property industries and
bodies such as the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS).
Friends of the Earth estimates there are 100,000 contaminated sites in the
UK including old chemical plants, disused mines, 6,000 former rubbish tips
and 5,000 old gas works. Herbert Smith, the law firm specialising in the
environment, says the clean up could cost between Pounds 100,000 and Pounds
1m per acre. Many sites contain chemicals and toxic metals that can pollute
water sources or methane gas that can cause underground fires and
explosions.
Developers are not opposed to the registers in principle but object to the
form proposed by the government. The DoE found it would be too expensive and
time consuming to draw up lists which would accurately assess the state of
contamination on each site. So it settled for a system which would include
all sites known to have been put to a contaminative use.
Contamination would have been negligible in many cases and some land might
have been rendered harmless by expensive de-contamination treatment.
Nevertheless they would have appeared on the registers and remained there
permanently. There was no right of appeal against the decision.
'The scale of the impact is vast,' the RICS complained to David Trippier,
minister for environment. 'We believe hundreds of thousands of sites could
be effectively sterilised for re-development - up to 30 per cent of the
Black country for example.'
The House Builders Federation told Trippier that unless the measure was
amended it would have 'a damaging and prolonged effect on the housing
market.' Many modern housing estates, business parks and out-of-town
shopping centres are built on previously polluted sites which have usually
been given de-contamination treatment.
The registers would affect many properties held by government departments
and block attempts to rejuvenate derelict inner city areas where much of the
contaminated land is located. Ironically, the building which houses the
Department of the Environment in Westminster would be on the list as it was
built on the site of a old gasworks.
The National Rivers Authority, the official watchdog for water quality, is
alarmed at the amount of pollution seeping into rivers from old sites. In
the Black Country it has identified 200 badly contaminated sites and is
drawing up a programme for tackling the worst of them.
Under the Water Resources Act it can clean up a site and reclaim the cost
from the person who 'caused or knowingly permitted' pollutants to get into
rivers. But it is difficult to identify the person guilty of old pollution
and current owners could be made bankrupt if they are forced to pay.
Attempts to solve the problem will continue whichever party is in power
after the general election. In a policy paper, Judith Denner of the DoE's
contaminated land branch says: 'Registers are only part of the government's
overall strategy. The next step is to establish the need for follow-up
action on registered sites.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920325

