FT922-443

FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: A drama of cryptic drawings


   By NIGEL SPIVEY


THE BYROM COLLECTION
by Joy Hancox
Jonathan Cape Pounds 25, 320 pages
THIS BOOK is the interim result of one woman's fascination with an
18th-century character called John Byrom: closet Jacobite, pioneer of
Pitman's shorthand, Fellow of the Royal Society - and curator of a corpus of
over 500 rather similar and rather perplexing drawings. Joy Hancox is
writing Byrom's life: here she describes the drawings.
Put aside the publisher's hyperbole. Put aside, too, the first-person
discourse of intrigue in which the description is couched. You are left with
a piecemeal catalogue, the contents of which are more or less interesting
according to taste. The drawings date across two centuries, and their
superficial homogeneity is in their geometric nature - complexes of circles,
triangles, cubes and squares - but within these patterns there are
intimations of Judaeo-Christian cabbala, Freemasonry, the occult, methods of
defence and navigation, and architectural design.
The limits of enlightenment are soon reached. Byrom was evidently one of
those types obsessed with the cryptic almost for the cryptic's sake, though
he was wise to keep his Jacobite sympathies quiet. He formed a 'Cabbala
Club', whose members included Sir Hans Sloane, but whose functions remain
necessarily obscure. He left no documentation with his collection of
drawings: how they came to be assembled, and what unites them as an
assemblage, are richly speculative questions. The only clues Byrom provided
came from ciphers in his own abbreviated shorthand.
The sleuthing has plainly been fun for the author, even if it fails to add
up to a proper denouement. Where the drawings are likely to arouse most
interest is in their apparent allusion to the early theatres of London. It
used to be assumed that the Elizabethan play-house evolved out of
bear-gardens and cock-pits. Those who like their Shakespeare to be a man of
the people have always resisted the alternative suggestion that it was the
English discovery of the works of Vitruvius - architectural adviser to the
Emperor Augustus - which gave rise to Shakespeare's 'wooden O', and the
Burbage family's first London theatres. Vitruvius outlined a ground plan
whose basis was a circle containing four equilateral triangles: and this is
the basis for a number of drawings in the Byrom Collection, some of them
even annotated with mention of a 'Globe.'
Are these plans of Shakespeare's Globe of 1599? If so, the Globe, with its
pennant declaring it to be theatrum mundi ('All the world's a stage . . .'),
is as architecturally germane to the English Renaissance as the works of its
chief playwright are in a literary sense. There is a drawing of the Rose
Theatre in the Byrom Collection which corresponds closely with what
archaeologists have uncovered there. What correspondence may exist between
the Vitruvian Globe of the Byrom Collection and the yet unexcavated Globe
remains to be seen.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920627

