FT924-846

FT  22 DEC 92 / Japan drafts budget to lift economy


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S Finance Ministry yesterday published a draft budget for fiscal 1993
that attempts to balance an expected fall in tax revenues with the need to
increase public spending and stimulate an ailing economy.
The draft, which provides for an austere 0.2 per cent increase in total
outlays but a 4.8 per cent rise in public works spending, was approved at a
cabinet meeting yesterday and will be debated by the government until the
end of the week.
Some estimates will change because of the negotiations, but the draft,
hailed as 'stimulatory' by the ministry, is the basic guide to Japanese
government spending for the fiscal year beginning in April.
Outlays in several areas, including pensions and agricultural subsidies, are
to fall, while defence spending is set to rise by 1.7 per cent, the smallest
increase since 1960. Overseas aid spending is scheduled to rise by 4.7 per
cent and social welfare outlays by 2.9 per cent, the smallest increases in
both sectors since 1987.
The ministry said that while outlays in most areas were restrained to a
degree unprecedented in recent years, public works spending was increased.
Business organisations generally welcomed the emphasis on public works
spending, but Mr Masaru Hayami, head of the Association of Corporate
Executives, said the ministry's calculations might be flawed because they
are based on an 'overly optimistic' forecast of 3.3 per cent economic growth
next year.
Meanwhile, the second budget, the annual estimates of the Fiscal Investment
and Loan Programme (Filp), which taps funds in government-affiliated
financial institutions, provides for a 12.4 per cent rise in public
works-related spending, compared to a 10.8 per cent rise in the current
year.
Mr Robert Feldman, economist at Salomon Brothers in Tokyo, said the budget
was 'definitely expansionary' and almost certain to be supplemented by a
special budget package in fiscal 1993. 'This budget is really a sign of the
economic times. The ministry is doing everything it can, particularly with
the Filp,' Mr Feldman said.
Ms Chiharu Shima, economist at UBS Phillips & Drew, said the budget was
'enough to keep the engine running, but not enough to accelerate the
economy'.
Finance Ministry officials said that the budget was not drafted with
Washington in mind, but that US officials should conclude Japan was doing
everything possible to revive the domestic economy and contribute to
international growth.
The ministry expects the slowing of the economy will lead to a 1.9 per cent
fall in tax revenues. As a result, construction bond issues are scheduled to
rise by 11.7 per cent to cover the deficit, and debt paper as a percentage
of the general account revenue will rise from 10.1 to 11.2 per cent.
Editorial comment, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921222

