FT921-12097

FT  29 JAN 92 / Some democracy fatigue sets in over the Alps


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


THE much-admired Swiss form of direct democracy, in which every important
government decision must be ratified in plebiscites, appears to have run
amok.
The Swiss will be invited to go to the polls four times this year to vote on
perhaps a score of national issues, from vivisection to membership in the
International Monetary Fund and the European Economic Area.
This is far beyond the normal level of plebiscites (there were votes on only
four issues at the federal level last year) and suggests to many that the
system is no longer be working properly.
Under the Swiss constitution, the federal parliament is required to submit
all its important decisions to a vote. Moreover, any citizen may petition
for a referendum on a government decision that he does not like. He may also
petition for a plebiscite, or 'initiative' as it is called, to decide
whether a law should be withdrawn or amended. Provided the required number
of signatures are obtained (50,000 to contest a government decision, 100,000
to launch an initiative), the plebiscites must be held.
The system has been lauded for promoting consensus and compromise in an
ethnically diverse country, but there are signs that it is being abused by
special interest groups and distorting the policy-making process.
The main problem is that, while Switzerland's population has nearly doubled
since the system was established in 1892, the number of signatures required
to force a referendum has remained unchanged (with the exception of 1977,
when it was adjusted to take account of women's being given the vote). Thus,
as all sorts of special interest groups have discovered, it has become
progressively easier to raise the number of necessary signatures.
Another problem, which has also not escaped the attention of special
interest groups, is that Swiss voters have a preference for voting against
whatever is being proposed by the government. Fourteen have blocked
government proposals. Among those defeated was the 1986 proposal that
Switzerland join the UN and last year's proposal to subject Swiss citizens
to value added tax. The success rate for initiatives is much lower.
Moreover, there is evidence that the average citizen is suffering from
vote-fatigue. The average turnout in the past couple of years for federal
referendums and initiatives has been only 43.6 per cent, with only
significantly higher turnout for an issue that is close to the Swiss heart.
Nearly two thirds of the electorate turned out in 1989 to express their view
on the abolition of the Swiss army, and a surprisingly large minority
supported the idea.
Political observers say these trends have begun to have an effect on the way
the government operates. Whereas policies used to be prepared in an
objective atmosphere by committees of civil servants, they are now subjected
to political scrutiny at a very early stage to assess whether or not they
are likely to attract a majority in a referendum.
Among this year's potentially troublesome plebiscites is that on whether the
country should join the IMF. The Government has wanted to join for several
years but only managed to get a decision through Parliament last year. Now
it appears that an unlikely coalition of conservative isolationists and
left-wing opponents of IMF pressures on developing countries will succeed in
reversing the decision.
The proposal to cut the stamp duty on securities transactions perhaps
illustrates best the weaknesses of the system. The Government has been
loathe to give up this tax because it is a large source of revenue, but
revenues have been declining recently because, whenever possible, Swiss
securities avoid the duty by executing their trades in London or Luxembourg.
Opponents of a Swiss government plan to build a new railway through the Alps
have failed by a whisker in their petititon to force a referendum on the
issue. They gathered only 49,380 signatures, 620 short of the minimum
required.
This may be good news for those concerned about Switzerland's relations with
its European neighbours, but the Swiss ecology party, which sponsored the
petition, was obviously not: it said that its failure was due to late
delivery of signatures from some districts and that it was considering an
appeal to the courts.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

920129

