FT923-9714

FT  04 AUG 92 / Employers offered training cash incentive


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


A BUILDING industry trade association is offering employers subsidies of
more than Pounds 1,000 for each trainee they recruit in an effort to avert
skills shortages.
The Heating and Ventilating Contractors' Association, which organises
training in its industry, is offering employers who are not members of its
association a one-off grant of Pounds 300 and payment of two years' training
fees, at Pounds 375 a year, in return for taking on a trainee funded by the
Youth Training scheme.
The incentive is one of the most radical by an employers' organisation at a
time when employers generally have cut the number of training places for
young people. That has put a strain on the YT scheme under which companies
take on young trainees either temporarily or permanently.
One of the main reasons that Training and Enterprise Councils, which
administer the YT scheme in England and Wales, have found it difficult to
uphold the government's guarantee of a training place for all young people
who want one has been a shortage of places with employers. Part of the YT
training period has had to be spent with an employer and not just in
college.
There has been a sharp reduction in training places in the heating and
ventilation industry - in the 12 months to July there were about 3,000 craft
and technician trainees; This September the new intake is projected to be
around 1,200.
The HVCA, is offering the same incentives for its 1,200 member companies,
with the one-off grant increased to Pounds 400. The association said it had
more than adequate funds for the scheme.
Mr John Clarke of the HVCA said: 'If we do not continue to train now, there
will be a very severe skills shortage when the recession ends. Companies
will then have to pay over the odds for staff and that will be reflected in
contract prices.'
He said most employers in the industry employed about 10 people and
companies were finding it a struggle to keep on adult staff, with little
left over to recruit apprentices.
Mr Clarke said at least two colleges in London had stopped offering courses
for the industry and he feared more might close. The HVCA said there was no
difficulty about its funding of the initiative - the more employers who
wanted to take up the offer, the better for the industry.
Cuts in training by employers were said yesterday to be one of the reasons
for a fall in the number of young people leaving YT with qualifications.
According to a survey published by Youthaid, a charity concerned with young
people in the labour market, the proportion of young people leaving YT with
qualifications fell from 38 per cent in the 12 months to March 1991 to 35
per cent in the 12 months to July 1991.
The survey also showed a further effect of the recession, with the
unemployment rate for young people leaving the scheme rising from 20 per
cent in the 12 months to March 1991 to 23 per cent in the same period to
July 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920804

