FT923-9806

FT  03 AUG 92 / US Money and Credit: Eyes focus on July unemployment figures


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


ALL eyes will be focused on the July unemployment figures due on Friday,
amid signs that the number of non-farm jobs created last month might have
been more than 100,000.
This would be a significant reversal on the June loss of 117,000 jobs, which
was taken as a sign of the weakness of the US recovery, pleasing the bond
market and contributing to the logic behind the last discount rate cut by
the Federal Reserve.
The jobs data this Friday could dampen the bond market's recent bullish
mood, just as any sign of a more positive trend in the US economy is
negative for bond investors.
On the other hand, a growing number of players in the Treasury market would
probably agree that inflation is no longer an immediate concern, the US
economy seems more stagnant than recovering and the lack of consumer
confidence will continue to weaken the recovery for some months to come.
It was the very weakness of consumer confidence last Tuesday that caused the
yield curve - the graphic depiction of interest rates on various maturities
ranging from short-term notes to the 30-year benchmark bond - to flatten for
the first time in months.
Another factor was a second-quarter 1.4 per cent growth rate for gross
domestic product, down from 2.9 per cent in the first three months of 1992.
This number told the US economic story quite well.
The 11.6 point drop in the Conference Board's consumer confidence index
caused the Treasury market to stage quite a rally on Tuesday, marking the
30-year paper a point higher and sending the yield down to 7.43 per cent. On
Wednesday the yield even briefly touched a very low 7.35 per cent.
Profit-taking and uncertainty about the next round of statistics took some
of the gloss off the rally.
By Friday evening the 30-year bond had eased  13/32 on the day, but still up
enough on the week to produce a yield of 7.455 per cent, down from 7.56 per
cent a week earlier.
While some speculate that the 30-year yield could drop below 7 per cent if
the Fed goes ahead with another interest rate cut in early September, the
analysts at Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette (DLJ) say the market is assuming
the economy to be far weaker than it really is.
DLJ predicts the yield will end 1992 at just below 8 per cent, which assumes
the US recovery will strengthen during the third and fourth quarters.
Other statistics to be watched this week are today's national purchasing
managers' index, which could rise to 56 from 52.8 in June; and the index of
leading economic indicators which is due out tomorrow, and could be down by
0.3 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920803

