FT924-8127

FT  12 NOV 92 / West accused of failure to support Yeltsin's reforms: FT
Conference (Doing business in Russia)


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


A SENIOR western adviser to the Russian government yesterday accused the
west of hypocrisy and indecision in failing to provide funds to stabilise
the economy or a policy of support President Boris Yeltsin's market reforms.
Addressing an FT conference in Moscow, Prof Anders Aslund, director of the
Stockholm Institute of East European Economics, warned the west that its
refusal to back Russian economic reforms could lead to chaos similar to that
which brought Hitler to power in Weimar Germany.
'The west is purportedly supporting President Yeltsin, democracy and a
market economy in Russia, but it stopped supporting this country after it
had ceased to be a communist, totalitarian, aggressive centrally planned
economy,' he said.
Having provided financing of just Dollars 8bn this year, the west revealed a
'prejudice that Russia can only be ruled by a Stalin in the Kremlin', Prof
Aslund told an audience of western and Russian businessmen at the
conference, entitled 'Doing Business in Russia'.
To fend off the danger of hyperinflation which could 'happen any day', he
also called for an immediate tightening of monetary policy and accused Mr
Viktor Gerashchenko, central bank chairman, of failing even to try to
stabilise the rouble.
He also called for fresh elections and a new constitution to provide the
legitimacy for painful reforms. He said the main danger to Russia was not
the extreme nationalists and Communists but the main opposition Civic Union
which wants reforms slowed.
Mr Anatoly Chubais, deputy prime minister, admitted that the government had
been guilty of 'too many unacceptable compromises' with advocates of a
looser monetary and credit policy. He said the priority was to fight
inflation.
Partly to make reforms irreversible, he would hold the first auctions in his
mass privatisation programme before the Russian Congress of People's
Deputies tries to unseat the government on December 1. He also urged foreign
investors to buy up privatisation vouchers being distributed to the
population in order to take part in the sale of medium and large-scale
enterprises.
Mr Gerashchenko, who also spoke at the conference, rejected attacks on his
policy of supporting Russian enterprises with central bank credits: the
country had no alternative source of financing. He announced that central
bank credit to enterprises and the government was likely to be about
Rbs4,000bn this year.
He agreed there was a need to tighten monetary and credit policy but said
this should be combined with a selective industrial policy to stimulate
production of food and consumer goods.
Mr Grigory Yavlinsky, prominent economist and former Soviet deputy prime
minister, suggested it was unfair to lay the blame for the failure of the
government's financial stabilisation policy entirely at the central bank's
door. Calling for a banking union which he had tried and failed to build
before the Soviet Union's collapse, he said financial stabilisation had been
doomed from the start in the absence of co-ordinated economic policies among
Soviet republics which continued to use the rouble.
Demonstrating the increasing assertiveness of Russia's regions, Mr Yuri
Shafranik, governor of the oil and gas producing region of Tyumen, urged
foreigners to do business directly at local level rather than look to
Moscow. 'You are more used to the centralised system than we are. This was
very convenient for you. Now this system no longer exists.'
Russia's parliament yesterday drew up measures curtailing the president's
powers to appoint a cabinet, making both ministerial posts and the cabinet
structure subject to parliamentary approval, writes John Lloyd in Moscow.
Many of the measures require constitutional changes, which can only be done
by the full Congress of People's Deputies.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921112

