FT924-12141

FT  22 OCT 92 / Arts: Front-line dispatch from the sex war - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


HUSBANDS AND WIVES (15) Lumiere, Screen on the Green
1942: CONQUEST OF PARADISE (15) Empire
PRAGUE (12) MGM Trocadere, Minema
BUFFY THE VAMPIRE SLAYER (12) MGM Panton St
The weightier a movie, the swifter it sometimes sinks. In America Woody
Allen's Husbands And Wives and Ridley Scott's 1492: Conquest Of Paradise -
two of the decade's best films to date - are going down fast at the box
office, gurgling 'Mayday' as the waves of audience indifference close over
them.
Both, one concludes, present discoveries that Mr and Mrs Average Filmgoer do
not want to know about. 1492 is about the way the New World discovered
Christopher Columbus soon after he discovered it. And in Husbands And Wives
we learn things about Woody Allen and his art that will disturb anyone still
thinking of him as Filmdom's bespectacled funster.
Not, heaven knows, that the media sages have not tried to dent that image.
Here, they have cried of this film, is the artist transcribing his own
crumbling romance with Mia Farrow in the tale of Gabe and Judy (Woody and
Mia), whose marriage begins to splinter soon after they hear that their best
friends (Sidney Pollack and Judy Davis) are separating. And look] Our
menopausal hero also falls in love with a girl old enough to be his daughter
(Juliette Lewis).
But five minutes into this film, who cares about the real-life parallels?
Allen himself, in a pre-emptive attack, sets about the old proverb in an
early scene: 'Life today doesn't imitate art, it imitates bad television.'
And Allen the director in Husbands And Wives takes a potentially
soap-operatic story and subjects it to the high-speed rinse-and-renew cycle.
The film combines a cine verite camera style with a fast and furious verismo
in the performances. This is not about Allen and his troubles; it is about
all of us and our troubles.
As the camera judders and pans around the chic New York sitting rooms, lives
strive to stay upright in the hurricane. Allen is a schoolteacher surveying
an intellectual age fast entering a new insanity (where theses abound with
titles like 'Oral sex in the age of deconstruction.') And Farrow is part
marital punchball, part restless matchmaker. She pushes best friend Davis
into the arms of architect hunk Liam Neeson, while Davis's own ex-mate
(played with eye-rolling mid-life anguish by director Sidney Pollack)
scampers after an airheaded aerobics teacher.
Love's labours are not just lost; they are hastened towards disaster as if
by a footballer dribbling towards his own goal. No Woody Allen film has had
such passion in its comedy. We rock with glee at the scene of dressed-up
Judy Davis taking time out to scream down a phone at adulterous Pollack
while a stupefied friend waits to escort her to the opera. And no Woody
Allen film has had such comedy in its passion. Watch the young Miss Lewis
dismembering the adoring Allen's self-esteem, as she takes apart his draft
novel in a taxi conversation. 'But I thought you admired it,' he finally
stammers. 'Well, Triumph Of The Will is a great movie, but . . .'
Husbands And Wives is a front-line dispatch from the sex war, complete with
bullet-holes, powder burns and tear-stains of helpless laughter. Styled like
an on-the-hoof documentary, its shuddering camera and straight-to-lens
monologues make recent Allen sex comedies like Alice seem tamely orthodox.
Better still, it shows that Allen the performer has grown far beyond the
schoolboy-in-shock phase of his early career. He is now an adult in shock,
wiser and sadder but no less hilarious. As Miss Lewis tells his would-be
writer in one of her few front-handed compliments: 'All this suffering and
you make it so funny.'
Those who do not learn from history, we are told, are condemned to repeat
it. But by what nightmare learning lapse has the cinema been condemned to
repeat the Columbus story three times this year? Perhaps it failed to learn
that anniversaries alone do not justify trotting out and re-trotting the
same chunk of Hispano-Hollywood hokum.
Ridley Scott's 1492: Conquest Of Paradise spends a dutiful hour going
through the usual stations of visionary heroism. Columbus (Gerard Depardieu)
the dreamer gazing at the sparkling sea; Columbus the rebel railing against
the Catholic church; Columbus the courtier spying friendship in Queen
Isabella (Sigourney Weaver); Columbus sailing through sunsets and near-miss
mutinies to the promised land.
We heave a sigh of relief when the feet finally stomp through the slo-mo
surf to land on the welcome mat of history. Is it over? Can we go?
No. For then the film begins. And in this glorious semi-apocryphal second
act Columbus-Depardieu, having bitten off his piece of the New World, is
rudely bitten back by it. His paradise island, with its Toytown of
half-built churches and government buildings, is battered by human storms
and natural hurricanes. And when his emergent slave culture tastes the blood
of rebellion, Paradise proves to be merely Hell turned a different way to
the light.
You might argue that other film-makers - Herzog in Fitzcarraldo, Saura in
Eldorado - have been here before. This is the coloniser colonised by his own
deliriums of power; the natives turned righteous avengers leaping from the
camouflaging wilderness. But with Scott going into the visual overdrive he
showed in Blade Runner and the underrated Legend, this film soon outpaces
its own pacesetters.
Every image has a painter's passion for organic, restless detail: billowing
smoke, flickering fires, the hieratic geometry of waving flags and banners.
And the sense of Nature biting back at Nurture crescendoes in a storm scene
choreographed with unforgettable force and simplicity: three goblets dancing
on a wooden table, a window-casing flung across a howling room, Columbus
pinioned to a wall by his own furniture, marching across the room as if
alive.
At the end of this scene Scott cuts to an image of peace and renewal no less
eerie than the maelstrom of destruction. A work party of ants carrying
sun-translucent green leaves trots across Columbus's floor in a sardonic,
Lilliputian parody of human endeavour.
Ridley Scott on this form - and in larger set pieces like the cathedral
scene with its giant incense-bearer swinging overhead like a demolition ball
of history - is the cinema's great decorative expressionist: a Von Sternberg
for our times. He should take a bow too for casting GD as CC. Depardieu's
protean grace as a performer - he looks like the Incredible Hulk, he moves
like Nijinski, he acts like Olivier - make this Columbus a hero, child and
visionary all in one. 1492, if not the last word on Columbus, is
definitively the last image.
There are few terrae incognitae left in the modern world, but Europe is one.
The continent featured in movies like Ian Sellar's Prague is a dark,
uncharted place populated by a tribe hitherto unknown to man. These are
Euro-actors: itinerant mummers like Bruno Ganz and Sandrine Bonnaire who
wander from one co-production to the next, swallowing the script and then
spewing it out in the lingo of the day.
In Prague the lingo is Runic English. A young Scot (Alan Cumming) comes to
the Czech capital to trace his grandparents, who died in World War 2. Old
newsreel footage may provide enlightenment, but not if film archivists Ganz
and Bonnaire can help it. They are - bring on the capital letters -
Mysterious Middle-Europeans. They play with the stranger, charm him, seduce
him, abandon him. And for why? God knows. Probably because film-maker Sellar
has seen too many Resnais and Antonioni films and thinks that is how people
behave sur le continent.
If Prague is mystification with thick accents, Buffy The Vampire Slayer is
drivel in Valleyspeak. Buffy (Kristy Swanson) is the high school cheerleader
picked for cross-and-stake duty by Donald Sutherland's 500-year-old vampire
operative. The film's idiocy is relieved only by the schoolgirls' spurts of
LA slang. I particularly liked 'What's the sitch?,' 'Get out of my facial'
and 'You're behaving like the Thing from another Tax Bracket.' Six out of
ten for scriptwriter Joss Whedon; one and a half and stay-in-after-class for
director Fran Rubel Kuzui.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921022

