FT923-9549

FT  05 AUG 92 / International Company News: Fujitsu to end chip production
at US plant


   By ROBERT THOMSON and MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


   TOKYO, LONDON


FUJITSU, the Japanese computermaker, is to end production immediately at its
semiconductor plant in San Diego as part of a reorganisation of the
company's chip production.
The decision, which could stir criticism in the US, reflects the financial
pressure on electronics companies, particularly those determined to stay in
the semiconductor race.
It is also a sign of a general restructuring now taking place within the
Japanese electronics industry.
About 260 workers are employed at the California plant, which assembled
1-megabit dynamic random access memory (D-ram) chips, and is one of two
Fujitsu semiconductor plants in North America. The chips, produced for sale
on the open market, are used in computers and telecommunications equipment.
The memory chip market has suffered over-production, leading to large price
falls. The 1-megabit D-ram market is particularly oversupplied and
increasingly dominated by South Korean suppliers.
The trend among Japanese semiconductor suppliers has been to enter markets
for the most advanced products at an early stage when margins are higher.
Fujitsu has not been successful in the memory chip market generally, where
it has failed to be an innovator.
The group has invested heavily in a recently-opened UK plant making
4-megabit D-rams.
However this has been incurring losses because demand has fallen short of
expected levels. Fujitsu's difficulties in the semiconductor market led it
recently to dismiss the heads of its European and North American
semiconductor operations.
Referring to the latest US move, Fujitsu said last night: 'We have to close
the plant because of profitability and competitiveness problems. We all know
that the profitability of the semiconductor industry is not so good. The
weak Japanese economy is a reason, but that is not the only reason for the
closure.'
Fujitsu reported a 68 per cent fall in pre-tax profits for the year to
March, while other Japanese chipmakers announced profit falls of 40 per cent
and more, due to the weak memory markets.
These companies are reviewing their chip production and their role in the
crowded consumer electronics markets. They have sought to reduce development
costs through partnerships with US and European makers.
It is likely some of the San Diego operations will be transferred to a
Fujitsu facility in Malaysia, where production costs are lower.
The US facility, opened in 1980, assembled about 800,000 memory chips out of
a total of 5m produced monthly by Fujitsu.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920805

