FT924-6535

FT  20 NOV 92 / The Property Market: The allure of warehouses - The sector's
attractive yields have caught the eye of investors and developers


   By VANESSA HOULDER


The humble warehouse has long been regarded as one of the least glamorous
sectors of the property market. That dowdy image, however, is in part
responsible for its laudable record as one of the industry's most successful
sectors.
In the 1980s, speculators' neglect of this seemingly unpromising market
helped protect it from the oversupply that plagued the rest of the industry.
That, in turn, helped warehouse properties generate returns of 22 per cent
over the past five years - more than double the market as a whole.
However, the sector's reputation is changing. High yields, low management
costs and the availability of new leases with good covenants have attracted
new investors in the past couple of years. At the same time, a flurry of
interest from developers has raised the possibility of oversupply.
Recent concern about oversupply is well founded, according to a new report*
by Chesterton, the property consultancy. 'Caution is required to prevent the
bandwagon effect which led to oversupply in the B1 (light industrial and
other business uses) market,' it warns.
The shift in attitude stems in part from far-reaching changes within the
distribution industry itself. Modern warehouses are larger, more carefully
positioned and more sophisticated than ever before - a trend that is most
visible in the big distribution parks that have emerged along the M1 and M6
motorways throughout central England.
The impetus for change in the distribution industry has come from the need
for improved response times and more frequent, faster deliveries. This has
stemmed from the heavy costs of holding stock, the relative fall in
transport costs and the increasing dominance of the large retailers.
'The conventional warehouse of the early 1980s is now becoming increasingly
outdated,' says Chesterton. 'As the level of sophistication continues to
increase, so the life of the building shortens and the rate of obsolescence
grows.'
Large retailers, particularly grocers, have been the driving force behind
such changes. From the mid-1970s onwards, they began to switch from local
distribution systems controlled by suppliers to their own regional or
national distribution networks. Other types of retailers have gradually
followed suit, although many are still grappling with the need to centralise
their distribution networks. Most manufacturers are even further behind,
having concentrated on rationalising their production facilities in the
1970s and 1980s.
The momentum of these changes has been checked by the slowdown in the
economy. 'It has been slowed down by recession but it is still happening,'
comments Ms Christina Howick, a partner of PMA, a London-based property
consultancy.
Even without the recession, the distribution industry is faced with some
important challenges and uncertainties, including:
The road versus rail debate, which has important implications for the
location of distribution centres. The case for distribution by rail is
enhanced by the costs of congestion, pollution and other environmental
concerns. However, many manufacturers and retailers are sceptical of the
rail industry's ability to provide the right level of service and
reliability.
The single European market, which is prompting manufacturers to review their
manufacturing and distribution operations on a pan-European basis. Companies
wanting to service the northern European market from one location are likely
to favour northern France, Belgium, Germany and Holland over the UK. The
future supply of land for warehouses. Chesterton reports that investors are
concerned about the high allocation by local authorities of land for
distribution uses. This could depress the rate of rental growth, investors
fear.
At present, the distribution of land with planning permission for warehouses
is very uneven. The south-east and east Midlands have more land with
detailed planning permission for such use than other regions.
This concern contrasts with the complaints of developers about what they
consider to be restrictive planning policies. 'There is a dearth of
constructive planning policies on the subject which is hampering British
industry,' complains Gazeley Properties, a leading warehouse developers.
Pressures for shorter leases, particularly for second-hand space.
'Short-term distribution contracts are typically three to five years and
there may be resistance to an institutional lease of 25 years,' says
Chesterton.
As well as these uncertainties, warehouse property has the disadvantage of
large average lot prices - often costing more than Pounds 10m. This,
combined with the specialist nature of these investments, heightens the risk
involved in replacing a defaulting tenant.
These risk factors justify a higher yield than other kind of property.
Indeed Chesterton believes that some yields have been driven down to
unrealistic levels. The growing availability of research and awareness of
this class of property are likely to stimulate continued interest among
investors. But the downward trend in yields suggests that the re-rating of
the sector over the last few years may have run its course.
* Shedding Light on Warehousing and Distribution, Chesterton Research
Department, 54 Brook Street, London W1A 2BU, Pounds 55.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921120

