FT924-810

FT  22 DEC 92 / Arts: A Christmas Carol - American theatre


   By PAULA DEITZ


At his public readings in America, during his Christmas tour of 1867,
Charles Dickens read A Christmas Carol to sell-out audiences (Longfellow
heard him in Boston). By then Dickens was using the story as a sentimental
warm-up for grimmer excerpts that followed.
Knowing this makes all the more commendable a remarkable presentation on
Broadway by the British actor Patrick Stewart, who is packing the house not
with a reading but a performance of Christmas Carol.
A veteran of the Royal Shakespeare Company, Stewart has become an American
pop hero as the starship captain (played like a Shakespearian king) in
television's Star Trek: The Next Generation. But when he enters he is simply
dressed in a nondescript brown suit, making no attempt to be like Dickens or
even of the period.
He snatches up the red-bound volume like a storyteller's trophy and begins
with 'Marley was dead' standing at a lectern. The only other props, all
painted brown, are a high desk and stool, a Windsor chair and a table that
also serves as a four-poster bed. No sooner has the listener's imagination
soared to fogbound City courtyards than, in a flash, the actor is across the
stage to Scrooge's counting-house.
This is when the magic begins. In a series of apparitions as life-like as
Scrooge's Spirits, Stewart proceeds to portray, in voice and manner, all 40
characters in a sort of one-man Nicholas Nickleby. There is nothing easy in
Scrooge's gradual transformation from 'Bah] Humbug]' to a man frightened to
the core by recognition of himself. Nor are there any minor characters, for
each in turn gives weight to the whole.
Stewart has a facility for portraying women, in voice and gesture - the
bustle of Mrs Cratchit at dinner or the capacious Mrs Fezziwig and her three
daughters entering the ball. This event, a tour de force of whirling hands
over hands and steps in stately formations, creates the dizzying effect of
20 couples.
With no sets, lighting designer Fred Allen, expands and contracts space. By
giving a sense of architecture to an empty stage, he uses light to convey
cold city streets or country lanes and, in an instant, returns the action to
Scrooge's cramped upstairs bedroom. The Ghost of Christmas Present arrives
offstage with a warm glow of blazing firelight first emanating from the
adjoining room and then filling the stage as Scrooge appears to enter it.
The image of this Spirit seated atop the table, torch held on high,
indicates some indebtedness to the first-edition illustrations by John
Leech. (This illustration and Dickens' original 1843 manuscript of Christmas
Carol are on view until January 10 at the Pierpont Morgan Library.)
It is hard to convince an audience when everyone knows what is coming, but
at this reading a sigh of relief could be heard when the last Spirit
dissolved into the bedpost.
More people than Ebenezer Scrooge are being transformed by this Christmas
experience. Stewart returns to the lectern briefly to conclude the tale,
before stepping away again to rear stage to return slowly towards the
audience, himself again, arms opened generously in a balletic gesture with a
simple 'And so, as Tiny Tim observed, God Bless Us, Every One]'
Instant standing ovation.
At the Broadhurst Theater, New York until January 3

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921222

