FT921-408

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (9): Risk in
a cool climate - Norma Cohen finds that the coffee-shop spirit survives


   By NORMA COHEN


FOR all the high-tech 20th century facade of the Lloyd's insurance market,
the heart and soul of the business remain what they were 300 years ago - a
group of men meeting in a coffee shop.
Unlike the trading floors of the world's leading equities and commodities
exchanges, occasionally the site of frenzied dealing, Lloyd's on a busy day
consists of hordes of dark-suited brokers patiently lining up at
underwriters' 'boxes'.
Seated or kneeling, they bargain with the underwriters, hoping to persuade
each to accept a portion of risk in return for the smallest possible fee.
Oil rigs, satellites, ships and international trade transactions are all
assets which can collapse at any time, causing devastating losses for their
owners. Underwriters, in short, agree to bear these losses if they occur and
charge a fee for their risk.
Unlike London's other major financial exchanges, Lloyd's temperature never
reaches fever pitch, even in the most trying times.
On the day of the insurance market's greatest single disaster - the
destruction of the Piper Alpha oil rig in the North Sea - unflappable
brokers went about their business in the usual fashion.
Calculating how much risk is worth is the job of the underwriter. 'It's
really much more an art than a science,' said Stephen Adams, of S E Adams,
head of an insurance syndicate specialising in excess of loss reinsurance.
Mr Adams ought to know. He joined the Lloyd's insurance market as a clerk
with an agency group in 1971 as an 18-year old school leaver with shoulder
length hair. 'I took the job because it paid Pounds 25 a year more than the
others,' he said. While many underwriters and brokers are clever barrow boys
whose education stopped at 16, a large number are university graduates and a
significant group are public school educated. Patrick Cunningham, an
underwriter in Mr Adams' syndicate, joined Lloyd's after a brief stint as a
milkman following graduation from Warwick University with a degree in
economics.
Salaries at Lloyd's vary widely but internal statistics show that a third of
all underwriters earn more than Pounds 100,000 a year - a figure that
understates actual earnings because it does not include the fees they pay
themselves as directors of agencies. Those directors' fees have now been
called into question by MPs who have been examining the pattern of losses at
Lloyd's.
In 1987, Mr Adams struck out on his own, forming his own syndicate backed by
'names' - wealthy individuals who pledge to use their entire personal wealth
to cover losses, if necessary. 'I see my main responsibility as making money
for my names,' said Mr Adams, summing up his role.
Mr Adams's day, like that of most other underwriters, begins at 7:45am in
his office. By 11:00am he has migrated to the Lloyd's building, joining
streams of like-suited gentlemen parading past the so-called 'waiters' in
red morning coats and top hats who staff the Lloyd's floor.
Mr Adams says publicly what some other underwriters will only say after a
few drinks - that some of the industry's woes must be laid squarely at its
own doorstep. 'Eighty per cent of these guys are unrealistic. and they are
driven by ego.'
Like himself, many underwriters got their feet wet by working for a large
agency group. When they finally strike out on their own, their sense of
power leads them to underwrite risks they do not properly understand.
In the early and mid-1980s the sudden surge in worldwide personal wealth
spawned a new generation of Lloyd's names, many from outside the UK and who
had never previously considered insurance as an investment. With fresh cash
sloshing around, underwriters undercut each other, offering lower and lower
premiums for high risk.
'My agency group hired a guy in 1984 to try to attract some American names.
They sent him to Georgia with a book of contacts and told him to come up
with four Names. He joined a golf club and signed up 84,' recalled one
underwriter.
The influx of cash had an electrifying effect on the lifestyles of
underwriters and brokers alike. 'A lot of marriages broke up in the early
1980s,' said one underwriter, adding that his own had succumbed as well. Too
many Lloyd's members - almost exclusively male - used their newfound wealth
to take women out on the town.
Meanwhile, underwriters must be distinguished from the brokers, with whom a
fragile relationship exists. A broker is a go-between, acting for the
insured, whose job is to persuade underwriters to accept the highest
possible risk for the lowest possible fee.
One of the most successful brokers is reputed to have earned more than
Pounds 1m last year, and not for nothing.
One underwriter, recalling the man's superb style, said he has 'a way of
patting you on the shoulder. All of a sudden I was being invited to dinner
at Carlton Towers (a posh London hotel) and flying by helicopter to the
races at Ascot. He wanted to be my best friend.'
It is a broker's job to keep underwriters happy. They are the source of many
of the Lloyd's perks - from football tickets to golfing holidays in France
to nights out in the West End. 'One guy I knew had been driving a 15-year
old Ford escort. All of a sudden he had a Jaguar] I knew where that came
from,' said one underwriter.
On the other hand, Lloyd's is a very small world and blatant bribery will
not be effective for long. A broker who habitually urges high-risk
low-profit business on underwriters will quickly find himself getting a cold
shoulder at underwriters' 'boxes'.
Regulators of all stripes have been calling for reform of the Lloyd's market
for years. In the early 1980s following a particularly devastating set of
losses for members of some syndicates, a set of regulatory reforms for
Lloyd's was introduced with much fanfare. But those have glaring failed to
prevent the sort of losses Names are now facing and members now agree the
market has finally taken reform to heart.
'Those were early days then,' said Mr Reg Brown, of RE Brown said. 'We all
thought we were bomb-proof.' He said the market was finally taken a more
business-like view of itself, a departure from the clubby days of old. 'I
have always said to my lads, 'We're nothing more than a sweet shop.' If we
don't open up in the morning, we don't sell sweets. If we don't sell sweets,
we don't make a profit.'
And the 'lads' at Lloyd's are getting the message.
Ironically, for all its significance in the world's insurance business, the
revolution of the 1980s appears to have touched Lloyd's little in many key
ways. For instance, the number of female underwriters can be counted on one
hand, although a number are employed as brokers.
But members insist there is no sex discrimination. 'Oh we make a special
effort to get the ladies. Any one that comes within a whisker of our box on
February 14 gets a chocolate heart,' said one underwriter.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920330

