FT924-6268

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: Kings of the blues - Pop


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


   IT IS an inspired idea


inspired as much by selective ticket buying among today's pop audience as
creative synergy - to present these two great Blues men on the same bill. If
BB is the acknowledged King of the Blues, Cray is everyone's choice as the
Crown Prince.
They also provide wonderfully easy critical contrasts. BB, a giant of a man,
comes on stage like a pink brocaded marquee, while Cray just rolls up his
shirt sleeves. His years on the cabaret circuit have given BB a glib, reach
out and touch, show biz act. He demands communal responses from the
audience; he has a straight man who hauls him back for manipulated encores;
at the final finale he distributes trinkets to the front row fans. Cray, in
contrast, has the personality of a Prime Minister.
And their approach to the blues also rings the changes. At 67 BB is not
playing for fame. He delicately, lazily, inter-weaves his guitar into the
noisy boisterous backing of his troupe of lively old stagers. It is unsubtle
stuff, harking back to the swing bands on the Chicago club circuit, forced
to play above raucous winers and diners. Cray in contrast, with a very
impressive band, does the business with conservatoire precision. His spare,
unadorned, discrete playing is a triumph for old fashioned musical virtues
as against the computer tech that is overwhelming pop.
Yet BB is somehow more enjoyable. He seems to visit the UK as frequently as
Atlantic depressions and sometimes gives short shrift. At Hammersmith he
took up Cray's challenge and devoted at least 15 minutes to a recreation of
the old Memphis days of the 1940s, sitting and crooning the blues, including
the classic 'The thrill is gone', as if they mattered.
Despite the black tie and tuxedo dressing it somehow got closer to the pain
of the blues than Cray's more soulful contemporary confessions of love and
betrayal in the adultery belt. Cray has rescued the blues from oblivion by
letting them sing the message of broken relationships among the socially
mobile but he misses out on the humour and earthy authenticity which BB
still recalls after almost half a century of chicken-in-the-basket dinners.
Hammersmith Odeon

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

921121

