FT922-4014

FT  08 JUN 92 / Lloyd's levy spotlights woes: The controversy over the
market's move to boost its guarantee fund


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE decision last week by the troubled Lloyd's of London to boost the size
of its central guarantee fund to Pounds 1bn has highlighted concern about
the insurance market's solvency.
Lloyd's says the extra Pounds 500m being raised by a one-off levy on all
Names - the individuals whose assets provide its capital - demonstrates its
capacity to meet all insurance claims.
The market's critics have dismissed the new measure as window-dressing that
does little to address fundamental weaknesses in Lloyd's capital base.
Worries have emerged this year because potentially several thousand Names
may be unable to pay for 1989 insurance losses that included those stemming
from disasters such as Hurricane Hugo. Lloyd's reports its 1989 results this
month and, according to Chatset, a company that monitors the market's
performance, the bill may well top Pounds 2bn, with a substantial minority
of weaker Names bearing the brunt.
According to Mr Alan Lord, Lloyd's chief executive, the new levy shows that
'in hard times we can cope from our own resources'.
In the first instance, the money is to be obtained from Lloyd's premium
trust funds, into which insurance premiums earned by Lloyd's syndicates are
paid.
Names underwriting in the three years affected by the levy - 1990, 1991 and
1992 - will not have to pay anything until June 1993 when the first of a
series of three one-off levies - each equivalent to 1.66 per cent of stamp
(the amount of premium a Name is allowed to underwrite according to Lloyd's
rules) will be charged.
The charge will be deducted by agents from the Name's annual profits or
added to their loss, in the same way as other personal expenses are treated.
Although the new money will not be raised until next year, it should equip
Lloyd's to meet claims that Names worst affected by the loss-making 1988 and
1989 years cannot pay. Where individual Names have insufficient assets to
pass the solvency test, amounts from the central fund will be earmarked to
meet the shortfall.
The measure has been generally welcomed by the market's agencies - which
manage syndicates - as well by the Association of Lloyd's Members, which
represents more than 9,000 of the market's 22,400 Names still underwriting.
Describing the levy as 'tantamount to a rights issue', Mr Robert Hiscox, one
prominent agency executive, says: 'It makes us more robust. We'll be more
liquid, able to meet claims and face up to litigation.'
According to a spokesman for the ALM: 'There will be a hell of a scream from
some Names. But it is an essential prerequisite for managing our way out of
the next two years.'
The measure also gives Lloyd's more time to discuss a possible bail-out plan
for the worst affected Names announced in April by Mr David Coleridge,
Lloyd's chairman.
Many Names are critical, however, especially those facing heavy losses. Mr
John Rew, co-editor at Chatset and himself a loss-making Name, says the levy
will 'cascade' losses at present faced by a minority of Names across the
market as a whole and contribute to what he describes as a general
'meltdown', with the market's capital base falling from its present level of
Pounds 10.1bn to as little as Pounds 4bn by the mid 1990s.
Mr Rew's analysis is based on a cautious assessment of the value of Lloyd's
assets and a downbeat view of the market's performance in 1990 and 1991.
Chatset is confident its forecast that losses in 1990 will amount to Pounds
1.15bn and to Pounds 750m in 1991.
As those Names remaining in the market pay their share of those losses -
which, in the market's three-year accounting system, will be reported in
1993 and 1994 - there will be a rapid erosion in the value of the Names'
assets, estimated by Mr Rew to be about Pounds 5.8bn rather than a figure of
more than Pounds 7bn claimed by Lloyd's. The resources of the 'average'
Name, writing about Pounds 400,000 in premium income, will be exhausted in
1994, Mr Rew believes.
At Lloyd's, Mr Rew's views are widely criticised as over-pessimistic and
even apocalyptic. Mr Paul Archard, chairman of the Lloyd's Underwriting
Agents Association, says that with insurance rates rising sharply, many of
his members are becoming more confident about the future.
Chatset is sticking to its guns. Mr Rew says help from outside in the form
of tax breaks and credit lines is needed.
He adds: 'The only hope that Lloyd's has is to save the capital base while
it is still there. A lifeboat must be put in place by the authorities.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920608

