FT922-4183

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: Multi-media movers - The duo behind the Montreux jazz
festival


   By GARRY BOOTH


JAZZ MUSIC rarely throws up the sort of sophisticated mover and shaker
encountered in the rock or film business. Two such artistic and
entrepreneurial dynamos are brought together in sleepy Montreux, however,
for a fortnight of considerable moving and shaking in July. The Swiss town's
jazz festival is co-produced by American arch-impresario Quincy Jones and
its founder, local whizz kid, Claude Nobs. With their guidance the event is
fast becoming a model multi-media 'happening'.
Montreux Jazz has always been one of the smallest music festivals in the
world yet at the same time one of the biggest. Its site, in the town's
stygian casino complex on the Swiss riviera, holds a meagre 4000 fans. But
its eclectic programmes, which stray from sophisticated jazz into
'adult-oriented rock', are impeccably recorded and syndicated to TV
audiences around Europe. Featured artists and their record company bosses
forego huge fees for the right to sell live albums with the Montreux name.
The person responsible for the event's pre-eminence over the last 25 years
is Claude Nobs, ex-chef and ex-Swiss tourist board svengali turned record
company executive and music promoter extraordinaire.
Now that he has joined forces with composer and entrepreneur Quincy Jones,
the Montreux fest seems assured of world domination. TV rights have been
sold in Japan, to the US Disney Channel, MTV and France's Canal. In
addition, spin-off festivals, programmed by the dynamic duo and bearing the
Montreux name, are being staged in Detroit, Atlanta, Tokyo and Rio de
Janeiro.
There are few names which attach to every kind of entertainment medium as
easily as that of Quincy Delight Jones. An almost spiritual intermediary
through his blissful arrangements for the writings of jazz music's finest,
producer of the world's biggest selling album (Michael Jackson's Thriller),
award winning film score writer (In the heat of the night) and film producer
(The Color Purple), he was voted entrepreneur of the year by USA Today in
1990.
He remains hip, however, and is expanding his interests in youth culture.
The Quincy Jones Entertainment Co is responsible for NBC's cult TV series
Fresh Prince of Bel Air while, under the auspices of Time Warner, he
launches a new magazine for hip-hoppers in September called Volume.
Now that le p'tit Nobs has the perfect foil for his own promotional talents
he says, only half joking, that he can't go on without him. Indeed, Q's act
of last year, his first as co-producer at Montreux, will be a hard one to
follow. Not only did he manage to persuade Miles Davis to play 'the old
stuff' one more time but he conducted the tormented genius in front of a
double orchestra of 54 top class musicians. This historic event, which took
place weeks before Davis died, was recorded by Nobs in stereo HDTV. An album
and a video, replete with nostalgic clips of Miles snarling at the camera to
'get out of my face', will be released by Qwest (A Warner Music Group
subsidiary run by Quincy) in September.
Nobs, whose day job is managing director of Warner Music Switzerland, makes
the contacts to facilitate such a package. Sony matches the Dollars 4m put
up by cigarette maker Lucky Strike in festival sponsorship with the loan of
its hi-tech HDTV hardware. The sophisticated recording studio of rock group
Queen is sequestered for the sound and in Gavin Taylor he has a top shelf
film director whose speciality is live music.
Nobs obsession to get it all down on tape has always been there. At his
luxurious chalet high above Lake Geneva, veteran motorbikes and 1950s juke
boxes vie for space with an archive containing film of every Montreux fest
in every conceivable format, as well as his own prodigious collection of
vinyl and CDs. The Smithsonian Institute has expressed an interest in the
Nobs archive, so valuable is it as a record of contemporary music.
Q has less academic ideas for the collection however: he sees the archive as
perfect base material for the new possibilities soon to be made available by
interactive multi-media technology. Multi-media refers to text, graphics,
video and sound. Q, like Nobs is a self-confessed 'tedologist' (someone who
is obsessed by the combination of technology, entertainment and design) and
uses the Montreux Miles footage as an example of what might be possible with
the type of new CDI equipment now available from Philips. Interacting with
CD and video technology, a user could contrast Miles' playing at past
festivals. It could even be possible to take a 'time-line' into the pianists
he used, for example, while watching and hearing Herbie Hancock, say.
'Interactive media can be used like an encyclopedia,' says Q the Ted, 'but
not a dry one.'
Q can still enjoy music without a mouse in hand, however. His playing days
were finished by a brain aneurysm in 1974 but he still likes to get in among
the action. For most of July he will be found rehearsing big bands and he
will be on the stand most nights, interacting for posterity, with the likes
Eric Clapton and Stephane Grappelli.
The Montreux Jazz Festival runs from 3-18 July. Abonnements are available
from Swiss Francs 155 for three nights up to Swiss Francs 1500 for a
festival VIP pass. For further information Tel. (Montreux) 21 963 8282/7474

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

920606

