FT924-5919

FT  24 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Restructuring costs behind fall at Fenner


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


THE COSTS of streamlining operations in the UK pushed Fenner, the
engineering group, down by 26 per cent to Pounds 5.53m at the pre-tax level
for the year to August 29.
Exceptional charges for redundancies and reorganisation came to Pounds
2.27m, pushing the UK business slightly into loss. The charges also off-set
the slight advance at the operating level from Pounds 11.2m to Pounds 11.3m.
Sales were 4 per cent down at Pounds 196.6m.
The operating gain was largely due to cost efficiencies. Over the last 18
months the company has cut costs by about Pounds 3m on an annualised basis
in the UK.
Mr Peter Barker, chairman, said the results showed the extent to which the
cost base had been cut back. 'We have tailored the operations to today's
level of demand.' he said. 'Notwithstanding the continuing recession, the
underlying profit trend is more encouraging.'
The power transmission business in the UK was operating profitably. Margins
were helped by the transfer of sourcing to the Far East through Contimach,
Fenner's Hong Kong company. The hydraulic and pneumatics operation had
suffered in the latter part of the year, although order books were currently
standing at record levels.
Mr Tom Brown, managing director, sought to ease anxieties over the proposed
closures of several British Coal pits, customers of Fenner's conveyor belt
business. In the worst case scenario, he said 'it would be a kick in the
shins, but not a total disaster'. British Coal represented less than 7 per
cent of total group sales, and any closures were expected to be offset by an
increase in export business.
Profits were at a record high in South Africa. In India, the contribution
had fallen as the economy began to slow following government measures to cut
inflation.
Fenner cut the dividend, as foreshadowed at the interim stage, from 5.1p to
2.5p, for a total of 4.2p (8.55p). Earnings, depressed by a high tax charge
including Pounds 600,000 on ACT, were 0.01p (5.47p). Excluding the
exceptional charge earnings fell to 5.08p. Debt was reduced by Pounds 7.3m
to with gearing of less than 40 per cent.
COMMENT
Fenner came in above analysts' expectations, even with the exceptional
charges. Yet even more encouraging was the decision not to cut the dividend
more than was forecast at the interim stage. Business appears to be
stabilising, and the full benefit of cost cuts should feed through in the
current year. However, there are still uncertainties about the amount of
profit which comes from politically unstable areas such as South Africa.
Forecasts for the full year are for about Pounds 8m, with the group
returning to a fully covered dividend. With a prospective p/e of some 15
times, last night's share price of 66p looks about right for the time being.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921124

