FT921-14381

FT  16 JAN 92 / Technology: Mobile information transmission


When London & Edinburgh Insurance's engineers visit garages to assess crash
damage, they send the information back to the computer centre so the repair
costs can be calculated. At the moment they use either a phone line, with a
modem, or the Cellnet cellular radio network.
Soon they could have several other options.
Audatex, the vehicle damage assessment company, is already talking to
Huchison Mobile Data, of Hertford, about using its data network for
transmitting the information. Huchison, which is planning to offer
commercial services to urban areas and motorways before the middle of the
year, is one of several companies to have developed such services.
Others include Cognito, which has developed a two-way paging service, and
Ram Mobile Data, Paknet, owned by the Vodafone Group and Cable & Wireless,
is also planning to enter the market - it already has a service for sending
radio data from fixed terminals, such as credit card verification units.
Such services will prove less expensive than the cellular radio networks
because they are designed specifically for data traffic which take up less
radio spectrum than voice calls.
Data companies envisage the service engineer as a prime target for their
services. Other forms include sales and distribution, as well as financial
services for sending information on share price movements.
To use the network a separate moden can be attached to the laptop, pen
computer or electronic diary, although eventually the modems will be built
into the machines. For Paknet, which launched its service in 1990, products
with built-in modems are available.
The biggest customers have proven to be burglar alarm manufacturers. 'When
burglars come they cut the phone wires,' points out John Smith, Paknet's
commercial director. 'We've had quite a few cases where the burglars cut the
wires and the police have come along and caught them.'

The Financial Times


London Page 13 Illustration (Omitted).

920116

