FT923-15733

FT  01 JUL 92 / Shephard investigates training shortfall


   By ALISON SMITH


AN INVESTIGATION into why Training and Enterprise Councils (Tecs) are
failing to meet the guarantee of training places has been launched by Mrs
Gillian Shephard, the employment secretary.
Employment ministers are said to have asked for more information on how
training provision compares with the government promise that everyone aged
16 or 17 who was not in work or in education would be guaranteed a place on
the Youth Training programme. The information, which is due to be provided
in the next few weeks, will be used in the department's discussions on
spending with the Treasury.
Mr Patrick McLoughlin, the junior employment minister, insisted last month
that the guarantee of YT provision was 'broadly speaking' being met, and
that funding this year was also 'broadly in line' with last year's
allocations, although more were staying on at school. In private, though,
ministers are embarrassed by the failure to meet the guarantee in the light
of the withdrawal of income support from people aged 16 and 17.
Labour said last month that up to 60,000 school-leavers might find
themselves without YT places after a survey of Tecs in which three quarters
of the 82 organisations took part.
Tecs have argued for more freedom to tailor programmes at local level, and
say the guarantee of a place on either ET or YT programmes cannot be met
without extra funding.
The department is believed to support the idea of greater flexibility for
Tecs, and to be ready to argue for more money if it can be shown that the
extra cash is needed to meet the guarantee.
One element in the public-spending discussions is likely to be a move
towards making more of the Tecs' funding related to the outcome of their
schemes. That would be either in terms of how close they are to meeting the
guarantees or in terms of whether those for whom they provide places go on
to jobs.
The leaders of the Tecs have already warned the government that unless there
is 'major reform' the 1,000 senior executives running the organisations
would leave.
In particular, they criticised Whitehall interference and said that Tec
successes were jeopardised by 'a welter of administrative procedures'.
Mr Henry McLeish, an opposition employment spokesman, said yesterday that
the government was 'scapegoating' Tecs for the failure to deliver the
guarantee.
He is today putting down parliamentary questions to ministers urging them to
publish information about the real state of the programmes.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920701

