FT922-4122

FT  06 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Lloyds retreat ends Bank's embarrassment -
Leigh-Pemberton left as uncomfortable spectator / Institutions' hopes are
dashed


   By ROBERT PESTON


ONE PERSON would have been very relieved yesterday to learn that the
struggle between Lloyds and Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation for
control of Midland Bank had ended, with Lloyds' decision to bow out of the
fray.
That person is Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton, the Governor of the Bank of
England, who has been a most uncomfortable spectator of the first hostile
attempt by one UK clearing bank to acquire another UK clearing bank.
Sir Jeremy Morse, chairman of Lloyds, said yesterday that the Bank had been
scrupulously neutral during the bidding contest.
Such neutrality was more a question of necessity for the Bank than of
choice. Under the terms of the 1987 Banking Act, the Bank can interfere in a
bank's affairs only if it perceives a threat to depo-sitors.
If the Bank's powers had not become more limited since the passing of the
Banking Act, it would almost certainly have tried to deter Lloyds from
responding to Hongkong's initial bid.
The Bank felt Midland might have been damaged by the uncertainty over its
future ownership.
In particular, it feared that the morale of Midland's staff was likely to be
undermined and that senior executives would quit the bank for fear that
under Lloyds' ownership they would have had poor job prospects.
But there was one incident in particular that unsettled the Bank during the
contest. That was the publication in newspapers of extracts from an early
draft of Lloyds' submission to the Office of Fair Trading on why the
competition authorities should permit Lloyds to buy Midland. Part of Lloyds'
argument in the submission was that Midland's depositors might be at risk
under the ownership of Hongkong Bank, because of the alleged threat that the
stability of Hongkong Bank would be undermined by China's taking control of
Hong Kong after 1997.
In effect, Lloyds was undercutting the authority of the Bank by asking the
OFT to take a view on an issue concerning the protection of depositors or a
'prudential' issue. Such prudential questions are normally settled by the
Bank independently of other arms of government.
The Bank's concern was not so great that Lloyds was asking the OFT to take a
view on the prudential question. Its concern was that Lloyds should be seen
to be doing so.
Lloyds denied that the leak of the report was deliberate. The Bank was not
only unhappy about the contest for control of Midland, but also bemused
about Lloyds' motives. It has been convinced that Lloyds did not stand any
chance of having its proposed bid cleared by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission.
Lloyds' views that there are probably too many bank branches in the UK - and
that a takeover by Lloyds of Midland would have allowed an orderly programme
of branch closures - attracted some sympathy in the Bank.
The Bank was convinced, though, that Lloyds would have found it impossible
to convince the MMC that such a takeover would not have posed a severe
threat to competition in some banking products and some regions.
The Bank has been acutely aware that banks are a favourite whipping boy of
politicians. It could not conceive therefore that a perceived reduction in
banking competition, particularly in the politically sensitive business of
providing loans to small businesses, would have been sanctioned by the MMC
and subsequently by the government.
There is one other illustration of the Bank's inability to control the
course of events in the battle for control of Midland. Mr Leigh-Pemberton
has been deeply involved in ensuring that Midland did not run into severe
difficulties since late 1990, after the collapse of an initial plan for a
merger between Midland and Hongkong Bank.
At the same time, Midland's profits were collapsing and it was about to
become the first UK clearing bank to cut its dividend since the 1930s.
So, to bolster confidence in the bank, Mr Leigh-Pemberton asked Mr Brian
Pearse to move from Barclays, where he was finance director, to become chief
executive of Midland.
Mr Pearse agreed on the condition that he would not merely be a caretaker at
Midland until it was bought by another bank.
He wanted a commitment from Mr Leigh-Pemberton that he would do what he
could to keep Midland independent for at least two years.
Mr Pearse felt he received such a commitment. But in late November, only
seven months after he took up the new post, Sir Jeremy Morse contacted his
opposite number at Midland, Sir Peter Walters, and suggested they meet in
secret to discuss a merger.
Midland felt obliged to talk to Lloyds, in deference to the interests of its
shareholders. In the event, Lloyds' interest persuaded Hongkong to renew its
plans to buy Midland. There followed a period of secret negotiations between
Midland and the rival suitors. On March 13, Midland's board backed the
approach from Hongkong Bank because it was convinced that a bid from Lloyds
would be blocked by the competition authorities.
Lloyds would not be deterred. Six weeks later, it announced publicly that it
wanted to buy Midland.
For all Sir Jeremy's protestations that this was not a hostile takeover
attempt, Midland has clearly seen it as such. Sir Jeremy admits that in the
final analysis Midland must be the arbiter of the friendliness of his
intentions.
There is also no doubt that the Bank, too, regarded Lloyds' actions as
hostile to Midland, but it was powerless to intervene. In the great banking
drama that was unfolding, it had become more a spectator than a protagonist.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920606

