FT922-458

FT  27 JUN 92 / Property: Ring of murky water - The attractions of moated
houses


   By DAVID HOPPIT


THEY were more aesthetic than defensive; even so, the moats that formed a
ring of murky water round country houses in East Anglia certainly kept out
all but the most determined villain.
Essex has more moats than any other UK county - at least 1,000. It seems
that the yeoman farmers of that county a few centuries ago were as
status-orientated as Essex man is today.
The purpose of the moat remains something of a mystery. Certainly the
labourers who toiled to dig them would have given a week's supply of mead
for the loan of a modern JCB. At castles such as Leeds, near Maidstone in
Kent, the moat was entirely defensive; but by the time the 15th century
mortar was dry at places such as Wingfield Castle, in Suffolk, military
strategy had made the water virtually obsolete.
So why were the moats built? Certainly they helped to guide visitors to the
correct entrance; they also kept farm and wild animals in their place - a
sort of liquid ha-ha.
The water was a source of food in hard times, carp and pike being popular in
those days; and was useful in the event of fire. Rainwater (and goodness
knows what else) was drained into the moat.
It seems the moat was a status symbol - the medieval equivalent of a Porsche
in the drive. People strove to build bigger ones than their neighbours. All
sizes appeared. But when does a moat cease to be a moat? When it is less
than five metres in diameter, apparently; it is a ditch.
It may be that the soil dug from the moat was used to raise the foundation
level of the house, and certainly in some cases the clay dug from it would
have been used to bake the bricks for the building; bricks were often made
in situ.
That is possibly a reason for the existence of the moat at The Kingston Wood
Estate, a beautiful manor house close to Cambridge, with a red-brick Queen
Anne facade and a most unusual linenfold panel front door. The moat encloses
more than three quarters of the immaculate gardens.
Kingston Wood is the 1,100 acre home of Sir Alexander and Lady Reid, who
have spent nearly 30 years lovingly developing the garden. They are moving
north and so the property is being offered by Bidwells (0223-841841). The
whole estate in several lots is expected to sell for Pounds 2.75m but the
house and 200 acres (plus the moat) can be had for Pounds 1.3m.
The house, its ground floor walls nearly one metre thick in places, is a
tangible history of English architecture; the entire roof was raised about
one metre at some stage. The present structure dates from the late 15th
century.
There is a fine moat at the aptly named Moat Farm at Dallinghoo, close to
Woodbridge, in Suffolk. The 16th century timber farmhouse, with five
bedrooms and 13 acres of orchards and paddocks, is being offered by Strutt
and Parker (071-629-7282) for Pounds 255,000.
The same agent is selling Old Hall Farm in Huntington, close to Chester,
with moated gardens plus frontage to the River Dee. For the past three years
the property has been run as a rare breeds and craft centre. Old Hall is
offered for sale now, lock, stock, hamsters and Peruvian Yacatan pigs for
Pounds 650,000.
Still on the subject of water, Bidwells is offering The Old Rectory which is
on the River Cam at at Fen Ditton, near Cambridge, and enjoys a front stalls
view of the college bumps races every June.
This is a large but friendly house that has evolved over the centuries and
has nearly every type of window. The largest part of the house is of Queen
Anne origin. The property sits on the prehistoric Fleam Dyke, the fortified
boundary of the fens. A price guide of Pounds 650,000 is suggested.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920627

