FT922-7229

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (1): Packaged for
more profits - With the emphasis on greater profitability, the courier and
express industry is now undergoing a rationalisation after a decade of
phenomenal expansion. Increasing demand for more sophisticated delivery
services, a need for greater security and environmental concerns are also
straining the cost base


   By PHILLIP HASTINGS


A DECADE of expansion at almost any price for the courier and express
industry during the 1980s has now been firmly replaced by a strong focus on
bottom-line performance.
The harsh reality of increasing losses is forcing many companies -
international and domestic - to scale back ambitious network development
plans and pursuit of ever-larger traffic volumes to achieve better
profitability.
Increasing demand from customers for higher quality and more sophisticated
delivery services is putting an even greater strain on the cost base of many
courier and express companies. Issues such as security and environmental
concerns are also having an impact on costs and profitability.
Meanwhile, plans to liberalise the UK postal industry and that of the
European Community as a whole could substantially change market conditions
for couriers and other companies handing express parcels and document
traffic.
The best example of the rationalisation of the international express
industry was the decision, announced earlier this year, of US parcels
carrier Federal Express to pull out of all European domestic and regional
activities.
Reasons for the decision were not hard to find. In the quarter to the end of
February this year, Federal Express incurred international operating losses
of USDollars 387m (Dollars 126m excluding one-off European restructuring
charges) on revenues of Dollars 595m. That compared with a loss of Dollars
71m on international revenues of Dollars 672m for the same quarter of the
previous fiscal year.
Few express industry observers expect the Federal Express pull-out to mark
the end of rationalisation on the global scene. Mr John Mullen, chief
executive of GD Express Worldwide, the new joint venture organisation set up
this year by TNT Express Worldwide and five postal authorities, believes
there is only room for two or three global integrators at the most. 'We are
now getting nearer to that situation but there is probably still some more
rationalisation to come,' he said.
Much of the express industry's rationalisation has so far involved moves to
share expensive aircraft capacity. However, leading express industry
executives believe that, in Europe at least, the next round of changes could
well focus on the road transport side of the business.
Meanwhile, TNT Express Worldwide claims it is already seeing significant
cost savings as a result of its joint venture with GD Net, the express
org-anisation set up by the post offices of Sweden, the Netherlands, France,
Germany and Canada. For a start, the additional traffic is helping to fill
up spare capacity on its 20-strong fleet of British Aerospace 146-QT jet
freighters.
TNT says overall traffic volumes from the five post offices belonging to GD
Net are roughly equivalent to the European volumes of its former courier
organisation TNT Skypak. 'On some routes, we will without doubt be putting
on extra aircraft,' said a TNT spokesman. Still to be decided is whether the
UK Post Office will join the TNT/GD Net organisation or seek alternative
ways of developing its international express delivery service.
A decision had been expected by now, but Mr Peter Howarth, managing director
of the UK Post Office parcels organ-isation Parcelforce, said a number of
options were still under consideration, including the GD Express Worldwide
venture.
He said Parcelforce may opt to work with only one partner or with several
different ones. And they could be other postal authorities or private sector
companies. A final decision is expected by July.
The emphasis on reducing costs and improving profitability now evident in
the international express industry, is just as apparent in the UK domestic
sector.
Mr Colin Millbanks, chief executive of Mayne Nickless group carrier
Parceline, claims his company has deliberately not chased volume at any
price and as a result has remained in profit since November 1990.
'Costs have been held at the levels of 12 months ago, which in real terms
means a reduction. This will have a dramatic effect on our bottom-line
performance for the financial year ending June 1992,' he said.
Another trend in UK domestic and international express sectors is that
customers are demanding more sophisticated services. On the international
front, this has led to big global integrators such as TNT, Federal Express,
DHL and United Parcel Service establishing separate divisions or management
teams to concentrate on developing wide-ranging logistics services for
multinational organ-isations.
Other express operators are following similar paths. US-based Emery
Worldwide, for instance, has just announced that it will expand its
Warehouse Inventory System Express (WISE) depot programme in North America
to provide customers with three levels of service for time-critical
shipments, including a two-hour turnaround service for immediate delivery
needs. The company is also looking to expand its WISE operations in Europe.
The pressure on domestic express companies to expand the scope of their
services is highlighted by Securiguard group parcels carrier City Link. Mr
David Kennard, managing director, says that as many companies are forced to
rethink their operating hours - starting earlier or working round-the-clock
 -demand is growing for faster and more flexible delivery systems.
He also says that in an increasingly competitive business climate, companies
are attaching far greater value to the supply of information. 'They want
more management information from their express carriers to enable them, for
example, to analyse expenditure by departments and service levels used,' he
says
These sort of requirements, at the domestic and international levels, mean
courier and express companies are continually having to invest in new
information technology. Increasingly, this means using EDI (electronic data
interchange).
However, this creates two problems for the courier and express industry,
claim operators. First, many customers are unsure exactly what they really
want in terms of information technology. Second, the reluctance of customers
to pay for it means the main cost burden falls on the express operators.
Another problem is the continuing uncertainty over moves to establish new
rules for mail and other postal service operations in the European
Community.
The European Commission last week published its long-awaited Green Paper,
which puts considerable emphasis on the need for community-wide standards
for basic postal services. But the Commission has decided that some EC
postal sectors should still be reserved for the postal authorities and
suggests gradual liberalisation of cross-border services.
Meanwhile, the UK Post Office is planning to offer discounts to private
companies who want to consolidate and trunk their domestic mail. UK Post
Office chairman Sir Bryan Nicholson indicated earlier this year that a
general framework for such arrangements was expected to be in place by early
summer.
Initially, the Post Office is likely to offer discounts to large users who
trunk their own mail direct to the postal centre handling the final delivery
of that traffic. But such discounts may subsequently also be offered to
third parties acting as consolidators for the collection, sorting and
trunking of mail.
Under the general Post Office monopoly on mail services, private carriers
have to charge a minimum of Pounds 1 per item for their deliveries. Mr
Robert Andrews, a director of parcels carrier Securicor Omega Express, told
an industry conference earlier this year that research suggested a reduction
of the monopoly limit to 75p or 50p was 'unlikely to cause sufficient shift
of first class letter traffic from Royal Mail to tempt current express
service companies to put the profitability of their core business at risk'.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920520

