FT922-431

FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: Shadow of a Cinderella - Review of the latest English
National Ballet production at the Coliseum


   By CLEMENT CRISP


ENGLISH National Ballet's decision to exhume Ben Stevenson's Cinderella is
odd, and not to be justified by the need for yet another safe box-office
title. When the company first acquired the staging in 1973, it was a pallid
and uninteresting thing. Now, somewhat revised, and tricked out with the
fripperies and fidget of David Walker's winsome design, it is even more
unwelcome as a repertory piece.
The shadow of Ashton's version is inevitably cast over this production, for
Stevenson has opted for several of Ashton's decisions about score and
narrative. But Stevenson's choreography looks drily academic, meagre in
feeling, tight and fussy, where Ashton was warm, witty, touching.
Prokofiev's score is surely his greatest for ballet, containing marvels of
melody and rhythmic variety at every turn: its waltzes are as thrilling in
their way as Tchaikovsky's. Stevenson offers dull evolutions that weigh down
Prokofiev's lilt and dramatic pulse, and the great moments - Cinderella's
arrival at the ball; her duet with the Prince and the mounting, fevered
excitements of the final waltz - go for nothing.
And absolutely fatal is Stevenson's decision to continue having the Ugly
Sisters played by men. When Ashton and Helpmann took these roles for the
Royal Ballet, they paid homage to a music hall tradition, but more
importantly, both were consummate drolls, and their foolery was born of a
long friendship and a huge understanding of the jokes implicit in such
impersonations. (Their 'characters' were also lightly based upon two women
they knew). ENB's pair, Maurizio Bellezza and Kevin Richmond, are called
upon to fall about, to flaunt and rampage like rabid drag queens.
Embarrassing and supernally unfunny, they ruin what little sentiment the
narrative possesses.
Other interpretations at the staging's first London showing on Thursday did
little to help matters. Agnes Oaks is a gentle heroine, but she does not yet
have the assurance to triumph over the dull things she is given to do. Jose
Manuel Carreno was her prince, letting off technical fireworks in the
ball-room, but hardly seeming caught up in the drama. The four soloists who
play the Season fairies were not the happiest advocates for the beauties of
classical dancing. The Jester, Stephane Dalle, was technically brilliant,
but it is a role to cute for comfort. The corps de ballet romped through the
ball-room in complicated costumes, as if waiting for the choreography to
arrive. It didn't.
Visually the production is sickly, predictable, and - to my eyes - hideous.
David Walker is adept at dressing a stage with period flummery which
artfully combines the twee and the oh-so-ingratiatingly pretty. This
Cinderella is no exception. It is a triumph of kitsch, and it finds its
apogee in the ballet's finale, which Mr Stevenson has decided must show us
Cinderella and her Prince being married. The scene takes place - how right,
how touching - in a wintry forest. The massed hordes of the corps de ballet
appear from the wings draped in white cloaks, like fugitives from an ice
show. There enter a priest, acolytes and four midget female angels, complete
with wings. (Are we perhaps in heaven, we ask ourselves? Hell, more likely,
answers critical conscience). The hapless pair are married, and the gorge
can rise no further as the curtain falls.
We may have to start fresh Nuremberg trials, for crimes against ballet and
artistic sanity.
Cinderella is sponsored by Digital Equipment Co.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920627

