FT923-9794

FT  03 AUG 92 / Nissan UK receives demand for Pounds 237m unpaid tax


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


THE Inland Revenue has issued estimated assessments for unpaid tax totalling
Pounds 237.6m against Nissan UK, the former British distributor of Nissan
vehicles controlled by Mr Octav Botnar.
The accounts of Nissan UK Holdings and its subsidiary NUK have been heavily
qualified by Kidsons Impey, the company's auditors, because of the potential
impact of the Inland Revenue investigation.
A warrant was issued at the end of January for the arrest of Mr Botnar, the
78-year-old NUK chairman, but he was abroad at the time and has not since
returned to the UK. He is believed to be living in Switzerland.
According to the company's latest annual report, just filed at Companies
House, NUK has lodged a formal appeal against the assessments and is
pursuing the appeal 'vigorously'.
The tax assessment, which was issued in October last year according to the
annual report, is based on Inland Revenue claims that NUK consistently
understated its profits in the period from October 1971 to July 1989.
Earlier this year Mr Michael Hunt, deputy chairman and assistant managing
director of NUK, and Mr Frank Shannon, a former NUK finance director, were
committed for trial at Southwark Crown Court on charges of corporation tax
fraud relating to the alleged profit manipulation.
Kidsons Impey claims that it has not received 'all the information and
explanations which we have requested' in connection with the Inland
Revenue's assessments and criminal charges.
The auditors state that they cannot form an opinion as to whether the NUKH
financial statements 'give a true and fair view of the state of affairs' of
the group, nor whether the statements fully disclose directors' transactions
and emoluments.
The financial statements have been prepared on the basis of a going concern,
but Kidsons Impey says that this may 'not be appropriate'.
Adjustments may have to be made 'to reduce the value of assets to their
recoverable amount, to provide for any further liabilities which may arise
and to reclassify certain fixed assets as current assets'.
The annual report discloses that the company doubled its dividend payment in
1991 to Pounds 40m, of which Pounds 11.38m was transferred from reserves, as
profit after extraordinary items totalled only Pounds 28.62m. Mr Hunt, who
is the beneficial holder of a 10.63 per cent stake in NUKH, received a
dividend payment of Pounds 4.25m.
The main shareholder and 'ultimate parent undertaking' of NUKH with a 71.5
per cent stake is the Panama-incorporated European Motor Vehicles
Corporation, which is controlled by the trustees of a settlement made by Mr
Botnar in 1974.
Nissan UK results, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920803

