FT924-1056

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: Dangers of being Number One fan - 'Misery' steers an
uneasy course


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


HERE IS the play of the film of the Stephen King horror thriller, and the
most remarkable thing about it is the alarming degree to which Sharon
Gless's portrayal of the grinning, auburn, sturdy, determined, grunting,
obsessive, homicidal and unbearable heroine Annie Wilkes resembles the
Duchess of York. Once the likeness hits you, the play becomes considerably
more interesting.
Otherwise it steers an uneasy and corny course. Suspense is an awkward path
to negotiate. Steer too far one way and you bore the audience; steer too far
the other and you are into realms of camp. Misery-the-play veers off in
either direction several times. Though usually among the most squeamish
people in any audience, I was on this occasion one of those who chuckled
heartily through the Act Two climax - and I was among the few who did not
already know the plot. I may be lowbrow enough to enjoy Ed McBain, Captain
Beaky and Eastenders, but I have not yet made it to Stephen King.
For those few of you who also need telling, the plot of Misery concerns a
writer of cheap historical romances which feature a heroine named Misery. He
is rescued from a car accident by Annie, who happens to be not only the
world's Number One fan of the Misery novels but also a psychopath. Since his
legs are agonisingly injured, she is able to hold him captive. Soon she
discovers with rage that he has begun to attempt another kind of fiction and
that, in the latest Misery novel, he has actually killed Misery off. You can
just imagine how she starts terrorising him after that. Novel, hovel, grovel
. . .
It is fun to see Sharon Gless perform a role so unlike that of the TV Cagney
(& Lacey) that has made her famous. She conveys has the character's gauche,
growling stolidity - but as a psychopath she is just a ham, along Whatever
Happened to Baby Jane lines. As for Bill Paterson, it is depressing to see
him in this material so soon after his superior performance in a rather more
compelling tale of a captive hostage, Death and the Maiden. In Misery, he is
highly intense, convincing and, often, funny. But what a waste of two
talented actors.
I call this the play of the film chiefly because the staging uses loud music
to manipulate the audience into alarm, panic, horror and even ironic
laughter. This is the Indiana Jones school of dramaturgy: hammer the pulses,
and switch the volume up, up up. The composer is Gavin Greenaway, but I
blame the director, Simon Moore, who is also the playwright. Though he
succeeds with the deliberately comic/campy parts - the Misery novels are
plainly pulp - he leaves us unsure how often we should be laughing
throughout the other sections. Misery is a pretty cynical exercise in
audience manipulation that is not canny enough to succeed.
At the Criterion Theatre

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921219

