FT922-13294

FT  13 APR 92 / Arts: Ciesinski Sisters - Purcell Room


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


The sisters Ciesinski have both been heard in London in the opera house  -
soprano Kristine far more often than mezzo Katherine - but their recital on
Thursday with the pianist Iain Burnside was their first appearance here
together. The programme of duets and solo songs was a nicely thematic one:
built around the title of 'All in the Family", it allowed them to range from
an exploration of filial associations in the German Lied, through songs by
sisters (Nadia and Lili Boulanger, Maria Malibran and Pauline Viardot) and
other halves (Fanny Mendelssohn, Clara Schumann, Alma Mahler), to a final
dose of glutinous American sentimentality from Dominick Argento and Lee
Hoiby.
It was a thoughtful compilation, full of intriguing curios. Malibran's songs
may be pure corn and Viardot's arrangements of Chopin disarmingly tasteless,
but at least one of Clara Schumann's Op. 12 settings, written in 1840, her
husband's 'year of song", would stand comparison with many of Robert's
lesser offerings. Alma Mahler's foray into Bergian expressionism in her
version of Dehmel's 'Ansturm' was partial confirmation of the theory that
she suppressed her own creative gifts in deference to her husband's fragile
ego, while Lili Boulanger's beguiling distillation of Debussy and Duparc
made one eager to hear all of the 1919 cycle Clarieres dans le ciel.
No one who has seen any of Kristine Ciesinski's roles at the Coliseum or
Katherine's fearsome Cassandra in the Scottish Opera Trojans could doubt
their dramatic gifts. Scaling those down to the intimacy of a Purcell Room
recital is another matter. Katherine's fierce intensity in Mahler's 'Das
irdische Leben' from Das Knaben Wunderhorn was thoroughly appropriate, so
too was their larger-than-life duetting in Brahms's 'Guter Rat'. But often
the proportions were wrong, the acting too intrusive , and the final effect
well over the top. In the straightforward Lieder Kristine seemed hesitant
and to be struggling to sustain her phrases.
The Ciesinskis communicate a vitality and enjoyment in their singing which
is infectious; they put on a fine show, though one that needs plenty of
space around it.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920413

