FT922-617

FT  26 JUN 92 / The Lisbon Summit: A mix of money, members and making
decisions


THE EUROPEAN Community summit which starts in Lisbon today promises to be an
unusual mix of the predictable and unpredictable, write David Buchan and
Patrick Blum in Lison.
Two things are sure. One is that EC leaders will tackle three main problems
 -the shape of Community finances for the 1990s, the degree to which the EC
should be run in a more decentralised manner, and the rate of admission of
new countries.
The second certainty is that none of these problems is ripe for final
settlement. But the Lisbon summit looks likely to determine the key
inter-relationship of all three issues, though quite how is this summit's
most unpredictable element.
Indeed, this trio of big issues has already become linked into the
overwhelming question mark placed over the Community by the uphill struggle
to ratify its Maastricht union treaty.
Financing. The Portuguese presidency has put this at the top of the agenda,
to be discussed first thing this morning, not least because Portugal, along
with Spain, Ireland and Greece, stands to get a further doubling of EC
structural aid over the next few years under the Commission's budgetary
plans.
Spain, in particular, has warned it might not ratify Maastricht unless it
gets a firm pledge at Lisbon of sufficient 'cohesion' aid. This threat is
weakened by the fact that Denmark's rejection has already placed Maastricht
in danger, but it cannot be ignored. Mr Jacques Delors, the commission
president, has already sought to bridge the EC's north-south gap by this
week conceding that his plan to raise EC spending by one third, from Ecu63bn
(Pounds 44bn) this year to Ecu83bn in 1997, could be spread over two further
years. An increase in the Community's revenue ceiling could be similarly
stretched out over the longer period.
The EC south might swallow this, provided Lisbon indicates that any scaling
down of Mr Delors' spending plan would hit policies such as EC research
programmes rather than cohesion aid. But the volatility of EC spending will
be underlined by discussion at Lisbon of Italy's milk quota problem. Future
EC spending plans are based on the assumption that farm expenditure will be
brought under control by the recent common agricultural policy reform, the
one big triumph of Portugal's presidency. But Italy nearly derailed this
reform, by insisting on a big increase in its milk quota, in order to avoid
a fine of as much as Ecu1.5bn for massive over-production of milk. Italy has
carried its demand to Lisbon.
Subsidiarity. In the wake of Denmark's rejection of Maastricht, Mr Delors
has readily seconded the insistence by German chancellor Helmut Kohl and UK
prime minisBrussels' giving national governments more role in administering
EC rules should get a thorough airing at Lisbon.
The EC leaders will first want to hear from Mr Delors on this. He is
increasingly making the link between Community policy ambitions and
subsidiarity in the area of EC research. The Commission president this week
admitted his disappointment that most states oppose his plan to boost EC
industry's international competitiveness through expanded EC-wide research.
Poorer states feel they do not have the high-tech companies to benefit,
while some richer countries, such as Germany and the UK, are ideologically
inclined against more public interventionism.
What lies behind Mr Delors' controversial suggestion of subsidiarity in
control of state aid is his feeling that, if the Community will not help its
industry more, it must leave individual governments freer to do so. With the
commission poised, for instance, to approve next week FFr6.6bn (Pounds 670m)
in French state to Bull, France's publicly owned computer company, this line
of Mr Delors may give leaders such as Mr Major pause about subsidiarity.
Enlargement. The Maastricht summit last December instructed the commission
to report on the overall implications of enlargement - accepting new member
states. The Danish rejection of Maastricht killed earlier commission ideas
that major institutional reform - going beyond anything in the Maastricht
pact - must accompany enlargement. But the final version of the commission
paper says 'the new treaty (Maastricht) must be ratified' before entry
negotiations can start with Austria, Finland, Sweden and Switzerland.
This pre-condition is likely to get backing from virtually all leaders, but
not Mr Major. Much of the division here turns on which is the best tactic
for prompting the Danes into second thoughts on Maastricht - to hold their
desire for enlargement hostage to full treaty ratification or (as the UK
believes) to let fellow Nordics lead them into the new European union. By
contrast, all leaders are agreed that other applicants for EC membership -
Turkey, Cyprus and Malta - must be left in the waiting room.
Editorial comment, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920626

