FT921-604

FT  28 MAR 92 / Leading Article: The morning after


SIR Winston Churchill once described democracy as the worst possible system,
except for all the others. It takes an election campaign to make one realise
how awful all the others must be. Buy Labour for more public spending. Buy
Conservative for tax cuts. What should the Advertising Standards Authority
say about those claims? It should rule both out of order.
A week dominated by charges and counter-charges over the sad case of a
little girl is illuminating only for the way in which electorates are
consistently deceived. If the Labour party is implying that it will
eliminate delays in the National Health Service, it is lying. If
Conservatives wish to deny there will always be a two-tier quality of health
care, they too are lying.
The UK confronts serious choices. But the most important of those choices,
over Europe and economic policy, divide the two parties internally. No
wonder these topics are taboo. The British people have to choose, instead,
between competing fantasies.
The point can be drawn from an analysis of the alternative economic
prospectuses by the Institute of Fiscal Studies, published this week.
Neither Labour spending increases, beyond those promised in Mr Smith's
shadow Budget, nor Conservative tax cuts, beyond the Pounds 1bn promised for
each of 1995-96 and 1996-97, can be afforded without a greater than expected
'growth dividend'. The likely growth dividend has already been spent. In
fact, it has been overspent.
Even on the government's optimistic forecast that growth between 1991-92 and
1996-97 will average 3 per cent, the public sector borrowing requirement
falls below 3 per cent of gross domestic product only by 1995-96. Moreover,
this assumes that after growing by 11 per cent in real terms between 1991-92
and 1994-95, general government spending will grow at a mere half a per cent
a year between 1994-95 and 1996-97.
Not at all likely
How likely is such a recovery? Not at all likely, for three reasons: first,
because it is what the Treasury forecasts; second, because it is all that
happened after the last recession, when conditions were far more favourable;
and third, because the UK is in the grips of a consistently underestimated
debt deflation.
To detail the Treasury's forecasting errors would be unkind, especially
since it has been in good company. But to consider the economic
circumstances is necessary. The end of the last recession coincided with a
sharp depreciation of the real exchange rate and real interest rates (base
rate less the rate of retail price inflation without mortgage interest) at
around 2-3 per cent. Now the real exchange rate is at best static, while
real interest rates are some 5 per cent and, as inflation falls, rising.
Furthermore, the personal sector, though richer, is far more indebted than
10 years ago; the nominal prices of housing are still falling; and the
London property market is suffering from a collapse of American proportions.
Pummelling groups
Why should anyone hope for a vigorous consumer-led recovery in these
circumstances? It is impossible, moreover, to understand why the Labour
Party should believe that pummelling the groups in society that must make
any recovery happen, plus a 'strategic framework for finance and industry',
plus a Pounds 1.1bn 'recovery programme' would make the desired recovery
either swifter or stronger. Or, more precisely, it is impossible to
understand why anyone should believe it.
Suppose that growth were to average only 1 1/2 per cent a year from 1991-92
to 1996-97. Real GDP would then be 7 per cent lower in 1996-97 than under
the Treasury's forecast. Furthermore, unemployment would continue to rise,
thereby increasing public spending. Under those assumptions a general
government deficit that would never fall below the 6 per cent of GDP
(without privatisation receipts) forecast for 1992-93 and 1993-94 can be
readily foreseen. It could be higher still.
Yet none of this grim background emerges into the light of public
discussion. The Conservatives do not want to discuss the problems because
they cast grave doubt on their reputation for economic competence. The
Labour party does not want to discuss the problems because they mean that
the long and imaginative wish list it calls a manifesto is no more than
waste paper. Yet the truth is that German monetary policy and its
determinants - the pain of unification, German industrial unrest and fiscal
deficits - bear far more on the prospects for the British people than
anything said in these miserable weeks.
So ignore what is being said in the election, if possible. Far more
revealing will be what happens the morning after. The Conservatives seem a
known quantity, although they too can spring surprises. But what of the now
increasingly likely Labour government? It would be tested severely, first of
all by the foreign exchange markets, then by its own supporters. It would
have to forget almost all the things it thought it was elected to do. On its
ability to do that might depend its chances for longer-term survival in
government.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920328

