FT922-13361

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Private sector urged to boost recovery drive


   By ROBERT PESTON and ROLAND RUDD


CHAIRMEN of City firms and big companies welcomed the Conservative election
victory and urged the private sector to do its part to put the country back
on the road to economic recovery.
'Business must rise to the occasion,' said Sir John Cuckney, chairman of 3i,
provider of long-term finance to small companies, and also chairman of Royal
Insurance. 'We must bring forward our investment plans and take more risks.'
Mr Nigel Rudd, chairman of Williams Holdings, the industrial conglomerate,
said: 'I think people will go out and spend money now the Conservatives have
been re-elected. Our middle managers are very relieved'.
For City firms, the outlook was 'better', according to Mr Peter
Meinertzhagen, chairman of stockbroker Hoare Govett. 'But the market is
still highly competitive', he added.
Merchant bankers expected the takeover market to revive. 'Companies will be
dusting off acquisition plans they shelved in the past few months', said
one.
Mr Brian Pearse, chief executive of Midland Bank, said businessmen's
confidence would improve and that would accelerate recovery. 'A clear cut
result is excellent', he said. Mr Pearse hoped the outcome would give 'a big
boost to the housing market'.
Mr Robin Biggam, chairman and chief executive of BICC, the construction,
engineering and cables group, said: 'The result is just bound to be good for
business. Everyone will feel that much more confident, sterling has
recovered and I now hope we will have the interest rate cut that the country
so badly needs.'
The need for a cut was also stressed by Mr Chris Haskins, who as chairman of
Northern Foods was one of the few top businessmen to express any support for
Labour's policies during the campaign. 'On economic policies, there was not
a lot of difference between the parties,' he said.
He said his company might have accelerated its investment plans had Labour
won, to take account of Labour's promise of increased tax allowances on
capital spending.
However Mr Martin Taylor, vice chairman of the Anglo-American conglomerate
Hanson, said: 'The economic stability of a Conservative government will mean
the investment from the Japanese and Americans will persist when it might
not have had the other lot won'.
The need for the government to improve the competitive position of the UK
economy was stressed by Sir Nicholas Goodison, chairman of the banking group
TSB and also president of the British Bankers Association.
'The government should concentrate on steering the UK into economic and
monetary union with other European Community countries', he said. 'It should
make sure we meet the convergence criteria (a series of economic tests) for
EMU.'
Sir Nicholas, who also called on the government to keep public expenditure
under control, said there were already signs of economic recovery.
Prominent Conservative supporters said they never had any doubt about the
outcome. Sir Tim Bell, head of the financial public relations firm Lowe Bell
and a long-standing adviser to the Conservatives, said: 'I forecast this
result.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920411

