FT921-14222

FT  17 JAN 92 / Blockbuster plan at old German film site: Leslie Colitt
describes efforts to get the cameras rolling again at Babelsberg studios


   By LESLIE COLITT


LITTLE but memories remain at the site of the former Universum-Film's
Babelsberg studios at Potsdam to remind one of the heyday of German film in
the 1920s.
Marlene Dietrich, Greta Garbo, Peter Lorre, Billy Wilder, Fritz Lang, Joseph
von Sternberg and Robert Siodmak were only a few of the stars and directors
who worked for Universum-Film at one of Europe's largest film production
sites.
Today the dingy studio buildings resembling obsolescent east German factory
halls are virtually empty. Tours of the film site are offered in an attempt
to emulate those at Universal Studios in Hollywood. But visitors to
Babelsberg, after paying DM11 (Pounds 3.80), find themselves being
shepherded through the bleak studios by dejected former employees of
Deutsche-Film (DEFA), the East German successor to Universum-Film.
They explain that their guide jobs are part of a public work-creation
programme and speak wistfully of the glorious film-making past in
Babelsberg.
But, if the Treuhand privatisation agency has its way, the Babelsberg site
will be resurrected as an ultra-modern media and entertainment centre
serving Berlin, the resurgent German capital across the Havel river.
The agency wants to see film and television production in Babelsberg along
with other media. The Treuhand, which is investing DM5m this year to
modernise DEFA's infrastructure, has agreed to let Brandenburg Radio begin
operating on part of the site and wants the highly-regarded Film Academy,
located in several nearby villas, to move there.
It has set a date of February 28, by which time bidders must present their
concepts for using the site. Two large European groups with extensive media
activities are among those who have already shown strong interest.
Bertelsmann, the giant German media group with large US investments, and
Compagnie Generale des Eaux (CGE), the French conglomerate which is an
important film producer, are battling to become the main investors at
Babelsberg.
Claims and counter-claims have been leaked to the German media and one
exasperated Treuhand official said Paris was exerting considerable political
pressure on Bonn to get the Treuhand to decide in favour of CGE.
'The competition is so intense that I would not be surprised if my telephone
is being tapped,' he remarked.
Mr Herbert Kuppers, CGE's director in Germany, stressed last month that it
wanted to take over the entire DEFA, including the 432,000 square metre site
and buildings. It was prepared to invest up to DM150m in the near future and
'billions' later on.
The company set a deadline of last December 31 for its bid but still remains
in the running, according to the Treuhand. Neither the agency nor the state
of Brandenburg, in which Babelsberg is located, wants a takeover of the
entire site by one investor, which explains an apparent delay in reaching a
decision. Mr Franz Wauschkuhn, a spokesman for the agency, said it planned
to reach a decision by next May and would not be 'put under pressure' by
bidders.
Bertelsmann, which is based in Gutersloh, has kept its cards closer to its
chest but has the decided advantage of already owning the Universum-Film Ufa
title and the rights to its films.

The Financial Times


London Page 2 Map (Omitted). Photograph Marlene Dietrich (Omitted).
Photograph Peter Lorre (Omitted). Photograph Greta Garbo (Omitted).

920117

