FT923-6373

FT  25 AUG 92 / Observer: George tries a come-back


Ask any American why George Steinbrenner is famous and no more than one in a
million would reply because he builds ships.
A handful might dimly recall that the foundation of his family fortune,
which has been leaking badly for several years, was the American
Shipbuilding Company, started by a great grand-father. But, until July 1990,
his name was indelibly associated with his ownership and often tyrannical
management of the most illustrious name in baseball, the New York Yankees.
Two years ago, Fay Vincent, the commissioner of baseball and a man whose own
job is now on the line, ordered Steinbrenner to relinquish his control over
the Yankees. It was not because he had fired 19 managers in 18 years  - and
rehired one of them five times  - but because of his association with a
known gambler. A few months later he also handed over the helm of his
shipyard to a retired vice admiral.
Gone, but coming back. A month ago, Vincent relaxed the ban. From next
season Steinbrenner can take control of the Yankees again, which might at
least make life interesting for what is now a third-rate side. Meanwhile,
Steinbrenner has had to resume command of his shipyard, following the death
of the admiral earlier this month. Its fortunes are at an even lower ebb
than those of his baseball team, and it may have to file for bankruptcy if
the US navy does not provide more money.
Whether Vincent is around to watch Steinbrenner's return to the dugout is
moot. He recently decreed that the Chicago Cubs should henceforth play in
the western division of the National League after a lifetime in the east.
The San Francisco Giants are to move to a swamp in Florida. The Seattle
Mariners are to be owned by the Japanese. In spite of ever increasing gates,
at least half the major league sides are said to be operating at a loss.
The owners, even without Steinbrenner, are restless and have summoned
Vincent to defend his stewardship of the national pastime. If Steinbrenner
behaves as he did in the past, he will probably hire Vincent as the next
manager of his shipyard.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920825

