FT921-378

FT  30 MAR 92 / Kashmiri police set to block militants' march


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


   MUZAFFARABAD


HUNDREDS of police and para-military troops were on alert yesterday in the
state capital, Muzaffarabad, in Pakistani-controlled Kashmir, as security
was tightened ahead of a today's planned march by militants to cross a
disputed border with India.
The authorities intensified their search for the march leaders at the
weekend and cut some telephone links. A special law was introduced
prohibiting public gatherings of more than four people.
While militants vowed to press ahead with the march, government officials
were confident the turnout would be low. During a similar march last month
at least a dozen people were killed and many were injured after police
charged at demonstrators trying to reach the border.
A similar march is planned by militants from the Indian side of Kashmir in
an effort to cross the border into Pakistan, but officials believe the heavy
presence of Indian troops is unlikely to allow that.
Meanwhile representatives of the militants said they were concerned that the
turnout would be low due to the Islamic fasting month of Ramadhan.
Moreover, a goverment crackdown since last Wednesday has forced many of the
march's leaders to go into hiding. Mr Amanullah Khan, chairman of the Jammu
Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), the leading organisation which called the
march, is still in detention at a unknown location in Pakistan since his
arrest last week.
The prime minister of Pakistani-ruled Kashmir, Mr Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan,
said that none of the militant leaders would be allowed to leave
Muzaffarabad. Militants leaving other cities to go to the border would also
be stopped, he added.
Mr Qayyum defended his goverment's position on the Kashmiri right to
self-determination leading to accession with Pakistan. He said: 'The
overwhelming majority of Kashmiris want accession to Pakistan. Our lifeline
depends on Pakistan.'
This has emerged as one of the most controversial differences between the
JKLF and the position adopted by the government of Pakistan and Kashmir.
A day earlier Mr Rajaz Muzaffar, acting head of the JKLF, who plans to lead
today's march, said: 'In Indian-held Kashmir, Mr Saxena, the governor, has
pronounced that he will stop the march of the JKLF. In Muzaffarabad Abdul
Qayyum has announced the same. What is the difference between Saxena and
Abdul Qayyum?'
India and Pakistan have fought three wars on the disputed division of
Kashmir and most observers fear that there could be another conflict as long
as the dispute remains unresolved. Pakistan claims that the state should
have been allowed to join it at the time of independence from Britain in
1947, whereas India rejects that position.
Pakistan has traditionally favoured a plebiscite for the Kashmiri people,
giving them the choice to join India or Pakistan. As the region has a Moslem
majority, Pakistani authorities are convinced the choice would favour
Pakistan.
But that stand is at odds with the position adopted by the JKLF militants.
They demand a 'third option' - the right to become independent, without
being tied to either India or Pakistan.
While their view is officially rejected by the government, it is finding
gradually getting some recognition.
Ms Shireen Mazari, a leading defence studies expert, says: 'The issue of an
independent Kashmir has to be thought about,' adding: 'Whether we like it or
not, that is very much a demand coming from certain quarters who are after
all fighting the Indian forces.'
The government is also concerned that restraining the march would make it
difficult for it to maintain a public image of criticising human rights
violations in Indian-controlled Kashmir.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920330

