FT924-11567

FT  24 OCT 92 / Markets: Hoping for growth in pits of despond - London
Markets


   By ANDREW BOLGER


THE SIGHT of a Tory government in ignominious retreat before the miners, who
are still led by Arthur Scargill, seems a rum harbinger for a stock market
rally.
However, the subterranean issue which linked the U-turn on pit closures and
this week's rise in share prices had little to do with coal and even less
with trade union power.
Concern that recession might be stretching into slump has recently been
mounting even faster than British Coal's unwanted stocks, and it was this
fear which helped fuel the threatened rebellion by government backbenchers.
A temporary reprieve for 21 of the 31 threatened pits, with the further
promise of an energy policy review, was sufficient to secure John Major a
slim majority. But the night before the prime minister had felt obliged to
declare: 'A strategy for growth is what we need; a strategy for growth is
what we are going to have.'
That assurance, combined with signs that German and other European interest
rates are at last poised to start falling, was sufficient to boost the
FTSE-100 by 105.8 points in the course of the week, sending the market to
its highest level since the surge last month caused by Britain's withdrawal
from the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
There was some debate as to whether this constituted yet another U-turn in
government policy - or merely, as the Treasury would have it, a change of
emphasis. But there was no doubt in the City that the government now sees
deflation as posing a greater short-term threat to the economy than
inflation.
The immediate consequences are likely to be further cuts in UK interest
rates and a vigorous effort to protect capital projects from the current
round of spending cuts. Public sector pay will be held down, but it now
looks as if infrastructure projects such as the Jubilee Line extension will
go ahead. Treasury rules concerning private sector investment in roads and
railways will also be relaxed.
As the accompanying chart illustrates, these rays of hope shone most kindly
on the bombed-out cyclical sectors: buildings materials, property and
construction. Concern that a relaxation of monetary policy would result in
higher inflation had an adverse effect on defensive, high-yield sectors such
as water and electricity.
In the case of electricity, there was also a strong suspicion that the
horse-trading which is about to start over the future of the pits will lead
to the industry being obliged to take more of the expensive, deep-mined
British coal than it wants. Four of the week's ten worst-performing FTSE-100
stocks were from this sector: Powergen, National Power, Southern Electric
and Scottish Hydro-Electric.
The new FTSE Mid 250 index, which captures the performance of the medium
sized-companies below the FTSE 100, illustrated how shares in smaller
companies tend to lag swift changes in market sentiment. When the FTSE 100
jumped 54.8 points on Tuesday, the Mid 250 rose only 26.7. But when the FTSE
100 increased by 26.7 points on Wednesday, the Mid-250 surged ahead by 53.8.
The second-line stocks continued to catch up on Thursday, when a 12.5 point
increase in the FTSE 100 was outstripped by a 30.4 rise in the Mid 250.
Any doubts about the need for a change in business sentiment would have been
dispelled by a grim survey from the British Chambers of Commerce, which said
companies suffered from a 'deeply disturbing' slide into a second leg of
recession last month, and no quick turnaround was likely.
Meanwhile Hanson, the Anglo-American conglomerate, published its formal
offer document for Ranks Hovis McDougall, the milling, baking and grocery
products group. Hanson's Pounds 780m cash bid is the first sizeable hostile
takeover in the UK stockmarket for months.
RHM has countered with a plan to demerge the group into three companies,
which it says will increase value for shareholders. Analysts believe that
taking the demerger route is more likely to increase the price offered by
Hanson than a straight bid defence, at a time when profits in the UK milling
and baking industry are under severe pressure.
However, most observers in the City believe RHM will succumb to any
increased offer from the acquisitive conglomerate. An important
consideration is that Hanson, having tangled unsuccessfully with ICI last
year, may well be willing to a pay a premium to regain its credibility as
the efficient takeover machine of old.
This week Peabody Coal, a subsidiary of Hanson, paid Dollars 200m (Pounds
123m) for the profitable Australian coal mining business of Costain, the UK
construction group. Hanson also said it would look at British Coal if it was
offered for sale, although it believed privatisation was a long way down the
road.
Connoisseurs of the government's ever-developing energy policy may recall
that Hanson spent a month in 1990 negotiating with the government to buy
Powergen, before the electricity generator was privatised. The talks failed,
but many commentators believed the threat of Hanson's involvement had a
strong effect on PowerGen's management, increasing their willingness to take
more debt on to the company's balance sheet.
If some of the 30,000 miners' jobs still at risk are to be saved, the
government's review will have to find ways of subsidising the cost of the
deep-mined coal they produce. Peabody, which operates open-cast and
deep-mine coal mines in the US, is one of Hanson's core businesses which the
conglomerate wishes to expand. The Australian purchase was the first large
acquisition outside the US by Peabody.
Could the government be tempted to offer sufficient incentives to tempt a
group such as Hanson to take on the problems of British Coal? Perhaps Arthur
Scargill's miners are not so far removed from the stock market, after all .
. .

The Financial Times


London Page II

921024

