FT922-7174

FT  20 MAY 92 / The Lex Column: BA flies high


Lord King plays hard to get when it comes to possible airline alliances. But
the stock market is showing no such reticence in its increasingly passionate
love affair with British Airways. BA's shares have outperformed by more than
55 per cent over the last nine months, and predictably took off again
yesterday on the back of better-than-expected fourth-quarter passenger
yields and a 20 per cent jump in the final dividend.
Given the dreadful industry background - and the dismal performance of most
of its international competitors - the City is certainly right to applaud
the company's navigational skill. The danger, however, is in getting carried
away. The argument of the bulls is simple enough: if this is what BA can do
in a recession, what is it capable of when recovery gets under way, and
increased passenger volumes combine with a slimmed-down cost base to
transform the bottom line?
BA is operationally geared, to be sure, but it is important to remember that
growth markets will also be increasingly competitive markets. The signs are
already there over the North Atlantic, as reflected by the fall from more
than 60 per cent in 1990 to 35 per cent last year in the contribution to
operating surplus from the Americas. The immediate threat from American
Airlines and United has been headed off, but BA for one is not under any
illusion that this state of affairs will last. Europe looks set for renewed
turbulence after next year's third phase of liberalisation. While BA should
end a winner the impact of independents picking off its most profitable
routes should not be discounted.
There is also the question of the company's medium-term financing needs.
Cash flow and existing loan facilities should be sufficient to fund the
aircraft purchase programme for at least a couple of years. But BA could
well come back to shareholders when Lord King finally leads an airline
partner to the altar.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920520

