FT922-4352

FT  05 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Ashdown praises PM treaty effort


   By RALPH ATKINS


MR PADDY ASHDOWN, Liberal Democrat leader, yesterday praised Mr John Major
for trying to ensure that the Maastricht treaty survives.
But Mr Ashdown will attempt to provoke a wide-ranging policy debate in his
party, to include consideration of its stance on the future of Europe.
In a speech in Bristol tomorrow, Mr Ashdown will propose that Liberal
Democrats put more emphasis on a decentralised and politically accountable
Europe. Maastricht was too much of a treaty for politicians, not
individuals, he believes.
In a letter to the prime minister yesterday, Mr Ashdown said that he had
'severe reservations' about Maastricht. 'We regard the treaty's failure to
address Europe's democratic deficit as a crucial deficiency; we believe that
the treaty has signally failed to address the issue of subsidiarity.'
Mr Ashdown reiterated his commitment to ever closer European union, though,
describing Maastricht as 'a transition mechanism to a deeper and wider
Europe, not an end point in itself'. He was heckled in the Commons this week
over his stance.
Aides said he would not want to dilute his commitment, but European
Community institutions needed to be more people-friendly.
The speech tomorrow will follow Mr Ashdown's call last month for an
anti-Tory alliance, which would include Liberal Democrats. That was also
intended to provoke discussion among Liberal Democrats over the party's
strategy and policy in the wake of its election performance, ahead of its
autumn conference.
Mr Ashdown has already faced criticism from within the parliamentary Liberal
Democrat party for trying to push the internal debate ahead with unnecessary
haste.
Mr Ashdown will float ideas for policy initiatives across a broad range of
areas, including health, education, the economy and taxation.
He has already hinted that he wants the Liberal Democrats to back a
substantial shift away from the taxation of income and towards the taxation
of resource use.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920605

