FT923-9754

FT  04 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: British growers reap crop of
frustration - The cereal harvest is early but there is disappointment over
yields, quality and prices / Farmer's Viewpoint


   By DAVID RICHARDSON


THE UK cereal harvest is three weeks early this year. Normally our combine
harvester rolls into barley, sown the previous autumn on our Norfolk farm,
during the last week of July.
Spring planted barley is usually ready in the first half of August and
autumn-sown wheat can be relied upon to be fit for harvesting between August
18 and 23. This year we began the barley before mid-July. We could have
started sooner if the weather had not been wet. But it was mainly dry once
we got going and that allowed us to complete all of our autumn and
spring-sown barley without starting the grain drier and indeed, to deliver
it to a merchant for onward sale to the brewers.
Moreover, on July 30 when we finished combining the barley we moved into the
earliest ripening wheat. It too was ready and dry enough to store without
expensive artificial drying and so we worked through last weekend to take
fullest possible advantage of the favourable weather. It was the first time
in more than 30 years of farming that I had harvested wheat in July. By last
evening we had completed more than one-third of our total harvest and within
that more than 20 per cent of our wheat had been gathered in excellent
conditions.
Farmers up and down the country have had similar experiences. As a rule of
thumb those in the balmier south are even further forward than we are in
Norfolk. Those in the chillier north, as always, are a few days behind.
So that's the good news. Now for the bad. First there was the disappointment
at the price we got for the barley. For years we have tried to grow best
quality, for which the brewers would pay a generous premium because it was
ideal for best beer. The chief characteristic of such barley, apart from
being able to germinate, is that each ear of grain should contain the
minimum of nitrogen.
This has been more difficult for us to achieve than for some other farmers
because our land is relatively fertile and has regular applications of
farmyard manure from our sheep and pigs. This manure contains nitrogen,
which is transmitted through the soil and the root system of the barley to
the grain.
But this year, for some unaccountable reason, our barleys contained much
lower percentages of nitrogen than usual. At last, it seemed, we were going
to make some real money.
Imagine my frustration when I was told by the merchant that not only had
most other barley farmers grown similar low nitrogen crops but that the
market did not want much of it anyway. The story is, apparently, that the
low nitrogen crops were needed in the past for making pale ales. Nowadays
most beer drinkers choose lager and that requires rather higher levels of
nitrogen than we had grown.
I am assured that there is more than an element of truth in the story. But I
could not help thinking that it might also be a convenient ploy to talk down
the price. In any event the premium over animal feed barley price that we
were offered was rather more modest than I would have preferred.
At least the yield of the barley, particularly that which was autumn sown,
was up to expectations. But the weight of the wheat we have been combining
since appears to about 20 per cent per acre down on last year and this seems
to be general across the country.
Paradoxically wheat crops looked better this year than last through most of
the summer in spite of the spring drought. Indeed, when the rains began in
June and some of the moisture deficit began to be made up, many farmers,
myself included, privately began to think we would harvest big crops this
year. That only goes to show how little we know about the components of high
yield.
It is clear now that we had too much June and July rain for wheat. Some fell
in heavy storms and knocked whole fields virtually flat - in the trade we
say those crops have 'lodged' - and although modern harvesters will do a
remarkable job of picking them up, when they go down as early as June we
know they will not ripen evenly and that the quality of the grain will
suffer.
But the rain brought other problems too. It produced the kind of moist
micro-climate in the developing ears of the wheat that was ideal for the
spread for fungal diseases, particularly one called fusarium. Crops all over
the country have been affected this year and in spite of attempts to control
the disease by spraying with a fungicide it has still reduced yields
significantly.
Instead of the bold, bright and well-rounded wheat grains we have been
fortunate enough to harvest over the last few years, most farmers are
finding that a worrying proportion of their crops are producing shrivelled,
dirty-looking samples. This is the result of the ear disease and the main
reason for lower yields.
It is also likely to detract from the value of the grain. For the fact is
that the UK has, in recent years, grown an exportable surplus of some 5m to
6m tonnes a year. If my experience of reduced yields is repeated across the
country this year that tonnage will also be lower. Nevertheless UK farms
will still produce significantly more than is needed for domestic
consumption.
Following the excellent quality of UK grain gathered from the last few
harvests merchants, supported by the export agency British Cereals Exports,
have been able to open up new overseas markets and have been remarkably
successful at selling virtually all that was not needed at home.
However, this year's lower quality must raise questions as to whether that
success can be repeated. Much will depend of course on what other supplies
are available on the market. Reports from several other European countries
suggest that they too have had problems and so the situation may not be as
bad as it appears.
Meanwhile, to add insult to injury it has just been announced that the
European Community's farm policy reform package, agreed last May, will, with
the tacit acceptance of British Ministry of Agriculture officials, remove
all price support from feed wheat. Only common, or bread wheat, will be
eligible to be accepted into intervention stores.
As has happened - so often and so illogically with other EC farm commodities
in the past - this will mean that the best quality is locked away from the
market. Even more serious for British wheat growers, it will mean that 70
per cent of the varieties that grow best in this country and for which there
is a market both domestic and for export, have had their price safety net
withdrawn. It also means that French farmers, whose climate allows them to
grow the necessary quality far more easily than we can and who overproduce
by double the percentage that we do, compared with domestic consumption,
have once again won the political battle to get the best deal.
British officials, it is reported, sat on their hands in Brussels and
abstained from voting on the matter, allowing the member state that produces
the vast majority of the EC's cereal surpluses to get away with it again.
Are they determined to destroy British agriculture.? If they are, they are
going the right way about it.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920804

