FT921-428

FT  28 MAR 92 / Shell plans North Sea job cuts: Union attacks proposals to
shed up to 4,000 workers by end of decade


   By JULIET SYCHRAVA


SHELL UK plans to shed up to 4,000 North Sea jobs by the end of the decade,
as it replaces old production platforms with more modern ones which will
require fewer staff.
The company said yesterday it would cut 40 per cent of its offshore
workforce and 25 per cent of North Sea jobs onshore by the year 2000. Only
negligible profits could be made in the North Sea, Shell said.
Between 2,000 and 4,000 jobs will go, as the company reviews all of its 32
platforms.
The cuts angered union officials. Mr Roger Lyons, general-secretary-elect of
the Manufacturing Science and Finance Union, which represents offshore
workers, said: 'Shell is rushing this announcement through before the
general election without any consultation. Shell clearly fears a Labour
victory on April 9 will force them to consult on their plans as happens in
every other civilised country.'
Mr Chris Fay, managing director of Shell Exploration and Production (Shell
Expo), said he was 'flabbergasted' that news of the cuts threatened to cause
a pre-election storm. 'I was surprised such a big issue could be made of
what is an evolutionary process,' he said.
Jobs would go because the company had to cut costs on its older, more
expensive platforms, which were only marginally profitable, he said.
Reports of the cuts emerged after Mr Fay told visitors to the new Gannet oil
platform earlier this week that it would have a crew of less than 40,
compared with 200 on older platforms.
But he stressed yesterday this did not necessarily lead to 4,000 job losses.
Although he confirmed the percentage size of the planned cuts in offshore
and onshore workforces, he said the bulk of its 8,700 offshore staff are
already contractors, many of whom work only half time.
Cuts were more likely to be between 2,000 and 4,000 over a 10 to 15-year
period with most of the losses coming towards the end of the decade. Only
about 400 jobs would be lost this year and a similar figure next year.
Mr Fay also said Shell would be creating many new jobs as development of the
North Sea continued. These would help offset the losses.
The main reason for the cuts, Mr Fay said, was that there were few large
oilfields left to develop. 'People should recognise the increasing
marginality of the North Sea,' he said.
This meant Shell had to cut its costs, he said. Cuts of Pounds 150m to
Pounds 180m were planned for 1992, from a total operating cost of Pounds
900m. Only a small percentage of the cuts would be job losses.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920328

