FT923-10785

FT  29 JUL 92 / World Trade News: HK group to invest in Chinese entrepot
project


   By Our Foreign Staff and Agencies


WHARF Holdings, a Hong Kong-based conglomerate, is to invest about 20 per
cent of its net assets in a project that could transform the central Chinese
city of Wuhan, and reinforce Hong Kong's preeminence as South China's
leading port.
The focus of the project will be a containerisation centre where
manufacturers would load containers and clear customs before 'exporting'
goods directly along a 1,200km modernised railway line to Hong Kong,
according to Mr John Hung, Wharf's executive director.
The multi-billion-dollar project had won strong backing from Beijing, with
letters of intent signed in June. As well as the containerisation centre,
trains, tunnels, power plants, hotels and industrial complexes could be
built under the plan, which would take at least 10 years to complete.
Wuhan, capital of Hubei Province, astride the Yangtze River about 800km
inland from Shanghai, has long been a critical transport hub in central
China. Its road and rail bridge provides an important land crossing of the
Yangtze.
Freight from China's interior is often shipped to Wuhan, to be forwarded
north or south on the country's railway system.
From this commanding communications position, Wuhan has grown to be central
China's main industrial city. It is already a critical entrepot for goods
exported through Hong Kong, and is an important supplier of food to the
territory.
It is estimated that transforming Wuhan into a modern inland cargo
distribution centre will cost at least Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 780m). Mr Hung
said yesterday that Wharf would now progress to a detailed feasibility
study. The company has nominated consultants and already has staff in Wuhan.
The project offers powerful attractions to both Hong Kong and Wuhan. For
Hong Kong, anxious to build close economic links deep into the Chinese
mainland, it would ensure the colony's pivotal importance to south China
even after 1997, when Beijing regains sovereign control.
Shanghai's ambitious Pudong project has been seen by some as a potential
threat to the territory in the 21st century.
Leaders in Wuhan and its hinterland see the investment as a potential
catalyst for foreign investment, which has been hard to attract because of
difficulties in overcoming the problems of using China's rudimentary
infrastructure.
The city has also been pinpointed by Mr Gordon Wu, head of Hopewell Holdings
in Hong Kong, who has built roads and power stations in Guangdong.
He plans to build a 500km arterial road through Hunan Province, which will
link with Xiang River barges to Wuhan.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920729

