FT924-1040

FT  21 DEC 92 / Economists see end to recession but weak growth


   By EMMA TUCKER and KEITH FRAY


THE RECESSION will end next year but growth will be weak, unemployment will
breach 3m and inflation will overshoot the upper limit of the chancellor's
target range.
Those are among the findings of the latest Financial Times survey of
forecasts, carried out during the first two weeks of December.
The consensus from economists at 38 universities, inter-governmental
institutions, independent think tanks and City investment houses is that the
economy will grow by 1 per cent next year, in line with the latest forecast
from the Treasury.
The following year, growth will recover to just below the so-called trend
growth rate of 2.5 per cent, but that will have only a small effect on
unemployment.
For that reason, most economists remain cautious about prospects for
consumer spending.
Just over a third of the 38 economists surveyed expect it to rise above 1
per cent in 1993. They are also less optimistic than the Treasury about
fixed investment and export growth.
Nearly all the forecasters expect the trough of the recession to occur in
either the present quarter or the first quarter of next year.
But they disagree on how fast the economy will subsequently grow.
Mr Peter Warburton, chief economist at Robert Fleming, a merchant bank, is
the least optimistic, forecasting growth of only 0.7 per cent in the fourth
quarter of 1993 compared with the same period this year.
The most bullish forecast comes from Mr James Walsh, macroeconomic
forecaster at the Economist Intelligence Unit. He expects growth of 2.7 per
cent over the same period.
Like four other economists surveyed, though, Mr Walsh is forecasting slower
growth - about 2 per cent - in the year to the fourth quarter of 1994, in
expectation of policy tightening as inflation starts to pick up.
According to the survey, base rates will fall to just under 6.5 per cent by
the end of next year, but rise again to 7.5 per cent by the end of 1994.
Only five economists see base rates dropping to 5 per cent next year, an
expectation that agrees with forecasts - at least for three of them  - for
low inflation over the next two years.
The greatest disagreement among the economists arises over the prospective
size of the UK's current-account deficit.
Professor Patrick Minford at Liverpool University, Prof Tim Congdon at
Lombard Street Research and Mr Warburton, members of the 'Liverpool Six'
group of monetarist economists, are much more optimistic about the UK's
trade position than most others.
All three forecast a current-account deficit of less than Pounds 10bn next
year.
That compares with the gloomiest forecasts, from Mr Keith Skeoch at brokers
James Capel and Mr Gerard Lyons at DKB International, the Japanese bank, who
both expect deficits of more than Pounds 20bn in 1993 and 1994.
The monetarists were vociferous advocates of devaluation long before
September 16, when the pound was forced out of the European exchange rate
mechanism.
Their optimism about Britain's trade balance generally reflects expectations
for slow import growth over the next two years rather than buoyant export
growth.
The outlook for inflation is mixed. The consensus forecast is that the
chancellor's target range of 1 per cent to 4 per cent for the retail prices
index excluding mortgage interest payments will be breached next year and in
1994.
Professor Wynne Godley at Cambridge University is one of a number of
economists expecting inflation to rise next year before dropping again in
1994. 'I think inflation will slide back because, unless we devalue further,
the real economy will remain depressed by rising unemployment,' he said.
Mr Skeoch believes a number of factors will boost the chancellor's chosen
measure of inflation beyond the upper limit of his target range.
They include the introduction of the council tax, the over-indexation of
duties as the Treasury recoups lost revenue, any upward pressure on seasonal
food prices after a very weak 1992, and any increase in petrol prices from
today's very low levels.
Mr Richard Jeffrey, chief economist at brokers Charterhouse Tilney, says
that a drawback about an explicit target for inflation is that industry
tends to raise prices at a faster rate as inflation moves towards the top of
the band.
'They do this with the object of getting price increases through before a
government policy reaction,' he said.
The good news for the chancellor is that most economists expect the M4
measure of the money supply to stay within its monitor range of 4 per cent
to 8 per cent.
Only Mr Neil Williams at Daiwa Europe Bank and Mr David Smith at brokers
Williams de Broe expect the upper limit to be broken next year.
Average earnings will drop below 5 per cent next year, but creep back up to
5.7 per cent in 1994, according to the survey.
The outlook for manufacturing industry is slightly more positive than the
Treasury forecast.
The average forecast for manufacturing growth in 1993 is 1.3 per cent
followed by 2.8 per cent the year after, but the latter figure masks
considerable differences.
Most economists expect house prices to start rising - slowly - towards the
end of 1993. Mr Alan Davies at Barclays Bank and Mr Mark Cliffe at Nomura
Research Institute are among the few economists expecting rapid house price
inflation.
'House prices may not begin to make any appreciable headway until well into
1993, but house price inflation could subsequently move up temporarily to
annual rates of 10 per cent of more,' said Mr Davies.
By contrast, Daiwa's Mr Williams says house price growth will not match RPI
inflation until the end of 1995.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921221

