FT924-11302

FT  27 OCT 92 / Tax panic grips Italian evaders


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


THE LID on Italy's worst kept secret has finally been lifted: the
self-employed, professions and small business have been getting away with
absurd tax returns for years.
The secret has been blown by the simple expedient of the finance ministry
leaking data on tax returns of the 6.1m classified as self-employed in order
to demonstrate the equity of a proposed new 'minimum tax'.
In the country of the fur coat, the cellular telephone, the third holiday,
the Swiss bank account, and the highest savings ratio in the EC, 35 per cent
of self-employed are supposedly living on the poverty line with annual
incomes below L7.2m (Pounds 3,310). Only 3.6 per cent of wage-earners have
incomes in this category.
On the basis of a spot check on 62,000 tax returns, the authorities
discovered 56,000 were under-declaring. The worst offenders were retailers,
who declared only a fraction of their projected earnings.
A check of 22 delicatessens in the wealthy northern city of Varese showed
average taxable income of L12.6m (Pounds 5,800); 11 leather shops in
Florence had average taxable income of L20m (Pounds 9,210). Employers were
also often declaring earnings half that of their employees.
The new tax measure assesses real earnings by category on a computerised
formula and then imposes a minimum payment regardless of the return
submitted. In most cases this entails a doubling of current declared
earnings for the new tax base.
Not surprisingly it has provoked a storm of protest, the first organised
manifestation of which was a meeting yesterday in Rome of the traders'
association, Confcommercio.
Last week, senior members of the Christian Democrat party unsuccessfully
tried to water down the proposal with a series of exceptions. 'They wanted
to make the exception the rule,' said one official.
'The traders wanted to raise issues like 'Why should my income be the norm
if traffic restrictions cut my clientele?' or 'What happens if for six
months someone has not been able to serve properly because of a bad back?'.
. . It was impossible.'
The protest cuts across all political persuasions but grouped as a whole
these 6m people represent a formidable block of votes. Their main champion
is the populist Lombard League.
The unions have kept their distance, aware their that wage-paying members
for years have paid their taxes at source.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921027

