FT924-6227

FT  23 NOV 92 / Blockade of Adriatic ports begins: Diplomats say tightened
embargo will fail to stop violations along Danube


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


WESTERN warships yesterday began enforcing a United Nations trade embargo on
Montenegro and Serbia in an attempt to stop the war in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Five ships from the Western European Union (WEU) yesterday were due to join
seven Nato vessels detailed to stop and search all ships sailing to or from
Adriatic ports in Montenegro, which along with Serbia comprises the
reconstituted although unrecognised Yugoslavia.
The task force, which includes HMS Gloucester, is authorised to use force to
stop any ship suspected of smuggling goods banned by the UN resolution.
Nato announced on Saturday that ships from its Standing Naval Force
Mediterranean (Stanavformed) would begin policing Adriatic waters yesterday
with the support of maritime patrol aircraft in an operation codenamed
Maritime Guard.
However diplomats yesterday feared that the tightened oil embargo would not
stop violations along land routes and the River Danube. One diplomat said:
'The blockade addresses only part of the problem, but the major violations
concern interdiction on the Danube and the still porous land borders.'
Lorries carrying tens of thousands of tonnes of petrol cross Yugoslavia's
frontiers each day, according to police and diplomats.
The UN imposed sanctions, including an oil embargo, on Yugoslavia on May 31.
Until yesterday, however, the multinational Adriatic flotilla was only
empowered to monitor the sanctions, not to enforce them.
The sanctions have failed to curb the bloodshed in Bosnia. Serb forces
yesterday shelled Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital besieged for nearly seven
months. Four people were killed in shelling by Serb fighters of Travnik and
Turbe, a nearby village, 45 miles north-west of Sarajevo. Relief workers
yesterday warned of an outbreak of typhoid fever in Travnik, packed with
tens of thousands of refugees who have fled fighting in nearby towns.
Meanwhile, in an interview yesterday with Politika, the main Serbian daily,
Mr Dobrica Cosic, the Yugoslav president, said he would not stand against Mr
Slobodan Milosevic, the president of Serbia, in elections due on December
20. Mr Cosic, a well-known writer who wields great influence among Serbs, is
widely seen as the only candidate who could pose a serious challenge to Mr
Milosevic.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

921123

