FT922-3945

FT  09 JUN 92 / World Trade News: Finland aims to put its house in order
ahead of EC entry


   By DAVID DODWELL, World Trade Editor


FINLAND is to remove barriers to foreign investment, and privatise state-run
industries before entry into the EC in 1995, according to Mr Pertti
Salolainen, deputy prime minister and trade minister.
'We want to build confidence both internally and abroad that Finland will be
a full partner in the EC, a reliable partner which can deliver,' Mr
Salolainen said. 'We are ready to make sacrifices to put our house in
order.' Inward investment would be 'totally free' by the end of this year.
The country's determination to join the EC appears unaffected by Denmark's
recent referendum threatening the EC's integration plans as formulated at
the Maastricht summit late last year: 'We don't expect the EC to rein in on
commitments, despite Denmark's referendum,' Mr Salolainen said.
He expected the EC's answer to Finland's request for full membership to be
ready by the end of this year, with 1993 dedicated to detailed negotiations
for Austria, Sweden and Finland. A national referendum on the terms of entry
into the EC will be held in 1994; full membership is timed to come into
effect at the beginning of 1995.
Finland has over the past two years been thrown into deeper economic turmoil
than at any time in the past 40 years. The collapse of trade with the former
Soviet Union, which until two years ago made up 26 per cent of exports,
coincided with recession in its two main western markets, the UK and Sweden.
Reorientation of the economy started last year with a 14 per cent
devaluation of the Finnish markka. This alone has boosted exports by between
10-15 per cent, and improved competitiveness by 20 per cent since the low
point of the third quarter last year, Mr Salolainen said. The improvement is
urgently needed, since trade collapsed by 19.2 per cent last year, from
Dollars 27.0bn (Pounds 14.8bn) in 1990 to Dollars 21.8bn in 1991.
'We had a bit of bad luck in all directions,' Mr Salolainen added. Trade
with the former Soviet Union, which used to account for a large share of
Finland's energy imports and a big proportion of its exports of textiles and
clothing, shoes and leather goods, has slumped to 3 per cent of total trade.
Strategy towards the former Soviet Union will now focus on the Baltic
states, mainly Estonia, training east bloc business leaders, enhancing farm
output, and cleaning up the environment. Finland sees itself as a 'gateway'
to the eastern bloc, and is trying to attract investment for a road linking
Poland and the Baltics to the St Petersburg area.
Its nationalised petroleum company, Neste, is evaluating Russia's energy
resources, while the Poyry consultancy company has been asked to draw up a
plan for forestry in Russia and the Baltics. Since the former Soviet Union
is expected to recover so slowly, Finland has focused on diversifying its
trade with the west.
Sales to east Asian markets, including China, have risen strongly, from a
monthly average of Dollars 90m in 1991, to an average this year of Dollars
111m. While Germany has in the past year overtaken the UK and Sweden to
become the country's leading trading partner, Mr Salolainen said Britain
remained a top priority.
'It will take a couple of years, but I'm sure that we can put our house in
order by the time we enter the EC,' he concluded.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920609

