FT924-8305

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Capital Markets: Stock Exchange tries to
settle a trading problem - Gilt marketmakers' rules have been eased


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE London Stock Exchange yesterday relaxed its rules on gilt marketmakers
in an attempt to relieve the settlement log-jam in the gilts market, in the
process making it more difficult for private investors to switch between
gilt issues.
The continuing settlement problems, which first became acute last Thursday,
also prompted claims that the infrastructure supporting the gilt market was
inadequate, and the Bank of England should seek to modernise the settlement
arrangements. The Bank, said the current problems were caused by unusual
events and did not indicate any underlying problems in the market.
The stock exchange announced that marketmakers would no longer have to take
on 'contingent' trades of less than Pounds 50,000, in which investors sell
their holding in one gilt issue and move into another. These trades have
helped to clog the marketmakers' settlement systems, prompting them to
discourage retail brokers from passing them any more small bargains.
Contingent trades have become popular in recent days in part because of the
Bank of England's decision, announced a month ago, to redeem its 9 per cent
stock due 1992-96. For the Bank, early redemption gives the opportunity to
refinance the issue at a lower coupon.
Many of the retail investors who held these gilts have been switching into
other gilt issues, taking the advantage to move into longer-dated stocks to
benefit from the steepening UK yield curve.
The switching has become more active recently as speculation has grown of a
possible two-point interest rate cut to coincide with today's Autumn
Statement. Daily trading volume has jumped to an estimated 7,000 bargains,
from around 2,500 before.
The problem is said by brokers to have become acute since last Thursday when
Greenwell, one of the three big marketmakers who handle retails trades,
experienced a computer failure. Greenwell said yesterday its systems had not
shut down entirely, and the difficulties it experienced were 'readily
overcome'.
All three marketmakers - the others are County NatWest and UBS - were
reported by brokers to have turned away trades, though the marketmakers
denied they had imposed minimum size limits to deter small bargains. 'We've
all had difficulties, but we've done our best,' County said.
The settlement difficulties have raised the spectre of the far more
substantial backlog that threatened to overwhelm the equities market in
1987, and which was one of the main motivators for the development of
Taurus, a paperless settlement system.
The Bank's settlement arrangements, introduced five years ago, are
paper-based and rely on brokers delivering stock certificates within 24
hours of a trade taking place. Brokers complained yesterday that this
arrangement is designed to suit institutional investors, rather than private
clients.
'The Bank of England has resisted gilts going on to Taurus,' said Mr Paul
Killik of stockbrokers Killik. Gilts should at least be put onto the
exchange's Talisman system, which allows paperless settlement between
marketmakers, he said.
The Bank said current volumes were unusual, and yesterday afternoon it was
meeting other marketmakers who only deal with institutions to see if they
could help relieve the pressure.
It added that if volumes looked as though they would remain high, it
expected intermediaries in the market would increase their systems capacity
to service the extra business.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921112

