FT924-943

FT  21 DEC 92 / Israel ignores UN call to reverse deportations: Army kills
seven Palestinians in occupied territories


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   JERUSALEM


ISRAEL rejected international demands to reverse the deportation of 415
Palestinians trapped in south Lebanon yesterday and issued a sharp warning
to the government in Beirut not to attempt to push them back into
Israeli-held territory.
As the deportees pledged to remain in their makeshift camp in no-man's land
between the Israeli and Lebanese armies until they could return home,
Israeli forces shot dead seven Palestinians, including a nine-year old girl,
in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip over the weekend. The toll of six
dead in Gaza on Saturday was the highest in one day for more than two years.
The Israeli cabinet yesterday reaffirmed the decision to deport the alleged
Islamic fundamentalist militants, taken after six soldiers had been killed
in a spate of armed attacks by the Hamas Islamic Resistance Movement.
Ministers rejected a unanimous resolution passed by the United Nations
Security Council on Friday condemning the action.
The government also strongly contested a High Court petition by civil rights
lawyers seeking a reversal of the expulsions on the grounds that Israel was
responsible for their fate in the absence of a jurisdiction willing to
accept them. The court, which last Wednesday gave the go-ahead for the
expulsions, is expected to rule today.
An angry stand-off has developed between Israel and Lebanon over the
deportees. Mr Rafik al-Hariri, the Lebanese prime minister, reiterated his
government's insistence that they should return to Israel. 'There is
absolutely no way we will change our position. Never. Ever. Lebanon is not a
dumping ground,' he said.
Mr Yitzhak Rabin, his Israeli counterpart, replied by saying the deportees
were now the responsibility of Beirut. 'It will be a mistake to try to push
them back into our area. It will be a major mistake.'
The government has won strong public backing in Israel for the expulsions,
which covered many academics and professionals said by the security forces
to be the 'brains' behind Hamas. But government officials acknowledged that
the plight of the deportees, huddled in tents in freezing conditions, had
caused serious damage to what had previously been strong international
support for Mr Rabin.
Fears that the deportations could halt Middle East peace talks were
underscored by moves by the Palestine Liberation Organisation, which backs
the talks, to reconcile its differences with Hamas, which opposes them.
Israel says its action against Hamas is meant to strengthen those
Palestinians backing the peace talks, but the PLO says it will not return to
the talks unless Israel reverses the deportations.
Last night the PLO appealed for international protection for Arabs in the
Israeli-occupied territories.
Israeli forces kept up a rigid security regime in the occupied territories
over the weekend. The killings in Gaza occurred when a week-long curfew was
lifted in Khan Younis refugee camp.
Mr Rabin will today meet the leader of Tsomet, a small far-right party, to
discuss its entry into the Labour-led coalition.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921221

