FT922-631

FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (8): Given higher priority - The
Environment


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


MRS Gro Harlem Brundtland may have lacked the panache or effrontery of
Cuba's Fidel Castro at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro but the Norwegian
prime minister was well received by delegates for her knowledgeable
contribution to the discussion. Here at least is one western democratic
leader who seems to be in tune with the feelings of the developing nations
over the future of the global environment.
As the head of an international commission investigating the subject in the
early 1980s she was one of the few politicians with a claim to know
something about the subject beyond the cloudy platitudes and cliches that
tend to dominate too much of the global environmental debate.
It has also ensured that the Norwegian government gives a much higher
priority to environmental issues than most others among western market
economies. Parliament recently agreed to introduce a new article into
Norway's constitution which grants everybody the right to a health and
sustainable environment. Such a gesture may seem rather meaningless to many
people but at least it focuses national attention on a subject that has been
neglected for far too long.
As a small country, Norway is only responsible for an estimated 0.1 per cent
of global emissions and its total share of world greenhouse gas emissions is
less than 0.1 per cent. During the late 1980's annual emission of greenhouse
gases amounted to about 2.6 tons per capita, lower than any other OECD
country except for Turkey. But as this year's OECD report on Norway
indicated the rate of greenhouse gas emissions was growing at a faster rate
than most industrialised countries, particularly those of nitrogen oxides.
However, as the OECD study made clear: 'The pattern of greenhouse gas
emissions in Norway can be largely explained by the country's geographic
conditions'.
Carbon dioxide emissions are low because most of Norway's electricity
generation comes from environmentally friendly hydro-power. But as a large
producer and exporter of petroleum responsible for world carbon dioxide
emissions, Norway in the words of OECD 'makes it very susceptible to global
policy decisions in this area'. The high level of nitrogen oxides in the
atmosphere is due to coastal shipping transport and the fishing industry.
What environmental pollution there is in Norway is caused by the industries
of other countries, such as acid rain which comes from coal-burning plants
particularly in Britain, Germany and eastern Europe. Only an estimated 5 per
cent of the sulphur oxide deposited over Norway comes from Norwegian
emissions.
The extent of the damage this has caused to Norway has been quantified
recently. The pollution of inland waters which has affected fish catch
levels is calculated to cost between NKr530m-NKr610m annually, 0.1 cent of
the country's GDP. The annual yield of timber lost as a result of acid rain
amounts to between Kr330m-NKr650m while the annual damage caused by sulphur
dioxide on fixed capital totals Nkr440m.
Norway does not devote much of its resources to pollution control, at least
to judge by the latest comparative OECD data which showed it amounted to 0.8
per cent of gross domestic product compared with 1.5 per cent in the US and
1.3 per cent in Britain.
The government has committed the country to pollution reduction targets that
are better than the agreed international standards. It is pledged to halve
emissions of sulphur dioxide by next year from their 1980 level and reduce
nitrogen dioxide emissions by 30 per cent by 1998 from a base line figure
for 1986. There is a national target of stabilising carbon dioxide emissions
at the 1989 level by 2000 and a rapid phase out of halons and CFC's -
manmade chemicals.
Norway has agreed to reduce water pollution by 1995 with a halving in
micropollutants compared with 1985 , a 70 per cent cut in cadmium, mercury,
lead and dioxins and a 50 per cent reduction in emissions of nutrients such
as nitrates and phosphates. It is closely involved in schemes to reduce
pollution in neighbouring regions such as the Kola peninsula of Russia where
nickel producing plants are an environmental problem. It has been estimated
that NKr300m is being spent over the next five years in total transfers for
the Kola project.
Moves inside Norway to encourage better treatment of the environment in the
past have been based on regulatory controls. But in last year's budget there
was a switch in policy to the use of the tax system to improve the country's
environment and not just raise revenues for the government by making it
financially advantageous for polluters to take action to reduce their costs.
This year, the budget increased the new 1991 tax imposed on carbon dioxide
emissions while the tax on mineral oil was pushed up from 65 per cent to 90
per cent and the petrol tax by 25 per cent or 12 US cents per litre for
leaded petrol.
Norway's environment is likely to be improved most through international
action to reduce emissions from its more industrial neighbours to the south.
This ought to be a powerful argument for those Norwegians who want their
country to join the EC.
Strangely enough, a large number of those who want to give a clean
environment the top priority are hostile to the EC. But to be green in one
country is an illusion as Mrs Brundtland can tell them.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920626

