FT924-11515

FT  26 OCT 92 / Peace negotiators build Balkan castles in the air: Time and
the Bosnian winter are pressing


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


IT IS almost two months since Mr Cyrus Vance, former US secretary of state,
and Lord Owen, former British foreign secretary, were appointed as joint
international mediators for ex-Yugoslavia. There has been no discernible
improvement for the people of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The fighting continues, thousands are still being forced from their homes in
renewed 'ethnic cleansing' by all three communities, and the besieged
inhabitants of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, face death this winter from
cold, hunger and disease.
Yet in the makeshift offices of the International Conference on Former
Yugoslavia in the United Nations headquarters in Geneva, there is cautious
optimism. The feeling is that a peaceful solution is possible before winter
is out. Brick by brick, negotiators say, construction of that peace has
begun.
The immediate goal of Mr Vance and Lord Owen as conference co-chairmen has
been to stop the fighting in Bosnia and lift the Serb blockade of Sarajevo
and other Bosnian cities. Given the refusal of the world community to
intervene militarily in the Bosnian conflict, they are operating what levers
they have.
First, they have used their personal authority, contacts and (in contrast
with the ill-fated Carrington talks) concerted international backing to win
the confidence of all sides and to try to get them talking to each other and
to the co-chairmen. 'We are not here to take sides but to find a solution as
rapidly as possible,' Mr Vance said recently.
Though the mainly Moslem Bosnian government refuses to meet the Bosnian Serb
leadership face to face, last week it ended its boycott of talks on the
demilitarisation of Sarajevo. The Bosnian president, Mr Alija Izetbegovic,
also met Yugoslav president Dobrica Cosic face-to-face for the first time.
Second, the two mediators have laid great stress on normalising relations
between Croatia and the rump federal republic of Yugoslavia, consisting just
of Serbia and Montenegro. This reflects not only the need to defuse possible
flashpoints, for instance, in the Serb-controlled UN protected areas of
Croatia or the Prevlaka peninsular, but also to enlist the leaders' active
backing for an ethnically mixed Bosnian state.
Inducements include international economic aid to rebuild their shattered
economies and the lifting of sanctions on and diplomatic recognition of what
remains of Yugoslavia.
Third, the two co-chairmen, and the constitutional broker for Bosnia, Mr
Martti Ahtisaari, have told all three warring factions that there can be no
partition of Bosnia-Hercegovina on ethnic lines and no 'green line'
separating communities in Sarajevo.
The draft constitution that the co-chairmen plan to publish tomorrow
envisages a single secular Bosnian state within existing borders, divided
into regions or provinces with a high degree of local autonomy.
The constitution will include strong protection for human rights and there
may be some provision for international human rights monitoring during the
transition phase. 'The local governments will be able to safeguard ethnic
rights, such as education and culture, with protection for minorities,' says
Mr Fred Eckhard, spokesman for the co-chairmen.
The three parties are now wrangling over maps, both in Geneva and, to an
extent, in fighting on the ground. The Bosnian government, which had wanted
a unitary state, says it could accept 8-10 provinces, enshrining Moslem
majorities in key Bosnian towns. The Bosnian Serbs, having been told that
three ethnic cantons are out of the question, want as few separate regions
as possible.
Mr Ahtisaari says that whatever the eventual number there can be no neat
slicing of Bosnia on ethnic lines. Even now, for instance, though Bosnian
Serbs claim to control 70 per cent of the territory, the mainly Moslem
government holds Bihac in the north-west, as well as Sarajevo and some other
towns to the east.
Moreover, the constitutional principles drawn up (and accepted by all sides)
at the London conference on ex-Yugoslavia at the end of August include the
right of people to return to their homes. Though no one expects all those
expelled to go back (deterred by memories, fear and the destruction of homes
and property), some, perhaps many, will choose to do so if conditions are
right. Areas claimed, say, by Serbs as 'theirs' may not remain so.
While the fighting and suffering continues in Bosnia, all this may seem pie
in the sky. Many believe the outcome of the Geneva negotiations can only be
an acceptance of the fait accompli achieved by Bosnian Serbs militarily. The
negotiators in Geneva reject this view, while arguing that within the basic
principles the three sides must reach their own accommodation.
Equally, there is a hard-headed appreciation that the negotiations could
fail. Gains by hardliners in the Belgrade power struggle, continued
insistence by the Bosnian government on trying to win back territory by
force, or refusal by Serb and Croat warlords in Bosnia (and Serb-controlled
Croatia) to toe the line, could bring the fragile edifice crashing down.
'The co-chairmen will give it their best shot,' says one insider. 'But if by
January there's no imminent prospect for a settlement, they're unlikely to
stick around.' Mr Ahtisaari's leave of absence from running Finland's
foreign service expires next February. Time, and the bitter Bosnian winter,
are pressing.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921026

