FT923-6347

FT  25 AUG 92 / Lep spells out its pattern of losses


   By JANE FULLER


LEP Group, the freight forwarding and security concern, incurred large
losses partly because of a pattern of providing funding for new ventures
disproportionate to its share of the equity.
The catalogue of losses was spelt out to shareholders yesterday at an
extraordinary general meeting called to approve a financial rescue. Among
the unfortunate ventures were commercial property development in California,
garment companies in the US, Hungary and Malta, and a Tanzanian gold mine.
Often the group had only a minority stake, but a disproportionate liability
to provide financial support. Other losses ran to the duty payable on vodka
and cigarettes for Soviet soldiers in the former East Germany and the loss
on the sale of the company's Lear Jet.
The details of how Lep slid into more than Pounds 500m of net debt and
Pounds 109m of negative shareholders' funds were delivered by Mr David
James, chairman.
The rescue proposals, which entail about 25 banks swapping Pounds 180m of
debt for 85 per cent of the restructured company, were approved.
Last year Lep incurred a loss of Pounds 235.1m after Pounds 219.4m of
exceptional and extraordinary charges. The biggest write-off was the entire
US property portfolio, previously valued at Pounds 93.4m.
Mr James again warned shareholders that failure to approve the restructuring
proposals would lead to the group being wound up.
Among those who would suffer would be the 10,448 employees, trade creditors
owed tens of millions of pounds and the company's pensioners. The pension
fund's purchases of assets from the company had included an office called
Coombe Hill House. Its downward valuation had exposed the fund to a
potential deficit of about Pounds 6m had the company been wound up. Its
continuance left a deficit of less than Pounds 1m, which would be restored
over the next three years.
ADT, the security group which built up a 27 per cent stake in Lep and has
written off Pounds 65m as a consequence, abstained in the vote. Mr David
Hammond, its deputy chairman, suggested the banks should 'take more pain' as
they had not written off any money.
Tough task, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920825

