FT921-14299

FT  16 JAN 92 / Progress in hunt for missing Maxwell money


   By BRONWEN MADDOX and IVO DAWNAY


THE pursuit of Pounds 1.3bn missing from the late Mr Robert Maxwell's public
companies, Mirror Group Newspapers and Maxwell Communication Corporation,
has homed in on six secretive Liechtenstein foundations and two Swiss
companies.
The six foundations or 'stiftungs' - Corry, Allandra, Baccano, Akim, Kiara,
and Jungo - have been targeted by accountants Arthur Andersen and
liquidators of the collapsed Maxwell empire searching for the money.
In other developments yesterday, members of parliament renewed their efforts
to discover where the Maxwell money went.
Concerns over the Mirror Group pension fund also deepened yesterday with the
revelation that pensioners of MCC could lose all their pension benefits.
There may be 'no liability under the pension fund's trust deed to make good
the deficit', according to a confidential report to MCC's bankers by Price
Waterhouse, the accountants.
Most of the money appears to have flowed out from MCC and MGN to the web of
400 private Maxwell companies - and then out again to Liechtenstein,
Switzerland, the US and Panama.
Arthur Andersen, who are administrators of the private Maxwell companies
under UK insolvency laws, now suspect that some of these foundations were
used to conceal the origin of funds.
The Swiss-based companies Yakosa Finanzierungs and Servex are thought likely
to have had a central role in the alleged scheme in which Mr Maxwell
illegally supported the share price of MCC, now the subject of an
investigation by the Serious Fraud Office.
Meanwhile, members of the House social security select committee decided to
send written questions on the Mirror Group pension fund to Mr Maxwell's sons
Kevin and Ian, after they refused on Monday to respond to oral questions.
Some time after they receive the written questions they will be asked to
return to the Commons to give their answers.
Acknowledging that the threat of possible legal proceedings against the
Maxwells provoked legitimate concerns over the citizen's right to stay
silent, Mr Frank Field, chairman of the select committee, said he believed
the decision addressed the problem of witnesses' fears of incriminating
themselves.
The committee was not prepared to make itself vulnerable to public criticism
for failing to probe the MGN pension fund at a time when it might soon be
unable to pay its beneficiaries, he added.
'We do not wish to put them in a position where they might incriminate
themselves,' Mr Field said. 'We also do not want to conduct our inquiries in
a way which lawyers for the Maxwells can claim they cannot get a fair
trial.'
MCC pension fund, Page 25

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920116

