FT921-1453

FT  24 MAR 92 / Canada may come to the rescue of Olympia & York


   By BERNARD SIMON, ROBERT PESTON and VANESSA HOULDER


   TORONTO, LONDON


THE CANADIAN government is considering measures to help Olympia & York, the
world's biggest property developer, overcome its financial difficulties.
A spokesman for Mr Donald Mazankowski, the Canadian finance minister, said
O&Y, developer of Canary Wharf, Europe's biggest new office development in
the London Docklands, is 'talking to us about certain possibilities' and
that agreement on a plan of action is likely by the end of the week.
Authorities in the UK and the US are understood to have been told that the
Canadian government is likely to help O&Y, which is controlled by Toronto's
Reichmann family, dispose of assets in Canada.
Under this plan, the Canadian government would act as a 'guarantor' in asset
sales by O&Y, according to a UK government official.
If banks or other buyers were not able to raise sufficient funds to buy
O&Y's properties, the Canadian government could provide a portion of the
required finance in the form of bridging loans to facilitate these deals.
It is believed that the Canadian government may help dispose of the Exchange
Tower, a Toronto office block being sold to banks for around Dollars 300m
(Pounds 173m).
The US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have been kept informed of
O&Y's discussions with the Canadian government. There is no suggestion that
the UK and US governments will participate in attempts to help the company.
O&Y admitted on Sunday night that it had been suffering from a 'liquidity
crisis', or shortage of cash. At the end of last week, it persuaded banks to
provide it with more than Pounds 100m in emergency short-term loans, to meet
requirements including the costs of continuing to build at Canary Wharf.
A senior Canadian official said the authorities had already played an
important role in encouraging banks to provide short-term loans designed to
keep O&Y trading while discussions took place on a more thorough
reorganisation of its debt, estimated at considerably more than CDollars
10bn in total. 'It's a question of giving people time to make intelligent
decisions,' he said.
The Canadian authorities were concerned that any 'precipitate' action by
O&Y's lenders had the potential to disrupt financial markets, he added.
O&Y is among Canada's biggest companies. It has around 70 banks led by
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce. Other Canadian banks with big loans to
it are Royal Bank of Canada, Bank of Montreal and Bank of Nova Scotia. Bank
shares fell yesterday on the Toronto stock exchange.
In the UK, Barclays and Lloyds each have loans to it of more than Pounds
50m, most of it lent for the construction of Canary Wharf.
Vanessa Houlder writes: O&Y's request for planning permission to build 3.2m
sq ft of offices at Heron Quays, next to Canary Wharf, came under fire at a
public meeting held by local authorities and community groups in Poplar last
night.
The meeting resolved to seek legal redress against the London Docklands
Development Corporation, the body responsible for the area's regeneration,
if it gave planning permission to O&Y during the run-up to the election.
Observer, Page 21 World stocks, Page 41

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920324

