FT922-3966

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (22): Time lords and video
managers - Environment New Media


   By PRABHU GUPTARA


'All of management is integrally connected with time management,' one of
Britain's few management gurus, Professor John Adair once said. It should
not be surprising therefore, that in an attempt to improve Time Management,
he has produced an integrated system on the subject.
The Filofax-type package, called The Keytime Management System, is at
present sold only in one (desk) size, but the manufacturers are considering
other sizes. It is one of the best of the many such systems available, and
the manufacturers assure me that they are attending to the only problem I
have spotted so far: one is likely to lose the highlighter, as it does not
fit its holder properly. It comes with an introduction to the system
designed by Professor Adair, and the company offers the system by itself or
in conjunction with Adair-designed and -approved seminars on time management
which it runs in-company.
* * *
By contrast, scenario-planning is fashionable, and Professor Bill Weinstein
of Henley has produced a video-related executive workbook, Managing the
Changing Environment. (Results Training). This enables executives to
understand and practise scenario-planning in relation to their companies, in
the global context as well as in a boom-bust economic climate.
* * *
There may be no such thing as a free lunch, and one certainly does not find
many free products which can be recommended, but Pharos is an 'expert'
computer programme produced by NatWest and designed to help you assess how
your business will be affected by the Single European Market, and what
strategic or operational actions your company should address.
The programme helps you build a profile of your company and analyse your
business from several key perspectives. It then highlights key issues,
explains their relevance, suggests courses of action, and advises on sources
of information. Best of all, Pharos enables you to keep up to date with
changing legislation by means of a twice yearly update: NatWest has
announced that the first of these will deal specifically with business
responses to UK and European environmental issues. Update3 cost Pounds 40 +
VAT for customers of NatWest, of Ernst & Young and for CBI members: all
other businesses must pay Pounds 125 + VAT.
* * *
Another company diagnostic tool in relation to the Single Market, though a
workbook rather than a computer program, is Euro-Train (Pounds 70 for single
copies, multiple copies cheaper). The second volume consists of a regional
listing of information sources. The focus is on helping you examine your
commercial, production, human resource and strategic profile and identify
actions you need to take. Both Euro-Train and Pharos have arrived in the
market late, but their appearance is still welcome.
* * *
The Prime Minister's Opportunity 2000 campaign is only a small part of an
almost global move to enable women to take their rightful place in society.
The Glass Ceiling Breakers, (Wilcox Bulmer) is a half-hour European
Commission video sponsored by Unilever showing how a variety of women, from
schoolgirls to top bankers, furniture removers to a dress designer, have
broken through the invisible barriers which have kept women from jobs
traditionally reserved for men.
* * *
To help with decision-making and team-work, Training Business Products has
produced a business game, Overboard. This is best played by a group of
between six and 18, though it could conceivably be played by larger numbers.
Simple in format, using cards and discussion groups, the game is
surprisingly effective in drawing out key problems in existing groups for
discussion and analysis. Gower's more complex but equally effective business
game on a similar theme, called Top Team, is ideally suited to middle
managers and can also be used to tackle problem-solving, communication and
time-management. This game is played by between 16 and 24 participants; both
games last an hour to an hour and a half.
* * *
Sold] is the BBC's video-based guide to consultative selling, a concept
which was originally pioneered by the Huthwaite Research Group but which has
now been developed by several others. Sales training is dominated by the
inspiring personality who produces hype, glitz and froth in varying degrees,
so there has not been much good material on the subject, and nothing good on
video until this BBC pack, which utilises the BBC's strengths in drama
production.
Up to date prices and other details of all these products are available from
Prism International on 0252-375223.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920609

