FT924-12236

FT  21 OCT 92 / The Coal Crisis: British Coal vows open mind on review


   By JOHN MASON


BRITISH COAL will conduct consultations over its closure programme with an
open mind, the corporation insisted in the High Court yesterday.
Lawyers for British Coal gave the assurance as a legal challenge to the
proposed closures by the National Union of Mineworkers and Nacods, the pit
deputies (supervisors) union, was adjourned until November after the
government's change of direction in agreeing to consultation.
Mr Charles Falconer QC, for British Coal, said: 'We will embark on these
consultations in good faith and with a genuinely open mind. We reject
entirely the suggestion that we have been guilty of any breach of integrity
in the past or will be in the future.'
However, no false hopes should be raised - British Coal's present view was
that there remained a very strong case for the closures.
Mr John Hendy QC, for the unions, said they had no confidence that the
consultations would be genuine or that the results would not be pre-judged
by British Coal's activity or inactivity in keeping the mines viable, he
said.
Mr Hendy failed to win an assurance from British Coal that miners at 10 pits
threatened with early closure would be kept in work pending the outcome of
the 90-day consultation period.
The mining of coal at six of the pits involved in unions' action would have
stopped by the end of this week, Mr Falconer said. While the men would
continue to be employed, many would have no work and would be sent home.
The judge, Mr Justice Vinelott, said the recent changes in the situation had
removed much of the urgency in the case and the court would be reluctant to
reject the assurances given by British Coal.
A three-day hearing for the challenge to the proposed closures is scheduled
for between November 14 and 28.
Mr Mark Stephens, the unions' solicitor, said later that although there was
no longer any need for an emergency injunction, the miners would press at
the November hearing for court orders reversing the closure decision on all
31 pits.
A similar court challenge being brought by the Union of Democratic
Mineworkers will go ahead on Thursday as planned.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921021

