FT922-4455

FT  05 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Italian call for CAP reform
delay refused


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


MR GUILIO Andreotti, Italy's caretaker prime minister, has received a dusty
reply to his request that ratification of last month's Common Agricultural
Policy reform be held up so that the Lisbon summit later this month can
discuss Italian milk quota demands.
Mr Andreotti wrote to Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission president,
and Mr Anibal Cavaco Silva, prime minister of Portugal, the current EC
president on May 30, asking for the legal implementation of the CAP reform
to be taken off the agenda at the next agriculture ministers meeting on June
15-16.
At a time when the EC has been plunged into crisis by Denmark's rejection of
the Maastricht treaty, the Italian premier's veiled threat to invoke
national interest - the so-called 'Luxembourg compromise', whereby the rest
of the 12 would desist from forcing unacceptable measures on one of their
partners - over illicit milk output has caused great anger.
Approval of the radical reform, which took 18 months of negotiation, was
held up two weeks ago because Italy wanted to validate retrospectively the
2.5m tonnes of milk it produces in addition to its allotted quota. Farm
ministers voted the reform through over Italy's objections.
Mr Delors yesterday replied to Mr Andreotti's rather curt letter by saying
'this factor has nothing to do with the Lisbon summit. . . I know there is a
problem for Italy but this has got to be resolved in another place'.
Aides to Mr Ray MacSharry, agriculture commissioner and political architect
of the CAP reform, said 'farmers have already waited too long for CAP
reform. They need certainty and they need to start sowing in August'. Mr
Cavaco Silva has yet to reply formally, but is understood to be hostile to
any delay, particularly as the CAP package is the only sizeable feather in
the cap of the Portuguese presidency, which runs to the end of June.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920605

