FT922-4145

FT  06 JUN 92 / BP division to close Scots HQ: Anger over government
assurances - 350 jobs to be lost - Labour seeks meeting with ministers


   By NEIL BUCKLEY and JAMES BUXTON


BRITISH Petroleum's exploration arm yesterday announced it was to close its
Glasgow headquarters with the loss of 350 jobs, prompting a row over alleged
breaches of guarantees given when BP took over the offices from Britoil, the
former state-controlled oil company.
About 300 workers will be transferred over the next year to Aberdeen, where
the majority of BP's 5,000 Scottish employees are based and which will
become an integrated headquarters for exploration and production across
Europe. A further 350 people will be made redundant.
Mr John Browne, the chief executive, said that the move was prompted by the
need to cut costs, and the shift towards smaller and less economic fields in
the North Sea.
BP Exploration is the largest operator in the UK sector of the North Sea
with an output of nearly half a million barrels of oil a day.
Mr Fergus MacLeod, industry analyst at County NatWest in Edinburgh, said the
action was expected, and was likely to save BP about Pounds 50m a year.
The St Vincent Street offices in Glasgow passed to BP when the company
acquired Britoil in a Pounds 2.5bn takeover in 1988. Sir Peter Walters, then
BP chairman, gave written assurances to Sir Peter Middleton, then permanent
secretary at the Treasury, including that Glasgow would become the business
headquarters of the combined BP/Britoil upstream business in the UK. The
assurances were repeated in the Commons by Mr Nigel Lawson, then chancellor.
Mr Donald Dewar, shadow Scottish secretary, said yesterday's announcement
was a 'flagrant breach' of those guarantees. 'The guarantees were worthless
and the deal sold on a false prospectus. This raises major issues of
political honour and the way this government deals with multinationals.' He
is to press for a meeting with ministers.
Mr George Galloway, Labour MP for Glasgow Hillhead, said BP were 'corporate
liars'.
The government initially retained a 'golden share' in Britoil, but redeemed
that in 1990. Ministers said at the time that they were happy BP had
fulfilled its pledges on Britoil.
BP said Abbey National Life had agreed to lease two of the Glasgow
building's six floors as a life assurance centre and was considering whether
to take further space.
Assets sale, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920606

