FT922-4101

FT  08 JUN 92 / Suharto party's majority set to slip


   By WILLIAM KEELING


   JAKARTA


INDONESIA goes to the polls tomorrow to elect a new parliament with the
ruling Golkar party, in power since its formation in 1971, certain to win
but probably with a reduced majority. Nevertheless the make-up of the
parliament will be an important indication of President Suharto's popularity
in the run-up to presidential elections next March.
In the last election in 1987 Golkar won 73 per cent of the vote and the
officials of the two opposition parties, the Indonesian Democratic Party
(PDI) and the United Development Party (PPP), admit they have no chance of
power.
The parliament has little effective control over the presidency. Since
President Suharto assumed power in 1965, the parliament has neither
initiated, nor blocked, a single piece of legislation.
The 400 members elected tomorrow will be joined by 100 members nominated by
the armed forces.
Nevertheless, the month-long election campaign has not been devoid of
incident. Last week the PDI, which won 11 per cent of the vote in 1987 and
which has its roots in the nationalist movement of former President Sukarno,
mobilised up to 3m supporters, out of a 100m electorate, at a rally in
Jakarta.
The rules of the campaign, however, have restricted hard political dialogue.
Parties are not allowed to campaign on religious issues, which has made life
difficult for the PPP, an amalgam of Islamic groups which took 16 per cent
of the vote in the last election.
Other banned topics include the dominant role of the small ethnic-Chinese
community in the economy, and anything which might question national unity.
Mr Witoelar argues that public debate of sensitive issues would invite
political instability, even a re-run of 1965 when up to 500,000 people were
killed in the aftermath of a failed communist coup.
One issue that has broken through has been alleged nepotism within
government, and criticism of the business interests of President Suharto's
children. Two of his sons run companies which enjoy monopoly rights over
buying and selling certain farm produce.
Golkar supporters are preparing themselves for a reduction in their
majority, perhaps to 68 per cent. A fall below that figure would embarrass
President Suharto in advance of the presidential elections in which he is
expected to stand for a sixth five-year term.
The question of who could succeed the 71-year-old president is itself
becoming a sensitive issue. President Suharto has in the past attracted
all-party support for his nomination, but the PDI has suggested it might put
forward an alternative candidate.
Although his re-election should still be guaranteed - the presidential
electoral college includes all members of parliament, plus another 500
members chosen by the president - much will depend upon the support of
senior army officers with which the president has not always agreed.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920608

