FT924-851

FT  22 DEC 92 / Flawed Kenya poll is set to resolve little: Michael Holman
and Julian Ozanne warn of grave consequences if election is not judged
'free'


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN and JULIAN OZANNE


THE carload of government supporters careered down Nyeri's main street,
loudspeaker blaring election slogans, occupants waving posters adorned with
a cockerel, symbol of Kenya's ruling party, Kanu.
It was a forlorn gesture of defiance. Nyeri, centre of a rich agricultural
region and home to the disgruntled Kikuyu tribe, will declare for the
opposition in elections next Tuesday, the first multi-party poll for 26
years.
But when overall results are declared, Kanu and its leader, President Daniel
arap Moi, may well have cause to crow.
The combination of an efficient party machine, a core of support based on an
alliance of ethnic minorities and what are politely termed election
'irregularities' make it possible now that Kanu will slide home with the
most seats in the 188-member parliament and Mr Moi may win the presidential
poll, largely by default.
A year ago this prospect would have been almost inconceivable. Since then
the opposition forces have fragmented and Kanu has been able to exploit this
division. But this alone might not have been enough to return Kanu to power
after the past decade of autocracy and corruption, and the ruling party has
taken no chances.
Election observers already concede privately that government manipulation
has seriously flawed the election process. They say the government and the
ruling party - a distinction without a difference - have influenced the
outcome in four main ways. Voters' rolls in at least 20 constituencies were
given a Kanu bias through the registering of party supporters bussed in from
elsewhere.
Opposition parliamentary candidates, some planted by Kanu, have been offered
bribes to stand down. At least 22 have withdrawn so far.
Opposition candidates were prevented from submitting nomination papers in 17
constituencies, leaving Kanu candidates unopposed.
State resources - ranging from government funds to vehicles and civil
servants, radio and television - have been deployed in Kanu's cause.
The consequences of failure to meet the criteria of 'free and fair' are
grave. Aid flows, suspended a year ago, will stay frozen, and the stability
of what would be an unrepresentative government will be fragile.
Without the government weighting the deck in its favour, political observers
say, the election would have been a closer-run affair. Disillusionment with
Kanu under Mr Moi among the three largest tribes - the Kikuyu, the Luo and
the Luhya - paved the way for a possible opposition victory.
Leading the challenge is the Democratic Party of Mr Mwai Kibaki, former
finance minister and vice president. Running second is Ford Kenya, under Mr
Oginga Odinga, the 85-year-old veteran politician; and in third place is
Ford Asili, headed by former minister and businessman Mr Ken Matiba.
At least three of Kenya's eight provinces have largely deserted Mr Moi and
Kanu - Central, Nyanza and Nairobi. The stronghold of opposition is in the
densely populated Central province, home of the large and wealthy Kikuyu
tribe, which forms about 21 per cent of Kenya's 25m population.
All-powerful under the late President Jomo Kenyatta, they today feel
alienated and marginalised by President Moi's 14-year rule. All 25
constituencies are likely to fall to opposition parties, mainly to the DP,
whose leadership is predominantly Kikuyu. The rest will be split between
Ford Kenya and Ford Asili - most going to the latter, thanks to Mr Matiba's
strong presence in his home district of Murang'a.
Most of the 29 seats in Nyanza province are expected to fall to Ford Kenya;
Kanu's best chances are in Kisii district, where Mr Simon Nyachae, the
influential former cabinet secretary, is leading the party's campaign.
Nyanza, a fertile sugar cotton and rice province bordering Lake Victoria, is
home to Mr Odinga's Luo tribe, 13 per cent of the population. They are
deeply embittered by the murder two years ago of their kinsman, Mr Robert
Ouko, the former foreign minister. There are suspicions of high-level
government involvement in his death.
In Nairobi, where Luos and Kikuyus make up a majority of the capital's
population, most if not all the eight seats are expected to fall to the
opposition.
Mr Moi and Kanu are strongest in the Rift Valley province, home to about 30
per cent of the electorate and with 44 seats at stake. The province is home
to Mr Moi's Kalenejin tribe (11 per cent) and other minority ethnic groups
such as the nomadic Turkana, Samburu, Maasai and Pokot, who will turn out
solidly for Kanu.
In Eastern Province the DP is a strong contender for the 32 seats at stake.
Kanu's best chances lie in the arid northern districts of Isiolo and
Marsabit, containing six seats.
In the 20 constituencies in Coastal province at least half the seats are
expected to fall to the opposition, mainly to Ford Kenya, benefiting from an
informal alliance with the banned Islamic Party of Kenya. The IPK represents
the disgruntled local Moslem population, who accuse the government of being
dominated by inland tribes.
Western Province's 20 seats are likely to be split between Kanu and the main
opposition parties. A key figure is Mr Martin Shikuku of Ford Asili,
expected to win support of his Luhya tribe (14 per cent.)
The wild and virtually sealed off North Eastern province, with 10 seats, is
a mystery. Its population, Somali in origin, are resentful about a
government ethnic screening exercise last year, but Kanu is the only party
with a presence.
Opposition parties have already warned about the prospect of serious unrest,
even civil war, if Kanu clings to power unfairly. In the slums of Nairobi,
Nakuru and Kisumu hundreds of thousands of urban poor with nothing to lose
are a powder keg waiting to be lit.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921222

