FT923-11003

FT  28 JUL 92 / Wellcome Trust raises Pounds 2.1bn through sale of 270m
shares


   By MAGGIE URRY


WELLCOME TRUST, the medical research charity, yesterday confirmed it had
raised Pounds 2.1bn net of expenses through its sale of 270m shares in
Wellcome, the pharmaceutical group, at a price of 800p.
Mr Roger Gibbs, chairman of the Trust, said he was 'very pleased' with the
result of the sale given poor stock market conditions since details of the
issue were announced in June. At that time the issue size was indicated at
330m shares, and the company's shares were trading above 900p.
Wellcome's share price fell yesterday from 826p to 800 1/2 p, as the stock
market weakened. The volume of shares traded was 14m, regarded as a low
level for the first day of trading in an issue of this size.
Mr Gibbs said that 'the Trust's total income for its next financial year
will now be some Pounds 220m, double that of the current year'. The Trust
announced a number of research initiatives yesterday.
Mr Gibbs said the Trust now had a Pounds 5bn portfolio, half invested in its
remaining 42 per cent Wellcome stake and the rest in higher-yielding
securities. It will build up a diversified equity portfolio.
Around 60 per cent of the shares sold were allocated to UK institutions.
Applicants through the UK public offer received 14.4m shares.
Another 70m shares were allocated to investors in the US. This makes it the
largest share sale in the US for a non-US company, barring privatisations.
It takes the proportion of Wellcome's shares held there to 10 per cent.
About 2 per cent of the group's shares will now be held by Japanese
investors.
Mr John Robb, chief executive of Wellcome, said the sale had gone some way
to achieving a broader international spread of shareholders for the company.
Mr Robb was particularly pleased that the take-up of shares had been strong
in the US and Japan, as well as Britain, as these were the two largest
pharmaceutical markets in the world.
Demand from other areas was weaker, with investors in Germany, France and
Canada taking only a few million shares in all. Some of the selling observed
yesterday was believed to have come from Germany.
Robert Fleming, the merchant bank running the global sale, is expected to
track down the identity of these sellers.
Mr Gibbs praised the Trust's advisers.
As well as Fleming, he picked out Warburg Securities and Cazenove in the UK,
Morgan Stanley in the US and Nikko Securities in Japan.
Wellcome sale a windfall for research Page 17
Observer Page 15
Lex Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920728

