FT922-3957

FT  09 JUN 92 / Russia says reform remains intact


   By JOHN LLOYD and REUTER


   MOSCOW, BAKU


THE Russian government yesterday claimed its reform strategy remained
intact, in spite of a week in which three senior ministers from the
industrial lobby entered the cabinet and an indefinite delay was put on
raising energy prices.
A new round of negotiations between the government and the IMF on an
economic programme starts in Moscow this week, with a deal still in the
balance. Agreement is required to give Russia access to Dollars 24bn (Pounds
13.1bn) of funds put up by the west and the IMF, and more importantly, to
allow the World Bank to lend to the republic.
Mr Anatoly Chubais, the minister in charge of privatisation, told an
economic conference yesterday that the pace of privatisation had quickened,
and that receipts now totalled Rbs5bn. This is, however, far short of the
rate necessary to fulfil a planned receipt of Rbs90bn this year.
The government passed a privatisation law through parliament on Friday
although deputies had refused to pass it a week before. Mr Boris Yeltsin,
the Russian president, has also said he will sign a decree to bring in a
bankruptcy law - which the deputies had also thrown out.
The bankruptcy law will have its casualties - as Mr Feodor Prokopov,
chairman of the Committee on Employment, said yesterday. The government
expects 4m unemployed by the year end, and is proposing unemployment benefit
of 75 per cent of the minimum wage.
Mr Chubais said that he still expected a struggle over the privatisation
programme, due to go back to parliament in a few days' time.
Mr Yegor Gaidar, now joint first deputy prime minister with Mr Vladimir
Shumeiko, the former deputy speaker of parliament, told Izvestia that
reforms hung on the solution of debts of Rbs1.7 trillion in the enterprise
sector and the lack of cash in the economy which has left millions of
workers unpaid. However, he said that he would not bail companies out with
more credit; and that the debt problem would be addressed by selling it off
at a discount.
Azerbaijan's nationalist Popular Front yesterday said its leader, Mr Abulfaz
Elchibey, was headed for victory in the presidential election that took
place on Sunday, Reuter reports from Baku.
A victory for Mr Elchibey, who is against participation in the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS), would distance Azerbaijan further from Moscow's
sphere of influence.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920609

