FT922-7232

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (12): Thun closure raises questions
 -Ian Rodger looks beneath the pall that lies over the Swiss banking
community


   By IAN RODGER


IT HAS, in many respects, been a great year for the Swiss banking industry,
with most of the leading universal and private banks scoring handsome profit
increases.
But the decision by Moody's, in January, to remove its triple-A rating from
the long-term bonds of Credit Suisse, and, earlier this month, to do
likewise to Swiss Bank Corporation, has cast a pall over the whole
community.
One of Moody's main arguments was that the liberalisation of Swiss financial
markets in recent years was putting the stability of the banks' earnings
into question.
Certainly, liberalisation has already had a significant impact on banks at
all levels, and there are indications of more shocks and radical changes to
come.
The biggest shock last year was the forced closure of a regional bank, Spar
und Leihkasse Thun, something no one ever expected to see in Switzerland.
While the Thun bank was very small, with assets of SFr1.1bn (Pounds 411m),
its failure revealed many problems in the Swiss banking system arising from
liberalisation.
It undermined the assumption that one of the big universal banks would
always be a rescuer of last resort in such cases. Second, it showed that
traditional supervision procedures were no longer adequate in an era when
even small banks were free to compete as aggressively as they liked in
various financial markets. And it highlighted the need for consolidation in
a sector where 185 banks had combined assets of only SFr86.1bn, roughly a
third of those held by Union Bank of Switzerland alone.
It also suggested that Swiss banks, long accustomed to easy money, were ill
prepared to cope with the tougher conditions imposed by the falling
international popularity of the Swiss franc.
These problems have manifested themselves in different ways on different
sectors. The big universal banks, for example, have seen their balances of
traditional, low-cost savings deposits decline as customers headed for
higher yielding money market instruments.
Together with the private banks and the bigger cantonal banks, they have
also suffered from squeezed margins on securities trading since the
elimination of fixed commissions at the beginning of last year.
The private banks have had to sharpen their investment management skills,
realising that their Swiss names, courtesy, location and currency were no
longer adequate to attract and hold deposits from the world's rich
individuals. Better service comes at a cost, and most banks have been
trimming staff. Last year, two famous old Geneva names, Darier and Hentsch,
felt the need to merge, and others are likely to follow.
As costs rise, private sector banks have pointed angry fingers at the
cantonal banks, whose public sector owners would rather endure low returns
than face angry voters. But cantonal and regional banks have been losing
market share steadily to the universal banks, especially in their core
business of mortgage lending, and are fighting for survival.
Mr Robert Studer, chief executive of UBS, startled a Zurich audience in
March by predicting that 100 of the country's 630 banks could disappear in
the next 10 years.
Two weeks ago, Mr Hans Dieter Vontobel, chief executive of Bank J Vontobel,
a leading Zurich-based investment bank, retorted sharply, saying that power
in Switzerland's financial markets was already too concentrated in the hands
of the big three.
Liberalisation should not be pursued so vigorously as to reduce still
further the degree of competition, Mr Vontobel argued. But he agreed that
rationalisation in the next few years would be substantial, possibly
eliminating 20,000 jobs.
Mr Studer thought that one of the big three might even decide to give up
retail banking in the foreseeable future, because profits were so thin in
this area.
All this, plus the uncertainty over Switzerland's future relations with the
European Community, would seem to provide more than enough reasons to
question the stability of Swiss banks in the next few years.
The big banks argue that they are almost certain to emerge stronger from the
process, and this is probably true. But they also admit there could be a
long period during which many dying institutions lunge desperately at
business, keeping margins very low for everyone.
Thus, it is just as well that they have finally got their international
business in order. While many of the world's banks are still licking their
wounds from their misadventures in global banking over the past few years,
the big three Swiss banks have sparkled.
Aided by their strong balance sheets, and no doubt also by the retreat of
troubled Japanese and US banks from the key international markets, the big
three have found profitable pickings in international lending, foreign
exchange dealings and fund management.
Credit Suisse said 30 per cent of its net income came from foreign
operations; but Bank Julius Baer, in a recent study, argues that the figure
would be more like 66 per cent if income from the group's Luxembourg based
mutual funds, which are managed from Zurich, were included. UBS said the
foreign contribution to its earnings last year tripled to 25 per cent.
SBC said that its association with the derivative specialists, The O'Conner
Partnerships in Chicago, in which it invested about SFr90m a little over a
year ago, yielded net income of SFr107m last year, but overall foreign
earnings were depressed by large provisions on bad debts.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920520

