FT922-4532

FT  05 JUN 92 / Technology: Fashion hits the factory floor - How colour
screens have brought manufacturing to life


   By ANDREW BAXTER


Recession-weary machine tool salesmen can be forgiven for wearing grey faces
but at least the sophisticated computer equipment that controls their
machines is beginning to blossom out in colour.
Long accustomed to working with black-and-white screens, users of computer
numerically control (CNC) machine tools are starting to resemble the
telly-watchers of the late 1970s.
In an industry where jargon comes by the bucketfull - and even CNC suppliers
have trouble keeping up with each other's impressively named new product
features - customers can at least ask suppliers one simple question: 'Is it
in colour?'
The answer is often yes, but the only problem is cost: colour costs hundreds
of pounds more than black-and-white. Even in a total machine tool package
costing a five-figure sum, the widespread use of colour has been hampered by
the extra cost - and during a recession the total package cost becomes
particularly critical.
It is a similar story with thin film transistor flat screen TV technology -
big savings in space compared with a traditional cathode ray tube screen,
but several times dearer.
Colour has been available for some years on CNC, and might seem like a
luxury on something so utilitarian. Compared with a Cadcam screen, after
all, a lot of the information on a CNC screen is by definition numerical.
The majority of CNCs sold by GE Fanuc Automation, the world's leading
producer, is still mono, says David Avrell, UK managing director. And that
will remain the case, he says, until the cost comes down.
The benefits of a palette of 256 colours, as is available on some CNC
equipment, look somewhat dubious in comparison with some of the far-reaching
technological developments in CNC over the past decade - the trend towards
open systems and a striking development in specialist software that allows
machine tool companies and users to customise their bought-in CNC equipment
and differentiate their machine tools from the competition.
But colour does have a role that goes a long way beyond aesthetics. As has
happened elsewhere in the electronics industry, and particularly in personal
computers, CNC suppliers have spent heavily to make their equipment easier
to use over the past decade, and colour can help the process.
Massimo Ziliani, head of US CNC producer Allen-Bradley's motion control
division, says: 'I see colour becoming something pretty natural on CNC
equipment.' Using different colour on a graphic of a complex part shape can
help the operator specify the right dimension for a particular profile.
As has been found in Cadcam, colours and shading make a 3D object more
readily understandable as a version of the real thing.
Even so, Ziliani admits it is hard to explain customers' desire for colour
in some factory automation applications. Allen-Bradley has been pushed by
users to develop a high-definition colour screen for a robot's operator
panel, which is used only for programming and is rarely visited when the
robot is working.
'I think the look or appearance of a nice screen with nice graphics is
something that is an image of high-tech,' he says. 'So there is a marketing
consideration here.'
If suppliers are asked to use colour screens in these applications, the
market in CNC on machine tools ought to have greater potential, especially
in small-batch production when the machine tool is being reprogrammed
frequently.
Flat-screen technology, meanwhile, lends itself to use in the machine tool
industry for a number of reasons. The quality of the display is one
attraction, says Avrell, and light tends to enhance the screen.
The saving of space could also be important in small machine tools, says
Ziliani, who otherwise remains a firm adherent of CRTs. 'I am still
convinced that a high-resolution CRT is cheaper and more readable, and hence
more effective,' he says.
Most CNC suppliers would agree with Terry Margetts, sales and marketing
manager at Cranfield Precision Systems (CPS), part of Powys-based Control
Techniques, that 'flat screen has got to come in, but when it's a sensible
price'.
CPS, which over the past three years has been developing a new mass market
system called Flexible Numerical Control, is sampling the flat screen market
regularly, says Margetts.
At present, he says, a 10-inch colour flat screen produced in volume would
cost Pounds 1,750 against Pounds 400 for a colour CRT. In black and white,
flat screens cost Pounds 300, against Pounds 125 for a CRT, so they are
becoming more viable commercially.
The CNC industry will, as usual, strive to give the machine tool builders
what they want and can afford. But CNC suppliers cannot do much about the
price of a flat screen. Reductions, Avrell believes, will depend on flat
screens penetrating markets outside machine tools, such as in buses and
aircraft where space is at a premium.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920605

