FT923-9546

FT  05 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: UK aluminium can recycling rate
increases to 16 per cent


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


ALUMINIUM CAN recycling rates in the UK increased sharply in the first
quarter of this year, from 11 per cent to about 16 per cent, according to
the Aluminium Can Recycling Association.
The industry expects the pace of improvement to continue because the last of
seven regional centres planned for the UK, where scrap merchants and other
collectors are able to exchange cans for cash, opened for business this
week.
The new infrastructure was needed to feed a Pounds 28m dedicated aluminium
can recycling facility at Warrington, in the north of England, established
last year by Alcan of Canada - the first of its kind in Europe.
In the whole of last year Warrington processed 2,180 tonnes of used cans
among other aluminium scrap collected by Alcan.
The dedicated, which started up in October and ultimately will be able to
process 50,000 tonnes of used cans, already has handled 2,259 tonnes of
recycled cans from the UK in the first half of this year. The rest of its
feedstock is imported, mainly from the US.
The UK's seven new regional 'aggregation centres' enable merchants to take
250 kg loads of used cans to collection points close by instead of having to
deliver to Warrington or to the Swansea collection centre operated by the
Aluminium Company of America (Alcoa). Merchants get the same 'factory gate'
price as paid at the Warrington facility and receive their cash seven to 10
days after delivery.
Acra suggests this should enable more of the UK's used aluminium cans to be
drawn into a 'closed loop' system where the special alloy used for
can-making is used over and over again for cans instead of being downgraded
and used in other products.
The European aluminium industry has set itself a target of recycling 50 per
cent of all aluminium cans by the mid-1990s. Acra says that in those areas
of the UK where extra promotional effort has been made - such as Warrington
and Swansea - recycling rates have been above 40 per cent.
Last year about 21 per cent of all aluminium cans consumed in Europe were
recycled, twice the percentage in 1987. Sweden, which has a mandatory
deposit scheme on cans, had the highest recycling rate, 85 per cent,
followed by Iceland, 75 per cent, and Switzerland, 50 per cent.
Remelt plants for used aluminium cans are operated by Granges in Sweden
(15,000 tonnes a year); VAW in Germany (20,000 tonnes); Elval in Greece; and
Alcan in Italy. Reynolds is bringing a 60,000 tonne-a-year unit into
production at Venafro, Italy, where one of the lines will process cans.
Pechiney is investing in two units, at Neuf-Brisach and at Nogueres with an
annual capacity of 15,000 tonnes each.
About 32,350 tonnes of aluminium cans were recycled in Europe last year (up
from 25,000 tonnes in 1990) and so the industry is putting plenty of
capacity in place for the expected recycling growth.
Efforts to promote that growth and to provide the necessary infrastructure
are being co-ordinated by Acre (Aluminium Can Recycling Europe) formed in
1984 by Alcan, Pechiney of France and VAW of Germany. Alcoa and Reynolds of
the US, joined in 1988, as Alusuisse-Lonza, Hydro Aluminium and Elval agreed
to provide support in their domestic markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920805

