FT921-14194

FT  17 JAN 92 / Football pools at risk, MPs warned


   By BETHAN HUTTON


FOOTBALL pools would not survive the introduction of a national lottery,
according to a letter circulated to MPs yesterday. A private member's bill
which would make a national lottery possible comes before parliament today.
In a letter to Littlewoods Pools, the largest UK pools operator, Mr Frank
McFadden, manager of the European office of Coopers & Lybrand, the
accountancy firm, said: 'The introduction of a UK national lottery would
effectively kill off the football pools within a period of weeks.' He based
his claim on the experience of Littlewoods Pools in Belgium which survived
only three weeks after a national lottery was introduced.
Mr McFadden wrote a report for the European Community last year on the
gambling and betting industry.
His letter said: 'The UK has the largest gambling and gaming market within
the European Community. There is a limited elasticity of demand for
additional gambling and gaming products in Britain.'
Mr Ivan Lawrence, Conservative MP for Burton and sponsor of today's bill,
described Mr McFadden's argument as 'manifest nonsense'. He added: 'It
totally misses the point that football is a passion in this country. The
Italian experience shows that where there is a strong footballing nation the
pools continue side by side with the lottery successfully.'
Mr Lawrence pointed to a Gallup poll in October which found that 92 per cent
of pools players would continue to play if a national lottery was
introduced, and that only 5 per cent would stop.
Mr McFadden's letter was circulated by the Advisory Forum on Gambling, a
lobby group funded by companies including pools operators and betting
offices. It also warned that loss of pools revenue because of a national
lottery would lead to many job losses, particularly in Liverpool.
Some charities have been actively supporting Mr Lawrence's bill. Others have
said that a national lottery would divert money away from other forms of
charitable giving.
Mr Frank Flannery, deputy chairman of UK Charity Lotteries, which last year
launched an instant lottery game to raise money for charities and the arts,
said having one national lottery would be unfair. He called for legislation
to create a 'level playing field' so organisations could run lotteries
nationally.
Observer, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920117

