FT924-965

FT  21 DEC 92 / Arts: Bruckner Eighth Symphony - Barbican Hall


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


It was a busy night at the Barbican. No sooner had the theatre audience for
the new Hamlet (see above) vacated the foyer than it was filled again by a
capacity crowd gathering to go into the concert hall for Georg Solti's 80th
birthday concert with the London Symphony Orchestra.
In fact, the evening marked a double anniversary. Although it had not been
heralded in advance with much of a fanfare, the single item on the programme
was a centennial performance of Bruckner's Eighth Symphony, first heard on
18 December 1892. Quite probably by chance, the event came as the
culmination of an unusually high number of performances recently of this
symphony: Andrew Davis precise and ordered, Franz Welser-Most at Edinburgh
noisily impassioned, above all Gunter Wand creating a marvel of deeply-felt
symphonic radiance at the Proms.
Like Wand, Solti has a lifetime's experience on which to draw. But his life
in music has followed a very different path, leading him along cosmopolitan
routes largely away from Austro-German territory, through the opera-houses
of the world, taking in music from most national traditions, all of which
has left a mark on the way he conducts in his years of seniority.
He also set out from a different starting-point. The fiery young Hungarian
has never entirely been exstinguished. This performance of the Bruckner was
not hard-driven in the way that so often brought Solti criticism earlier in
his career, but it was strongly, even momentously dramatised. Those grand
climaxes which in Wand's performance had risen as glowing affirmations of
what had gone before here became combative and triumphal: a battle had been
fought and won.
Still in fine form after its recent Sibelius cycle, the LSO supported Solti
with well-judged playing, which ensured that louder passages did not blare
or get congested, even in this hall, which might be thought inimical to
Bruckner. In the end the very determination to conquer the symphony's
majestic heights made the evening rise to the occasion.
Sponsored by Philips Electronics UK Ltd.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921221

