FT924-6491

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (1): Long road to political reform -
President Salinas wants a place in history for setting Mexico on the way to
long-term growth. But the country is not yet a democracy, nor an industrial
powerhouse


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


ACCORDING to Mexican tradition, the power of a Mexican president begins to
ebb in the fifth year of his six-year term. Often his popularity begins to
weaken. In some cases the president makes a last-ditch desperate bid for
popularity or for a place in history.
President Carlos Salinas, who underlined this month his government's
commitment to fiscal austerity for the coming year, does not come across as
someone likely to buy popularity for himself at the longer-term expense of
the country. But he wants his place in history as the man whose bold reform
programme set Mexico on the road to long-term growth. Building on the
changes set in train by his predecessor, President Miguel de la Madrid, the
Salinas economic reforms have changed Mexico from an inward-looking economy
dominated by government subsidy to an open, more market-responsive one.
The reforms are widely viewed as a model for others. Economic policy has
been been consistent, well-designed and well-executed. It has confronted
difficult issues such as the reform of agriculture. Though highly
conservative fiscally, the government says its policy has allowed it to
increase social expenditures significantly.
Yet inevitably, because such things take time, the economy is still
adjusting to the reform process, while the country's political system has
yet to accommodate its implications. The glue that held the old
corporativist system together has been irretrievably loosened, but there is
no clear vision yet of what will replace it. Mexico is not yet a democracy;
neither is it a manufacturing powerhouse. Mexico may become both of these
things, but the passage between where the country stands today and these two
desirable objectives may be less than smooth.
This possibility has been brought home to the government over the last year
on both the political and economic fronts.
Mr Salinas has long given the impression that his vision of the way forward
for Mexico's economy is clearer than his idea for the country's political
future. But protests, led by the left of centre Party of Democratic
Revolution, following elections for a handful of state governorships this
year, have pushed political reform to the front of his agenda.
The p r o t e s t s forced the resignations of governors from the ruling I n
s t i t u t i o n a l Revolutionary Party (PRI) after what is widely held to
have been presidential intervention. From the government's point of view,
the protests and resignations have had several undesirable consequences:
they have weakened the credibility of the political system, weakened the PRI
internally and increased dissatisfaction with Mr Salinas within the party,
and they have provided the PRD with a way of gaining political influence
without winning votes.
The government had already, in its earlier reforms, improved the electoral
processes. The further reform that it plans to pass into law in the second
quarter of next year will attempt to reduce the electoral bias in favour of
the PRI that arises partly out of its ability heavily to outspend its
opponents.
The opposition will agree to this, but Mr Salinas may be worried about again
alienating the PRI. He says he wants further reform of the ruling party, but
clearly he also wants to avoid so weakening it that there is a risk it might
lose the 1994 presidential election.
'The PRI is in very bad shape and the problem is not just cosmetic. The
political system is not working for anybody any more,' says Mr Rolando
Cordera, a political analyst.
According to Mr Salinas, the process of reforming the PRI 'hasn't finished
and will have to go further'. The party needed to produce political
proposals and an ideology, so that people would know what it stood for.
Internal restructuring of a 50-year-old organisation was necessary, the way
the party financed itself had to be transformed; and there needed to be
advances in the way candidates were chosen.
However, in spite of the party's internal strife, Mr Cordera believes the
PRI candidate will win the 1994 election. 'The PRI is not ready or willing
to lose the next presidential election and I think they are not going to
lose it unless they face a very profound internal crisis,' he argues. Mr
Luis Alvarez, president of the National Action Party (PAN) agrees, if for
different reasons: 'If the process were truly democratic, we'd be able to
win in 1994. But I think in 2000, it's a practical possibility.'
On the economic front, a sharp rise in the current account deficit, caused
in part by strong pent-up demand for imports after a decade of austerity,
has provided a cause for government concern. It has raised questions about
the capacity of the economy to sustain significant per capita growth without
sucking in unsustainable levels of imports. This year, to ensure a continued
flow of finance into the country, the government was forced to push up
interest rates, thereby slowing growth.
To many economists, the size of the deficit - equivalent to 6 per cent of
GDP this year - strongly emphasised the need for further structural reform
in the Mexican economy. While the government has continued to emphasise
fiscal stringency - it is predicting another government surplus next year -
this has not been sufficient by itself to make the economy competitive.
'The government has done well in public finances, and a good job, by and
large, on privatisation, but on deregulating the economy there are a
tremendous number of things still to be done,' says Mr Jonathan Heath, chief
economist at Macro Asesoria Economica, an economic consultancy.
This point is conceded by some government officials, although some of what
needs to be done will have to await another administration. Officials say
the government is working on proposals to give independence to the central
bank and is expected to introduce a significant streamlining of the 1973
foreign investment law, which will open new sectors of the economy to
foreign ownership, apart from a small number of industries deemed strategic.
Poor Mexican infrastructure - transportation and ports - severely weakens
the economy's competitiveness and will have to be addressed. Restrictive
practices in the ports - the average wage of a docker is Dollars 1,100 a
month - mean that the most important port for Mexican trade is now Houston,
Texas.
Reform of the bureaucracy is also seen as necessary, as are sweeping changes
to the legal and judicial system, where procedures are unduly lengthy and
bribery of judges common. Not only is this necessary to prevent the
widespread abuse of individual rights, but it is also an essential condition
for a functioning market economy with enforceable contracts and property
rights.
Some finance officials see the need for a reform of the labour laws, which
make it impossible to cut nominal wages except in business emergencies. 'We
have inflation inertia in Mexico. Wage settlements have been too high for
inflation to fall faster,' says one.
All this is needed to provide the backdrop to improve Mexican productivity,
itself the key to economic growth and the alleviation of the extreme poverty
which grips a fifth of the population. While Solidarity, the Salinas
anti-poverty programme, continues to increase in size and importance, growth
will have to be relied on to raise the general standard of living.
Some foreign and local businessmen report positive experiences with respect
to the productivity of their own workforces, but these indicators need to
become more common. The agricultural and educational reforms of the
administration should be steps, over the longer term, towards achieving
these objectives.
Another critical element in increasing investment and improving productivity
is the North American Free Trade Agreement with the US and Canada.
Negotiations on this critical element of the Salinas economic plan now await
ratification by legislatures in the three countries.
However, the way forward has been clouded somewhat by the defeat of
President George Bush, who has been a strong supporter of Mr Salinas, in the
US presidential election this month. President-elect Clinton has praised Mr
Salinas and said he supports Nafta in principle but he wants further
safeguards with respect to the environment and jobs. Until it is known
exactly what Mr Clinton means by this, and until the agreement is ratified
by the US Congress, nervousness among Mexican policy-makers will run high.
The coming year, then, is to be a crucial one for the Salinas
administration. Three important issues - political reform, the economy and
Nafta - will influence heavily the long-term importance of his place in
history. They will also largely determine the choice that the president is
expected to make in the next year or so about the man he wants to lead
Mexico to the next century.

The Financial Times


London Page I

921120

