FT922-4519

FT  05 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Euro-deals


WHEN IS a Euro-merger not a Euro-merger? The question was central to the
recent argument over whether the rival bids for Midland Bank by Lloyds and
the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) should be examined by
competition authorities in Brussels or London. Now the issue has arisen
again over the vetting of the planned Dollars 2.5bn takeover by Nestle, the
Swiss food group, of Perrier, the French mineral water company.
In the Midland case, matters were resolved after EC merger authorities
decided to limit their scrutiny to the HSBC offer - which they swiftly
cleared - leaving the UK Monopolies and Mergers Commission with sole
jurisdiction over the Lloyds bid, which is still being investigated. In the
event, that was a sensible compromise because an HSBC-Midland merger might
have had competition implications at the EC level, while Lloyds' offer bore
exclusively on the UK market.
The issues in the Nestle-Perrier case are different. The European Commission
has launched a full investigation into the deal on the grounds that it could
damage competition in just one national market, France, where Brussels
estimates the merged company would account for more than half all mineral
water sales. That approach is strongly contested by Nestle, which argues
that the relevant market against which the merger should be judged is the EC
as a whole.
As a general principle, it would be greatly preferable for the EC to leave
national authorities to examine large mergers which potentially affect
competition in only one country. However, the French government has chosen -
at least partly for domestic political reasons - not to refer the Perrier
deal to its national competition commission. As a result, Brussels is the
only authority available to handle a deal which clearly demands anti-trust
scrutiny. The case for an EC investigation is strengthened by the risk that
the merged company could use monopoly profits earned on the French market to
distort competition elsewhere in the Community.
However, while the particular circumstances of this case justify Brussels'
involvement, it is a second-best solution. Effective merger control requires
firm and consistent regulation by independent authorities at both the EC and
the national level, with clearly defined jurisdictions and common criteria
for judging deals. Trying to muddle through with a patchwork system which
avoids jurisdictional conflict only by accident will simply create
increasing legal anomalies, political friction and business uncertainty.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920605

