FT924-8017

FT  13 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Overloaded Bank


WITHIN THE Group of Seven industrialised countries, the Bank of England is
sui generis. Perhaps surprisingly, in the light of its historical role in
the development of central banking practice, it enjoys less formal power and
influence in the conduct of monetary policy than most of its peers. Yet its
activities over the past decade have extended way beyond monetary policy and
banking supervision to such diversions as coaxing the Stock Exchange into
the modern world and helping rescue industrial companies from oblivion.
Against the background of Britain's ignominious departure from the ERM and
the Bingham report's criticisms on BCCI, the Bank's unusual combination of
interests looks striking. Could Britain's postwar failures of monetary
policy and banking supervision owe something to a conflict between these
diverse roles?
The range of the Bank of England's activities lay outside Bingham's scope,
which no doubt explains why there is no more than a passing reference to
such conflicts in the report. Yet it is hard to believe that the culture of
the institution could be unaffected by its top executives' preoccupation
with the competitiveness of the City of London. Much of London's competitive
edge in the European time zone derives from the Bank of England's open-door
policy to foreign banks and, in earlier decades, its light regulatory touch.
Yet BCCI cried out for just the opposite treatment. To expect central
bankers to wear kid-gloves in one department, while turning abruptly
adversarial in another, looks an admirable recipe for supervisory failure.
The question of whether monetary policy and banking supervision should be
combined in the same institution is more difficult. Some central bankers
argue that if they are required to act as lenders of last resort, they must
be allowed to play a part in supervising the banks. Others claim that the
lender of last resort function is incompatible with their anti-inflationary
mandate. The noteworthy point is that the US Federal Reserve and the
Bundesbank, which are not directly responsible for supervision, have much
better records on inflation than central banks with a wider remit. All of
which underlines the case for a far deeper review of the roles of the
Treasury and the Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921113

