FT923-6621

FT  22 AUG 92 / Travel: Life and death in an ocean of emptiness - With the
lions of Ngorongoro, in Tanzania


   By MICHAEL J. WOODS


ON tip-toe, and with a smiling frown on her broad fawn face, the lioness
danced playfully away from the white-tailed mongoose. This valiant animal,
little bigger than a cat and with a white plume of a tail, repeatedly leaped
at the lioness's chin, snickering with anger as he did so.
The lioness stepped aside. As the mongoose made to run off, his tail like a
beacon in the flat grey light of morning, she flicked out a dinner-plate paw
and swept his feet from under him. The mongoose lay winded for a moment.
As he got up, a second lioness came to tease him further. Like domestic cats
with a shrew, they had no intention of eating their captive, merely of
having a good time.
But this was a terminal mongoose. His chattering so excited one lioness that
she playfully picked him up and tossed him a few feet through the air. He
was dead before he hit the ground.
These were just three of the 100 or so lions which are packed into the
Ngorongoro Crater in Tanzania, for they live there at the very high density
of about one to the square mile. As a result, they are remarkably easy to
see but, like lions everywhere, they spend most of their time doing very
little.
To watch interesting lion activity you have to be out early or stay late,
which was possible when I was there (late March), when camping on the crater
floor was officially forbidden. That white-tailed mongoose met his end at
6.30am only 500 yards from our camp just a few days before the ban was
announced. From now on, you will have to rise very much earlier in order to
tackle the tortuous and hour-long descent to the crater floor to be in time
to catch some of this action.
By way of compensation, the Tanzanian government has allowed the
construction of a fourth lodge on the crater rim and a fifth is to follow,
offering between 200 and 400 more bed spaces. To avoid saturation of the
crater floor, access will be rationed by permit with the intention of
encouraging more people to explore the rest of the 3,200-square-mile
Ngorongoro conservation area which lies between the crater and Serengeti
national park.
It is an ocean of short grass plains, apparently endless, gently rolling - a
daunting space. Occasionally there is an island, a rounded granite hillock
exfoliating like an old, tired onion with a growth of whistling thorns and
characteristic umbrella acacias to give shade. These are havens for
predators which occasionally sally forth like pirates to make a raid on
passing prey.
In contrast to the crater, which has permanent water and a mosaic of
habitats and thus contains remarkable concentrations of mammals and birds,
the conservation area appears to be empty. But this is a trick of the
landscape, for its vastness, stretching in every direction, is deceptive,
giving the illusion of a much reduced quantity of game.
In fact, these plains were full of life during my visit, which took place
when the rains were imminent. The herbivores had given birth and the place
was bouncing with wildebeest calves, young Thompson's gazelles, zebra colts
and a host of other species.
Then strings of wildebeest set off to follow the rain. Files of animals
perhaps two or three miles in length came over the far horizon as a tiny
cloud of dust and after 20 minutes or so were barely distinguishable with
binoculars. At that distance they looked almost like North American plains
bison in a western.
Shortly, though, they were passing close at hand, walking, trotting,
cantering, walking again - cow, calf, cow, calf, making that strange
bleating sound and carving yet another groove across the plain. Crossing
these paths is like driving over the lines in a railway marshalling yard.
Gibbs Farm Safaris is run by Nigel Perks, a tall, broad Kiwi fed a love for
Africa on a childhood diet of David Attenborough's Zoo Quest programmes.
From our camp moored against a large rock (you have to link your camp to
something out there - simply to plonk a tent down on the open plain would be
terrifying), we set out every day without coming across another vehicle.
Nigel had an uncanny knack of foretelling what we would see and, with an
excellent eye for wildlife, ensured that the list included both serval and
African wild cat.
On the last day we were to have the privilege of joining a group visiting
Olduvai gorge, which also lies within the richly-endowed conservation area,
in the company of Mary Leakey. Looking round a kopje on the way we found a
dozing cheetah. With time to spare we sat and watched.
The cat lay warming on the rocks and gradually came to life. Cheetahs hunt
by sight, generally in the mornings, so we waited a little longer. Soon it
bounded nonchalantly from the rocks and strode casually on to the grass.
Here it stood for a while and then sat like a large china spotted cat. In
the distance were a group of gambolling, grazing Thompson's gazelles, too
far to stalk.
The cheetah flopped on the grass and stared glassily towards the horizon. A
faint hint of grey dust suggested approaching wildebeest.
The tension in the Land Rover was palpable. Wildebeest after wildebeest went
by. Perhaps we had mistaken the cheetah's intentions. But suddenly it was
flying; there was dust, panic, confusion, running hooves, a walking cheetah
 -it had missed.
Like cars on a packed motorway, wildebeest on the move speed up, slow down,
run, walk, trot, stop, canter, all for no apparent reason. The ones towards
the back had no idea why those further up were making haste and no inkling
that the cheetah was back in doormat mode.
This time there were no mistakes. We saw a spotted buff explosion, a pall of
dust and the waving chestnut legs of a wildebeest calf as the life was
suffocated out of it. We never did get to Olduvai.
Michael Woods' safari to the Ngorongoro conservation area in Tanzania with
Gibb's Farm Safaris was arranged by Art Of Travel of 268 Lavender Hill,
London SW11 1LJ, tel: 071-738-2038. Gibb's Farm Safaris is based at Gibb's
Farm, a lodge between Lake Manyara national park and the crater which is
linked to Ndutu, a second lodge on the edge of the short grass plains.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920822

