FT922-584

FT  26 JUN 92 / Employers win appeal on union derecognition


   By RAYMOND HUGHES, Law Courts Correspondent


EMPLOYERS wishing to replace collective bargaining with personal contracts
will be encouraged by a ruling yesterday from the Employment Appeal
Tribunal.
By a two-to-one majority the appeal tribunal upheld an appeal by Associated
Newspapers, publishers of the Daily Mail, against an industrial tribunal's
decision that when it derecognised the National Union of Journalists it
penalised one of its journalists for union membership.
The dissenting voice was that of Mr Albert Blyghton, legal secretary of the
TGWU general union, one of the court's two lay members.
The NUJ said later that it would appeal against the ruling - if necessary to
the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.
Mr David Wilson, the father (chairman) of the Daily Mail NUJ chapel (office
branch), had complained that Associated Newspapers had breached a section of
the 1978 Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act. He said he had been
denied a 4 1/2 per cent salary increase because he refused to sign an
individual contract.
The section concerned provides that 'every employee shall have the right not
to have action (short of dismissal) taken against him as an individual by
his employee for the purpose of . . . preventing or deterring him from being
or seeking to become a member of an independent trade union, or penalising
him for so doing'.
Mr Justice Wood said the issue was whether, after derecognition of a union,
an employee could succeed in a personal claim under the section.
In 1990, Associated Newspapers derecognised the NUJ for collective
bargaining, although staff remained free to be union members. Finally, all
but 15 of the 173 NUJ members at the Daily Mail signed individual contracts.
The industrial tribunal had found that in changing journalists' employment
terms and conditions and not paying the 4 1/2 per cent to those who did not
sign new contracts, Associated Newspapers had taken action against Mr Wilson
as an individual.
Mr Justice Wood said that derecognition had been aimed at all union members
equally and not against any individual and was therefore not covered by
section 23.
Mr Wilson could choose whether to accept the new contract terms. His union
membership was unaffected and he was not penalised for being a member.
The judge said Mr Blyghton's view was that Mr Wilson should be protected in
the same way as in the past non-union members had been protected against
discrimination in comparison with union members.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920626

