FT924-8338

FT  11 NOV 92 / International Bonds: Hungarian central bank launches DM600m
Eurobond


   By BRIAN BOLLEN and NICHOLAS DENTON


   LONDON, BUDAPEST


D-MARK issues dominated the international bonds market yesterday. Bankers
say that the consolidation of the past two weeks or so has come to an end
and the sector is rallying.
National Bank of Hungary started its 1993 borrowing programme early with a
DM600m seven-year Eurobond launched yesterday on the German market. The
bonds carry a coupon of 10 per cent and were priced at 102.00 to yield 9.59
per cent at issue or 250 basis points over German bunds.
Bayerische Landesbank, the German bank which led the issue, said that the
market was receptive if not bullish and trading was within fees at 99.70 to
99.80. Bankers described the terms as being in line with those on Hungary's
DM600m in January this year, adding that the issue looks like a slow mover.
They feel it looks slightly large in current market conditions, the pricing
a bit tight and the maturity possibly slightly too long. On the plus side,
they also noted that it is the first D-Mark issue for payment next year and
that this should give the underwriters enough time to clear their books.
NBH, the Hungarian central bank, said that it and the underwriters timed the
issue to exploit an opportunity at the long-maturity end of the German bond
market. Rates have fallen sharply but analysts do not expect the trend to
continue.
The latest issue, for which payment is due in January, is part of an NBH
programme to borrow Dollars 1bn in 1993 through at least four bond issues to
maintain Hungary's position on international markets and increase central
bank reserves.
NBH expects maturing debt of Dollars 2bn in 1993 to be offset - assuming a
balanced current account - by direct capital inflow of at least Dollars 1bn
and official borrowing of about Dollars 800m. The central bank plans to
increase foreign currency reserves from the present level of Dollars 5bn to
about Dollars 6bn. Nevertheless the view is gaining ground within the
government that reserves are adequate and pressure is strengthening for NBH
to ease its expensive borrowing programme.
Hungary is also set to meet a growing part of its external financing
requirements through domestic issues since NBH recently said domestic
underwriters could apply to sell forint bonds to foreigners. Hungary's
declining reliance on international capital markets has come as its access
has improved. NBH recently issued its first Yankee bond, a Dollars 200m
10-year exercise.
Meanwhile, Basle-based rolling stock supplier Eurofima's DM350m eight-year
bonds will find their way to the regular investors, say bankers, adding that
the associated currency warrants enabling buyers to take a position on the
dollar against the D-Mark look expensive. Eurofima's FFr500m block trade
re-opens an existing FFr1.5bn bond due 1999.
Strong investor demand is still being reported for sovereign, supranational
and elite corporate borrowers in sterling. But Guinness was criticised for
the way it tried to take advantage of the firm tone by launching a Pounds
150m five-year Eurobond. It was widely described as tightly priced at 42
basis points over comparable gilts. The borrower is, however, a well
accepted and regular name and a new issue which does not suffer from coupon
drag can risk being more aggressively priced.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921111

