FT924-6212

FT  23 NOV 92 / Broadcasters baffled by the sounds of silence: The effect of
management secrecy on the BBC's morale


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE government green paper on the future of the BBC, expected later this
week, comes as most staff have more pressing things to worry about than the
grand strategic questions of the financing of the corporation and the role
of public-service broadcasting in an age of multi-channel television.
Mr Tony Lennon, joint president of Bectu, the broadcasting union, which has
suffered a steady stream of job losses at the BBC, expresses a widely held
view succinctly: 'Our great apprehension is not about what the government is
going to do to the BBC but over what the BBC is manifestly doing to itself.'
For 45 dressers at BBC Television - people who adjust, look after and
launder costumes - the debate with the government is academic. They were
told last week that their function was being contracted out and they were
losing their jobs next month.
There is greater uncertainty and insecurity about Producer Choice, the new
BBC policy of giving producers the right to buy-in services, than about the
activities of Mr Peter Brooke, the national heritage secretary.
Using a cricketing mataphor, Mr Brooke has described the BBC debate as more
of a five-day test than a one-day match. He will be looking for greater
efficiency from the BBC, but there is little chance of a frontal assault on
the corporation of the sort that might have happened had Mrs Thatcher still
been in power.
The effect of Producer Choice on morale, with the loss of jobs as internal
resources are slimmed down to correspond with the anticipated fall in
demand, has been made much worse by several other factors.
One is that the top management has been saying nothing in public, or even
much to its own staff, about the strategy, in spite of months of committee
meetings. The reason is that a deal was done with Mr David Mellor, the
former heritage secretary, that the BBC should stay silent until after the
green paper was published.
It was clear at the time that Mr Mellor planned to exclude some of the more
baroque ideas - such as proposals for an arts council of the airwaves to
which any broadcaster could apply for public funds. Mr Mellor's resignation
has not only caused delay, but it is believed that the arts council idea has
crept in again. Meanwhile the top brass of the BBC says little.
Asense of drift and inertia has been heightened by the 'two
director-generals problem'. When Mr John Birt takes over from Sir Michael
Checkland after Christmas it will be after 18 months as director-general
designate. During that period he has felt the need to behave like a Trappist
monk. Nobody knew what Mr Birt was thinking, while everyone knew Sir Michael
was on the way out.
A third level of uncertainty has been caused by one of the few things the
BBC has been saying - that its future lies in producing distinctive
programmes that the market finds it difficult to provide. Some fear that is
a strategy of planned retreat, and what is really needed is a fight for
audience share across every genre of programming.
The intensity of fear and uncertainty increases as you go down the
hierarchy.
A department head believes that the BBC is adopting 'absolutely the correct
strategy' and that a greater understanding of the logic of Producer Choice
is becoming more common among senior producers. The executive believes a
deal has been done with the government: real pain for a continuation of the
licence fee.
One producer describes the mood as caution rather than threat. The producer
is being bombarded with glossy brochures soliciting work, not from outside
companies but from internal departments eager to retain their work.
The producer said: 'There has been too little consultation (on Producer
Choice) too late', fearing that the most important resource at the BBC, its
technical craft tradition, will be eroded. There are concerns about
'contract culture' - being employed on a series of short-term contracts
rather than having staff rights. 'I think there is a crisis of morale. All
these changes are taking place and no real sense of where we're going.'
The view looks much bleaker to a videotape editor: 'Things are really bad.
There is no sense of job security at all. We're just keeping going as long
as we can.'
He fears there is a long-term, hidden agenda to withdraw from internal
production and become increasingly a commissioner rather than a maker of
programmes. He said editing capacity was being artificially reduced to force
producers to go outside. 'BBC management . . . It's a joke.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921123

