FT924-7986

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement: Mixed response from markets


   By OUR MARKETS STAFF


REACTION in financial markets last night was divided over the Autumn
Statement, with some dealers claiming it contained several ingenious
measures and others fearing it would not do enough to stimulate economic
growth.
The announcement of a 1 percentage point cut in base rates, from today, had
been accurately priced into foreign exchange dealing earlier in the week,
and the pound barely moved against either the D-Mark or the US dollar in its
wake.
Traders in UK stocks showed some pleasure with the cut in base rates and
share prices rose before and after the chancellor spoke to the Commons.
Several stock market analysts warned the statement may not be enough to push
the stock market significantly further.
Gilt prices were depressed because of the chancellor's forecast that the
public sector borrowing requirement would rise to Pounds 44bn in 1993-94.
According to analysts at S. G. Warburg Securities, this implies that gilts
will have to be issued next year at a rate of Pounds 1bn a week, a prospect
they described as 'daunting'.
The currency markets' immediate reaction was muted. Sterling stood at
DM2.4105 at the start of Mr Lamont's speech, rose to DM2.4150 and later
closed at DM2.4200, more than a quarter of a pfennig up on the day. Against
the dollar, the pound closed weaker on the day at Dollars 1.5240.
The FT-SE 100 Index of leading shares closed at 2,726.4, showing a net gain
of 29.6. The projected figures for the PSBR caused a drop in gilt prices,
which ended the day as much as a quarter of a percentage point lower at the
long end.
Mr Nigel Richardson, a UK economist at S. G. Warburg Securities in London,
said the overall nature of the package was encouraging and it was even
'ingenious in places'. He said the proposals to stimulate the housing market
and abolish the car tax would help boost consumer confidence.
Mr Ian Beauchamp, chief economist at Hambros Bank in London, said the
chancellor's proposals were simply 'tinkering at the edges rather than
getting to the heart of the problem of stimulating economic growth'.
Institutional/Gilts reaction, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921113

