FT921-14174

FT  17 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Labour wobbles on tax


LABOUR'S plans to eliminate the anomalies created by the interaction of
national insurance contributions with income tax are commendable. An
employee on Pounds 20,000 a year faces a marginal tax rate of 34 per cent
(income tax plus NI contributions); when earnings rise above Pounds 20,280,
the ceiling for employees' NI contributions, the marginal rate drops to 25
per cent. This is anomalous, and reform long overdue.
But eliminating the NI ceiling would impose losses on taxpayers which would
be politically difficult to digest at one sitting. For an employee on Pounds
25,000 a year, the cost would be Pounds 425; at Pounds 30,000 a year, the
cost would be Pounds 875. And even at much higher incomes, the loss created
by lifting the NI ceiling would be greater than that imposed by Labour's
plans for income tax.
About 3.5m voters would face tax increases of poll tax dimensions (the
additional higher rate band, by contrast, would probably threaten fewer than
1m). Anyone on more than the average full-time male non-manual earnings - 14
per cent of taxpayers - would pay more. The effect would be even greater in
the south-east: a draft IFS report suggests that a third of households would
pay more NI contributions.
Political implications
The political implications of such a tax increase are clear. And the
Conservatives have launched a ferocious - if somewhat mendacious - assault
on Labour's plans to ensure that anyone who aspires to modest income should
feel threatened. When an opinion poll published on Wednesday put the
Conservatives ahead of Labour, the Conservative chairman, Mr Chris Patten,
was quick to claim success for his tax campaign.
Within 24 hours, senior Labour figures had let it be known that the NI
reform could be phased in over years. Indeed, phasing-in had always been
intended: scrutiny of policy documents revealed that increases would be
introduced gradually to avoid disrupting family budgets.
Strange silence
Maybe, but it is strange that neither Mr Kinnock, Mr Smith nor Mrs Beckett
has mentioned such phasing during the myriad interviews they have given on
Labour's tax plans. The oversight is all the more inexplicable because
Labour could still honour its spending pledges if the abolition of the NI
ceiling were done in stages.
This is not the first time that a carefully crafted package of Labour tax
proposals has come unstuck under inspection. During the 1987 general
election campaign, Labour's manifesto was less than frank about its plans to
eliminate the married man's tax allowance. And prior to election day, Mr
Kinnock and Mr Hattersley found themselves embarrassingly at odds over how
far down the income scale their tax increases would reach.
Whether this was significant in the scale of Labour's defeat is impossible
to judge. But Labour has had almost five years since then to get its tax
policies right. The party can hardly complain if its belated endorsement of
phasing in the removal of the NI ceiling is portrayed as a panic measure in
response to an adverse opinion poll.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920117

