FT921-3785

FT  12 MAR 92 / UK News (Employment): Hammond admits to talks with Murdoch


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


PROSPECTS FOR reconcilia-tion between the EETPU electricians' union and the
Trades Union Congress deteriorated yesterday as the union's leader revealed
his role in events which led to printworkers losing their jobs at News
International, the newspaper publisher, in the mid 1980s.
Mr Eric Hammond, EETPU general secretary, says he held secret talks with Mr
Rupert Murdoch, News International chief executive, for nearly a year over
proposals which led to EETPU members taking the jobs of printworkers in new
premises in Wapping, London.
The disclosure in Mr Hammond's autobiography will cast a shadow over talks
on the re-affiliation of the EETPU to the TUC as part of the Amalgamated
Engineering and Electrical Union. The AEEU will be formed in May with the
merger of the EETPU and the AEU engineering workers' union. The EETPU was
expelled from the TUC in 1988 for refusing to implement rulings on
inter-union disputes.
The EETPU had said previously that early discussions with News International
were conducted at local and branch level and by a national secretary. Senior
EETPU officials had implied they considered the talks to be a mistake.
Although Mr Hammond steps down as general secretary tomorrow, leaders of
other unions will want to know whether senior colleagues - including Mr Paul
Gallagher, his successor - were aware of Mr Hammond's role.
Mr Gallagher was unavailable for comment yesterday, but colleagues indicated
he was surprised by the extent of Mr Hammond's involvement. Mr Gavin Laird,
general secretary of the AEU, said he was disappointed by Mr Hammond's
account.
Mr Hammond recalls telling Mr Murdoch as early as February 1985, nearly a
year before Wapping opened, that his members could operate print machinery
at the new plant. 'There was an almost audible click as Rupert suddenly
realised that here was an opportunity to end print-union power once and for
all,' Mr Hammond writes.
News International subsequently sacked 5,500 print workers, sparking a
year-long dispute which led to violent clashes with police outside the
plant. Some 180 EETPU members worked as printers at Wapping, but the company
refused to sign a recognition deal with the union. 'He (Rupert Murdoch) has
shown no spark of gratitude, even though he couldn't have succeeded without
us,' says Mr Hammond.
The disclosures are likely to strengthen the resolve of some leftwing
unions, including the GPMU printers, to extract harsh terms from the EETPU
in the TUC affiliation talks.
Mr Hammond says in his book that in 1984 he offered a deal in confidence to
Mr Arthur Scargill, the NUM miners' union president, by which he would have
balloted power workers on striking if Mr Scargill had agreed to ballot the
NUM on a strike already in progress.
Maverick, The Life of A Union Rebel. Weidenfield and Nicolson. Pounds 16.99.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920312

