FT924-6038

FT  24 NOV 92 / Russia agrees debt accord with Ukraine


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


RUSSIA and Ukraine yesterday removed a key obstacle to a western plan to
reschedule the former Soviet Union's foreign debt when they agreed to settle
a row over Soviet assets and to let Moscow handle western creditors.
The accord between the two rivals gives western creditors an opportunity to
reschedule the foreign debt of more than Dollars 70bn (Pounds 46bn) at talks
which start in Paris today.
After months of refusing to give up its 16.5 per cent share of the debt
until it got a similar share of the assets, Ukraine has finally allowed
Russia, the only republic to make any debt repayments since the collapse of
the Soviet Union, the sole right to negotiate with western creditors.
The Ukrainian government has also given up claims on debts owed to the
Soviet Union by its former Third World allies.
In theory, these debts amount to more than Dollars 100bn, but are performing
so poorly that Russia has been trying to sell them.
In return, Moscow, which has persuaded most other republics to give up all
claims on all former Soviet assets in return for assuming their share of the
debt, has promised to negotiate with Kiev a special pact on sharing out
remaining assets and liabilities.
The Ukrainian government says this means it will get a share of former
Soviet embassies abroad, as well as reserves of gold, hard currency, and
diamonds which it has accused Russia of hoarding for itself, but which
Russia denies having.
The only catch to the hard-won agreement not to wash their dirty laundry in
public is that both parties reserve the right to renounce it if they fail to
agree a bilateral pact by the end of the year.
While their agreement may eventually unravel, both of the republics are now
under pressure to clear the way for a rescheduling accord.
The Russian government has been particularly anxious to clinch a
rescheduling agreement before a critical session of the Russian
super-parliament on December 1.
The new government in Ukraine, meanwhile, realises that it is more
profitable for the struggling republic to get rid of the Soviet debt burden.
It is now up to western creditors to decide which debts to include in a
rescheduling.
Germany wants to stick to a cut-off date of January 1 1991, while the US,
which has a very small exposure, is sympathetic to Russian demands that it
cover all debts incurred until the Soviet Union's collapse in December 1991.
Experts for the Russian government and the main Civic Union opposition group
have agreed a compromise anti-crisis plan which must now be approved by
political leaders of both sides, Leyla Boulton writes.
The plan is part of moves by President Boris Yeltsin to salvage the thrust
of market reforms and the composition of his cabinet ahead of the
potentially stormy December 1 session of the super-parliament.
The document rejects a return to price controls and old-style state
procurement demanded by the Civic Union, but puts more emphasis on
protecting the poor and minimising unemployment.
The document also appears to assume that monetary and credit policy will
continue to be improvised by the government and the Russian central bank.
The document makes no changes to the government's privatisation programme.
However, it does call for more support to create small businesses in
industry and other productive spheres, and for the speeding of small-scale
privatisation.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921124

