FT924-11279

FT  27 OCT 92 / Dushanbe quiet after defeat of Nabiyev troops


   By STEVE LEVINE


   MOSCOW


DUSHANBE, the capital of Tajikistan, was mostly quiet last night after the
government, backed by units of the Russian army, defeated a two-day coup
attempt by supporters of the former Communist president.
The rebels left Dushanbe after the government of acting President Akbarshah
Iskandarov promised that a special parliamentary session would decide
whether Mr Rakhmon Nabiyev, who was ousted from office at gunpoint last
month, should be reinstalled. There was no indication whether the promise
would be kept.
More than 2,000 irregular troops patrolled the city last night. There was
occasional gunfire.
The coalition Tajik government of pro-Islamic and democratic parties has
fought forces loyal to former President Nabiyev since May in battles that
have killed more than 1,000 people. The pro-Nabiyev forces possess
substantial arms, including armoured vehicles, but analysts said they seemed
unlikely to mount a new challenge to the government soon.
Part of the reason is a lack of leadership. Two of the three strongest rebel
military leaders were either killed or wounded in the coup attempt, which
began at dawn on Saturday when they seized control of much of Dushanbe.
Mr Rustam Abdourahim was killed and Mr Langari Langariyev wounded: both were
leaders of the irregular militia recruited from the southern Kulyab region.
The political leader of the coup attempt, Mr Safarali Kendjayev, the former
parliamentary speaker, was wounded by his own troops when Commonwealth of
Independent States forces escorted the rebels out of Dushanbe on Sunday
night.
This leaves just one of Mr Nabiyev's key military leaders - Mr Sangak
Safarov, perhaps the most daring and skilful of the ex-president's
lieutenants - fully operational. Mr Safarov did not take part in the latest
fighting.
The CIS garrison in Dushanbe provided tacit support to the Tajik government
during the coup attempt. Though taking no part in the battle, the 201st CIS
Division took control of virtually all of the capital's strategic points. It
blocked roads leading into Dushanbe, preventing the entry of rebel
reinforcements, and defended the railway station, the television station and
the airport.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921027

