FT924-990

FT  21 DEC 92 / Broadcasting newcomer promises cost-effective TV: How
Westcountry's approach will differ from its predecessor's


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR Stephen Redfarn could not be more proud of his converted factory on the
Langage Science Park on the outskirts of Plymouth.
In 10 months the factory has been turned into the headquarters of
Westcountry Television, the new ITV broadcaster that will take over the
licence from Television South West just after midnight on new year's day.
Westcountry will be one of the smallest ITV companies, concentrating, at
least in the beginning, on making programmes for the region rather than the
ITV network.
Yet what is happening on the outskirts of Plymouth provides an indication of
how ITV is changing.
Mr Redfarn, chief executive of Westcountry, who spent most of his working
life as a merchant banker, says: 'This is cost-effective television. It is
not a ticky-tacky television station.'
Contrasts between Westcountry and TSW, creations of two different eras in
television, go far beyond differences in location - TSW worked from city
centre studios in Ply-mouth.
At its peak TSW had 350 staff, although it now has a skeleton staff of about
140. Mr Redfarn thought he needed 167, but has decided 112 will do - partly
through cost savings in the depths of an advertising recession; partly from
farming out most programmes, apart from news and politics, to independent
producers.
In place of TSW's single transmission point in Ply-mouth, Westcountry plans
seven studios - three capable of broadcasting specially tailored news for
their areas, the rest capable of injecting breaking news stories.
Transmission was put out to tender and HTV, Westcountry's larger neighbour,
won the contract. Sale of advertising has been contracted out to the TSMS
sales house.
Rather than pay BT for links between studios, Westcountry will be the first
ITV company to have its own digital communications network. 'We get
telephones and data thrown in,' Mr Redfarn says enthusiastically.
There were months of uncertainty for Westcountry after it won its franchise
with a bid of Pounds 7.82m - TSW sought judicial review of the Independent
Television Commission's ruling that its bid of Pounds 16.2m was
unsustainable and the case went all the way to the House of Lords.
All that time, Mr Redfarn was unable to sign contracts. When the company
finally got its licence in April it was too late to build a studio.
After fact-finding in the US, Westcountry has come up with another British
first - using Videssence fluorescent studio lights, which are cool and
reduce the cost of air conditioning.
Westcountry's programmes will be under the control of Mr John Prescott
Thomas, former head of BBC Bristol's Network Production Centre.
The flagship programme will be Westcountry Live, an hour-long news and
magazine programme every weekday. There will be live political and sports
programmes, series on The West At Work and a regional quiz called Westwise.
Plans include a children's drama about children who set up a pirate
television station on Drake's Island on Plymouth Sound.
Westcountry has cost about Pounds 12m to set up and running costs, excluding
programme costs, will be about Pounds 12m a year.
Mr Redfarn, who has three main shareholders - Associated Newspapers,
Brittany Ferries and South West Water - has no doubt that the franchise will
be profitable.
Just how profitable will be influenced by how long smaller companies such as
Westcountry continue to receive the national ITV network at a subsidised
price.
The subsidy will be reviewed in two years and some large ITV companies feel
that in the new harsher world everyone should pay their own way.
It has been assumed until now that when takeovers of ITV companies become
possible in 1994 the big companies will swallow up the small ones. But what
if small companies such as Westcountry with its weighty shareholders were to
move against larger ITV companies?
Mr Redfarn simply smiles at the suggestion.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921221

