FT923-9492

FT  05 AUG 92 / Letter: The struggle to alleviate plight of the Somalis


   From Baroness CHALKER


Sir, Sadly there is very little with which I could disagree in Julian
Ozanne's description ('Desperate famine stalks the forgotten Somalis', July
28) of the desperate and harrowing conditions in Somalia.
Numerous similar reports can leave us in no doubt that a human tragedy is
unfolding on a scale never before seen in that country.
I must make it clear, however, that Britain has not forgotten Somalia. The
government is deeply concerned about what is happening there. For months, we
have been in the forefront of efforts to alleviate the suffering. None of
this has received very much attention in the media.
We have been among the first to respond to needs as new possibilities for
delivery have opened up. In January, I announced a gift of 14,000 tonnes of
food aid via the Red Cross; in May, we provided a further 5,000 tonnes of
food through the UN World Food Programme; earlier this month, I allocated
Pounds 2.5m to the Red Cross for its country-wide relief activities.
We have given all possible support to British aid agencies which continue
their heroic work inside Somalia, in spite of the enormous difficulties and
danger. In June, I responded immediately to the UN's appeal on behalf of
refugees, predominantly Somalis, in Kenya, with a grant of Pounds 1m. We
gave a further Pounds 50,000 for the Somali boat refugees arriving in the
Yemen within days of their plight becoming known.
Since the present crisis began in early 1991, we have provided almost Pounds
15m for Somalis in need. I expect to provide more in the months ahead. Our
record is a far cry from the near-indifference of which you accuse the west
in your leading article, 'Time to interfere' (July 29).
The tragedy we are witnessing in Somalia is highly complex and there are no
easy solutions. Until peace and stability return, helping the hungry and
dying will be enormously difficult.
Somalia remains for us an acute priority in a highly troubled region, the
Horn of Africa, which continues to absorb the lion's share of the
humanitarian aid resources available to us; some Pounds 155m since the
present crisis began in late 1990.
Lynda Chalker,
minister for overseas development,
94 Victoria Street,
London SW1E 5JL

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920805

