FT922-4432

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (9): Hard thinking about the future -
Mining


   By PHILIP GAWITH


ON THE surface, it is business as usual. Mining men tell you, with the
studied assurance of the old hand talking to the ingenue, that 'Yes, we're
at the bottom of the commodity cycle, and yes it has been a long and deep
downturn, but no, we're not worried - we've been there before and we'll be
there again.'
They are being economical with the truth. Low commodity prices may well be
familiar territory for resource companies, but there are at least two
reasons for believing that South Africa's mining industry is at a more
important juncture than the bottom of another commodity cycle. The first
concerns politics - the downturn coincides with South Africa's emergence
from political isolation, an event rich in business implications. The
second, gold: in previous cycles there was the prospect of the gold price,
and hence the fortune of the industry, performing contra-cyclically. The
fact that gold has become just another commodity, however, has removed this
cushion and focused increased attention on the future of the industry which
is still at the heart of the economy.
The contribution of the mineral industry to South Africa's gross domestic
product in 1991 amounted to 10.4 per cent. Mineral exports contribute 46 per
cent of South Africa's total merchandise exports of R66.2bn. Gold share was
just over R19bn.
Beneath the veneer, there is little doubt there is some hard strategic
thinking about the way forward. Some of it will be painful - coming to
terms, for example, with the fact that the pre-eminence of gold within
exploration budgets can no longer be justified - but much of it will be
challenging. At present the impression is that while political reform has
released the industry from its geographic jail, it is still blinking as it
gets used to the light. This is hardly surprising. Management spent much of
the 80s engaged in an epic battle with a fledgling, but powerful, trade
union movement. There was little time for strategic thinking, nor did the
country's circumstances encourage it.
Understandably, the first post-sanctions trend to emerge has been the mining
houses going outward bound. Mr Brian Gilbertson, the chairman of Gencor,
clearly speaks for many when he says: 'Internationalisation is an important
priority. I don't think we've achieved anything like what we would want to
achieve.' In pursuit of this ambition, Gencor and other groups have their
geologists scouring Africa, South America and parts of Europe for deposits.
As Mr Nick Segal, group consultant on strategy and public affairs at
Johannesburg Consolidated Investments (JCI), notes, however, there are
interesting tensions in this process. From a balance sheet point of view, it
makes sense to become an operator in a First World environment where there
is a more stable operating environment, access to superior technology and
less currency risk. On the other hand, the mining houses have an irrevocably
South African complexion and hence a powerful interest in contributing to
the political and economic stability of the region by investing there.
Perhaps the trump factor in this process will be exploration. Mr Bernard van
Rooyen, executive director at Gold Fields, comments: 'South Africa has a
remarkably rich range of minerals, but it is also remarkably well explored.'
By contrast, many African countries have hardly been explored at all in the
post-colonial era. Within South Africa, Mr Van Rooyen notes, with all known
leads pursued, the challenge is to conceptualise where, in younger rock
formations, mineralisation might occur and then to find means of accessing
such deposits.
The enthusiasm with which mining houses explore opportunities abroad will
also depend on what options they have on the home front. Here the tables are
by no means evenly laid, and one reason why Gencor is understood to be
taking a fairly gloomy prognosis for the future of gold, while being more
enthusiastic about internationalisation and beneficiation as the way
forward, may be their lack of good mineral rights locally.
In terms of important projects, beneficiation is the present focus. There
should be decisions within the next six months on whether to go ahead with
the Columbus stainless steel project, a joint venture between Anglo American
and Gencor, and the Alusaf aluminium smelter - a Gencor project. Although
their costing remains unclear, Columbus will probably cost about R3bn while
Alusaf will be closer to R6bn. Both will be very large with Columbus planned
to have a smelting capacity of 600,000 tonnes a year and the Alusaf
expansion 466,000 tonnes a year.
The second half of 1992 will also see De Beers's Venetia diamond mine come
on stream, as well as the Northam platinum mine, owned by Gold Fields. All
platinum producers are expanding capacity.
The most significant recent capital expenditure announcement was Anglo
American's decision in April to spend R1.7bn on the Moab extension to the
Vaal Reefs gold mine. Some analysts have expressed scepticism about the
viability of the project, to the extent of claiming that the decision is
almost a political statement of belief in the future of gold. That may be
the effect of the announcement, especially coming at a time when the gold
price was at a six-year low of Dollars 335 an ounce, but Anglo clearly
believe they have a commercial proposition. Notwithstanding the extreme
depth and geological complexity of the mine, it has estimated recovery
grades of 11 grammes a tonne making it rich by modern standards.
In spite of Anglo's announcement, the gold industry is at a low ebb. Without
a better gold price, the industry is destined to shrink with JCI, Anglovaal
and Gold Fields all sitting on substantial deposits which cannot be viably
developed at present prices.
Although producers outwardly are putting on a brave face, most of them can
see rising costs, but no rising price. In the period 1988-91 the gold price
stayed in a very narrow range of about R1,000 per ounce with inflation
running at about 15 per cent per annum. Few are brave enough to hope for
anything better and, in spite of the enormous strides made by the industry
in containing its costs, the profitability of the marginal mines continues
to deteriorate with a number certain to close in the near future. At present
prices, uneconomic gold mines account for about 12 per cent of total
production and 15 per cent of employment.
The consequences of further lay-offs will be serious. Employment in the
industry has already shrunk from 534,000 in 1986 to about 400,000, with the
tragedy being not only that these workers often have many dependants, but
that they are in most cases illiterate and unskilled and hence have little
chance of alternative employment.
While most mining houses are involved in quasi-welfare work through
training, education, and housing assistance schemes, they are helpless to
assist once a worker is laid off. Thus it is not only for reasons of
self-interest they are hoping the upturn in the commodity cycle will be a
strong one.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920605

