FT923-15470

FT  02 JUL 92 / Economic Viewpoint: Time to state the case for an
anti-savings drive


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


There would have been a time when the chancellor's heart would have leapt
for joy at the rise in the UK personal savings ratio of more than one
percentage point to 11.5 per cent in the first quarter of 1992.
But this time, if Norman Lamont's heart registered any reaction at all, it
was not joy. When a country is struggling to emerge from recession, a rise
in savings is the last thing a chancellor wants.
Of course, it can be argued that there are better ways of stimulating
domestic demand than weak personal savings. The chancellor could listen to
all the siren voices asking him for more government spending and to expand
the budget deficit still further from its probable level of Pounds 30bn
plus. Or he could take risks with Britain's hard won trend towards lower
inflation by slashing interest rates and leaving the Exchange Rate
Mechanism.
I know which of the three would carry least risk - lower personal savings.
Of course, the personal savings ratio is not an instrument of policy in the
way that the budget and short term interest rates are. But it would
nevertheless be helpful to get away from a mind set in which savings are
always regarded as good and consumer spending as bad.
Some of us can still recall the National Savings drives which were inflicted
on us at school where we were expected to buy stamps to provide a ship or an
aircraft. I was not as shocked as I was meant to be when Milton Friedman
said to me that these savings drives had been intended to reduce
inflationary pressure and they had not affected the government's military
programme. If savings drives helped to relieve inflationary pressure,
anti-savings drives might help to relieve deflationary pressure.
In fact, I had been inoculated against any excessive or automatic belief in
the virtues of savings when as a precocious schoolboy I read a book by a
popular science writer, Gordon Rattray Taylor. He wanted to get to the
bottom of why unemployment had been so high before the second world war. He
explained that the real Keynesian message was that savings had been too high
and this had led to the evils of low output, high unemployment and general
depression.
It still seems to me the essential message of Keynes's General Theory in one
sentence, although the long term persistence of heavy unemployment cannot be
explained without bringing in wage behaviour.
Now for the inevitable qualifications and complications. To start with,
personal savings are only part of savings and very often not the most
important part. What matters from the point of view of the national economy
is total savings, including those of business and government.
It is puzzling that so inadequate an indicator as the personal savings ratio
has been such a good contemporaneous indicator of the state of the economy.
Personal savings were last near their present level in 1981, the bottom of
the previous recession. The personal savings ratio reached a low of 5.4 per
cent in 1988, the year of greatest inflationary pressure in the last boom.
Why is not more attention paid to the total national savings ratio? The
answer is that to do so would give the game away. For by the conventions of
national income accounting (whose inventors are now in Valhalla), savings
equal investment by definition. This is so in a closed economy or the world
as a whole.
Even in a single country investment is equal to savings plus the balance of
payments deficit on current account (or minus the payments surplus).
Many countries often have small gaps in their balance of payments; so true
savings ratios are not too different from investment ratios, and tell us
little about problems of boom, slump, capital shortage or surplus or
anything else. Even the UK's payments deficit is only 1 1/2 per cent of GDP.
For the world as a whole, the only gaps between savings and investment are
statistical errors and omissions. The inflationary or deflationary gap is
like one of these gaps in the mountains about which one reads in the guide
book, but which always keep receding further into the horizon.
The actual gap, which I have kept until the second half of this article for
the busy business read-er to avoid, is between intended sav-ings and
intend-ed investment. The two can be brought into line in a depression by a
fall in output and income to a level where savings are low enough to do no
more than offset the amount of investment that business is willing to carry
out.
But more stages are necessary in the argument. I have frequently criticised
the US obsession with the Japanese balance of payments surplus by saying
that it was just the mirror image of a Japanese savings surplus which was
performing a valuable function in promoting world investment and keeping
down world real interest rates.
Why then cannot any tendency for savings to exceed investment in the UK be
offset by a balance of payments surplus, Japanese style, instead of the
familiar deficit? No doubt the answer is long and complex and contains
structural elements. But the immediate reason why British industry cannot
easily make up abroad for any shortfall or demand at home is that the
tendency to slow growth and recession is worldwide.
The Germans are exceptional in still being in a situation where there is
more danger of excess demand than of deficient demand, thanks to unification
pressures. But in most other places the complaint is that consumers are not
spending enough. In Japan, the reluctance of consumers to accumulate more
debt is leading not just to a higher balance of payments surplus but to
recession.
How about, I will be asked, the much-discussed world capital shortage? What
world capital shortage? Obviously the former Communist countries could make
use of more funds both to replenish their capital stock and to help their
own hard-pressed consumers until their economies revive. But there is a
difference between a desire or even a need for capital and an effective
demand for it on terms that western investors are willing to meet. At
current levels of interest rates, wage rates, prices and so on there is
inadequate demand for capital to meet the world's savings potential.
The hardest piece of evidence against my view that intended savings are too
high is the obstinate tendency of world real interest rates to remain stuck
at about 4 per cent, judging by the yield on long term UK indexed bonds.
I cannot pretend to explain this completely. One possibility is that
although there is no effective capital shortage now, there will be in the
future and that the recession is just - for all its agony - a phase. A
related possibility is the fear that under the influence of recession or
just political weakness, governments might overdo the deficit spending and
create an excess demand for loanable funds in future. Yet another
possibility is that the bond market is just being lethargic in reacting to a
changed situation. The operators in it may have an exaggerated fear of
deficit spending.
If that is the case, then real interest rates will eventually drop. But in
the meanwhile some cushion is required; and it is as well that the maximum
levels of budget deficit decreed in Maastricht look like being exceeded not
only in the EC but in the world as a whole.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920702

