FT924-6044

FT  24 NOV 92 / Major pours cold water on big EC projects


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


MR JOHN MAJOR has indicated he favours co-ordination of economic planning by
members states - rather than big multi-billion pound, cross-border
infrastructure projects - to stimulate growth in the European Community.
He believes that excessively ambitious plans for combatting economic
downturn would only add to member states' budgetary problems.
The prime minister's views were made clear yesterday as officials outlined
parameters for EC talks on a Community growth strategy ahead of the
Edinburgh summit on December 11-12.
After yesterday's finance ministers' meeting in Brussels, Mr Norman Lamont,
the chancellor, is to lead efforts to reach a common EC position in time for
the summit. Mr Major met Mr Jean-Luc Dehaene, the Belgian premier, in
Brussels yesterday in the first of a series of pre-summit bilateral
discussions.
British officials brushed aside claims the UK had made a U-turn by bowing to
pressure to add the issue to an already crowded summit agenda.
Downing Street said proposals for multi-billion-pound infrastructure
projects, widely reported to be under discussion in the European Commission,
were not realistic.
Officials stressed that the British presidency would seek the backing of its
EC partners for the more modest goal of co-ordinated action to maintain or
boost member states' capital spending programmes.
The officials said the UK presidency would urge action broadly parallel to
that set out in the government's autumn statement on public spending earlier
this month. This seeks to stimulate growth by maintaining capital spending
projects and other supply side measures while holding down the public sector
wages bill.
Such proposals fall substantially short of the measures being suggested by
the Commission and several EC countries to fight slowing growth rates and
unemployment.
Sir Leon Brittan, the senior UK commissioner, yesterday appeared to reflect
Mr Major's views when he rejected such plans as 'grandiose' and likely to
exacerbate member states' budgetary difficulties.
However, he argued in a BBC interview that there was now a good case for an
EC-wide drive to boost capital spending and to open up monopoly sectors to
competition.
In London, a senior government official agreed there was now a broad
consensus across the Community that the Edinburgh summit should discuss
fully how to react to the economic downturn.
By following the UK's medium-term programme of preserving capital spending
schemes while restraining pay rises, member states could maintain the goal
of budgetary convergence, he said.
However, it was also pointed out that the Edinburgh agenda was already
lengthy with such issues as enlargement, completion of the single market,
future Community financing, Denmark's demands on the Maastricht treaty and
the definition of subsidiarity.
The future of the exchange rate mechanism and the conclusion of the Gatt
accord on trade liberalisation are also certain to need time for debate.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921124

