FT922-4042

FT  08 JUN 92 / UK Gilts: Dealers shrug off Maastricht factors


   By PETER MARSH


PRICES of gilt-edged securities slipped by up to 1 point as investors
weighed up the implications that European monetary union may not happen
after all.
But the shock waves sent through Europe by the referendum in Denmark may end
up having only a relatively small impact on the outlook for gilts. By Friday
night, many gilt practitioners were considering the outlook for the
securities with reference to factors other than the terms as set out in the
Maastricht treaty for Emu. These plans have now been relegated to history.
The gilt specialists were coming round to the conclusion that Maastricht had
 -in reality - had only a minor impact on the performance of the gilt market
over the past six months.
'Even before the referendum, many people thought Emu in some shape or form
had only a 50 per cent chance of coming off; after all, there were so many
things that could have gone wrong,' said one gilts observer. 'After the
Danes' decision, the probability has been pushed down to, say, 20 per cent.
The change has been in terms of nuance rather than a complete re-think about
how the market is operating.'
This interpretation was supported by the modest change in the yield
difference between gilts and lower-yielding German bonds during last week.
On Monday, 10-year gilt yields were 124 basis points (1.24 percentage
points) higher than the yields of equivalent German bonds. This illustrated
the scepticism on the part of many investors that union was on course to
take place by the end of the century.
Had their confidence about union been higher, the yield spread would have
been much lower, indicating the perception that inflation and interest rates
in the two countries were on course for convergence.
On Friday night, after the Danish decision led to investors switching out of
UK securities but left German bonds little changed, the yield difference was
slightly higher at 137 basis points. It looks over the next few weeks that
the yield difference may edge up still more, as investors rethink their
strategies over economic convergence. Theories held by some economists a
week ago that the yield difference might come down to only 100 basis points
by the end of the year are no longer in circulation.
Even so, the extent of last week's gilt sell-off has to be considered in the
context of the steady increase in gilt prices since the Tories' election win
on April 9. Prices are still much higher than on election day, with yields
correspondingly lower. In the 10-year area, gilts are now yielding about 9.1
per cent, compared with about 9.8 per cent on the day of the poll.
All this supports the thesis that many investors reckon the trend in Britain
towards lower inflation and interest rates - factors generally perceived as
being helpful to gilts - should continue with or without Emu.
That appears to be the view of the Bank of England, which on Friday
signalled a 'business as usual' approach by announcing an auction on June 24
of an expected Pounds 2bn or so of bonds maturing between 2007 and 2012.
Details of the specific stock and the amount to be auctioned are to be
announced on June 16. Plans for the auction were well received in the market
 -the type of stock is expected to be fairly easy to sell - and prices edged
up.
The auction announcement came after the Bank sold about Pounds 400m of 9 per
cent conversion stock due 2000 that had been available to the market for
over a week. It had been the residue of an Pounds 800m tranche of bonds
announced on May 22. During the week the Bank also gave details of gilt
sales in April - when demand for the securities was exceptionally strong.
Net gilt sales (taking into account redemptions) during the month were about
Pounds 4.4bn, of which Pounds 3.1bn were sold to UK non-bank investors and
Pounds 464m overseas.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920608

