FT924-6248

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (2): Rebirth of a region - Lorraine
shakes off its old blackspot image


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


THE slow pre-programmed death of Lorraine's state-owned coal mines, the
largest and most efficient in France, is an object lesson to the British
government as it grapples erratically with its own coal industry closures,
writes William Dawkins.
Lorraine is today beginning to shake off its old image as France's
industrial blackspot, having lost 16,000 coal jobs over the past 25 years,
not to mention 75,000 in steel and iron ore mining and 26,000 in textiles.
Remarkably, the region has lived through this industrial cataclysm without
serious social unrest. There was violence in the early stages of the steel
closures and token strikes in some coal mines, but there has been nothing
approaching the scale of the British coal strike under the government of Mrs
Margaret Thatcher.
Today, Lorraine has an unemployment rate of 9.4 per cent, slightly below the
national average and one of the highest flows of foreign investment in
provincial France after its prosperous little neighbour, Alsace.
The rebirth is, however, far from perfect in that few of the new jobs have
been created in high technology industries - and businessmen complain of a
shortage of advanced services such as software consultancy in Lorraine.
According to Anvar, the state research agency, nearly three-quarters of
Lorraine's industrial workforce is employed by companies that devote less
than one per cent of their value-added to research and development.
Some job creation schemes have had a difficult ride. One of the oddest is
Parc des Schtroumpfs, a FFr1bn theme park near a former steel works in
Hagondange, based on the cartoon characters known as Smurfs in the UK.
Backed by Usinor Sacilor and the regional government, it went into
liquidation in 1990, only a year after opening, because the number of
visitors fell dramatically short of target, but was rescued by Walibi, the
Belgian theme park operator.
Others have been reassuring, like the growth of a community of plastics
companies around St Avold, on the northern Lorraine border with Germany, now
the second largest plastics centre after Oyonnax in Rhone-Alpes
The transformation of Lorraine has been successful enough to attract
international attention. The Polish and Czechoslovak governments, which have
asked Sofirem, the 25-year-old job creation arm of Charbonnages de France
(CdF) for advice on how to reduce the pain of coal mine closures in their
own countries.
Sofirem has helped more than 400 new and existing companies over the past
eight years and claims an 85 per cent success rate.
So what is the secret?
Out of Lorraine's three traditional industries, the Saar coal fields in the
north-east of the region stand out for having made planned closures more or
less evenly over a period of 25 years, so spreading the pain relatively
thinly. The iron and steel job reductions in around Longwy and Thionville in
the north and Pompey and Neuves-Maisons in the south, were less evenly
planned, because the outlook for the French steel industry was never as
bleak as for coal. Like CdF, the state-owned steelmaker Usinor Sacilor has
its own job-creation arm for the region, Sodiest, which has supported 1,000
new companies in its 10-year existence, a larger but less experienced body
than the coal board's Sofirem.
Achieving a smooth run-down for coal mining, due to close entirely in
Lorraine and nationwide by 2005, has not been easy. For the French
administration, like the UK government, has had changes of heart over the
future for coal.
Sofirem was established in 1967 when the government launched the first coal
output reductions on the realisation that French production costs could
never compete against cheap imported coal from Australia and south America.
It then eased off the reductions with the 1973 first oil price shock, only
to step them up again with France's subsequent decision to launch what
turned out to be the most ambitious nuclear energy programme in Europe.
The Socialist government bought another volte-face on coming to power in
1981, when it said coal output must rise by a third by the end of the
decade, only to change its mind in 1984 with the sober abandonment of its
go-it-alone economic expansionism.
Mr Richard Muller, head of the industrialisation department at Houilleres du
Bassin de Lorraine - CdF's local branch - does not expect any further
U-turns in government policy.
Accordingly, Lorraine, which now accounts for three quarters of French coal
output, is set to lose its remaining 14,000 mining jobs within the next
decade or so.
Massive state aid for retraining and economic development has been part of
the answer. Over the past five years, Lorraine alone has swallowed one fifth
of France's entire primes d'amenagement de territoire or regional economic
development budget, spent on business parks, roads and start-up premises.
Foreign investors can expect to find generous incentives, of between 10 per
cent and 30 per cent of project cost, depending on the location, says Mr
Michel Ferrand, a director of Adena, the Nancy development agency.
Richard Muller reckons that, all kinds of assistance included, each of the
13,565 jobs created or aided in Lorraine's former coal fields has cost the
public purse FFr100,000 - 'on an international comparison, we think that is
pretty reasonable,' he claims.
Another important element has been the advice and training organised by
Sofirem and the CdF itself, says Mr Jean-Jacques Fix, Sofirem's Lorraine
regional manager.
Sofirem offers start-up equity funding for former coal miners seeking to set
up their own businesses and helps them present their cases to bank lenders.
Most former miners, however, prefer the safer course of getting a new job
with another employer, often a foreign investor.
Here the CdF funds retraining, pays former employees' salaries for a trial
two months in a new company and runs a prospection service for employers and
employees.
'We can offer people of high quality and motivation,' says Mr Fix.
The British government is not the only one who might have an interest in
Lorraine's experience. Just a few miles away over the border, the German
coal industry is reducing production from its mines in the same Saar
deposits that stretch under Lorraine, but at a far more gentle pace,
reflecting the Bonn government's more coal-dependent energy policy. Yet
France decided long ago that coal mining in the area could never be
internationally competitive.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
WAGE RATES COMPARED
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Listed here are average hourly wage rates, expressed in French francs,
as at June 1991, as estimated by the European Community
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                 In         France
                 francs     = 100
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Germany          148        121
Belgium          146        120
Netherlands      124        101
France           122        100
Italy            122        100
UK                93         76
US               106         87
Japan            109         90
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page I

921123

