FT921-3948

FT  12 MAR 92 / Far-right challenge for Kohl


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   STUTTGART


CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl's ruling Christian Democrats (CDU) are in danger of
losing their absolute majority in Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany's richest
federal state, and of allowing right-wing extremists to gain a foothold in
the state parliament.
The latest opinion poll, published less than four weeks before the state
election, shows support for the CDU, which has ruled Baden-Wurttemberg
unchallenged since 1972, slipping to 44 per cent. At the same time, the
extreme right Republican Party is backed by 4.9 per cent, only a fraction
short of the 5 per cent mark needed to gain seats in the regional
parliament.
Total support for the extreme right stands at 8 per cent, including the
National Democrats (NPD) and the German League, according to the poll
carried out by the respected Allensbach Institute for the Frankfurter
Allgemeine and SAT-1 TV.
The figures suggest a continuing drift by voters away from the mainstream
parties - the CDU, Social Democrats (SPD) and Free Democrats (FDP), and
towards protest movements like the Greens and the far right. Although the
move is marginal, it is enough to worry the main parties.
All the party leaders in Baden-Wurttemberg fear a low turn-out on April 5,
giving the extremists an extra chance to gain the crucial 5 per cent.
The same poll shows the SPD holding on to its own absolute majority in the
northern state of Schleswig-Holstein, against the trend of weakening
national support, largely thanks to the personal popularity of Mr Bjorn
Engholm, the state and national party leader. The poll figures show why Mr
Kohl and his CDU colleagues have raised the issue of controlling the influx
of asylum-seekers as their main campaign theme, mainly to prevent erosion of
their vote to the far right.
Baden-Wurttemberg, home to such German industrial giants as Daimler-Benz and
Robert Bosch, is the last state in west Germany still ruled by the CDU and
Mr Kohl is desperately anxious to retain control. His party is still tainted
by the resignation of the former prime minister, Mr Lothar Spath, just one
year ago - although not so much because of the hint of corruption for which
he was forced to resign, but rather because he remains more popular than his
successor, Mr Erwin Teufel.
Mr Kohl is throwing his own considerable political weight into the campaign
in support of Mr Teufel, so his own reputation is riding on the outcome.
Chancellor Kohl and Foreign Minister Genscher share a joke before a cabinet
meeting yesterday

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920312

