FT924-814

FT  22 DEC 92 / Arts: Robert Wilson's 'Faustus' - German theatre


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


Robert Wilson, director, writer, painter, was the Texan little boy lost who
turned European theatre upside down in the 1970s. Now, star entertainer of
Paris, Berlin, Hamburg, his latest revivals are the controversial draws of
this year's Paris Autumn Arts Festival.
His newest piece, Dr Faustus Lights the Light, has all the ingredients
needed to keep Wilson fans cheering: cold artifice; the play of light and
dark; perfectly timed automatic movements; minimalist music; semi-nonsense
text. But the aesthetic is so close to that of Wilson's early work, notably
the 1976 Einstein on the Beach, that this Faustus looks like a parody, or an
anachronism from Wilson's avant-garde days. Has Wilson developed at all in
two decades?
Faustus was written as a libretto by Gertrude Stein in 1938 but never
composed by anyone. Its story - Faust sells his soul for electric light -
has natural appeal for Wilson, who sets it as a ballet of light bulbs and
fluorescent strips interspersed with dances from Devil. A red one sways on a
swing, a black one spurts up on a seesaw. Both are familiar Wilson types,
with the pointed bodies, ashen faces and white hands of the Cabaret-inspired
Devil/emcee from his last show, The Black Rider.
Here too is the ice-hard, jagged imagery: close-cropped heads, razor-sharp
dresses, bony bodies, a gigantic pair of scissors, each snip marked by
shattering glass. Dancing is slick: splits, slits, high kicks. A leg juts
out, three identical heads pop up like gargoyles, behind the curtain.
Against a black sky, light forms into circles. A puppet is shot marching
along a neon sign. Bulbs rise and descend like yo-yos. At last, a single
strip of light shrinks further into the distance. Stage and cast are
swallowed in blackness.
Dramatic, technically clever, but not enough. Wilson carries his chill,
exaggerated aesthetic into actions and words, trying to tie his staging to
the dire absurdity of Stein's text, written in relentless monosyllables. He
enhances the monotony by using German actors who speak no English, who chant
the lines flatly. Movements, jerky, automatic and stylised, echo speech. A
cast of three Fausts and three Margaretes, acting in absolute unison as if
worked by a puppeteer, underlines the absurdist repetition.
Stein's post-modern joke about the meaninglessness of words is impossible as
'spoken opera' - dull as a boring play about boredom. Like all Wilson's
work, this show is a perfectly unified, choreographed vision. But the
vacuous play makes devices that once charmed look empty, worn out.
There are glimmers of the heart that is missing. Faust's poodle is played by
a cabaret-girl with a blond pigtail and grey suit who waddles on 'hind'
legs. She no longer bays at the moon because Faust has destroyed moonlight,
so she pouts 'thank you' endlessly between red painted lips. Hans Peter
Kuhn's fairground music, on accordion and scratchy double bass, hints at the
love, lyricism, painful loss which elude the strait-jacketed performers.
Wilson is still sadly obscure in England. Do not cross Europe for this
Faust, but it is a collector's piece and another episode in Wilson's
tortuous relationship with German theatre. The 1990 love-and-murder musical
hit The Black Rider, still in repertory in Hamburg, was the summit of that
achievement. Here is nothing but artifice; no emotion, no meaning. Wilson,
like Faust, has lost his soul.
Paris Autumn Arts Festival continues to Dec 29. 'Dr Faustus Lights the
Lights', Hebbel Theater, Berlin, Jan 18-24; Comedie, Geneva, Feb 2-5.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921222

