FT921-11908

FT  29 JAN 92 / Arts: Manchester, Swansea and the North to celebrate the
millennium


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


They were ringing the bells in Manchester last night and illuminating the
sky with fireworks to celebrate the city's selection as UK City of Drama in
1994. Add on the cost of the lobbying and the promotional literature which
secured the award and Manchester will have spent already a good chunk of the
Pounds 250,000 grant it received yesterday from the Arts Council to speed it
on its way.
But the whole Arts 2000 programme, under which a different part of the UK
hosts a specialist arts festival in the years running up to the millennium,
is more about prestige and confidence than cash. Manchester currently has
the chutzpah to go for the big events, like hosting the Olympics, and its
plan to regenerate the reputation and vivacity of the city through boosting
drama is just part of its ambitions. Next month it is holding a major
festival of Expressionism and in the summer the annual festival of arts and
television will be enhanced by a Pounds 1.3m three year sponsorship from the
local brewer, Boddingtons.
Against such commitment, built on a thriving theatrical base, the rival
claim of Sussex stood little chance, although selecting a region which has
almost totally ignored the arts in the past would have triggered a much
greater change in attitude and made more impact on the local population.
However the imagination and co-operation which took Sussex to the short list
should ensure that the theatrical life of the county is permanently
improved.
Yesterday's awards ceremony, hosted by Lord Palumbo, chairman of the Arts
Council, and originator of the scheme, brought the artistic enthusiasm of
the regions to London's South Bank. It made you realise that, despite the
proximity of the West End and the big national companies, London badly needs
its own artistic renaissance.
Swansea saw off challenges from Kirklees and Nottinghamshire to be chosen as
City of Literature and Writing in 1995. The fact that this spreads the
scheme to Wales undoubtedly played a part, but Swansea prepared an
imaginative programme, covering two languages, plus an international
dimension. The bequest by the council of a fine Edwardian building in its
docklands area as a National Centre for Literature also impressed the
judges. Swansea's approach seems very down to earth. It pledged yesterday
that it will incorporate in its plans the best ideas on offer from Kirklees
and Nottinghamshire.
The north, England beyond Yorkshire, is to be the Region for the Visual Arts
in 1996, at the expense of Glasgow, Bradford and Hampshire, who were also
short-listed from among a dozen applicants. In this case the selectors went
for an area with big ambitions but little past achievement. The region now
plans to open much needed art galleries across its wide open spaces, a
landscape which played a big part in its proposals.
Arts 2000 seems to have caught the popular imagination, at least that of
local councillors. Years designated to architecture, photography, opera,
etc, will be open to offers soon.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920129

