FT923-6491

FT  24 AUG 92 / Foreign banks split on loans to Efim


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


DIVISIONS have emerged between foreign bank creditors to Efim, the Italian
state holding company put into voluntary liquidation last month, ahead of
this week's meeting with Italian treasury officials in London.
The differences became apparent as foreign bankers, who lent around L3,500bn
(Pounds 1.63bn) of Efim's L8,500bn total debt, held a round of talks in
London and Milan late last week to co-ordinate their positions.
Separately, there have been unofficial indications that the Italian treasury
may be prepared to soften its position on the treatment of bank creditors,
opening the way to a compromise.
Foreign banks earlier this month threatened to declare Efim in default on
its loans after the treasury announced it would pay rates of interest
substantially below current market levels on the special bonds to be issued
to Efim's creditors.
As a result, banks would receive only around 80 per cent of the total
principal and interest due.
Last week, about 15 foreign bankers met senior treasury officials in Rome to
discuss their differences.
However, the meeting was limited to an exchange of views, with detailed
talks being left to this week's session in London, expected to take place on
Wednesday or Thursday.
Foreign bank creditors appear divided between those calling for an immediate
declaration of default on Efim's loans, and possibly the invocation of
cross-default clauses on loans to Iri and Eni, Italy's two other state
holding companies, and others recommending a less hawkish approach.
Gaps have also emerged over bankers' interpretations of the treasury's
position.
At last week's meeting, Mr Mario Draghi, its senior civil servant, made
clear that no solutions had been 'pre-judged'.
Foreign banks are at odds as to whether that apparent flexibility is a
tactic to gain time and exploit creditors' divisions, or indicates a real
willingness to raise interest rates on the bonds - the crux of the dispute.
Meanwhile, the treasury appreciates foreign banks could play a decisive part
in plans to privatise state assets to cut the budget deficit and the risks
it runs if the conflict continues.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920824

