FT923-6356

FT  25 AUG 92 / Management (The Growing Business): A brief to beef up the
boardroom - Diane Summers says that non-executive directors have much to
offer small companies


   By DIANE SUMMERS


The portentous phrase 'corporate governance' is not constantly on the lips
of every small business person. Recent debate on improving corporate
reporting and strengthening the roles of auditors and non-executive
directors has been conducted at a rarefied level and has concentrated on
listed companies.
Now, however, the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants (Cima) is
attempting to widen the debate and make it of more practical application.
Cima claims, in particular, that there are positive business advantages to
be gained from involving non-executive directors from the earliest stages of
a company's development.
The emphasis on policing  - safeguarding public interest  - has meant that
the non-executive director's other role, as a provider of independent
financial advice, has been obscured, argues the institute.
Cima says the non-executive director may be able to offer the growing
company:
Business advice based on experience and knowledge. The non-executive
director can provide an objective assessment of executive management so that
the best use can be made of existing staff. Financial expertise for
management purposes and to meet statutory requirements. Non-executive
directors can help ensure goods and services are costed and priced properly.
Checking effective credit control and 'strengthening the resolve of
executive management in the event of late payment', may also be a useful
function.
Non-executive directors can keep an eye, too, on the planning and submission
of regular returns, such as VAT, PAYE and National Insurance contributions.
Guidance on good management practice, personnel policies and compliance with
British and European standards and health and safety regulations.
'Guardianship' on issues such as pay and pensions. Non-executive directors
can help ensure management rewards are not at the expense of shareholders or
staff; that profit-related pay schemes have a defined range; that staff
working conditions and terms of service are of an acceptable standard and
that proper arrangements for pensions are made.
As far as the choice of non-executive directors is concerned, Cima advises
businesses to look at the overall balance of skills and experience of their
management teams and then attempt to fill the gaps.
A team of non-executive directors in a medium-sized or larger company could
have some or all of the following: a director well-versed in the
technological side of the mainstream business; at least one director who has
had wide experience of direction and leadership of a company; a director
with sales or marketing experience; a director with good City connections; a
qualified accountant or lawyer.
Independence is clearly essential. Proned, the body which promotes the role
of non-executive directors, has a code of practice which recommends that the
non-executive director should not have been employed in an executive
capacity for at least five years by the company on whose board he or she
sits.
Professional advisers acting as non-executive directors should not be
retained by the company on a continuing or regular basis, nor should
significant customers or suppliers become directors.
Non-executive directors, their value to management. Public Affairs
Department, Cima, 63 Portland Place, London W1N 4AB. Free.
Further information from Proned, 1 Kingsway, London WC2B 6XF.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920825

