FT921-15363

FT  10 JAN 92 / Worrying cracks in Belfast confidence: This week's bombs may
have damaged more than just buildings


   By TIM COONE


BUSINESS As Usual signs pasted over boarded-up shopfronts greet 1992 in
Belfast's city centre.
Shoppers glance upwards with curiosity at windowless office blocks as
workmen scoop up piles of shattered glass with shovels from the pavement and
rip out warped window frames with crowbars.
The year started with two explosions in the heart of the city. Between them
they are likely to cost the British taxpayer Pounds 10m in indemnity
payments.
The two IRA bombs which devastated two Inland Revenue buildings and damaged
scores of shops, offices, restaurants and bars at the beginning of the week
have created a scene reminiscent of the worst periods of the city's history.
The manager of one large retail chain store said: 'It is amazing how people
have not been put off by the bombs. Staff have come in, rolled up their
sleeves and started the clean-up with a determination to get business back
to normal as quickly as possible.'
But behind the doughty resilience of this city's population, now accustomed
to the tribulations caused by 22 years of IRA bomb damage, there is growing
concern about the government's security policy and its response to the
renewed IRA bombing campaign - which its leaders have warned will intensify
this year.
The area manager of Guardian Royal Exchange, whose offices were extensively
damaged in Monday's blast, said: 'There is a feeling in the business
community that the security forces could do a little bit better and that it
is time to take the initiative and go after these guys.'
Unionist leaders called this week for stricter security at Republican
strongholds within the city. Criticism has been levelled at the army for
withdrawing 500 troops just before Christmas. They were brought into the
province one month earlier in response to the renewed campaign.
That criticism is thought to be shared at senior levels within the Northern
Ireland Office (NIO), the government body which is responsible for the
administration of Ulster and foots the bills for the IRA attacks. Insurance
companies stopped providing cover for bomb damage in the 1970s.
Those bills have been rapidly mounting. Last December the NIO announced a
moratorium until next April on capital spending in the province in order to
meet the cost of clearing up after firebomb attacks. A bomb badly damaged
the Europa hotel and the Grand Opera House in the city centre on December 4.
The manager of a leading glazing firm in Belfast said: 'That bomb caused
some Pounds 5m in damage, about 20 per cent of it in glass.
'What we are seeing is as bad as we had in the 1970s, although it was more
continuous then.'
In the 1990-91 fiscal year the NIO paid out Pounds 22.7m in indemnities for
property damage in Northern Ireland. The damage from the bomb attacks in
Belfast's city centre in the past month alone is unofficially estimated at
Pounds 15m to Pounds 20m.
Mr Richard Needham, the NIO's minister for economic development, remains
optimistic. There is no intention to change the NIO's policy on
indemnification, which amounts to an open-ended commitment. He views the
bombing campaign as an opportunity to reconstruct Belfast's city centre.
The issue of improvements has been one of the wrangles between businessmen
and the NIO. Until now the NIO has been prepared to pay only the costs of
restoring the damage, and not to pay for improvements. That may change soon.
The process of compensation is slow, however. Joxor's bar and restaurant,
just around the corner from the Europa hotel, has had its windows blown out
three times in four weeks. Its owner says the total cost will come to about
Pounds 20,000 and that on past experience it will probably take up to two
years before the NIO compensation is paid in full. He smiled and said: 'The
bank manger has been very sympathetic. He's had his windows blown out as
well.'
Close to Joxor's is Windsor House, the tallest office block in Ireland and
home to the Inland Revenue as well as the European Commission in Northern
Ireland and numerous private offices. The building, which houses about 1,000
workers, was extensively damaged in the earlier Sunday blast. Plywood eyes
now stare out over the city where the windows once were. Piles of paper
litter, blown off desks and out of filing cabinets, lie in sodden heaps on
the pavement in the wintry rain.
The general manager of the Europa, Mr Michael Williamson, said only 50 of
the 200 rooms in the hotel were in use, one month after the Opera House
bomb, and he thought it would be two to three months before the hotel was
operating normally again. His compensation claim would 'probably be in
excess of Pounds 1m'.
In spite of the disruption there remains an air of determined optimism. Mr
Williamson said: 'We are not going to let it force us out.' His view is
seemingly shared by most businessmen in the city. Christmas trade was better
than expected for most, and the NIO's indemnification policy allows
tradesmen to view their reverses with a detached black humour.
Nevertheless, should the bombing campaign continue, as threatened by the
IRA, many businessmen fear there would be a decline in trade. They say
intensified security checks, causing traffic congestion, often cause more
disruption than the bombs.
Mr Needham believes the IRA's latest campaign is an act of desperation and
that the tide has turned against it. 'They cannot hope to win power as they
once did, with the Armalite in one hand and the ballot box in the other.
Their support is falling.
'They are terrified of a schism in their ranks. If they give up what can
they bargain with? Their alternative is to carry on with a policy knowing
they cannot win.'
Is Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, hoping to bomb its way to the
negotiating table then? 'There is no possibility of that while they continue
to support violence,' said Mr Needham.
When asked about statements made this week by Mr Martin McGuinness, a Sinn
Fein leader, who said that his party will 'make it as easy as possible' for
the British government to open a path to the negotiating table, Mr Needham
replied simply: 'We are living in interesting times.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Photograph The search goes on, one of the new 24-hour check
points on the Falls Road in west Belfast yesterday (Omitted).

920110

