FT923-6516

FT  24 AUG 92 / Arts: St. Petersburg Philharmonic


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


A YEAR ago the Edinburgh Festival was playing host to the leading orchestras
and opera companies from the Soviet Union when the world was shaken by the
August coup. Stories circulated of musicians refusing to believe the reports
in the Scottish evening newspapers until they had seen for themselves
pictures of Yeltsin astride a tank or Gorbachev on television returning to
Moscow.
Now the Soviet Union is gone and the Leningrad Philharmonic has returned to
Usher Hall, Edinburgh as the St. Petersburg Philharmonic Orchestra. This
year's festival theme of Tchaikovsky must have made the orchestra's
participation almost select itself. The exhilaration of its performances at
the weekend will have shown that the scalding concerts given in the heat of
the crisis last year were no isolated high-point.
The playing here was brilliant and full of passion. As with any of the top
international orchestras, the St. Petersburg Philharmonic achieves a
remarkable clarity of texture and yet its sound is never transparent in a
bloodless fashion. The overall picture is of strong colours, firm outlines,
vital rhythms, with every player providing a full complement of red
corpuscles.
In Tchaikovsky's Serenade for strings the sonority of the opening (where
Tchaikovsky hit upon the then novel idea of double-stopped chording)
pulsated with vibrancy down through every part. The first violin section
also deserves a note for its unanimity in the Elegy, which could have been
the work of one player, exactly in tune, however high the part went, and
producing an impassioned singing line.
The Fourth Symphony, announced by a piercing trio of trumpets, was
hair-raising as a display of orchestral elan and power. Mariss Jansons now
exerts an even tighter grip over this symphony than when he last conducted
it London and the sense of music of such fearsome intensity just being held
in check by his iron grasp only makes the final pages, when he lets
everything rip, the more cataclysmic. These were two unforgettable
Tchaikovsky performances, which fully justified the festival's policy of
giving the well-known works a hearing too.
The pair of concerts under Jansons included two other major pieces. On
Friday Shostakovich's Fifth Symphony again presented tension screwed to its
tightest notch. No slackening of the pace is allowed in Jansons's
Shostakovich, no brooding, no letting the attention wander; and this
symphony, in which the composer was forced by political blackmail to keep
his musical vision blinkered, is the most ideal Jansons material. On
Saturday Mikhail Rudy joined the orchestra for a strong account of
Rachmaninov's Second Piano Concerto. Where others may allow the famous main
theme to droop into spineless lyricism, Jansons set a tough, march-like
rhythmic tread in motion underneath and Rudy responded with playing equally
firm of purpose, the weighting finely judged, poetry and passion ever just
below the surface. After Edinburgh the St. Petersburg Philharmonic moves on
to the Proms. It should not be missed.
Concerts sponsored by IBM United Kingdom Ltd. and The Royal Bank of
Scotland.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920824

