FT923-15490

FT  02 JUL 92 / The Future of the European Fighter: Partners assess
feasibility of three-way split - Optimism belies serious concern


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent and ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


BRITAIN, with a 33 per cent stake in EFA, remained confident yesterday that
the programme would go ahead even if Germany pulled out.
British Aerospace (BAe) and General Electric Company (GEC), which is
involved in the development of the radar and electronic warfare system for
the aircraft, both said the project could continue as a three- rather than a
four-nation programme.
BAe also claimed that the aircraft could still be produced by the three
partners ( Britain, Italy and Spain) at a similar unit cost to that applying
to four partners.
Although initial British calculations suggested that German withdrawal might
lift EFA's price to the UK by 7 per cent - and by 12 per cent if Spain also
decided to pull out - officials yesterday argued that additional costs could
be reduced by reorganising the production plan and other measures.
'Already major savings have been identified,' Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the UK
defence secretary, said yesterday.
Costs could be saved by rationalising production and test sites. A German
withdrawal could also save costs because German wages are higher than those
in the three other partner countries.
One proposal is the establishment of a single production line, probably at
BAe's Warton plant in Lancashire.
However, this is likely to involve difficult negotiations between the
partners anxious to safeguard their work-sharing interests in the project.
Mr Rifkind also said yesterday he had been in contact with the Italian and
Spanish governments, which had indicated 'the importance they attach to this
project and their desire to see it go forward'.
However, this initial optimistic assessment does not disguise the
considerable uncertainty the German decision has created and the risk that
it could provoke severe repercussions to the programme and its future
viability.
Even if the other partners stay in the programme, they will have to
renegotiate the partnership in the event of German withdrawal.
This process could be complex and take at least 18 months, thus delaying
EFA's overall development timetable.
If the project collapsed, BAe estimates that around 40,000 jobs would be at
risk in the UK aerospace industry alone. Many thousands more jobs would be
indirectly affected in the UK.
The EFA programme needs a production run of about 400 aircraft to be viable.
When the four nations signed the original memorandum of understanding in
1988, they planned to buy a total of 765 aircraft: 250 each for Britain and
Germany, 165 for Italy and 100 for Spain.
Italy is now considering buying only 130 aircraft and Spain 87, while the UK
could reduce its original requirement to around 200 fighters. This would
still just make the necessary 400 aircraft break-even mark.
However, these figures could be revised again before the governments have to
commit orders for the aircraft next year.
This is likely to entail additional adjustments to workshare arrangements as
partner countries change the level of their proposed orders for the new
fighter.
German withdrawal would also have repercussions for broad industrial
collaboration in Europe.
'Withdrawal would be a backward step both substantively and symbolically,'
Mr Rifkind said yesterday. 'You cannot on the one hand make great rhetorical
flourishes in favour of European co-operation if you are simultaneously
withdrawing unilaterally from the most important example of European defence
collaboration.'
Mr Rifkind will ask Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, to clarify
his country's position on EFA when he visits London on Monday.
There is still some hope that Germany may in the end review its position and
stay in the programme, even though this would clearly require modifications
to the original four-nation project.
The feeling yesterday was this could result in a compromise, with Germany
ultimately opting for the EFA airframe but 'de-scoping' the aircraft by
adapting it with its own avionic and weapons systems to reduce costs.
Senior Royal Air Force officials said yesterday Germany could decide to
select a 'less capable' version of the aircraft if it changed its
operational requirements for the fighter.
An Italian Defence Ministry spokesman has said that officials were aware of
the changing German position on the future of the Eurofighter, Robert Graham
writes from Rome. But he added that no immediate reaction was likely from
the newly-installed government until it had passed a vote of confidence,
which will probably be held on Saturday.
Italy formally supports the original project in which it has a 21 per cent
stake, both because the air force needs such a new aircraft and because of
the industrial spin-offs. Both the Defence Ministry spokesman and Alenia,
the state-run aerospace company, responsible for the Italian end of the
project, said any decision would have to be a political one.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920702

