FT924-8048

FT  13 NOV 92 / Families curb spending on food


   By RICHARD EVANS


BRITONS are spending proportionally less on food and clothing and more on
their homes, transport and leisure according to government statistics
published today.
There are also indications that the country is saving more in spite of hopes
that a rise in consumer spending would help pull the economy out of
recession.
The wealth of statistics in the annual report on family spending compiled by
the Central Statistical Office shows that average weekly household
expenditure last year was Pounds 259, an increase of 4.8 per cent on 1990.
But with inflation running at 5.8 per cent over the same period, the figures
represent a decline in spending in real terms.
At the same time, average gross weekly income rose by 8 per cent to Pounds
363, giving support to the belief that more people were putting their money
in savings accounts rather than spending it.
The statistics, gathered from a representative sample of 7,000 households
across the country with each adult keeping a detailed diary of all
expenditure, give a definitive glimpse of how people spend their money.
They also highlight the great differences that remain in income and spending
patterns between the wealthier and poorer sections of society.
The average gross weekly income of households in the top fifth of the income
range, for example, was Pounds 825 compared with an average Pounds 76 for
the lowest fifth. Households in the lowest fifth received three quarters of
income on average from social security benefits.
The survey found that the number of people earning money from investments
has almost doubled in the last 20 years, from 3.6 per cent in 1971 to 6.5
per cent last year, while income from wages and salaries over the same
period dropped from 73.9 per cent to 61.2 per cent. There were also big
differences in the money families set aside for various items, with
high-income homes spending Pounds 21.53 a week on alcohol and Pounds 73.63
on food compared with Pounds 2.91 and Pounds 21.07 respectively for the
lowest earners.
In general, high-income families spent relatively more on clothing,
footwear, motoring and leisure services while low earners spent more on
housing, fuel, light, power and food.
Food and housing continued to be the two largest items of expenditure, and
together made up nearly 40 per cent of all spending. However, money spent on
food has dropped from 33 per cent of the total weekly budget in 1957 to just
under 18 per cent last year.
Expenditure on clothing and footwear also dropped, from about 10 per cent in
1957 to slightly over 6 per cent last year, while the amount spent on both
housing and motoring doubled over the same period. The amount spent on fuel,
light and power has remained steady.
The survey found that people in Northern Ireland spent most on fuel, light
and power bills with an average weekly expenditure of Pounds 14.81 per
household.
Households paid an average Pounds 24.96 last year in interest on credit
cards, and average weekly betting payments were Pounds 1.44. However,
average winnings were only 81p.
Households in the UK have been getting smaller, and now only a tenth conform
to the popular image of the average family of two adults and two children.
The average last year was 2.42 people per household, the lowest figure
recorded since the survey started in 1957.
Nearly one in three households consist of single people, twice as many as 30
years ago, and just over two thirds of householders are owner-occupiers.
Scotland has the lowest proportion of owner-occupiers at just under 50 per
cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921113

