FT922-4212

FT  06 JUN 92 / Sport: Graf needs the superhuman touch - This afternoon
Monica Seles will try to complete a hat-trick of French Open wins /  A look
forward to the final


   By JOHN BARRETT


THIS afternoon's French Open final between the reigning world champion,
Monica Seles of Yugoslavia, and the woman she displaced from that pinnacle,
Germany's Steffi Graf, will be the eighth contest between these two since
they first met on the same slow clay of Paris in 1989.
Monica was 15 then, a tall thin girl with whirling matchstick limbs on which
she lurched about the court, projecting early double-handed forehands and
backhands of astonishing power and accuracy - each blow accompanied by a
ferocious grunt.
Steffi was 19, the perfect athlete and holder of all four grand slam titles,
as well as the winner of the Olympic gold medal. I still remember the look
of disbelief on her face when the precocious Yugoslav left-hander took the
middle set of their semi-final and pushed her to the limit in the decider.
This was the first time I had studied the remarkable Seles, and I could see
what Graf's father, Peter, had meant when he had told me two years earlier,
following Steffi's first grand slam success in Paris over Martina
Navratilova: 'The one to watch is Seles, she has a quality of shotmaking
that none of the others can match.' How right he was. A year after that
first meeting, on the eve of the 1990 French championships in Berlin, Steffi
lost for the first time to Seles, a decisive 6-4 6-3 and a prelude to
another success for Monica in the Paris final.
Seles knew the significance of that 7-6 6-4 win. 'That was so important to
me: a first grand slam title meant that I was up there with the others. I
was rather surprised that I won actually, but it meant that on clay at least
I could beat Steffi.'
It also meant that within four years the French Open had crowned three
youngest-ever champions. In 1987 Steffi won at 17 years, 11 months, 23 days.
Two years later Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario beat Graf to lower that record by
five months and in 1990 Seles became the champion at 16 years 6 months.
This will be the third encounter between Seles and Graf at these
championships, their second final on this famous showcourt, built in 1928 as
a stage for the four French musketeers, Borotra, Lacoste, Cochet and Brugnon
and the queen of French tennis, Suzanne Lenglen.
Borotra and Lacoste will probably be there today to see if Seles can achieve
something that even Lenglen never did by winning the French title three
years in a row. It is true that Lenglen was the champion from 1920 to 1923
but the event was a domestic French affair then.
Not until 1925 were overseas players admitted and Lenglen could win only
twice more in 1925 and 1926 before turning professional. The only players to
have scored the hat-trick are the Californian Helen Wills Moody (1928-30)
and Germany's Hilde Sperling (1935-37). Lenglen is someone whom Seles
greatly admires, an interest sparked by the late Ted Tinling who had once
been Suzanne's official umpire and later became the game's finest couturier.
It was no surprise when Monica appeared in a 1920's costume that Suzanne
would have adored, following her Australian Open win last January.
It was a gesture that said a great deal about Monica's sense of style and
timing, qualities that she required in full on Thursday to overcome a
determined challenge from Gabriela Sabatini.
Having watched their final in Rome last month, a match which had revealed a
new resourcefulness about the Argentinian No 1, I was waiting to see how
Seles would cope with the drop shots and cleverly angled volleys that had
defeated her that day. She very nearly did not cope at all. When Sabatini
led 4-2 in the final set I thought that Seles had left it too late after
squandering a winning opportunity in the second set when a break point that
would have left her serving for the match at 5-4 eluded her.
Not for the first time, Seles revealed her remarkable match-playing ability.
When all seemed lost and she looked tired, she stepped up the pace and broke
Sabatini to 15. An opening volley after a blazing return was followed by
some of the fiercest groundstrokes you will see - each piercing drive
faster, deeper, lower over the net than the last - to clinch the game.
It spelt the end of Sabatini's resistance. Three games in a row fell to
Seles, the last after saving two break points with two more blazing forehand
winners. The 6-3 4-6 6-4 victory was extremely impressive.
Earlier on Thursday, a day when the top four seeds were all involved in the
semi-finals for the first time in Paris since open tennis began in 1968, the
German had done well to beat Sanchez-Vicario. The Spaniard took the first
six games, just as she had done last year in inflicting a 6-0 6-2 defeat on
the former champion.
This was the worst beating ever endured by Graf. To her credit Graf began to
control her wayward forehand that had committed more than 20 unforced errors
in the opening set. Instead of pressing home her advantage, Sanchez-Vicario
played rather too carefully, trying to extract a win rather than impose one.
The tactic proved fatal for it allowed Graf to dig in and get some rhythm
and confidence.
By the end she was approaching her normal form with the sliced backhand,
deep and fast, digging into the red dirt to set up the openings for the
forehand winners which at last outnumbered forehand losers. The final
result, 0-6 6-2 6-2, measured Graf's improvement, but she will need to avoid
such a poor start today if she is to regain the title that she last held in
1988.
Steffi must remind herself that she beat Seles twice last year, once on hard
courts in the US and once on clay in Europe. However, neither win was in a
major event and Seles has shown that she reserves her best for these
occasions.
Already the winner of five grand slam titles at a younger age than anyone
before her and successful in the last four she has contested, it seems that
only a superhuman opponent can halt her progress. These past two weeks, Graf
has looked all too human.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920606

