FT924-11393

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (19): Hamburg - A revitalised gateway /
Bright prospects for the port-city, media metropolis and high tech centre


   By QUENTIN PEEL


IT IS hard to believe that just seven years ago, Hamburg was trailing behind
the rest of West Germany, a depressed city with double the national average
unemployment.
Its port and its shipbuilding industry had been through traumatic
adjustments with mass redundancies, and the big oil refining industry was
languishing from the effects of the latest oil price shock.
Germany's prosperity seemed to be shifting ever more to the south, leaving
the proud Hanseatic port city out on the periphery of both the German and
the European economies.
And then the city picked itself up. Today it is bursting at the seams, the
streets bustling, shops bulging with goods, cranes swinging over a string of
large property developments, and with an air of self-confidence which would
have been unthinkable back in 1985.
Business at the port is stronger than ever, while financial services,
especially insurance and banking, run second only to Frankfurt; and Hamburg
is the undisputed media capital of Germany.
Where it is was formerly headquarters for a declining shipbuilding industry,
it is the aerospace and aviation sector, with Deutsche Airbus, and
Lufthansa's marketing and maintenance divisions, which is the dominant force
today.
Part of the story is about German unification, that windfall of history
which has left Hamburg no longer cut off, with a third of its natural
hinterland behind the Iron Curtain, but ideally placed as the best equipped
gateway to eastern Germany and the rest of eastern Europe - not to mention a
revitalised Baltic Sea basin.
But unification was really only the icing on the cake. For Hamburg had
already managed to turn the corner towards a recovered prosperity well
before the Berlin Wall came down: it is rather a story of the remarkable
depth and resilience of the German economy.
'Things looked lousy for us back in 1985,' says Dr Urda Martens-Jeebe, of
the Hamburg business development corporation, (HWF).
'There was the oil price shock (five oil majors have their German
headquarters in Hamburg), unemployment was rising, shipyard subsidies were
being drastically cut: it was a structural and economic crisis.'
That was the year when the HWF was founded, in what at the time must have
appeared as a fairly desperate effort to bring back jobs to the city. It was
also the year the city hit the bottom of its own regional recession, and
started to bounce back. It was a fortunate coincidence.
'From 1986/87, the growth in investment picked up to the national average,'
according to Dr Claus Noe, the state secretary for economics in the city
government. 'It was the first signal that the structural crisis had been
overcome.
'Between 1987 and 1989, two things happened which helped Hamburg. First, the
psychology disappeared that there was a north-south divide in Germany. And
that was supported by the development in competitive costs.
'Our big rivals, such as Munich, Frankfurt and Dusseldorf, were showing
classic symptoms of boom conditions: rents, land prices, and transport
problems were all combining to frighten off the investors. They started
looking around for another site, and Hamburg suddenly was in demand.'
Hamburg may have suddenly started to enjoy a significant competitive
advantage, but the hard graft of the HWF has also paid off. The aim was to
make the city more conscious of investors, and investors more aware of the
city.
'We had to make the city more friendly towards business,' says Dr
Martens-Jeebe.
'It is our job to make it clear if the economic policies of the Senate - the
city's governing council - are not in the interests of the business
community.'
The HWF tried to identify those areas where, in spite of its restructuring
problems, the city still was a leader.
'We had forgotten what Hamburg offered. Everyone assumed the high tech
locations were in the south. But medical technology was here - and
pharmaceuticals.
'It is the media metropolis, all the big publishers were here. And it was
already a headquarters for civil aviation.
'We had to create an investment consciousness: that it was good and right to
be in Hamburg. There was no point in trying to get the sort of industries in
Munich - we are not going to get a major motor manufacturer.'
Then the HWF concentrated on markets for potential investors: particularly
Scandinavia, Britain (with very strong historical ties to Hamburg), the east
coast of the US, and the Far East.
The real success story has been with investors from the Far East: they
identified Hamburg as the ideal base for a foothold in the future single EC
market.
In 1987, the Evergreen container shipping company from Taiwan decided to
make its European headquarters there. Today there are 63 different Taiwan
operations in the city.
Part of Hamburg's attraction has been its life style. Being a big media
centre helps: there is a thriving cultural scene, and a lively intellectual
community.
Hamburg is trying to attract head offices, rather than big manufacturing
operations, for which it does not really have the space - 'the living
conditions are good, so they have no difficulty getting their managers to
come here willingly,' says Dr Martens-Jeebe.
At the same time, Hamburg is now co-operating with the neighbouring federal
state of Schleswig-Holstein, not competing: the city tries to attract the
headquarters, while the factory site can be located in Schleswig-Holstein.
All that was happening before 1989, when the Berlin Wall came down.
Unification simply meant that the revival of Hamburg suddenly accelerated:
imports soared, construction companies won new contracts in the east, the
city's food processing industries, breweries and the like found a huge new
market on their doorstep.
In 1935, about one third of Hamburg's income came from its economic ties
with what became East Germany. Now that is likely to be realised again.
It is not only eastern Germany. For all its economic plight, the liberation
of eastern Europe and the Soviet Union has opened up the Baltic Sea as a
whole economic area. And the applications of Sweden and Finland to join the
EC, as well as the presence of all Scandinavia in the European Economic
Area, means that Hamburg is no longer on the periphery.
Of course, there are problems. Rents for housing have increased about 40 per
cent in five years. There is an urgent need for a fourth crossing of the
river Elbe to relieve traffic congestion. And the relatively high structural
unemployment remains.
One problem is that with all the high technology industries, Hamburg has not
been attracting jobs for its unqualified workers - 'we are a high wage, high
technology city,' comments Dr Noe.
'Unqualified workers are not needed in a high technology service centre.
That is a big problem,' he adds. The only other thing Dr Noe is worried
about is that Hamburg will be described as a 'boom town.'
'We don't like that expression,' he says. 'It means the last phase of the
economic cycle - and it means over-heating. There is no talk of that here
yet.'

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921026

