FT924-8234

FT  12 NOV 92 / UK Company News: J Bibby suffers 9% downturn to Pounds 32.2m


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


J BIBBY & Sons, the industrial and agricultural group which recently became
the first foreign company to win a hostile bid in Spain, yesterday revealed
a 9 per cent fall in annual pre-tax profits to Pounds 32.2m on sales 14 per
cent higher at Pounds 625.2m.
The profits included a Pounds 1.9m contribution at the operating level from
Finanzauto, Spain's only Caterpillar distributor, and its Portuguese
subsidiary, Stet, which Bibby acquired for Pounds 86m this summer after a
six-month-long bid battle.
After interest charges, however, Finanzauto - which was purchased in July -
incurred a Pounds 1m loss, while Stet returned a profit.
Mr Richard Mansell-Jones, chairman, said the prospects for Finanzauto were
good following a restructuring of the business. 'I would hope this time next
year to be making very bullish noises about Finanzauto in 1994,' he said.
However, the outlook for the group as a whole - which is 79 per cent-owned
by Barlow Rand, the South African Caterpillar distributor - remained
difficult. 'Our current expectation is that . . . bleak conditions will
probably prevail well into . . . 1993,' he said.
Bibby's four other businesses all suffered a decline in operating profit,
with the sharpest fall in agricultural products.
Severe price competition in animal feeds had depressed margins, although Mr
Mansell-Jones said there would be room for improvement following a
rationalisation of the industry earlier this year.
In the materials handling division, the recessionary conditions of the UK
were offset by growth in the south-eastern US.
Scientific products suffered from declining markets and a bad debt of Pounds
1m from Japan. Mr Mansell-Jones said the Japanese market was proving
increasingly difficult.
Finally, Bibby's paper operations were down almost 10 per cent at the
trading level, but slightly higher in pre-tax terms.
During the year, Bibby cut gearing from a peak of 120 per cent to 65.6 per
cent, although on a banking basis - which includes guarantees as debt - the
ratio was 77.9 per cent.
The final dividend is maintained at 6.9p, for a same-again total of 9.75p.
Earnings of 20.09p, against 20.61p, were cushioned by a substantially lower
tax charge of 18.2 per cent (29.1 per cent).

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921112

