FT924-11927

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (22):  Single
pricing would highlight those 'extras' - Charges, Changes are in the
pipeline, powered by the fund management industry and by regulation / Survey
of Unit Trusts


   By JOHN AUTHERS


COMPARED WITH other investment products, unit trust charges are relatively
easy to calculate. However, this is not necessarily an advantage.
Despite pressure from regulators, life assurance products - generally more
expensive than unit trusts - come with no obvious price tag. So unit trusts
can lose out in comparison.
The unit trust industry is therefore debating whether to make its products
even cheaper. Current unit trust pricing is tightly determined by legal
regulations.
Charges can usually be broken down as follows:
Bid-offer spread. This quaint piece of phraseology is borrowed from
share-dealing. It is intended to allow for the costs incurred by the unit
trust in trading.
The investor buys units at one price (the offer) and sells at another (the
bid). The difference between the two can vary substantially, but the average
is probably around 6 per cent. That means that, if you invest Pounds 1,000,
the immediate resale value of your holding is just Pounds 940.
The bid-offer spread reflects two underlying costs. Unit trust managers
invest in shares and face the bid-offer spread imposed by equity
marketmakers. They pass this cost on to investors via their pricing
mechanism.
The second and normally larger cost is the initial charge. This covers the
costs of setting up your investment, including administration, paperwork,
and the unit trust company's sales costs. A typical initial, or 'front-end',
charge would be 5 per cent, of which around 3 percentage points would
reflect the commission paid to the salesman or the independent financial
adviser. So out of a Pounds 1,000 investment, Pounds 10 might go on
share-dealing costs, Pounds 20 to the manager and Pounds 30 to the salesman.
There are ways of reducing this charge. If you approach the management
company direct, with a large enough sum, say Pounds 20,000, you may be able
to negotiate a smaller spread. And a fee-charging adviser should be able to
rebate commission, although a fee will be payable instead.
Management charges. These are ongoing, and are deducted from the value of
the fund each year. Again, they are expressed as a percentage of the fund,
typically 1 or 1.5 per cent, and are intended to pay for the management
costs - paying for research, software, and fund managers' salaries.
When you look at unit trust statistics, these will be quoted on an
'offer-to-bid' basis, so that they take fair account of the actual costs
faced by investors. Some companies quote figures on an offer-to-offer basis
 -so take care.
None of this seems simple (unless you have ever read an account of a life
office's charges). But significant changes are in the pipeline, powered both
by the fund management industry itself and by regulation.
Moves are afoot to allow single pricing. Funds would have only one price,
and any extra charges would, very visibly, need to be shown as an addition
to this. Those who want to invest the maximum in a unit trust personal
equity plan (Pep) already have the charges made clear to them; they pay the
maximum Pounds 6,000 plus, typically, the Pounds 360 of charges on top. This
could produce a powerful push towards cutting overall charges.
Regulations do not stop innovative methods of charging for unit trusts, if
held within a Pep. This has resulted in moves by Fidelity and then Gartmore,
who cut the front-end charges on their Peps from 5 per cent to 2 per cent.
However, investors who discontinue their Pep within a year pay 3 per cent
extra. This goes down to 2 per cent within two years, and 1 per cent within
three. After three years, there is no exit charge. The idea is to encourage
long-term investment.
Scottish Equitable has also done away with its 5 per cent front-end fee
altogether, and replaced it with a flat fee of Pounds 45 plus VAT - less
than 1 per cent for those who invest the maximum Pounds 6,000. However,
Scottish Equitable has introduced an extra 0.875 per cent annual charge,
which may help it reclaim some of its lost profits.
Will this lead to a price war? Robin Berrill, of Henderson Unit Trusts, is
adamant that it will not. His group has no intention of further cutting
front-end charges, and he says such a move could lead to many managers
leaving the industry. This could mean less competition for the consumer.
He is also angry that concentration on unit trust pricing has diverted
attention from the charges paid for life products, which are still in
general much higher.
But lower initial charges need not necessarily damage fund managers'
profits. More than half the charge goes straight to the salesman. And if the
perception of lower charges brings in more investors, managers can profit
from the effect of a larger annual management charge.
In February, Murray Johnstone, the Glasgow fund manager, slashed its
front-end charge from 6 per cent to 1 per cent (while increasing its annual
charge from 1 to 1.5 per cent). The effect on its business was dramatic - in
the year to June 1991, sales of Pounds 4.2m were out-balanced by Pounds
13.9m in repurchases. In the year to June this year, sales increased to
Pounds 15.2m, while repurchases dropped to Pounds 12.0m.
The problem lies with intermediaries - fund managers that adopt this
approach cut themselves off from most advisers, and must rely either on
direct investment from private investors, or on fee-charging advisers. Can
British fund managers distribute enough funds this way?
The experience in the US, where regulators allow much more varied charging
structures, is encouraging. While many mutual funds - the American
equivalent of unit trusts - are sold through insurance brokers and
representatives, with similar front-end charges to those levied here, there
is also a range of 'low load' funds. These have much lower front-end
charges, and are sold direct to the public, via press and other advertising.
Fidelity, the biggest fund manager in the US with funds under management of
Dollars 182bn, charges between 2 and 3 per cent front-end for equity funds,
with no initial charge at all for bond and money-market funds. An American
spokeswoman is quite clear about it: 'We charge less than 3 per cent, and
that's the way we've grown. We sell direct to the customer for the most
part, and we try to give the best value for the least cost. That's the theme
on which this company was built.'
However, the US market is much larger than the UK, and it is easier to
attract enough investors to make 'low load' and 'no load' funds profitable.
In the UK, Fidelity itself believes that the low-load route would be
impossible. It may even be that the move to lower charges is merely a
reflection of the desperate need of managers to drum up business.
But whatever the reason, a choice of charging structures can only be
excellent news for the consumer.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

921023

