FT923-10695

FT  29 JUL 92 / Output decline may equal last recession, says CBI


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


UK MANUFACTURING faces a drop in output during the current recession which
could be as steep as the decline it suffered a decade ago, according to the
Confederation of British Industry.
The CBI's latest survey of industrial trends says manufacturing output fell
by 0.6 per cent in the second quarter of the year compared with the previous
quarter.
Manufacturers, whose optimism about the economy has fallen sharply since
April, now expect output to continue declining over the next four months and
for demand to remain flat.
If, as the CBI's projections show, manufacturing output in the third quarter
falls by 0.9 per cent, the total drop in output, from a peak in the fourth
quarter of 1989, would be 14 per cent. During the 1980/81 recession,
government figures recorded the drop in output from peak to trough as 15 per
cent.
The latest results from the CBI dashed expectations expressed at the time of
the last survey that output and orders would pick up. In fact, orders and
output continued to fall over the past four months.
Official figures for manufacturing output in June and July from the Central
Statistical Office, have yet to be released. The May figure showed a small
month on month fall in output after a 0.4 per cent increase in the first
quarter when compared with the previous quarter.
Mr David Wigglesworth, chairman of the CBI's economic situation committee,
said: 'We don't know when the recession will end and this uncertainty is
having a negative effect on all of us. The continuing cuts in investment
bode very ill for the medium and longer term competitiveness of Britain's
manufacturing industry.'
The survey also highlighted the pressure on manufacturers to cut prices.
Profit margins continued to be squeezed over the past four months as more
firms cut rather than raised prices at the factory gates.
Mr Wigglesworth said the only positive results from the survey were that
inflation was still falling and that companies were not planning to cut
investment in training and product innovation.
The survey indicated that many manufacturers will continue to cut their
staff and investment. But the rate of increase in unemployment has slowed
down and is not expected to worsen.
Despite the survey, UK equities enjoyed a widely expected rally yesterday.
An early gain on Wall Street helped produce a sharp rise in the second half
of the session in London and the FT-SE Index closed at 2,373.4, an increase
of 25.4. The trading volume, however, was not large enough to imply a
convincing change in the investment mood.
CBI expects drop in output and cut in jobs Page 7
Lex Page 18
London stocks Page 38

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920729

