FT923-6486

FT  24 AUG 92 / International Company News: LSI Logic to centre its
manufacturing in Japan


   By LOUISE KEHOE


LSI LOGIC, the Silicon Valley semiconductor manufacturer, is to close its
plant in Germany, reduce operations in the US and shift most of its
manufacturing to Japan and the Asia Pacific region.
About 450 jobs will be lost, including about 275 in Germany, in a broad
restructuring of the group's manufacturing and product strategy. 'Our cost
structure is out of line with the current level of revenues and we are
compelled to reduce costs, and do it quickly,' said Mr Wilfred Corrigan,
chairman and chief executive.
LSI, which specialises in application specific integrated circuits, will
take charges of Dollars 95m to Dollars 110m in the current quarter and
expects to report net losses of about Dollars 100m. For the second quarter,
LSI reported losses of Dollars 5.8m on sales of Dollars 151.8m.
The German assembly and test factory in Braunschweig was opened in 1985 and
is one of the most advanced of its kind in the world. It was built to serve
expected strong demand from the European computer industry, Mr Corrigan
said, but the anticipated level of demand failed to materialise.
'There is very little PC or computer workstation manufacturing in Europe,
and this represents a large portion of our market,' he noted.
The rise in the value of the D-Mark against the dollar has made the factory
more costly to operate, Mr Corrigan added, and it could no longer compete
with the lower costs of subcontractors in Asia.
In addition to closing the German plant, LSI Logic said that over the next
18 months it would shift the bulk of its wafer fabrication operations to
Japan where it had a large scale facility and was in the process of
constructing a new factory in a joint venture with Kawasaki Steel. Research
and development as well as pilot line production would remain in the US.
'Following completion of the new wafer factory in Japan in 1993, LSI Logic
does not foresee the need to build new wholly owned plant capacity,' said Mr
Corrigan.
The company aims either to share the cost of future plants with strategic
partners as it has in Japan or to subcontract manufacturing. The cost of new
semiconductor plants has risen sharply over the past few years, making them
affordable by only the world's largest chip makers.
'By the mid-1990s you are going to see a lot of shared chip plants,' Mr
Corrigan predicted. LSI's problems stem from losses in the market for
personal computer chipsets driven by sharp declines in PC prices.
However, the bigger issue faced by LSI is high overhead costs. The cuts will
reduce costs by about Dollars 10m per quarter, the company said. LSI
projected net losses of about Dollars 100m after charges, for the current
quarter but said that it hoped to return to profitability in the fourth
quarter.
'We are committed to lowering our break-even point, restoring profitability,
and pursuing a value-added product strategy with emphasis on intellectual
property, ASIC design tools and system-level integration,' Mr Corrigan said.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920824

