FT922-450

FT  27 JUN 92 / Summer Food: Fire, without smoke - Barbecues really do go
better with gas


   By PETER KNIGHT


A GAS barbecue might sound like heresy, but it works. It is ready in 10
minutes (as opposed to at least 30 with charcoal), the fuel is clean (no
dirty hands and no woodsmoke) and it does not need to be lit with smelly and
environmentally damaging petrochemicals.
More important, the food tastes just as good cooked with gas as it does with
the more traditional fuels.
But there is a problem. All gas barbecues look hideous, much like an old
radiogramme stuck to the top of a wheeled Zimmer frame. These contraptions -
known as 'wagons' - are certainly not suitable for Design Museum groupies,
who much prefer the beautifully bulbous Weber kettles. Weber does offer a
gas model but it is also in the 'wagon-style'. As one of my snootier
metropolitan friends put it when he first saw my latest toy: 'Very
Weybridge, don't you think?'
Grilled meat, goes the theory, gets its unique taste from the fat that drips
from the meat, vaporises on the hot coals and returns to flavour its source.
Most gas barbecues provide a layer of larva rock between the flame and the
food. Some use metal or a ceramic surface instead, but the idea is to
provide radiant heat underneath the food - exactly the same principle as
glowing charcoal.
Barbecueing is mainly a male hobbyist activity and is consequently riddled
with mystique and claptrap. Every daddy with his Texas Homecare tongs and
plasticised apron has a theory on how to get the best flavour from the
coals. Some use wood chips, some marinade, some blow the dust from the coals
with a hairdryer and many manage to undercook the chicken while smoking out
the neighbours.
All you really need for a barbecue - if you have the space and no neighbours
 -is a bit of chicken wire, a few bricks and some logs to burn into coals.
But few of us, especially those in the city, have this opportunity. That is
why I spent about Pounds 120 on a Thermos WG22 - which so grievously fails
the domestic aesthetics test that my wife forces me to hide in the hedge.
You do not have to spend as much, but most people spend much more. There are
portable versions for under Pounds 50. These are simple trays with a burner
and some larva rock. The carrying handles become feet and they work off
disposable Gaz cylinders found in camping shops. For double the price you
get a much sturdier device that has automatic ignition (as in a cooker),
uses a refillable Calor gas cylinder and has two adjustable burners, which
give gradations of heat on the same cooking surface.
The barbecues become more sophisticated as the price rises, with the most
expensive models costing about Pounds 500. However, no matter what the
price, the principle remains roughly the same, although some manufacturers
replace the larva rock with metal or porcelain devices that are designed to
do the same job.
Most gas barbecues have a lid that turns the device into an oven. Large
pieces of meat or whole chickens can be roasted with the lid down, either on
a spit or on a dish. The lid can also be used to smoke the meat, by throwing
aromatic wood chips on the larva rock a few minutes before serving.
British Gas sells a range of bottled gas barbecues from Pounds 45 to Pounds
400. It also offers a small range of fixed versions that are built in and
connected to the gas mains. Garden centres, department stores, DIY stores
and Argos also sell gas models.
A big drawback is that these barbecues are reasonably complicated bits of
machinery and they have to be assembled at home like some giant Meccano set.
Unless you particularly like spending time screwing bits of metal together,
this can be tedious.
You will need to allow at least two to three hours to put them together. Be
prepared to get very frustrated along the way and, above all, make sure you
read the erratum note in the instructions. I spent ages wondering how I was
going to get a WG screw into a hole that was obviously designed to take a
different diameter.
If you can persuade the shop to sell it assembled, do. It really is worth
it. Do not even try to put it together unless you are reasonably calm about
screwing, bolting and following written instructions. Gas can be dangerous
and while home assembly is not difficult, it must be done correctly.
Choosing between the different models is difficult. Price usually reflects
the ruggedness of construction and the number of extra facilities, such as
shelves and racks. The more expensive versions also have glass windows on
the lid so that you can peek in to see how the roast is doing.
The main difference is in the size of the grilling area (important if you
want to cater for crowds) and extras such as warming racks and shelves.
Remember to ask if the price includes a regulator - the switch that goes on
the gas cylinder.
I was in a hurry and bought my Thermos from Sainsbury's Homebase. It does
not sell regulators and did not know where I could get one. I would have got
a marginally better deal at British Gas which included a regulator and (at
the moment) a Pounds 5 voucher for the gas cylinder, which has to be bought
elsewhere. British Gas includes delivery in its price. Argos sells the same
model at Pounds 99, but without a regulator (about Pounds 10).
Barbecueing on gas is a little different from charcoal. Heat is controlled
by regulating the flame rather than moving the grill. At my first attempt I
had the heat too high and the chicken fat caused rather alarming flaring.
Once the flame was reduced and the larva rock had cooled sufficiently the
chicken cooked well.
You can give vegetables, such as sliced aubergines and zucchini, that
authentic criss-cross grill pattern and they taste as good as in any
fashionable Italian restaurant, especially when piled high and dressed with
parmesan, basil and olive oil.
One of the biggest benefits of gas is that you can have char-grilled food
throughout the year without going to a restaurant. I am not sure if I will
be out in the garden grilling in my overcoat in December, but I like to
think I will.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920627

