FT921-11738

FT  30 JAN 92 / World Stock Markets: Manila recovers after a series of
disasters - The Mt Pinatubo eruption could not stop the market last year


   By VICTOR MALLET


Political risk looms large in the minds of investors contemplating the
Philippines stock market.
Starting from a deep trough, the market was south-east Asia's best performer
last year and continued to forge ahead in early January, encouraging brokers
in Manila's Makati business district to declare themselves resolutely
bullish.
Mr Irving Ackerman, an American broker resident in the Philippines for 37
years, is in tune with the mood of his colleagues and rivals, but he recalls
self-deprecatingly how he told the Makati Rotary Club, in November 1989,
that Filipinos were about to enjoy their most prosperous period in years. A
week later, a failed coup attempt of which economic effects are felt to this
day destroyed confidence at home and abroad. 'All the things I had said went
into the trash can,' he says.
A series of disasters, including an earthquake, a typhoon and the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait, followed the coup attempt, and it was only in 1991 - in
spite of a severe setback prompted by the eruption of the Mt Pinatubo
volcano - that the market recovered from depression. From under 600 in early
January last year, the Manila composite index rose to 1,303 by January 17
this year, a performance dented only by inflation of 17 per cent and - for
foreign investors - a slight decline in the peso against the dollar.
Over the last 10 days the index has been falling back again, partly because
of uncertainty about the outcome of the May elections, although yesterday it
recovered 11.45 to 1,242.04.
Speculation by Filipinos disenchanted with property and other investments
has been crucial to the stock market's rise, according to Mr Erico Claudio
of James Capel. The traditional refuge of the local speculator, the US
dollar, became increasingly unattractive as economic reforms and stagnant
imports created a plentiful supply of dollars in Manila.
'The stock market here is still very speculative,' says Mr Claudio. 'It is
only in the past few years that trust funds and institutional investors have
started looking at the market. Foreigners were not able to ride on this
local rise because it did not make sense to them.'
Brokers say that foreign fund managers in Hong Kong, London and other
centres now account for only about 10 to 15 per cent of volume on the rival
Manila and Makati exchanges, and have reduced the Philippines share of
regional funds to around 3 per cent. A liberalisation of foreign exchange
regulations, allowing foreign investors to expatriate money within two weeks
to a month after a sale, has improved the market's image, but volume remains
modest - typically worth Dollars 15m or less a day - and prices volatile.
The Securities and Exchange Commission is regarded as competent but
underfunded, and the existence of two competing exchanges, each marking
prices in chalk, is incon-venient for foreign investors even if it provides
arbitrage opportunities for energetic local brokers.
Last year's rise notwithstanding, brokers have been advising their foreign
clients to buy selected blue chips, particularly those which might benefit
from increased spending by consumers as politicians spread their money
around before the elections.
San Miguel, the beer and food conglomerate, Philippine Long Distance
Telephone (PLDT) and Ayala Land remain the favourites, but brokers are
advising some of their bolder clients to look at oil and oil service
companies likely to benefit from further oil finds, and at companies with
lower price/earnings ratios. One such is the recently floated Manila
Electric Co (Meralco), the electricity distributor with a prospective 1992
p/e of less than five; but it has little track record and faces the risk of
lost revenue caused by power shortages if drought continues.
Mr Ackerman notes that the dominance of major stocks such as San Miguel
makes the rise in the composite index deceptive. 'The average is not exactly
indicative of the real situation,' he says, suggesting there might be more
mileage in less well known stocks, in the mining sector for example.
Analysts in the Philippines believe that the market will rise further, but
they accept that foreigners are concerned about political uncertainty in the
run-up to the elections in May. 'That is why investors continue to be
cautious,' says Mr Villamor Vital, chief strategist at All Asia Securities.
Or, as Mr Claudio puts it: 'We assume that foreigners will invest after the
election.'

The Financial Times


London Page 35

920130

