FT923-6574

FT  24 AUG 92 / Pressure on pound unsettles Tory MPs


   By Financial Times Reporters


THE ECONOMIC uncertainty in the UK as a result of the pound's weakness
triggered a new spate of public unease from Conservative backbenchers
although there were sharp divisions over how to respond.
With Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, not due back from Italy until later
today it was left to Mr Gerry Malone MP, the party's deputy chairman, to try
to calm the many backbench Tory MPs now expressing both deep-seated unease
and fiercely divided opinions as to the correct political strategy.
He told the BBC that the markets were testing the government's resolve on
inflation. It was crucial, he said, for Britain to remain within its ERM
bands as part of a consistent programme to cut inflation and interest rates.
Refusing to rule out interest rates rises as an option, he added: 'Nobody
ever saw this as a one-way street.'
Downing Street said there were no formal plans for a meeting between Mr
Major and Mr Lamont. Instead, they would both probably 'take stock' during
the day.
Conservative Euro-sceptics have seized on sterling's weakness and the
continuing UK recession to press their case for Britain's withdrawal from
the ERM.
Building societies warned that they would be unable to keep their mortgage
rates down if there were an increase in the banks' base rate this week.
'If base rates go up, there is no doubt that mortgage rates will follow very
quickly. Building societies don't have the scope to absorbed an increase,'
said Leeds Permanent, the fifth largest building society.
Business leaders would greet an increase in interest rates, with dismay.
While industry has been generally supportive of the government's
anti-inflation stance within the ERM, it has repeatedly singled out interest
rate cuts as an essential step to economic recovery. The Confederation of
British Industry has been calling on the government to implement minor
interest rate reductions.
The prospect of higher borrowing costs will further demoralise the business
community. Any rise is certain to bring renewed warnings of company closures
and job losses. There will be particular anxiety over the prospects for
corporate investment programmes.
More outspoken criticism of the government's handling of the economy is also
likely, along with demands from some industries that Britain either quits
the ERM or seeks a realignment of the currencies within it.
Mr Peter Morgan, director general of the Institute of Directors, claimed
that many businessmen had not wanted Britain to join the ERM in the first
place.
Mr Ronald Taylor, director general of the British Chambers of Commerce,
conceded higher rates might be necessary but added: 'We are part of a club.
I don't think you can walk away and abandon it just because you have hit a
spot of bother, albeit a very difficult and deep spot of bother.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920824

