FT924-6033

FT  24 NOV 92 / World Trade News: Luxembourg minister may win MacSharry job


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


LUXEMBOURG has appointed Mr Rene Steichen to its seat on the 17-member
European Commission, with a strong chance he will take over the EC farm
portfolio from Mr Ray MacSharry next year.
Mr Steichen, 42, has been agriculture minister in Luxembourg's Christian
Democrat-led coalition since 1989.
He takes over the Grand Duchy's top spot in Brussels from Mr Jean
Dondelinger, the cultural affairs commissioner, whose health has been poor.
In September, Mr MacSharry turned down the Irish government's invitation to
stay on in his post.
He has announced that he is retiring from public life to pursue a career in
the private sector. Since then, no obvious candidate to succeed him has
emerged.
The post of agriculture commissioner brings control over more than half the
Community budget, and by tradition is held by a small country.
It holds diminished attraction now that Mr MacSharry has settled reform of
the Common Agricultural Policy and has negotiated agreement with the US on
long-running disputes with the EC over subsidised food exports.
It is also possible that in the new Commission, which is due to take office
from January 1, 1993, agriculture's international dimension will be hived
off, leaving Mr MacSharry's successor the important but mundane job of
managing markets.
Mr Steichen has also had charge of cultural affairs, and could fill Mr
Dondelinger's job; however, he seems an obvious choice for agriculture now
that mooted candidates from Portugal and the Netherlands have failed to
emerge.
Mr Antonio Cardoso e Cunha, the Portuguese commissioner, is to be replaced
by Lisbon's foreign minister, Mr Joao de Deus Pinheiro, rather than Mr
Arlindo Cunha, the farm minister who chaired the last stage of the CAP
reform talks.
Mr Frans Andriessen, the EC external affairs commissioner, seems likely to
stay for another two years.
Two possible replacements from Holland, Mr Piet Dankert, minister for
Europe, and Mr Gerrit Braks, a former farm minister, had also been canvassed
for the agriculture job.
It was rumoured in Brussels in recent weeks that France might get the farm
slot, in order to help offset its farmers' hostility to the CAP and Gatt
reforms.
Few Commission officials or EC diplomats give this idea credence, but it may
resurface during the difficult negotiations in coming weeks between France
and its partners.
Luxembourg's appointment makes it certain that there will be at least five
new commissioners in January, though this number could still rise to eight
or nine.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921124

