FT921-498

FT  28 MAR 92 / Books: Turbulent master of the macabre


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


EDGAR A. POE: MOURNFUL AND NEVER-ENDING REMEMBRANCE by Kenneth Silverman
Weidenfeld & Nicolson Pounds 25, 564 pages
'EA POE - Ho] Ho] Ho] . .' chanted Noel Coward to roars of laughter from his
Las Vegas audience. Poe was teased about his name in his lifetime too. This
is one of the few glimmerings of humour in Kenneth Silverman's new
biography. It clears up many misconceptions about, and is the fruit of years
of research into, Poe's sad strange life. Name apart, there can never have
been less cause for mirth in the life of a writer.
Tragedy struck in Poe's infancy and rarely let him be till he died at the
age of 40 in 1849. His mother Eliza Poe was a leading lady in a provincial
touring company. She had great success playing Shakespearean heroines in
places as far apart as Boston, Mass. and Richmond, Virginia. Poe was her
darling. His father, David Poe, as poor an actor as his wife was starry,
absconded one day never to be heard of again. In 1811 Eliza contracted a
fever and by the end of the year she was dead. Poe was only three.
John Allan was a dour Scottish immigrant to America, a partner in a then
flourishing tobacco-exporting business. He and his wife were keen
theatre-goers. They had admired Mrs Poe and they took responsibility for her
boy - hence his middle name - without formally adopting him. Like that other
successful story-teller, Somerset Maugham, the young Poe was an orphan
transplanted to an environment from which he soon felt alienated and which
he was determined on becoming adult to put permanently behind him.
Precociously clever and brilliantly imaginative, he began at an early age to
compensate by concocting poetic fantasies. By the age of 20 he had published
a slim volume of dreamy romantic poetry; like his later, more celebrated,
verse this early stuff contains an intense longing for an earthly paradise,
a preoccupation with death and the return to life of the dead.
Poe's turbulent youth, and ever-worsening relations with Allan, particularly
when trying to sponge off him, are well described by Silverman. They follow
a pattern of Poe's failure to sustain any form of work or training outside
his writing. His career at the University of Virginia came to an abrupt end
in a pile of unpaid gambling debts. Concerned to prove his manliness, Poe
gained one of the coveted cadetships to West Point, only to chuck it
half-way through. Here the analogy with Maugham - whose West Point was St
Thomas's Hospital - ends. Maugham accepted the world on its own terms;
something, as this book makes painfully clear, Poe could never bring himself
to do.
Poe married his cousin Virginia Clemm when she was 14. To this often sick,
ethereally lovely girl, Poe seems to have been more of an admired big
brother than a husband. He called her Sissy and her mother, Marie, who
always lived with them, was Mabby. Ten years later Virginia was dead. By one
of those numerical ironies with which the work and life of Poe is riddled,
24 was the age at which his own mother had died. He made one or two
determined attempts to re-marry among female poets and bluestockings but,
still a widower, he was dead himself a few years later - a classic example
of a literary genius ending his life as a burnt-out case.
Until the end his output was prodigious. Poems, stories, essays, a novel -
The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym - together with endless streams of
ephemeral journalistic items, poured out of him and into the various
magazines for which he wrote. The only interruptions to his flow of work
were those extended periods when he took to drink. They became quite
frequent in his latter years.
In spite of his immense industry, his many successes and his eventual
world-wide fame, there was no breakthrough into affluence. Poe was often his
own worst enemy; even so one cannot but feel he was cruelly done by. He
reaped little benefit from having pioneered many of those genres of
literature that have flourished commercially as popular entertainment since
his death. Historians of the detective story like Julian Symons agree that
Poe first gave it a definitive form in tales such as The Murders in the Rue
Morgue, The Mystery of Marie Roget, The Purloined Letter. His investigator
C. Auguste Dupin anticipated the methods of Sherlock Holmes. In another
famous tale, The Gold-Bug, with a detective element and concerning buried
treasure, he gave a lead to RL Stevenson. But the bulk of Poe's tales were
gothic horrors or spine-chillers. As a master of the macabre Poe is without
a peer.
Less well-known to the general public is his work as a literary theorist.
His essays on poetic composition were influential, particularly in France
where Baudelaire became a disciple. Poe was an early and vicious exponent of
the hatchet-job in criticism and reviewing. He laid into Longfellow and the
other New England writers whose hegemony he resented with savage ferocity.
The 'Frogpondium' was his contemptuous collective name for them.
Had he lived 50 or so years later when the laws of copyright became subject
to international agreement and authors began to receive royalty payments
instead of surrendering their work for outright fees, Poe would certainly
have become a rich man. Merely the royalties from his poem 'The Raven' - its
reception 'might be compared to that of some uproariously successful
hit-song today', Silverman says - would have kept him and his wife in luxury
for years. As it was it earned him only a few dollars initially with further
paltry fees for public readings of it.
His limitation - and this ultimately debars him from being classed with the
truly great - is also his strength: his obsession with literary mechanism,
his love of the ornately calculated effect, of what he called in his 'tales
of ratiocination' (the word detective was not then in use) the operation of
acumen in solving the mystery. As Alfred Kazin has written in A Writer's
America, 'Poe is the only American classic of whom it can be said that his
landscapes issued from his mind alone . . . He never quite overcame thinking
of landscape as a problem or situation.'
Even so, Poe's influence was lasting and it remains, whether in the fiction
of novelist-cryptographers like Nabokov and Umberto Eco, or in serious
horror-film directors like Roeg and Cronenberg. Silverman has performed a
valuable task. He presents all the ascertainable facts about Poe's life and
art as a coherent narrative.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920328

