FT921-14292

FT  16 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Worldwide revamp for commercial side of
Rover


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


ROVER GROUP, the vehicles subsidiary of British Aerospace, is restructuring
its commercial activities worldwide with the principal aim of sharply
increasing sales outside the UK.
Mr George Simpson, Rover's chairman, has set a long-term goal for the
company to export 60 per cent of its annual output of about 500,000 cars and
4-wheel-drive vehicles. This compares with a record 45 per cent last year -
when just under 200,000 vehicles were exported - and only about 25 per cent
in the period before privatisation.
The revamp announced yesterday includes the creation of Rover Europe, under
which the UK and continental Europe will be treated as a single market for
the first time.
The creation of a total of three new groupings - Rover Europe, Rover
International and Rover Marketing - is also intended to strengthen Rover's
efforts to be perceived as an upmarket producer.
As well as combining UK and continental sales activities, as part of
preparations for the single EC market post-1992, Rover Europe will also
merge previously separate sales and marketing operations for Rover cars and
Land Rover/Range Rover 4wd vehicles.
It will be headed, as managing director, by Mr Graham Morris, formerly
president of Rover's Sterling Motor Cars subsidiary in North America until
collapsing sales forced Rover's withdrawal from the US car market last year.
Its 4wd subsidiary in the US, Range Rover of North America, is still fully
operative, however, and will be grouped with Rover's other subsidiaries
outside Europe within Rover International.
Its managing director, Mr Chris Woodwark - formerly managing director of
Land Rover - will also take responsibility for developing new business
elsewhere, including Eastern Europe.
Among projects already underway for the region are possible production of
the Maestro in Bulgaria and the setting up of a Russian distribution network
for Rover vehicles through Orbicom, a UK-headquartered east-west trade
group. Longer term, Montego production could also be moved to Russia.
The third new division, Rover Marketing, is to be under the managing
directorship of Mr Kevin Morley, hitherto managing director of Rover Cars.
Mr Morley, whose responsibilities have been primarily for Rover's commercial
activities, including sales and marketing, will lead Rover's drive to
reposition its cars at the premium end of the market. He is also to become
chairman of a new, independent and as-yet unnamed company to be set up by
Rover Marketing to provide integrated marketing services to the group.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920116

