FT923-9885

FT  03 AUG 92 / Boost for Amato as Italians agree to end indexation of wages


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


THE agreement to abolish Italy's scala mobile wage indexation system
represents the second boost in a week for the new prime minister, Mr
Giuliano Amato.
Struggling with a mere 16-seat parliamentary majority, Mr Amato turned the
country's beleaguered economic position to his advantage in reaching the
accord with unions and employers on revising the pay system, which links
wage rises to inflation. In doing so, he achieved what the much stronger
government of his predecessor, Mr Giulio Andreotti, had failed to do in much
longer negotiations this time last year.
Coupled with his success in pushing through parliament a L30,000bn (Pounds
14.1bn) package of spending cuts and revenue increases last week, Mr Amato
had a firmer foundation for his appeal yesterday to foreign investors not to
sell the lira and to give his government time to push through crucial
reforms.
Mr Franco Reviglio, the budget minister, described the government's approach
as 'shock therapy' to improve the competitiveness of Italian industry
compared with its European Community partners. Italy needed a high degree of
responsibility and a political consensus to avoid 'a very serious financial
crisis', he said.
Mr Amato still has much more to achieve if he is to restore confidence in
the Italian economy and enable the country to meet its commitments under the
Maastricht treaty for economic and monetary union. The agreements reached on
Friday night have to be fleshed out, and some aspects of the deal, such as
the public sector tariffs freeze, could conflict with other aspects of
government policy, such as privatisation.
Bankers say a tariff freeze would make state companies such as the
generating authority, less profitable, and less attractive to investors.
While last week's approval in the lower house of parliament for the
government's emergency budget, designed to cut L30,000bn from the deficit,
was a major step, the real battle for Mr Amato will come next month, when
draconian measures are expected to be introduced to try to reduce state
spending as part of the 1993 budget.
Mr Amato further strengthened his government's credibility on Saturday,
naming former premier Mr Emilio Colombo as foreign minister. The 72-year-old
Mr Colombo is widely respected for his European Community credentials.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920803

