FT923-15404

FT  02 JUL 92 / Saudi banker indicted in NY over BCCI case


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


SHEIKH KHALID Bin Mahfouz, chief operating officer of the National
Commercial Bank of Saudi Arabia (NCB), the largest commercial bank in that
country, was indicted in New York yesterday on charges that he and an
associate had schemed to defraud depositors, regulators and auditors of the
Bank of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI).
The US indictment, announced by Mr Robert Morgenthau, district attorney for
Manhattan, alleges that Sheikh Khalid and Mr Haroon Kahlon, a London-based
associate, fraudulently obtained more than Dollars 300m from BCCI depositors
and other customers.
Mr Morgenthau said the Dollars 300m was obtained as part of a scheme that
involved Sheikh Khalid acting with Mr Agha Hasan Abedi and Mr Swaleh Naqvi,
former chairman and chief executive of BCCI respectively, who were
themselves indicted on fraud charges last year. The scheme was enacted, the
indictment says, in 1985-91 and involved more than Dollars 1bn in
transactions by Sheikh Khalid and NCB.
The indictment, which is a diplomatically sensitive matter because of the
prominence of the Bin Mahfouz family in Saudi Arabia, states that NCB is
controlled by that family. The bank itself has not been charged.
Last night Mr Lawrence Smith, an executive at the New York branch of NCB,
who said he was a spokesman for Sheikh Khalid, released a statement in which
the Saudi banker declared his innocence. He stated he was 'astounded' by the
'completely unwarranted' indictment.
The statement said Sheikh Khalid had suffered 'huge losses' from BCCI and
had co-operated fully with all investigators. He rejected, 'in the strongest
terms possible, any suggestion of involvement in any wrongdoing.'
NCB announced in May that, after discussions with the Bank of England, it
had decided to close its London branch 'in an effort to rationalise
operations and cut costs.'
Mr Morgenthau said he had received co-operation from both the Bank of
England and the British Serious Fraud Office in the Bin Mahfouz
investigation.
The New York prosecutor said a decision had not been made on whether to
freeze the Bin Mahfouz family's US assets. NCB controls a New York operation
that last year had about Dollars 500m of assets.
Mr Morgenthau said that BCCI, in 1986, needed fresh capital and that Sheikh
Khalid invested in BCCI and became a BCCI director. The prosecutor said his
investigation had discovered that Sheikh Khalid's investment in BCCI was
later 'secretly withdrawn, which resulted in a gross misstatement of the
true financial picture' of BCCI.
The secret accord led to Sheikh Khalid's sale of his BCCI shares in 1988,
along with the sale in 1989 of a separate shareholding in Credit and
Commerce American Holdings (CCAH), the holding company that owned First
American bank in the US. At least Dollars 300m of the payments to Sheikh
Khalid came from BCCI's own funds and were falsely recorded as BCCI loans.
But BCCI's auditors and regulators, including the Bank of England and New
York state banking supervisors, were led to believe that Sheikh Khalid
continued to be a major BCCI shareholder until April 1990, according to the
indictment.
Mr Morgenthau said negotiations are under way in London for Mr Kahlon either
to surrender in the US or face UK arrest and extradition proceedings.
Sheikh Khalid and Mr Kahlon face up to four years in prison and up to
Dollars 600m of fines in the US.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920702

