FT924-11948

FT  23 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Crops glut reduces Albert Fisher


   By ANDREW BOLGER


ALBERT FISHER, the food processing and distribution group, which yesterday
reported a sharp drop in profitability in the year to August 31, said
substantial rationalisation had taken place across the group.
Mr Tim Howden, chief executive in Europe, said: 'Three-quarters of our
profit shortfall in Europe was in fresh produce, where our management faced
the most difficult market conditions in recent memory.'
Operating profit in the European fresh produce activities fell from Pounds
15.2m to Pounds 7.5m. Profits advanced in the first half but deteriorated
markedly in the second six months.
Underlying growth in production coincided with lower than expected growth in
demand. The situation was aggravated by early and abundant crops throughout
Europe and intense competition for banana sales.
Food processing in Europe saw operating profits dip to Pounds 28.4m (Pounds
32m), but the group said results had held up well in adverse market
conditions. The division had been enlarged by the transfer in of the frozen
fruit and vegetable activities.
The production of sauces and dressings had been concentrated into two
factories from three. The frozen vegetable business experienced a difficult
year, affected by plentiful supplies and strong competition, while the
remaining businesses in the division produced results close to or above the
previous year's outcome.
The European seafood side achieved operating profits of Pounds 7.67m (Pounds
6.71m). The group said the five seafood companies had now been formed into a
separate division for management purposes, which should produce sourcing
benefits. The division's profits were held back by cockle supply problems, a
poor market for warm water prawns and low demand.
The North American fresh produce businesses saw operating profits drop from
Pounds 18.9m to Pounds 10.8m. Results at the half-year had been under
pressure due to the continuing impact of recession on the food service
industry, supplying hotels and cruise lines, which is responsible for the
majority of sales.
In the second half favourable growing conditions in the US resulted in a
produce glut similar to that in Europe, causing further pressure on prices
and margins.
The group said: 'Economic conditions in the UK and North America remain
severely depressed and weaker economic conditions are now being experienced
in continental Europe.
'While an early improvement in economic conditions is not foreseen, it is
unlikely that the combination of conditions which gave rise to the current
produce glut will continue to the same extent in the coming season, although
the present surplus of produce will overhang the market for some time to
come.'

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921023

