FT921-3913

FT  12 MAR 92 / Leading Article: Overkill in Japan


ANOTHER financial scandal in Japan is not, at first glance, the kind of
thing to set the gaijin pulse racing. It looks suspiciously like the modern
equivalent of the old newspaper headline about a small earthquake in Chile.
At second glance, the news that the president of Daiwa Securities, Japan's
second largest securities house, has been forced to resign looks more
disturbing - and not simply because the losses that precipitated the
resignation, equivalent to more than half a billion dollars, look
vertiginous.
When a stock market falls by more than 40 per cent after a period of
monetary excess, it is inevitable that the misdemeanours of the easy money
period will be exposed. In a country where corrupt money politics has long
been endemic it is also likely that senior politicians will be touched by
the resulting scandals. But the cumulative impact of all these murky
revelations from Japan makes it harder and harder to contain the fall-out.
The unique feature of the Japanese political and economic structure is the
role that consensus has traditionally played in the decision-making process.
The scandal at Daiwa is just the latest manifestation of the way in which
the pricking of the 1980s asset price bubble has undermined many of the
subtle trade-offs and unwritten checks and balances that constituted the
mechanics of the consensual process.
Somebody in the system has to take the losses that stem from the collapse of
the stock market; nobody wants to honour the guarantees, unwritten or
otherwise, that securities firms offered to their clients against falling
share prices during the boom, because the sums are too large. So executives
at Daiwa, and no doubt elsewhere, shunted the losses between client accounts
with different book closing dates, in the hope that share prices would
recover before the innocent victims discovered that they had been saddled
with other people's losses.
When the music stopped, the victims chose to sue and the verdict proved
expensive for Daiwa.
Similar problems now infect the wider political and economic fabric. In
monetary policy the Bank of Japan theoretically enjoys independence. Yet its
freedom of manoeuvre was constrained, in the past, by the mutual
understandings that have governed the workings of the bureaucratic and
political establishment.
Not so today. Mr Kiichi Miyazawa is a lame duck prime minister, having
suffered from both the Recruit Cosmos scandal and the Kyowa bribery affair,
and he is surrounded by tainted acolytes. The squeaky-clean head of the Bank
of Japan, Mr Yasushi Mieno, has seized the opportunity to strengthen his
fiefdom. He has ignored recent calls from politicians for lower interest
rates.
The result is monetary overkill at a time when there is a huge debt
overhang, the banking system is weak and the great locomotive of Japanese
growth in the late 1980s, industrial investment, has ground to a halt. While
the establishment consensus remains modestly optimistic about growth, both
the official statistics and the quarterly Tankan business survey suggest
that Japan could well be heading for the worst recession since 1974. For the
rest of the world such stringency on the part of the world's biggest
creditor country implies downward pressure on asset prices, whether of US
Treasury bonds, diamonds or Impressionist paintings, and mounting trade
friction as the Japanese current account surplus soars.
It is time for Mr Mieno to declare victory in his bureaucratic battle and to
address the real problem. What price autonomy, if the economy sinks?

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920312

