FT922-4207

FT  06 JUN 92 / As they say in Europe: Danes make it tough


   By JAMES MORGAN


REFERENDUM day dawned bright and cheerful in Copenhagen. Politiken had
written: 'It is satisfying to see that the final part of of the campaign . .
. has been spared national economic horror images.' It concluded: 'The
reaction of Danish and foreign investors (to a rejection) would be bound to
be negative but it is not possible to put a figure on how serious that would
be.' Nobody has since tried.
In fact, trying to work out what it all meant for Denmark was the least of
anybody's concerns. The Neue Osnabrucker Zeitung had little time for its
neighbours: 'It was not a victory for common sense, the outcome was all
emotion. The underlying worries about loss of sovereignty and identity in
the community, as well as reservations about the excessive power of a
reunited Germany, may have contributed. It was a triumph of the past, a
denial of the future.'
(The paper had used almost the same words two days earlier about the
unveiling of the memorial to the RAF's 'Bomber' Harris in London last
Sunday: 'There remains the bitter recognition that, on that island,
backward-looking attitudes rule, that the sensitivities of a closely-allied
country are not taken into account.' Curiously, the Harris statue was
erected at the church of St Clement Danes; it was a tough week for the
Germans).
The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung gave the nearest thing to an official
view: 'Much of the criticism of Brussels 'Eurocrats' is cheap and wrong:
compared with a German city, the commission is not overstaffed. Whoever sees
a 'super-government' on the horizon overlooks the fact that Brussels can
make only recommendations and it is the council of ministers that decides.'
In France, reaction was mixed. La Presse de la Manche, published beside the
Channel, sounded like the British: 'This is a bad way to build Europe. It
should evolve . . . But it cannot be done against the will of the people . .
. between the Yes of the English who, since ratification, have put
themselves out of the game, and the Danish No, there has to be a humble
reaction on the part of European tribunes.'
The Paris papers were caught leading on their now irrelevant parliamentary
debate on the ratification of the Maastricht treaty. But Liberation was
quick on its feet: 'The Danish rejection, even by a small majority, takes in
effect the form of a warning to the architects of this community which
remains, for most of its inhabitants, a technocratic construction, far from
daily pre-occupations.'
The Dutch have much in common with the Danes: both inhabit flat lands, speak
unlovely tongues, share a taste for second-rate cheese and are overrun with
pigsties. So, it was a surprise to find a hitherto unsuspected streak of
Danophobia in NRC-Handelsblad, which complained that the Danes had let
everybody down: 'The great aim of a powerful jump towards a federal Europe
desired above all by the Netherlands has failed . . . United Europe has
fallen into this state because of the relatively small but determined elite
that is Denmark.'
The Irish Times wondered whether an Irish referendum would go the same way:
'Parallels between the two states must now be subjected to more critical
scrutiny than ever before. It is a crude argument but, nonetheless, Ireland
does stand to gain more financially than does Denmark from Europe's new
direction . . . Ireland is a poorer state and, in a converging Europe, hopes
to raise its living standards, whereas Danes fear a fall.' Ireland, it
added, had weaned itself from dependence on its big neighbour while Denmark
feared the growing influence of its neighbour.
La Repubblica's correspondent in Copenhagen alone refused to reflect on what
it meant for his home country, partly because nobody could possibly know
what anything means for Italy. But he thought the result was good for the
British: 'John Major, in the next few months of the presidency of the EC,
will find precious allies among the men of Copenhagen in the struggle
against the centralism of the community bureaucracy and against any federal
tendencies.'
Shakespeare gave the Danes a prince who could not make up his mind, and who
has provided every nation and each new generation with food for thought as a
result. The Danes have voted twice for 'Europe' and once against. European
papers turned this week's split vote into an occasion to reflect upon
themselves, which meant each has come up with a different view of Danish
reality. One might ask the Danes what they think, if ever they could give a
straight answer.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920606

