FT924-6523

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Bonds: Investor interest aroused by Y75bn
Belgian issue


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE Kingdom of Belgium's Y75bn issue, launched yesterday by Nomura
International, sparked firm demand among European investors.
Dealers said the strength of the Japanese government bond market in the last
month has been fuelled by domestic purchases, while European investors have
tended to remain on the sidelines. However, yesterday's seven-year deal for
Belgium, priced to yield 40 basis points over the comparable JGB, succeeded
in catching their interest.
Dealers said the lack of supply, partly a result of poor arbitrage
opportunities, has helped support interest in the Euroyen market. Few
borrowers have tapped the market because of poor arbitrage opportunities,
but dealers said several sovereign borrowers are currently eyeing the
market. The Belgium offering is being used to refinance maturing yen debt.
Meanwhile, Ireland is now expected to tap the dollar sector early next week,
for up to Dollars 500m. The republic is aiming to raise five-year funds,
according to banking sources, but Finland's recent five-year deal, trading
at 82 basis points over the curve, could prove something of an obstacle.
While Ireland's debt rating is lower than Finland's, Ireland is generally
perceived as an improving credit and Finland as a declining credit. But,
while Ireland might expect to pay 60-65 basis points over the curve,
comparison with the spread offered for Finnish paper could prove
unfavourable.
Also in the dollar market, a Dollars 250m five-year deal for IBM Japan,
arranged by Nikko Europe, sold out rapidly. The deal was priced to yield 45
basis points more than the five-year US Treasury. Traders said the IBM name
is still well-liked among retail investors.
In the Euro-French franc market, the City of Paris made its debut Eurobond
offering, shifting from the domestic market in an attempt to broaden its
investor base. The FF500m seven-year issue via Credit Suisse First Boston,
was priced to yield 29 basis point over the curve. CSFB said the City's
credit is strong.
Oesterreichische Kontrollbank, Austria's triple-A rated export financing
agency, has set up a programme under which it can issue Eurobonds, notes and
private placements using the same documentation. The programme, which totals
Sch3bn, is similar to Sweden's recent Dollars 10bn programme. It was
arranged by Morgan Stanley International.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

921120

