FT922-697

FT  26 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Hongkong Bank wins 64% of Midland


   By DAVID BARCHARD and SIMON HOLBERTON


   LONDON, HONG KONG


HONGKONG and Shanghai Banking Corporation yesterday won overwhelming
acceptance from Midland Bank shareholders for its Pounds 3.6bn takeover
offer, giving it a total of 63.58 per cent of the British clearer's share
capital.
Counting was still proceeding last night and the final level of acceptance
will be announced this morning. The merger will be declared unconditional in
every respect on July 10.
The prospect of a significant block of Midland shares lying outside Hongkong
Bank's control seems to have been excluded. Mr Derek Netherton, director of
Schroders, the merchant bank advising Hongkong Bank, said that he knew of no
institutional shareholder which had rejected the offer.
The merger creates a new global banking group with assets of Pounds 145bn,
among the world's ten largest banks and well ahead of any other British
bank.
Within an hour of the victory announcement Mr William Purves, Hongkong Bank
chairman, told the Financial Times that he intended to proceed with the
merging of the two banks' operations as rapidly as possible. 'People in
Midland and my group want to get on with it.'
Top managers at the two banks are to meet in 10 days' time at a venue
outside London to take key decisions on the practical steps involved in the
merger.
Mr Purves said that he expected the bulk of the merger to be accomplished
with a year, much of it in the first six months.
He cited the consolidation of the treasury operations of the two banks as an
urgent priority. Operations in London, New York and Tokyo had to be brought
together 'as soon as possible'.
London would be the headquarters of the new, enlarged treasury which would
also take responsibility for handling the group's top corporate customers,
he said. The treasury would trade under the Midland name but be headed by Mr
Bernard Asher, Hongkong Bank's most senior executive in London.
Mr Purves said however that the merger would be 'a partnership of key people
in key areas'. These people would come from both banks.
'There are many challenges ahead and we will get down to them now that the
uncertainty has been removed.'
Preliminary figures last night showed that Midland shareholders owning some
351.3m shares, or 44.5 per cent, had accepted the offer, with half of them
electing to take the 60p cash alternative instead of the bonds.
Midland shares rose 24p to finish at 454p last night.
The steering committee of the FT-SE 100 index is considering when exactly to
replace Midland in the index with Hongkong Bank's shares. It is believed the
change will not be made for about two weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920626

