FT922-4340

FT  05 JUN 92 / UK bank accepts MiniScribe payment


   By ANDREW JACK


STANDARD CHARTERED Bank yesterday agreed to a Dollars 62m (Pounds 34m)
out-of-court payment in the US from Coopers & Lybrand, the accountancy firm,
and other defendants following the collapse of MiniScribe, a computer
disk-drive manufacturer.
Total settlements arising out of MiniScribe are now believed to be the
largest ever against an auditor after Coopers last month made a separate
out-of-court payment.
This class action suit, brought by bondholders in MiniScribe in Texas,
initially resulted in punitive damages of Dollars 550m, including more than
Dollars 200m against Coopers as auditors to the company. That decision was
overturned by the judge, but Coopers later agreed to an out-of-court payment
believed to be between Dollars 40m and Dollars 50m.
Standard Chartered lent Dollars 120m to MiniScribe in 1988. The company
later filed for bankruptcy protection, and the bank alleged fraud and
negligence on the part of the defendants since 1986.
The bank, which brought legal actions in Colorado, said yesterday it would
recover its initial loan as a result of the settlement and realisations of
assets made from MiniScribe.
Undisclosed portions of the settlement will come from Hambrecht & Quist,
investment bankers, Mr QT Wiles, chairman of MiniScribe, and Ellco, a
leasing company.
Mr Martin Hayman, head of legal services at Standard Chartered, said: 'The
result was the right result. We are not happy but are satisfied it is the
best for our shareholders.'
Coopers will be expected to provide payment from its US partnership. If
funds are insufficient, its partners are personally liable for the
difference.
Mr Harris Amhowitz, deputy chairman and general counsel for Coopers &
Lybrand in New York, denied any culpability in the firm's audit of
MiniScribe.
'Nevertheless, the firm agreed to settle to avoid the uncertainties of
successive jury trials.'
The Dollars 62m settlement is subject to US court approval, but Standard
Chartered said it expected that to be a formality.
A Dollars 338m settlement for Standard Chartered against Price Waterhouse
was awarded by an Arizona jury last month, relating to the bank's purchase
of United Bank of Arizona in 1987 for Dollars 334m. Price Waterhouse is
still considering its response.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920605

