FT921-15238

FT  11 JAN 92 / Markets: A week of strange bedfellows - London Markets


   By PETER MARTIN


IT WAS hard, in a dull week for corporate news, to tear one's attention away
from the most extraordinary revelation of the New Year: that Zsa Zsa Gabor
lost her virginity to Kemal Ataturk, the creator of modern Turkey.
Since Ataturk is one of the striking figures of twentieth century history
and Gabor, to put it politely, is not, this liaison is about as plausible as
suggesting a shared sentimental history for Stalin and Joan Collins.
Strange bedfellows abound these days, however, a sentiment well illustrated
by the chart alongside. Historically, a weak pound has been good for
equities, since it prefigures, in economic terms, a shift of national income
away from consumers towards producers. For most of the the past few months,
however, in one of those suspiciously neat correlations, the downward trend
in the D-Mark value of the pound has been exactly matched by the performance
of the FT-SE index.
Throughout the autumn, as the pound weakened, the market fell in step. The
reason, of course, lies in the UK's membership of the ERM. While the
currency is falling, the UK's ability to cut interest rates is limited;
indeed at some point a rise in interest rates may be needed to stop the
pound going through its ERM floor. The weakening pound thus carried a gloomy
message for the equity market, and the two fell together.
At the very end of the year, however, the correlation disappeared: the pound
continued to slide, but the stock market followed Wall Street up. The
rupture in the relationship between the FT-SE and the D-Mark is an
illustration of the way in which the London market became decoupled over
Christmas from the UK's economic fundamentals.
This week, with fund managers and brokers' analysts fully back at work for
the first time since December 20, the autumn's relationship has started to
recreate itself. The pound continued to fall for much of the week - it was
DM 2.840 on Friday, compared with the DM 2.855 a week before - and the stock
market also moved downwards, though with a few abrupt reversals en route.
FT-SE closed yesterday at 2477.9, down 26.2 on the week, having touched
2540.1 during the course of Monday. (Nicholas Knight, the Nomura strategist,
immediately highlighted the Monday figure as possibly the market's high for
the year.)
The rediscovery of bad news owed something to sterling, which was close to
its lower ERM limit against the Spanish peseta, the strongest currency in
the system. It also owed something to abrupt downward adjustments of
expectations. Warburg Securities cut its estimate for 1992 gdp growth from
2.0 per cent to 0.8 per cent, with non-oil output rising at only 0.4 per
cent - an economic recovery that looks all too much like the recession the
economy's supposed to be recovering from. And brokers downgraded profits
estimates wholesale.
The gloom over sterling was probably overstated: as Richard Kersley of BZW
pointed out, though there may well be a pre-election wobble for the pound,
this week's developments weren't it. 'This is how the ERM works,' he said.
Until the pound has really tested the lower bounds of its ERM range against
the peseta, and the Bank of England has been seen to intervene,
unsuccessfully, on a large scale, it is too soon to worry about the impact
on interest rates. Moreover, sterling is still well clear of its floor
against the D-Mark - and arguably that is the relationship which really
matters.
The week's economic and corporate news was only partly encouraging.
Household savings rates, reported on Tuesday, indicated that consumers had
lots of cash if only they chose to spend it. Boots the chemists reported
below-target sales over the Christmas season; Ratners the jewellers reported
sales below year-ago levels. Dixons, the electrical retailer, reported much
better Christmas sales. 'There is more consumer confidence out there than
you might imagine,' said Stanley Kalms, Dixons' chairman. 'Parts of the
country are bouncing with enthusiasm, such as Scotland and the North East.'
Dixons' shares closed at 211p, up 7p.
Ratners had more to announce than just a disappointing Christmas: there
would be a loss after interest and exceptional charges of around Pounds 70m
in the year to February, it said, along with no final dividend and a new
chairman. The shares closed at 21p yesterday, down only 1p on year's high.
Food retailers, which outperformed the market handsomely last year, had a
poor week, haunted by fears that a price war might be on the way. Sainsbury,
which is starting a big price promotion, closed the week at 340p, 19p down;
the sector as a whole lost 2.7 per cent. Fears of a price war were also
evident in the travel industry: Airtours, which rose 426 per cent last year,
fell 72p this week to close at 823p.
Air transport stocks had other influences at work: BA, for example, closed
unchanged at 229p, caught between poor prospects for the world economy and
lower costs: airlines will benefit from the continuing slide in the oil
price. North Sea prices dropped below Dollars 17 on Thursday, a trend to
which traders see no immediate end. Oil shares, downgraded by brokers'
analysts, suffered accordingly: BP closed the week at 282p, down 8 1/2 p;
Shell ended 25p down at 473p.
One other loser was British Steel, which announced the earlier-than-expected
closure of its Ravenscraig steel mill in Scotland, and said it was deferring
expansion plans at its other big mill, Llanwern, which had been seen as the
corollary of the Scottish closure. The move was interpreted as bad news for
an early return to dividends: the shares closed at 64 1/2 p, down 5 1/2 p.

The Financial Times


London Page II Graph (Omitted).

920111

