FT924-6276

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (4): The finest of jewels to bewitch
and bedazzle - Customers are becoming more discerning


   By VIVIENNE BECKER


THERE IS nothing to beat the sumptuous jewel: the ultimate icon of wealth,
status and femininity, which at its best combines natural beauty with the
artistry of man.
Jewellery has existed since time immemorial. In turbulent times it became a
convenient source of portable wealth. 18th century aristocrats fled Paris
with their jewel encrusted snuff boxes, and during the Russian Revolution
pocketfuls of Faberge trinkets were smuggled across Europe.
However, the intrinsic value of the precious metals and gems that makes
jewels so special also means it is hard to admire them for their beauty
alone - somewhere along the way the investment element inevitably creeps in.
Unlike a Versace dress of the same price, a jewel can still be turned into
ready cash even if the days of expecting a large profit are over. But in
these depressed times jewellery investment is a dangerous game - too many
diamond-laden fingers were burned when the jewellery and gemstone market
fell in 1982 after a long period of rising prices. The lesson has not been
forgotten and the attitude towards jewellery has changed. Buyers are more
realistic about the investment possibilities and have come to take a greater
interest in the intrinsic appeal of the pieces.
While the 1970s were an investment-crazy time, the 1980s saw the development
of a world-wide obsession with brands. The art of the jeweller became
subservient to clever marketing and image. Happily, the early 1990s sees a
different mood. It is no longer possible to sell jewellery on name alone.
Customers are becoming more discerning and are looking for good value rather
than investment, and value in terms of lasting style, workmanship and
materials.
One reason for the change in attitude was the 1980s boom in costume
jewellery, during which women became used to buying decorative, glamorous
and exciting jewels that flattered and changed their image in an instant.
The intrinsic worth of the materials did not really matter. Now they look at
real jewels with a different eye, demanding more than just a label,
searching for lasting modern classics or for fantasy jewels in precious
materials.
The fine jewellery trade is still dominated by the great international
jewel-houses - Cartier, Boucheron, Tiffany, Chaumet, Bulgari etc. Then come
the smaller companies that are privately owned and run by artistic
designers, the most exclusive being JAR of Paris and Verdura in New York,
followed by shops such as Marina B in Geneva and Elizabeth Gage in London,
all dedicated to individuality and quality.
Ward Landrigan, of Verdura in New York, finds that there is a 'much, much
stronger consciousness of style today. Generic jewels - jewellery without a
strong design element - are the orphans in the market today.' Joel
Rosenthal, of JAR, also thinks that: 'A new eye is being developed, little
by little. Many of our customers are becoming much more discerning.'
The very top end of the business, dealing in ravishing jewels in the Dollars
500,000 to Dollars 1m (Pounds 331,000 to Pounds 600,000) range, is
relatively little affected, so specialised is its appeal. Each of the
jewellery houses keeps its own corner of classic 'high jewellery,' usually
the more conventional, formal sets of precious gems and diamonds.
London-based Laurence Graff, which is opening a new shop in Bond Street next
spring, has cornered the market in magnificent stones, selling fine and rare
gems to the world's most important buyers, who are, he points out, still
buying. He finds that internationally there are fewer people in the market
for the world's most precious stones but the top clients - kings, sultans,
sheikhs, princes and potentates and the like  - are still there.
Once, the great jewel houses were also privately owned by talented, artistic
and dedicated individuals and their families, who ran their businesses in a
highly personal way. Now many of these jewel houses are part of
multi-national big businesses, run to a great extent from the board room.
Tiffany, which expanded its very successful London shop a year ago, is a
public company, after a management buyout from Avon in 1984. Bulgari is
still 93 per cent family-owned, while Boucheron is privately owned.
The mighty Cartier group ranks number one worldwide in the luxury goods
market in terms of figures and market share. In 1991 the group's turnover
was well over SFr1,800m (Pounds 829m). Although those golden, creative years
of Cartier died with the family, customers today buy a slice of the Cartier
magic and history along with the name.
M. Bamberger, managing director of Cartier UK, said: 'To say that we are not
hit by the recession would be ridiculous. But we have such a wide range of
products from accessories, watches, high jewellery to perfume, that we are
coping well. Figures are up on last year.'
During the boom years of the 1980s many houses started promoting more
accessible 'boutique' ranges to reach a wider market. The first of these was
the successful concept 'Les Must de Cartier' launched in 1973 to break down
intimidating barriers associated with fine jewellery and to attract a new,
younger clientele. These boutique jewels, along with watches, became
sought-after status symbols.
The Gulf War hit the top end of the jewellery market hard. The Middle
Eastern customers who formed the backbone of many jewellery businesses
stopped buying completely while other jet-setting customers, especially
Americans, stopped travelling and therefore shopping. The US market is now
showing some signs of picking up. In Japan and the Far East, however,
economies are suffering. Middle Eastern buyers have now cautiously resumed
buying. The UK, even in the good times, has never had an uninhibited home
market, Britons being temperamentally disinclined to spend money on such
conspicuous luxury.
For Italian women, mid-way in culture and mentality between Europe and the
Middle East, jewels are an essential part of their femininity and so
inventive designers, such as Damiani, have flourished by catering to their
needs with extravagant, fearless designs.
Bulgari epitomises the classic side of Italian style and has grown in
stature since the 1970s. Nicola and Paolo Bulgari believe that making
jewellery is a creative business, its real raison d'etre, and that
constantly reworking old themes is not the way ahead. They introduced the
rich Renaissance 'cabochon' look, an unconventional mix of uncut stones
mixed with gold and steel which established a debonair, modern style that
has an avid international following.
Chaumet was one of the grand old Paris jewellers with a fine shop in the
Place Vendome but after a scandal that landed the Chaumet brothers in prison
it was bought by Investcorp in 1987. The new owners worked hard to establish
a 'look', principally through a range called Anneau. At the same time they
went back to basics, promoting the most classic piece of jewellery, the
diamond ring, which continues to be their most important product.
Chaumet has made a point of actively launching new products and constantly
renewing itself: next month, Chaumet London is launching a range of exciting
semi-precious jewels designed by interior decorator David Hicks. It is an
enterprising venture offering quite different fare from the sort normally to
be found in the grand jewellers.
Of the old established houses, Boucheron alone is owned and run by its
original family: Alain Boucheron is the fourth generation of this jewellery
dynasty. Daniel Reveyron, director of Boucheron in London, believes it is
important to take a long term view of the jewellery business, which,
although buffeted by recession, is very much a survivor: 'Jewellery answers
one of the most ancient and basic instincts. The need for it will always be
there.'

The Financial Times


London Page III

921121

