FT921-3953

FT  12 MAR 92 / Italy's 'red belt' is barometer for PCI's successor:
Election will test whether Bologna's 'cultured, fat and rich' citizens are
none the less still red


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


CULTURED, fat and rich are the epithets Italians like to apply to the
citizens of Bologna. And with good reason.
Bologna was Italy's and Europe's first university town. Still today one in
five of the 405,000 inhabitants is a student.
Eat in any one of the city's restaurants or wander through the food shops
stacked with hams, pasta and cheeses and it is easy to see why Bologna
claims to be the nation's gastronomic capital and its citizens look so well
fed. The wealth, meanwhile, comes from the rich farmland of surrounding
Emiglia Romagna and the dynamic small specialised industries that have grown
up in the postwar period.
This intellectual environment, combined with farmers turned
agro-industrialists and peasants transformed into skilled industrial
workers, has also created a unique political culture. Bologna and Emiglia
Romagna have been the heart of Italy's 'red belt' - the central part of the
country which has been solidly communist since 1945. The city itself has
been the good government showcase of the Italian Communist Party (PCI).
'We have only had four mayors since 1945, all communist,' says Mr Renzo
Imbeni, the current mayor who has held office since 1983 and joined the
party aged 20 in 1964. No other large city has enjoyed such continuity in
its administration or seen ideology march hand in glove with solid
pragmatism during a time when Italy has lived through 50 governments.
Since the burial of the PCI last year and its rebirth as the Party of the
Democratic Left (PDS) in February 1991, the politics of Bologna and Emiglia
Romagna now provides the benchmark for support for the new party.
If the PDS fails to attract the former communist vote here in the general
elections on April 5, its credibility as a party refashioning the left in
Italy will be damaged. In the 1987 general elections the communists polled
42 per cent of the vote in Bologna (47 per cent in Emiglia Romagna) compared
with a national average of 26 per cent. The governing Christian Democrats
won 21 per cent in Bologna with a national average of 34 per cent.
'We may get some nasty surprises in the general elections; but I think the
old communist vote will generally hold,' says Mr Antonio La Foggia,
secretary of the PDS in Bologna. Old loyalties, he believes, will be
transferred to the PDS on the basis of sentiment and the communists' record
in Bologna of coping well with the kind of issues which have alienated
voters elsewhere. These include municipal corruption, the failure of
inner-city transport, poor education and collapsing health services.
But Mr La Foggia is aware of the forces likely to erode the PDS vote
nationwide which could reduce its chances of inheriting the PCI's long-held
position as the second-largest political grouping in Italy after the
Christian Democrats. He concedes some votes in Bologna will be lost to the
populous Lombard League of Mr Umberto Bossi.
'They are the only new phenomenon in the elections and some of the things
they are saying, like the rich north should not go on supporting the south,
have an echo here.'
He reckons a sixth of the former communist vote could go to the hard-line
rump of the old PCI which has broken ranks with the PDS and formed
Reconstructed Communism (RC).
'The ones who have gone to RC are mainly the older generation who found it
just too hard to give up their ideals.' Among the professional classes some
votes could also be lost to the small Republican Party of Mr Georgio La
Malfa.
The PDS in Bologna has 77,000 members signed up for three years, against the
89,000 of the PCI in 1990. The PDS has acquired all the old PCI structures
in Bologna, including its headquarters, a magnificent 17th century fresco
palace in the heart bought after the war with subscriptions from party
militants. Staff have been cut but there are still 40 full time.
'If you want a business analogy,' says the mayor, 'I think most former
communists have switched to the PDS because they did not wish to waste the
return of their investment.'
For such members the collapse of communism and the long internal debate
through two congresses over two years on the fate of the PCI has been
traumatic. 'Politically it was easy for me when the PDS was born on February
3 last year: sentimentally it was very hard,' says Mr La Foggia, who joined
the party aged 18 in 1962.
'I wanted the party to be called simply the Democratic Party in the style of
the US Democrats - that is the direction in which I think we should move.'
The Bologna communists were among the first to denounce the 1968 Soviet
invasion of Czechoslovakia and long kept their distance from Moscow. The
communist municipal administration demonstrated its independence by calling
itself the Two Towers Group (after the two medieval towers in the city
centre) and currently runs the council in coalition with the Socialists and
the Social Democrats.
In essence the PDS in Bologna is no real break with the past, representing
in the last resort honest government with a social conscience. For instance,
to meet increasing costs and total financial dependence upon central
government, Mr Imbeni has begun to hive off non-essential activities to
joint ventures with private business.
According to members of the business community, such as Mr Gianandrea Rocco
di Torrepadula, head of the Bologna Industrialists Association, the Bologna
'model' has been over-glorified.
'The communists have kept the city tightly controlled, even isolated. . . .
The fact that the city works owes as much to the Bolognese themselves.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920312

