FT923-6547

FT  24 AUG 92 / The Markets Under Strain: Business braced for rise in rates


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


BRITAIN'S recession-hit business community is bracing itself for an increase
in the cost of money, which it says will hit investment programmes and snuff
out any chances of economic recovery.
Given poor business prospects well into next year, as well as increasing
alarm at the impact of possible public spending cuts, some industrialists
are likely to warn that higher interest rates could turn recession into
slump.
The Institute of Directors said at the weekend that many businessmen had not
wanted Britain to join the European exchange rate mechanism. Others have
consistently suggested that sterling entered at too high a level.
Most business leaders still support ERM membership. They now accept,
however, that the price for government determination to beat inflation is
likely to be a longer recession and more unemployment.
For much of this year the Confederation of British Industry has argued that
interest rate reductions are the most important step towards encouraging
economic revival. It has said the government's successful fight against
inflation has already made possible minor, 'step-by-step' interest rate
cuts.
Any rates increase now, however small or temporary, would be met with deep
dismay and could bring more industrial criticism of the government's
handling of the economy.
With this year's spending round expected to involve particularly tough
negotiations between Treasury and departmental ministers, the CBI is urging
the government not to impose cuts that would further demoralise business.
Ministers have suggested that large reductions in capital programmes can be
achieved, most notably in housing, roads, education and prison building.
Concern in industry about possible cuts has prompted Mr Howard Davies, CBI
director-general, to write to Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the
Treasury. Mr Davies says that any increases in public-sector pay rates
should be financed through efficiency improvements or cuts in government
operations, enabling spending programmes to be maintained.
Mr Davies suggests recent planned increases in public expenditure recognised
that public expenditure would continue to fund the bulk of spending
programmes. He adds: 'We hope that recognition is also evident in the
outcome of this year's expenditure round.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920824

