FT924-11312

FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (12): A group to be proud of / Profile
of Ceylinco


   By WILLIAM KEELING


MR Lalith Kotelawala, chairman of the Ceylinco Group, is one of Sri Lanka's
most colourful businessmen. His boardroom walls are hung with pictures of
great corporate moments: Mr Kotelawala with Mr Harry Oppenheimer, the South
African diamonds magnate; Mr Kotelawala accepting an award from President
Ranasinghe Premadasa.
The Ceylinco chairman has reason to be proud of his achievements. The group,
which has no holding company, consists of 35 companies, four public, with
interests ranging from banking and insurance to tourism and diamond cutting.
With about 7,000 employees, Ceylinco has a turnover of more than SLRs5bn a
year.
Mr Kotelawala remembers with bitterness the period 1961-1977 when the
government nationalised many of the group's business interests, including
insurance and graphite mining.
The government also undertook a policy of import substitution, which led Sri
Lanka to produce a profusion of low quality goods.
'You make your own razor blades, which don't cut your beard but cut your
face,' Mr Kotelawala explains.
He says the government now understands the needs of business and cites as an
example his group's investment in hotels which would not have been
contemplated except for the generous tax holidays offered by government.
Mr Kotelawala suggests the government should now go further: 'Sri Lanka
should make itself income tax free'.
While many businessmen successfully elude the inefficient tax authorities,
they do not invest the undisclosed earnings into the productive sector.
As Mr Kotelawala explains, if such a person 'buys shares or puts the money
in the bank, he gets exposed and the tax people are after him'.
Other corporate executives describe Mr Kotelawala as an astute businessman.
In 1988 the group started Seylan Bank which last year took over the Sri
Lankan subsidiary of the disgraced Bank of Credit and Commerce International
following its closure, covering fully all BCCI depositors.
Mr Kotelawala says deposits were held by 'very poor Sri Lankans who had
worked in the Middle East and they would have lost their entire savings'.
BCCI also owned some prime land in central Colombo on which Ceylinco is
planning to build a SLRs600m residential and office complex.
Seylan has, however, been criticised by its competitors who allege it has
invested much of its funds in risk-free government securities, instead of
on-lending to business sectors. It is a charge Mr Kotelawala strongly
denies.
'We have gone into the rural branches, which we wouldn't have done if we
were purely profit-oriented'. He admits, however, the other banks are 'very
angry with us. In 3 1/2 years we have outstripped. . . all the other banks
in Sri Lanka'.
Mr Kotelawala says the group's success has been built around a forward
thinking approach to management. He promotes strictly on merit, so that 'on
my board of directors, there are people who started as security officers. We
have managers who began as messengers'.
He says each subsidiary pays 5 per cent of its profits every month as
bonuses to employees and claims 15 strike-free years following a decision to
set up a group trade union, of which Mr Kotelawala is patron.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921027

