FT924-6452

FT  21 NOV 92 / UK savaged over its Community presidency


   By Our Foreign Staff


BRITAIN faced a barrage of criticism over its role as president of the
European Community from three European capitals yesterday.
In Bonn, the UK presidency was denounced by a leading parliamentarian as a
'downright disaster', because of its failure to resolve Denmark's rejection
of the Maastricht treaty.
France joined Germany's criticisms when Mr Dominique Strauss-Kahn, minister
of industry and foreign trade, described the UK chairmanship as
'calamitous', and a Spanish official accused the UK government of simply
'trying to seek a consensus within the Conservative party' instead of trying
to reach consensus among EC partners.
The criticism came before yesterday's Gatt agreement, in which UK Prime
Minister John Major played a significant role. He last night brushed off the
attacks, suggesting the critics wait for the outcome of the Edinburgh summit
next month before passing judgment.
Speaking on French radio, Mr Strauss-Kahn accused the UK of creating
difficulties for France in the farm trade negotiations with the US.
'It is the most calamitous presidency I have lived through in all my time in
government,' said Mr Strauss-Kahn. 'The British have a manner of presiding
over the Community which puts us in very great difficult against the
Americans and I can hardly wait for December 31, when this community
presidency will be over.'
Mr Gunter Verheugen, chairman of the special committee of the Bundestag set
up to prepare ratification of the treaty, expressed deep pessimism at the
prospects for saving it in the face of Danish demands for far-reaching
amendments.
'It is a cause for very sharp criticism that the British presidency has
simply not exercised its leading and co-ordinating role,' he said.
'The British presidency in the second half of the year is proving to be more
and more of a downright disaster. I have real doubt that it will prove
possible to find an acceptable solution to the Danish problem in Edinburgh.'
He said the German parliament faced ratifying a treaty, and amending its
constitution, for something which would never come to pass.
In Madrid, the Spanish government served notice that it would block an
enlargement of the European Community unless there was prior agreement to an
increased Community budget and ratification by all the partners of the
Maastricht treaty.
'There is a logical sequence that has to be followed: first the Delors II
package, then ratification and then enlargement. The sequence was laid down
at Maastricht, it was agreed at the Lisbon summit in the summer and we do
not want it altered,' a senior Spanish official said.
Senior Whitehall officials said Britain still hoped to agree future EC
financing, a package of proposals to regain Danish support for the
Maastricht treaty, and the opening of talks on enlargement.
They were unsurprised by French criticism, in view of Mr Major's
determination to stop Paris blocking a Gatt deal.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921121

