FT924-6490

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (4): Four men wait for a finger to point
 . - The race to succeed President Salinas


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


THE race to succeed President Carlos Salinas started a few days after he was
elected in 1988. But with just two more years left of his presidency,
competition is heating up for the dedazo - the 'pointing of the finger' that
describes figuratively the president's hand-picking of his successor, writes
Stephen Fidler.
There are few doubts that President Salinas, like his predecessors, will
have the final say in choosing the candidate for his Institutional
Revolutionary Party (PRI) and that his choice will win the 1994 election.
The dedazo is likely to be made late next year, though Mr Salinas may wish
to postpone it to early in 1994.
Most money is on four contenders: Mr Pedro Aspe, the finance minister; Mr
Manuel Camacho, the mayor of Mexico City; Mr Donaldo Colosio, the social
development minister; and Mr Ernesto Zedillo, the education minister. But
the president may promote others - such as Mr Fernando Gutierrez Barrios,
the interior minister and Mr Emilio Gamboa, the social security minister -
to increase the competition and put pressure on better-placed rivals.
Pedro Aspe
The fortunes of Mr Aspe, 42, are tied to the economy which he manages. If it
is in bad shape, that would reflect badly on him as finance minister, and
would draw attention to the political experience and sensitivities that Mr
Aspe is seen to lack.
But if the economy picks up, he stands a good chance. He is the presumed
favourite of the international finance community, businessmen, the Catholic
church, and perhaps disaffected followers of the opposition National Action
Party (PAN). In his four years as finance minister, he has barely put a foot
wrong, engineering a successful reduction in inflation, privatisations,
pension fund and fiscal reforms.
Mr Aspe has a PhD in economics from Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
and is the techocrat's technocrat. There is nothing he likes more than to
take out pencil and paper and explain why Mexico's current account deficit
is self-financing. He speaks almost perfect English, is courteous and
charming, and has successfully forged alliances with some old-style
politicians, such as the agriculture and labour minister.
But the general consensus is he would be make a better president than a
presidential candidate. He is aristocratic, slightly aloof, and no favourite
of the party faithful, who fear he is too much of an economic
fundamentalist. If elected president, he would pursue further economic and
structural reform with energy and determination.
Donaldo Colosio
The only contender to have held elected office, Mr Colosio, also 42, is seen
as the compromise choice. From the northern border state of Sinaloa, he is
pragmatic and down-to- earth. At weekends he can be seen riding around the
village of Tepoztlan on a motorcycle, a typical common touch.
As head of the PRI for three years, he would carry the party vote if
nominated. But he is also presumed to share broadly the economic vision of
President Carlos Salinas, and worked under him in the Budget ministry in the
mid-1980s. He has a master's degree in urban planning from the University of
Pennsylvania.
He scored points for managing the party's convincing victory in the 1991
elections, and is seen as a capable administrator. The head of the Social
Development ministry, he has the enviable task of managing the National
Solidarity programme, a Dollars 2bn-Dollars 3bn a year anti-poverty project.
He travels with the president on his Solidarity tours, and may receive the
implicit support of local Solidarity committees across the country.
However, very little is known about what he thinks, and he may lack the
ideological vision that has characterised the Salinas presidency. He is not
as sharp or articulate as some of his rivals, and is likely to be more
dependent on advice when deciding policy. He has also made his share of
errors, deciding for example to select a wealthy pig farmer, Mr Eduardo
Villasenor, as the PRI candidate for the recent governorship elections in
Michoacan. Mr Villasenor was later forced to stand down.
As president, Mr Colosio would probably proceed cautiously with economic and
political reform, wary of upsetting too many vested interests.
Ernesto Zedillo
A quiet, almost silent education minister, Mr Zedillo is the least favoured
of the four front-runners. Yet he is extremely intelligent, thoughtful,
dedicated and close to Mr Salinas and also to the president's powerful chief
of staff, Mr Jose Cordoba.
Mr Zedillo, 40, has an economics PhD from Yale, and was budget minister
until last year. In that post he revealed an unwavering zeal in his campaign
to cut unnecessary spending, leading some to complain he lacked compassion
and political 'savvy'. He is a strong economic reformer, but unlike Mr Aspe,
from middle-class origins. Perhaps this may make him more palatable to the
Mexican public.
But his political inexperience came to light this year in a row about new
school history textbooks. A controversy over flattering references to Mr
Salinas overshadowed the improvements in the new books. The affair also
revealed a lack of support from Mexico's political class - almost nobody
came to Mr Zedillo's rescue.
His political and administrative skills will be tested by Mexico's education
reforms, which give the states authority for secondary and primary
education. Even if does not make it to the presidency in 1994, he is likely
to be given a good cabinet position, setting him up for the year 2000.
Manuel Camacho
The mayor of Mexico City, Mr Camacho, 46, is personally close to President
Salinas and a key adviser on political and electoral matters. Mr Camacho has
argued strongly for reconciliation with the left-wing Party of Democratic
Revolution, and has had a hand in resolving most of the recent electoral
disputes.
His conciliatory style, fear of making enemies, and difficulty in making up
his mind earns him the scorn of the technocrats in government, some of whom
would resign were he to come to power. He shows little interest in
economics, and is believed to have opposed some of the president's more
important economic reforms. He came under intense criticism earlier this
year for refusing to confront protesters blocking the city centre, so the
president felt compelled to take him to lunch in a popular canteen, to which
the nation's media was invited.
But Mr Camacho has presided over important reforms in Mexico City's
finances, is striving to change the city's political structure, and has
restored the fortunes of the PRI. In 1991, the PRI won 45 per cent of the
vote, from 28 per cent in 1988. He has shown great aplomb in defusing
potentially violent clashes.
If elected, he is likely to concentrate on reducing income inequalities, and
bring the PRD back into the political fold. He favours more political
reform.
Much can happen over the next year to shape the president's thinking and how
he analyses the country's priorities to the end of the century. If he is
convinced that the No 1 issue is further structural reform in the economy,
Mr Aspe's stock would rise. If his main worry is dissension in the PRI, Mr
Colosio's chances would improve. If he believes it is time for conciliation
within the country or if he becomes concerned about its governability, Mr
Camacho might find himself in the frame.
The fact is, though, that nobody except the president knows what is in his
mind. Furthermore, favourite contenders have a habit of losing out.
Fascinating though it is, discussion of the dedazo is - as one Mexican
writer has pointed out - one of Mexico's most useless subjects.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921120

