FT923-10803

FT  28 JUL 92 / International Company News: Indocement soars 23% to Rp138bn


   By WILLIAM KEELING and KIERAN COOKE


   JAKARTA


INDOCEMENT, Indonesia's dominant cement producer, yesterday announced net
profits of Rp138bn (Dollars 67.8m) for the first half to June, up 23 per
cent on the year-earlier period.
Sales tonnage for the six months to June reached 4.37m, up 31 per cent.
Indocement has a total capacity of 9.4m tonnes per year, equivalent to 52
per cent of national capacity.
The company, which achieved operating margins of 43.3 per cent in the
period, forecasts net profits for the year of Rp326bn, including
contributions from acquisitions announced last month of food and property
interests totalling Rp1,720bn.
Indocement is to hold an extraordinary meeting today to approve the
purchases. Some brokers are concerned that the acquisitions are non-quoted
companies from the Salim Group. The group, of which Indocement is part, is a
loose collection of companies in which Mr Soedono Salim, reputedly
Indonesia's richest person, is a leading shareholder.
Morgan Grenfell (Asia), in a letter supporting the proposed acquisitions and
contained in a circular to shareholders, has expressed its preference 'for a
more prudent financing structure' for the acquisitions.
The acquisitions are to be financed from Rp400bn of Indocement's cash,
Dollars 300m in promissory notes and up to Rp800bn from a Bank Central Asia
(BCA) facility. BCA is also part of the Salim Group.
Indocement's net gearing will rise from 11 per cent prior to the
acquisitions to 127 per cent. Brokers are concerned that the company, which
is trading at 24 times earnings, may make a rights issue, although
Indocement denies plans to issue new equity.
Mr Liem Sioe Liong, the leading Indonesian-Chinese businessman, has been
appointed deputy chairman and director of Singapore Land, one of Singapore's
main property companies, Kieran Cooke reports. It is believed to be the
first time Mr Liem has agreed to any public management role in Singapore.
Last year Mr Liem's Singapore registered KMP private company bought a
controlling stake in United Industrial Corp (UIC), Singapore Land's parent
company. The United Overseas Bank, one of Singapore's four big banks, is
also a shareholder in UIC.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920728

