FT924-11330

FT  27 OCT 92 / Tory crisis deepens over Maastricht: Senior MPs warn Major
to lift election threat - Government turmoil hits sterling


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, ALISON SMITH and JAMES BLITZ


MR JOHN MAJOR'S decision to threaten a general election over the Maastricht
treaty pushed the Conservative party into fresh crisis yesterday as senior
Tory MPs bluntly warned the prime minister to step back from a confrontation
on the issue.
After an hour-long meeting of the right-wing 92 Group, government business
managers were told there was 'universal condemnation' of the threat from the
60-odd MPs in attendance and fears that it had put Mr Major's leadership at
risk.
The turmoil unnerved London's financial markets, with sterling suffering
sharp losses against both the dollar and the D-Mark. Analysts predicted the
political uncertainty would bring further losses in coming days.
But the anger among Tory MPs and a decision by the Labour party to vote with
Conservative Euro-sceptics in an attempt to defeat Mr Major in a crucial
Maastricht vote on November 4, failed to persuade Downing Street to drop the
election threat.
That stance left the prime minister starkly at odds with most Tory MPs and
many ministers. The general view at Westminster was that the decision to
raise the stakes over next week's vote was dangerous brinkmanship. It was
designed to cow potential Tory rebels against Maastricht but had needlessly
risked the prime minister's own future.
Unless Mr Major was willing to step back from a confrontation - perhaps by
framing the motion for debate next week without a specific reference to
Maastricht - he would be staking his premiership on a single vote.
As party managers at Westminster tried to work out the relative strengths of
the pro- and anti-Maastricht factions, Whitehall officials left open the
possibility of such a tactical retreat. Calculations suggest that if just 31
Tory MPs vote to oppose the government, that could be enough to defeat a
paving motion.
Senior members of the 92 Group last night said a motion calling simply for
the adjournment of the Commons - a frequently used technical device - might
avoid an unnecessary split. Another option would be to allow MPs a free
vote.
They suggested some cabinet colleagues may have been urging the prime
minister to put his future on the line over the treaty to strengthen their
own hopes for the eventual leadership.
In all, 21 MPs at the meeting were reported to have spoken against Mr
Major's stance, with nine supporting him.
Mr John Carlisle said as he left the meeting: 'The mood was one of dismay at
the way the government has handled this, and one of personal anger towards
the prime minister.'
He added: 'There was a feeling of support for the prime minister, if only on
the basis that there was nobody else.'
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, signalled that while his
party would continue to support the government over Maastricht, it would
oppose it on an adjournment motion.
A stream of Tory Euro-sceptics said they would ignore the prime minister's
threat, arguing that they would be voting on the timing of the ratification
of the Maastricht treaty rather than on whether they had confidence in the
government. Facing Tory charges of opportunism, Labour argued that while it
supported the treaty, it did not believe that the legislation to ratify it
should be brought back until Denmark had clarified its position.
On foreign exchange markets the pound lost nearly 3 pfennigs against the
D-Mark, to close at DM2.4425. Sterling also lost more than 2 1/2 cents
against the dollar, closing at Dollars 1.5870, a 17-month low against the US
currency. It slipped further in New York to DM2.4255 and Dollars 1.584.
Dealers said a worrying feature of sterling's performance was its loss of
ground against the D-Mark at a time when the dollar and other European
currencies were firming because of expectations that the Bundesbank's
official interest rates will be cut. On the stock market, the FT-SE 100
index of leading shares closed down 8.1 points at 2661.6.
Level playing field sought for EC single market Page 2
Tory MPs caution Major over Europe Page 10
Press adds to confusion as PM walks tightrope Page 10
Editorial Comment Page 22
Joe Rogaly: The Tories' hung party Page 22
Currencies Page 35
London stocks Page 44

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921027

