FT921-11989

FT  29 JAN 92 / International Bonds: Italy considers FFr10bn issue of
long-dated bonds


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


TWO top borrowers may be preparing to launch offerings in the Euro-French
franc market.
Banks are currently bidding for the mandate to arrange a FFr2bn to FFr3bn
10-year deal for the European Investment Bank, due to be launched later this
week.
Italy, meanwhile, is in discussions with banks over a FFr7bn to FFr10bn
offering of long-dated bonds, according to market sources. The Italian
authorities are said to be considering a number of proposals for long-dated
issues, possibly as long as 20 years. Italy has become expert at raising
long-dated funds, an area of the yield curve which is closed to most
borrowers, having already launched long-dated deals in sterling and Ecu.
Meanwhile, the EIB is also said to be preparing an offering of floating-rate
notes in the Ecu market, which would appeal to Italian investors, who
already buy the Italian government's floating-rate Ecu debt, and for whom
the EIB name offers tax benefits.
In the Swiss franc market, Credit Agricole launched a SFr75m issue of
reverse-floating rate notes, the first use of the structure in the Swiss
market, according to lead manager Swiss Bank Corporation.
The seven-year notes pay interest at 12 3/4 per cent minus the six-month
London interbank offered rate (Libor), which currently stands at around 7
1/2 per cent, to give an initial interest rate of about 5 1/4 per cent.
However, because the interest rises if Libor falls, the issue provides a
hedging interest for money-market funds, which are exposed to falling
short-term rates.
However, the flow of such deals is likely to be limited by the lack of
opportunities in the swaps market.
The General Mortgage Bank of Sweden tapped the Swiss market for the first
time yesterday, with a SFr100m issue of subordinated debt.
In the sterling sector, the Nationwide Building Society added a Pounds 50m
tranche of floating-rate notes to an existing Pounds 150m issue, via Samuel
Montagu.

The Financial Times


London Page 27 Table (Omitted).

920129

