FT923-15527

FT  01 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Norway adamant on whaling
decision


   By KAREN FOSSLI


   OSLO


NORWAY IS adamant that it will not bow to international pressure condemning
its decision to reinstate hunting of minke whales following a five-year
pause, despite threats of trade embargoes on imported Norwegian fish.
Mrs Gro Harlem Brundtland, the prime minister, recognised internationally as
a champion of the environment, has stated publicly that Norway will not
reverse its stance and that quotas for 1993 commercial whaling will soon be
fixed even if the IWC fails to lift its commercial whaling moratorium
implemented in 1985.
The IWC Scientific Committee a few days ago unanimously estimated that the
north-eastern Atlantic stock stood at 86,700 animals. 'The harvesting of a
stock of this size on a sound, scientific and sustainable basis is fully
justified,' Norway argues.
Norway's last fixed commercial whaling exploitation quota was in 1987, for
325 minke whales from North Atlantic stocks and 50 from the Jan Mayen stock.
While it may be difficult for outsiders to understand Norway's hard-line
approach to commercial whaling, the government argues that in certain remote
areas of the country, especially in the north, fishermen and their families
depend on whaling as a supplement to fishing to earn an acceptable annual
income. In addition it is part of policy on settlement distribution.
It is a particularly important factor in outlying districts which offer few,
if any, alternatives to fishing and hunting, runs Norway's case.
Mrs Brundtland, who has received hundreds of international awards and
recognition for her work in promoting environment conservation, said she
expected criticism of Norway's decision but insists that it is in keeping
with the recent Earth Summit in Rio, which established that the objective of
achieving conservation and sustainable use 'shall apply to all marine living
resources, including marine mammals'.
Britain's Prince Philip, who also heads the Worldwide Fund for Nature, is
visiting Norway and will meet the prime minister today.
In a national radio interview, he said that although Norway's decision was
regrettable, he was 'too polite' to broach the controversial issue with Mrs
Brundtland.
In another radio report, the European Community was quoted as saying that
Norway's decision was hypocritical of its international reputation as a
friend of the environment and raised questions about the sincerity of its
convictions.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920701

