FT924-1011

FT  21 DEC 92 / Election fraud alleged in Yugoslavia


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


MILLIONS of people in the rump Yugoslavia yesterday cast ballots in crucial
presidential and parliamentary elections, in a vote overshadowed by charges
of foul play and media manipulation by Serbia's ruling Socialists.
Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, who is widely held responsible for the
war in neighbouring Bosnia, was fending off a challenge in his bid for
re-election from Mr Milan Panic, the Yugoslav prime minister, who has
cam-paigned on pledges of peace.
The Belgrade-born California pharmaceuticals magnate yesterday said, 'This
is the beginning of democracy in Yugoslavia. People want changes and I will
bring them.'
An exit poll of 1,370 voters predicted a tie, with both candidates taking 47
per cent of the vote. Mr Miroslav Sutic of the Partner polling agency said
young people who tended to vote later could tilt the final result in Mr
Panic's favour.
But complaints of election fraud flooded hot-lines set up by opposition
parties in Belgrade just after the polls opened at 7am.
'There have been a large number of reports of irregularities. A big
percentage of people say they are not listed in the voter registry,' said Mr
Jack Zetkulic, head of the observer mission of the Conference on Security
and Co-operation in Europe.
DEPOS, the main opposition coalition, and the Democratic Party, another
opposition group, said hundreds of people had called in to complain they had
not been allowed to vote.
Mr Milosevic's campaign, marked by its xenophobia and defiant tone, has its
strongest support in working-class and rural areas of Serbia. In the
industrial suburb of Kaludjerica, Mr Dragan Misovic, a student who voted for
the opposition, said: 'The workers will vote because they get paid for doing
nothing. The factories are all closed but they draw salaries.'
Belgrade turn-out was high despite freezing temperatures and a dense fog.
Most voters appeared to back Mr Panic and opposition candidates.
Foreign observers were highly critical of the campaign. 'It was an unfair
campaign. The media propaganda has been shameless, probably the worst we've
ever seen in the region,' said Mr Zetkulic, who added that about 90 foreign
observers had been despatched to monitor local, republican and federal races
in Serbia and Montenegro, the sole members of the reconstituted but
unrecognised Yugoslav federation.
Early results were expected today. If neither candidate gains a 50 per cent
majority a run-off has been tentatively set for January 3.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921221

