FT923-6644

FT  22 AUG 92 / Markets: Bush says sorry but stocks still slide - Wall
Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


AS PUBLIC apologies go, it was a big one. President Bush, in the speech Wall
Street had been nervously awaiting all week, said he was sorry for breaking
his pledge and raising taxes in 1990.
He admitted the tax increase was a mistake, he promised he would not do it
again, and to make it up to everyone, he said he would cut taxes in his
second term, but only if Congress would accept a compensatory cut in
government spending.
The President's words drew an ecstatic response from the Republican mob in
Houston, but on Wall Street the reaction was more muted - polite applause
but nothing more. As Newton Zinder, technical market analyst at Shearson
Lehman, put it: 'Nice speech, now get re-elected."
The main emotion yesterday morning was relief that the President had not
made any rash promises on taxes. Demand for Treasury bonds had been
restrained for a week before the speech by concern that Bush would announce
a big tax cutting package - a move that investors feared could revive
inflationary pressures in the economy, as well as hamper the long-term
chances of reducing the budget deficit.
Yesterday's half-point rise in bond prices, therefore, was more a
representation of the market reclaiming the ground it had lost over the
previous week than a positive response to the speech itself.
The stock markets, meanwhile, were far from impressed. The Dow got a quick
15-point lift in the first few minutes, but it could not hold on to its
opening lead, and by early afternoon it was registering a loss of 30 points
under pressure from the falling dollar.
The early consensus among equity analysts and economists was that while the
President's speech may have looked and sounded good on television, it was
short on economic specifics.
There was no explanation of how he would manage to cut taxes and spending,
create jobs and reduce the deficit all at the same time. The markets also
know full well that unless there is a dramatic turnaround in voting
patterns, Congress is unlikely to be controlled by the Republicans in 1993.
The chances that Bush will win approval for his plans if he wins a second
term are slim.
If the reaction from stock and bond markets was less than inspiring, the
response from the foreign exchange markets to the speech was the equivalent
of a big raspberry. It must have been embarrassing for the White House to
see the world's central banks stampeding into the currency markets to save
the plummeting dollar the day after a supposedly triumphant appearance
before the nation by the President.
Luckily for Bush, the US electorate pays no attention to the dollar. The
stock markets, unfortunately, cannot afford to be so easy-going about the
currency situation. The dollar's sustained weakness may help exporters
(sales of US goods overseas set a record in June), but it leaves the Federal
Reserve with less and less room to engineer another reduction in interest
rates.
If the latest economic statistics are anything to go by, the economic could
do with some fresh stimulus. The report on July's housing starts was
released this week showing a 2.8 per cent decline in the number of new homes
being built. The housing starts data are regarded as an important leading
indicator of economic activity, and to see the numbers in decline at a time
when mortgage rates are at historically low levels does not bode well for
the immediate economic outlook.
The housing numbers made it a difficult week for housebuilding stocks. Three
of the biggest, Clayton Homes, Centex and Standard Pacific all posted
notable losses on the data, while another, Kaufman & Broad, underlined the
gloomy short-term future for the sector by warning that its third quarter
profits would be some 20 per cent to 30 per cent below the a year ago.
Bank stocks also had a tough week. Almost all the important money-centre
stocks took a big fall on Wednesday on a variety of rumours: that the US
fund group Fidelity was a big seller of Citicorp stock; that the recent debt
accord between Brazil and international banks was in jeopardy: that
weakening Japanese banks would spell big trouble for US institutions: and
that Citicorp was planning a new stock issue.
None of the rumours turned out to be true, but the sharp sell-off on
Wednesday showed how vulnerable the bank sector remains despite a good
second quarter and talk of much improved balance sheets.
 ---------------------------
Monday      3324.89    -4.05
Tuesday     3329.48    +4.59
Wednesday   3307.06   -22.42
Thursday    3304.89    -2.17
Friday      3254.10   -50.79
 ---------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

920822

