FT922-7398

FT  19 MAY 92 / DASA leads joint bid for Fokker


   By PAUL BETTS and RONALD VAN DE KROL


   LONDON, AMSTERDAM


DEUTSCHE Aerospace (DASA), Aerospatiale of France and Alenia of Italy are
negotiating to acquire joint control of Fokker, the Dutch aircraft
manufacturer, in a move which could lead to a radical realignment of the
hard-pressed European regional and commuter airline industry.
The German, French and Italian companies are already partners in the
Regioliner regional aircraft consortium formed last year in which DASA, the
aerospace arm of the Daimler-Benz car group, owns 50 per cent with the other
two partners holding 25 per cent each.
Aerospatiale yesterday confirmed this partnership was now seeking to acquire
51 per cent of Fokker with DASA taking 26 per cent and Aerospatiale and
Alenia each taking 12.5 per cent of the Dutch aircraft group, which has a
current total market capitalisation of Fl 1.24bn (Pounds 375.9m).
DASA, which already co-operates on the Fokker 100 twin-engine jet, has been
holding talks with the Dutch company since March. Alenia already owns a 6
per cent stake in Fokker through its parent, the Italian state-controlled
Finmeccanica group.
Apart from taking a controlling stake in Fokker, the partners are also
proposing to set up a joint marketing company to promote all their various
commuter and regional aircraft products.
The negotiations led by DASA are understood to be difficult because it is
unclear whether the possibility of foreign ownership of Fokker would be
acceptable in the Netherlands. The Dutch government, which owns 32 per cent
of Fokker, is expected to play a crucial role in any deal.
The outcome of the talks is also uncertain because of possible complications
from the European Commission, which recently blocked an attempt by
Aerospatiale and Alenia to acquire de Havilland of Canada from the US Boeing
company.
Any deal would also have significant implications for British Aerospace,
which is seeking to rationalise its loss-making regional aircraft
activities. BAe has said a restructuring of the regional airliner sector was
necessary because there were too many manufacturers in a market depressed by
the financial problems of smaller airlines.
A French aerospace industry official yesterday did not rule out the
possibility that BAe might eventually also consider joining the new European
regional airliner partnership if the current negotiations are successful.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920519

