FT924-11550

FT  24 OCT 92 / Drink: Chateaux owners face a variable '92 claret vintage -
Edmund Penning-Rowsell goes to Bordeaux to assess the year in the vineyards


   By EDMUND PENNING-ROWSELL


THE 1992 red Bordeaux vintage will almost certainly be variable. I cannot
recall one more frustrating for chateau proprietors, less agreeable to
witness or more uncomfortable for the pickers bent double between the muddy
vine rows.
From September 28, when picking of the Cabernet-Sauvignon was generally due
to start, there was heavy rain following a hot, humid August. By the end of
September most of the earlier-ripening Merlot was in the fermentation vats
and everywhere declared satisfactory. In two afternoons a good average crop
was picked at Petrus: full-coloured and very fruity.
Later I tasted several vats of Merlot at Pavie and all had colour and fruit,
though varying. A Merlot vintage will help St Emilion and Pomerol, badly hit
in last year's frost. The Cabernets were not fully ripe and some growers
panicked and picked early. The more sophisticated waited until the second
week of October. Mouton-Rothschild recruited more than 800 pickers.
Twenty years ago these conditions, after a good flowering but a mixed
summer, would have resulted in, at best, a moderate, irregular vintage, with
a good deal of rot. Since, expertise in vineyard and cellars has advanced
greatly, and the keys to success this year lay in spraying, summer pruning
(vendange verte) limited yields and the elimination of unripe or rotten
grapes.
Mouton-Rothschild spent double its budget for spraying, and Latour sprayed
no fewer than 21 times instead of the normal 12. I saw truck fulls of
healthy, sweet grapes in the cellars.
Thinning the bunches on the vine was almost unknown ten years ago, but this
year Professor Pascal Ribereau-Gayon, head of Bordeaux University's
oenological department said: 'The great difference is between those who
thinned and those who did not.' Thinning is an expensive business which some
said was as costly as the vintage itself.
Moueix, which owns or manages 12 properties, mostly in St. Emilion and
Pomerol, employed 62 people for 25 days to perform this delicate task, and
La Mission-Haut Brion 50 for more than two weeks. Yields were pared with
more important chateaux making less wine around 45 to 50 hl per hectare. Ch
Margaux produced only 38 hl per hectare - the lowest in recent years.
Although the overall quality of the vintage will not be clear until after
the winter, and blends are made for the grand vin, it will surely be a
saleable one so long as prices reflect the vintage's size, the existence of
large stocks of unsold, unconsumed claret throughout the fine-wine drinking
world, and the recession. Prices must be at least 10 per cent lower than the
1991's - and they were down by 15-20 per cent on the 1990's. Some Bordeaux
merchants suggest that the first-growths, which set a broad scale of prices
for lower levels, should come down from their 1991 FFr160 a bottle to FFr120
or even to FFr100, and leading seconds to FFr60-FFr50.
However, these can be no reason for consumers to buy the 1992 clarets en
primeur. In a variable vintage we can afford to wait two years until the
wines are in bottle.
There will be great pressure on all but the most popular growths and
merchants to sell en primeur. They desperately need cash, especially after
the relatively small, disparaged but undervalued 1991 vintage. One well
established Bordeaux house that sold FFr20m of the 1990's en primeur
disposed of only FFr1m of the 1991s.
Nevertheless, although the Bordeaux wine world is in difficulties, in the 12
months ending in August red Bordeaux sales were down only 4 per cent on the
year, and total exports were actually 2 per cent up, although British
imports were 4 per cent down, albeit 13 per cent up in value. The good news
is that the 1992 dry whites are excellent, and the crop is the largest since
1979.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921024

