FT921-1282

FT  25 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Lasmo will incur small loss


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES and ANDREW FREEMAN


LASMO, the independent oil and gas exploration group, will today announce a
small operating loss after restating its results to embrace changes in
accounting practices. This could put additional pressure on the company's
shares in a sector already trading at a long-term low.
Lasmo, which took over Ultramar for Pounds 1.2bn last December, is being hit
hard by weak oil prices and is expected to announce cuts in its exploration
budget.
The overhaul of accounting practices will reduce earnings for the past eight
years, which will be restated. Mr Michael Pavia, finance director, argues
that it will make Lasmo easier to understand.
Mr Roger Aylard, oil analyst at SG Warburg, believes that Lasmo's restated
net profit for last year will be Pounds 31m, against an estimate under the
old accounting method of Pounds 70m.
The company's gearing is also expected to rise to about 80 per cent as a
result of the acquisition and the accounting changes. But Lasmo is confident
of reducing debt once it sells off Ultramar's downstream assets. The company
is inviting bids from other oil companies which it will evaluate in a month.
The alternative is to float off the Californian and Quebec refineries in one
North American company.
Lasmo had outgrown its previous accounting methods which are still widely
used by the UK's band of small, entrepreneurial oil exploration companies.
The biggest change is in the way the company accounts for the huge costs of
its exploration programme. It will now do this on a 'successful efforts
basis' in line with companies like British Petroleum and Shell, which means
that the costs of exploration are written off over the life of a producing
asset once a project has successfully found oil.
Costs of other projects, where millions of pounds are incurred only to find
a well is dry, are written off straight away - against the relevant year's
profits.
Lasmo had previously written off the costs of all developments - whether
successful or not - over the life of attributable reserves. This lengthened
the period over which costs were written off, boosting profits in the
short-term.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920325

