FT923-11016

FT  27 JUL 92 / Economics Notebook: Obstacles on the road to growth in China


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


Straight-line projections of past trends are almost always wrong, but with
that caveat in mind consider this one: in a little more than 20 years China
could have an economy as large as the US.
In terms of income per head it will, of course, lag America by a
considerable margin. It may only be of the order of USDollars 7,000 (Pounds
3,665) per head. But, by 2015 China will be well on the way to being the
most important economy in the world.
So, what are the assumptions? China's potential growth rate is the sum of
the growth in its workforce plus growth in productivity. The sum of these
two ought also to represent its non-inflationary growth path.
Mr Enzio von Pfeil, economist at Smith New Court in Hong Kong, expects the
workforce to grow by about 3 per cent and productivity by about 12 per cent.
For the US he estimated 1.7 per cent for civilian labour force growth and
1.5 per cent for productivity to give a potential growth rate for the US of
more than 3 per cent.
On the basis of these assumptions the real value of both the US and Chinese
economies reaches USDollars 10,000bn in 2015; during 2016 China overtakes
America.
Now back to the real world. China's economy is overheating. It seems set to
ride the boom phase of the 'boom-bust' cycle that has been a hallmark of the
Chinese economy since Beijing embarked on market-oriented economic reform in
1978.
In the first half of this year gross domestic product (GDP) was 10.6 per
cent higher than in the first half of 1991. Industrial production, on the
same basis, was up 18.2 per cent, and consumer spending was 14 per cent
higher over the same period.
China's nation-wide inflation rate in June was 5 per cent. But that national
figure disguises inflationary pressures where they matter most  - in the
cities. In May, three major Chinese cities, including Guangzhou (Canton),
had inflation rates above 20 per cent. That month inflation in the country's
35 main cities was more than 10 per cent and in June it accelerated to 10.5
per cent.
Some mainland Chinese commentators are sanguine. In the face of steep price
rises there was no 'sign of panic buying and people rushing to withdraw
savings from banks as predicted by economists,' wrote one Chinese
commentator in a recent issue of China Economic News. Well, no sign yet.
The desire for faster economic growth has become an article of faith for the
country's ageing leadership.
Just over a week ago it became Chinese government policy to strive for
annual real growth of between 9 per cent and 10 per cent a year for the rest
of this decade. If successful, China will have managed to double the size of
its economy by 1999.
But, at the current stage of its development the World Bank estimates that
China can probably not grow faster than 6 per cent a year - its estimate for
the long-run trend growth of total factor productivity - without inflation
getting out of hand. This is the growth rate which Mr Li Peng, China's prime
minister, also supports but he has clearly lost the argument.
The main constraints to China's growth and the sources of inflation are many
but a number stand out.
The first is monetary. China operates quantitative controls on credit but
its ability to enforce them is weak.
In the first half of the year China's banks made loans worth Yn120bn - twice
the government's original target. Much of this credit is being pumped into
the country's inefficient state industrial sector.
In the first three months of this year, money supply was rising at an annual
rate of 31.6 per cent. This was the ninth consecutive quarter of
accelerating growth and the highest quarterly reading since 1988 when the
economy last came unstuck.
China also had a problem with its budget deficit. At around 3.5 per cent of
GDP the deficit mainly reflects subsidies to state industries and the
country's urban population which receives virtually free housing, education
and health.
Although it sells government bonds to finance the deficit, it does not
sterilise the deficit. The massive loans to state industry are the result of
printing money; in effect, China monetises its deficit.
The second is infrastructure. Take road and rail. China is a little larger
in area than the US but its road network is equal to only 16 per cent of
that in the US while the length of its rail network is 23 per cent of the US
network.
The road network is poor, and the rail network is operating at full
capacity. With a quarter of the capacity of the US, China's railways ship
about 70 per cent of what the US transports by rail a year. Although China
is the biggest coal producer in the world power plants in Guangdong have to
import coal.
Electricity generation is another major constraint on China's growth. Simply
to satisfy current demand and eliminate shortages China needs to increase
its generating capacity by between 20 per cent and 30 per cent from its
current level of around 140,000MW.
China plans to increase capacity to 200,000MW by 1995 and to add another
40,000MW by the end of the century. But it has to run fast simply to stand
still.
However, the biggest constraint on China realising its full potential for
growth is political. Although China has liberalised many goods markets, it
is fearful of liberalising that nation's biggest market: the market for
labour.
The country's urban labour market is tightly controlled through a system of
urban registration with the police. Workers are tied to their place of work
which provides them with housing, health and educational services.
The cost of providing these services, especially in the state industrial
sector, is costing China dearly.
Yet the solutions to the problem - freeing the labour market, instituting
sensible housing reforms, and lifting the burden of the state from the backs
of the people are still distant prospects.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920727

