FT923-6614

FT  22 AUG 92 / Mountaineering: Rivals join forces on 'infinity ridge' - An
audacious assault on Nanga Parbat


   By RICHARD COWPER


BRITISH mountaineers are billing it the battle of the Himalaya. Doug Scott -
legendary climber and the first Briton to ascend Everest - versus Alan
Hinkes, a young thruster with a mission to become as famous as possible as
fast as possible.
There are just 14 peaks over 8,000 metres (26,000ft) in the world and the
ascent of these giants is viewed by many as the ultimate achievement for a
mountaineer.
The race between the Italian Rheinhold Messner and the Pole Jerzy Kukuczka
to be first to complete them all held the climbing world spellbound until
Messner was first over the top in 1986. So far they are the only two to have
climbed all of them.
Hinkes equalled Scott's record of four 8,000m peaks last year when he guided
a Venezuelan to the top of Broad Peak in the Pakistani Himalaya by the
normal route. He does little to disguise his intention of trying to bag as
many more as he can with the aim of proclaiming himself Britain's 'top'
mountaineer.
But for Scott, a man more concerned with climbing hard new routes on
mountains of any height with a group of friends, it is a race that will
never be. At 50 he has succeeded on more original routes in the world's
great ranges than perhaps any Briton, and is uninterested in a game of
numbers.
To scotch any suggestion of joining such a race, he has been quick to invite
Alan Hinkes on his own expedition this month to Nanga Parbat, at 8,150m the
world's ninth highest mountain. The attempt via the unclimbed
eight-mile-long Mazeno ridge is the most ambitious British climb anywhere
this year.
For Hinkes - without an expedition this season after Andy Fanshawe, his
partner for K2 (the world's second-highest peak), was killed in an accident
earlier this year - the offer proved irresistible.
'I looked at the route. I asked what was I letting myself in for with Doug .
. . but he has lasted so long, he doesn't want to die . . . I said Yes,'
says Hinkes.
Located in the Karakoram mountains of northern Pakistan, and bounded to the
north and west by the Indus, Nanga Parbat ('naked mountain' in Sanskrit)
stands in splendid isolation as the dazzling culmination of the western half
of the Himalaya.
Looking to the summit from Scott's base camp in the Rupal valley, it rises
almost sheer for close on 5,000m. Many say it is the most beautiful of the
big Himalayan peaks, but it is famous for savage storms and big avalanches,
the mountaineer's two worst enemies.
So far, the weather has been kind. Hinkes and Scott have spent a month
acclimatising, getting fit, and making a recce of the routes up and down.
Now, with their unusual but highly experienced team of two Russians, two
Nepalis and a British film cameraman (between them they have climbed 14
8,000m peaks), they are setting off for the Mazeno col to start the climb
proper.
At a time when most Himalayan climbers are obsessed with attempting the
steepest faces, the Mazeno ridge sounds like a return to more traditional
mountaineering: all the great Alpine and Himalayan mountains were first
conquered via ridges.
However, what makes this climb unique and highly dangerous is its unusual
length and sustained height. At least eight miles as the crow flies (no one
really knows), the route follows the world's longest unclimbed ridge.
From the Mazeno col, Scott's party will traverse a knife-edge ridge loaded
with dangerous cornices and ascend and descend at least seven mountains,
most of them over 7,000m, to the Mazeno gap. All this before the final
gruelling ascent in the so-called 'death zone' above 8,000 metres to the
summit pyramid of Nanga Parbat at 8,150m. It is hardly surprising that some
mountaineers are calling it 'infinity ridge'.
In comparison, the unclimbed and much coveted north-east ridge of Everest is
4 1/2 miles, little more than half the length of the Mazeno. Even so,
Everest's north-east ridge has long been regarded as the most awesome
Himalayan proposition because of the distance climbers have to travel at a
height where the body functions at less than 30 per cent of normal
capabilities.
The difficulties of the Mazeno ridge have kept all but one team away, and
that by chance. In 1979 a group of 22 of France's top climbers, led by Jean
Pierre Fresafond, were planning a new route on the Rupal face of Nanga
Parbat, but an earthquake denied them the opportunity. At the last minute
they shifted their efforts to the Mazeno ridge. The climb ended in disarray
after only the first of the Mazeno peaks had been scaled.
Says Hinkes: 'I think it is more committing than any route I know. If you
get trapped in a blizzard on the Mazeno ridge no helicopter can fly that
high. There is no easy way off. Both sides are precipitous. If you got sick
in a storm it would quickly become a matter of life and death. You either
have to go on or back. And if you are halfway along that's four miles at an
altitude where every step requires a tremendous effort.'
Nanga Parbat has often been cruel. Over the last century only 101 climbers
have reached its summit and 55 lost their lives trying, making it the most
dangerous mountain in the world after Annapurna. Most famous of all was the
great British mountaineer A F Mummery, who died trying to scale its Diamir
face in 1895 in a climb widely regarded as decades ahead of its time.
It was only last year that the first Britons - Roger Mears and Dave Walsh -
reached its summit. But Scott's attempt is of a different order. If
successful it will go down not only as the greatest British triumph on what
has been regarded as the Austro-German mountain, but the most audacious
achievement in the Himalaya for many years.
Both Hinkes and Scott will then have five 8,000m peaks to their credit. For
Scott, four of them will have been conquered via new routes. At 37, there
seems little doubt that Hinkes will eventually come out on top of any
British Himalayan league table. But success on the Mazeno ridge might make
him think harder about how he does it.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920822

