FT921-628

FT  28 MAR 92 / Books: Nasty secrets will out - Fiction


   By ISABEL QUIGLY


DUNSTER by John Mortimer Viking Pounds 14.99, 296 pages
JERICHO by Dirk Bogarde Viking Pounds 14.99, 278 pages
BAY OF ALL SAINTS AND EVERY CONCEIVABLE SIN by Ana Miranda Harvill Pounds
14.99, 305 pages
COMPOST, nourisher and perhaps poisoner of us all, the past must always
fascinate novelists. Two of the week's novels have narrators digging
painfully into the younger days of someone close to them. John Mortimer's
Dunster is masterly. No swanning around with the Brits in Chiantishire, as
in recent novels - though the British in Tuscany are crucial to this one's
past action. It goes much deeper, and more darkly, though the surface has a
similar exactness and exuberance and a similar deadpan wit. Destructive yet
with an integrity of sorts, Dunster is the kind of barefaced busybody who
churns up trouble wherever he goes, tangling fact and fiction inextricably
together. All through their lives and into middle age he has pursued his
schoolmate Progmire with a mixture of chumminess and guile, charm and
cheating, undermining his confidence, luring away his wife and, in a
roundabout way, his daughter, and in general stamping on his soul. Every
cause he backs he believes in with every fibre of his fairly, though not
totally, awful being, and when he decides that Progmire's admirable, beloved
boss, Sir Crispin, is a war criminal who in Italy in 1943 blew up a church
containing the entire population of a village, the fight is on. Sir Crispin
fights back, wins his libel action and, honourable to the last, refuses his
half-million damages. So, who comes out of it how? Dunster is defeated, not
just in law but in his soul and personality. Was he, ever righteous,
possibly wrong? And does winning a libel action guarantee truth?
Part thriller, part observer of current mores, realistic yet full of
ambiguities, Dunster raises every kind of question, moral and psychological,
while spinning along at a cracking pace. The trial takes up a third of the
book, involving us in courtroom doings as Mortimer so well knows them, not
as outsiders imagine them: muddle, noise, confusion, personal enmities,
liaisons, spites, cunning and the odd whiff of brilliance. At a more serious
level than recent Mortimer novels, it makes the best possible read.
Dirk Bogarde's Jericho also has a downbeat narrator and nasty secrets from
the recent past to uncover in a Mediterranean country. With his marriage
collapsing in Parsons Green, William is sent a key to the French home of his
brother James, out of touch for years and jealously resented for being born
a decade after him to steal the family's attention. Out he goes to Var to
discover the vanished James, and finds a way of life to cherish, beauty,
sunshine, a son he hardly knows and a surprising small nephew. Also a widow,
of sorts. And, when he pokes deeper into the underside of James's life, some
sordid truths.
What's to follow? The end is credible and, one is led to expect, happy. With
Parsons Green shuffled off, and with it Helen, the wife William no longer
even likes, a new landscape and its natural world appear. Son and nephew are
beautifully realised, vivid and present; so are the artefacts and the social
life of provincial France and, to a lesser degree, the widow-of-sorts and
her formidable bourgeois mother. Only the detection, the lewd discoveries,
the shock-horror aspects of bisexual, kinky James seem contrived and are,
frankly, tedious.
As readers of his memoirs will know, Bogarde's writing is stylish, showing
splendid descriptive power and judgments tender or waspish; as admirers of
his acting will remember, he has an uncanny way of entering the
personalities of others; and for good measure this Admirable Crichton has
painted, pretty well, his own book's jacket.
Another enticing jacket gives Bay of All Saints and Every Conceivable Sin an
initial advantage. What will Ana Miranda in her first novel make of the
rich, lurid life of 17th century Bahia, then capital of Brazil? Well, we
learn a good deal: about the country's history, its relations with Portugal,
its oppressive hierarchy of law and government; about slavery and
corruption, torture, violence, imprisonment, plantations, sugar, politics,
church. But research, which has clearly been extensive, has overwhelmed the
book: detail becomes oppressive, holding up the action. As a work of
imagination, it is leaden. No one comes alive, or seems to matter. It lacks
wit and pace, and so dully presented are the characters that it is sometimes
hard to tell or remember who's who. The translation is by Giovanni Pontier.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920328

