FT921-14188

FT  17 JAN 92 / FT Law Report: DTI questions must be answered


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


IN RE LONDON UNITED INVESTMENTS PLC
Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Dillon, Lord Justice Mustill and Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith): December 19 1991
THE Department of Trade and Industry has power to appoint inspectors to
investigate company matters which are the subject of allegations of fraud,
irrespective of whether they may also be subject to enquiry by the Serious
Fraud Office or the police; and an officer of a company questioned by the
inspectors for the purpose of the investigation cannot refuse to answer on
the ground only that to do so might incriminate him.
The Court of Appeal so held when dismissing an appeal by Mr Peter Stringer
Wilson, former chief executive of London United Investments plc (LUI), from
Mr Justice Scott's decision on an application by Department of Trade and
Industry inspectors, that his refusal to answer questions put to him by the
inspectors was unjustified.
LORD JUSTICE DILLON said that from January 1 1976 to October 4 1990 Mr
Wilson was a director of LUI.
LUI carried on business primarily as a holding company in the insurance
field, with two relevant wholly-owned subsidiaries, Walbrook Insurance and
HS Weavers (Underwriting) Agencies (HSW).
Mr Wilson was a director of Walbrook from December 3 1974 until August 2
1990. He was managing director of HSW from January 1 1976 until September
1989, when he became chief executive of LUI.
LUI ran into difficulties in 1989. On March 26 1990, following directions
from the DTI, LUI and its subsidiaries stopped writing new insurance
business. On May 22 an administration order was made in respect of LUI.
In October/November 1990 the secretary of state, in exercise of his powers
under section 432(2) of the Companies Act 1985, appointed inspectors to
investigate the affairs of LUI.
The inspectors were particularly asked to look at the circumstances
surrounding payments of commission on reinsurance contracts relating to HSW.
That raised questions with regard to arrangements made between HSW and a
German reinsurance company, Munich Re.
In an affidavit sworn on May 10 1991, the inspectors said it was apparent
from their investigations that between 1976 and 1989 HSW had entered into
reinsurance quota share treaties with Munich Re; and that during that period
deductions of 5 to 6.5 per cent, totalling Dollars 46m, were made from
reinsurance premiums and paid to various companies based in Germany or
Liechtenstein, referred to as the 'Smith companies'.
The inspectors said they regarded it as essential to their investigation to
determine why those deductions were made, what was the true nature of the
role performed by the Smith companies, and for whom they were acting.
They pointed out in their affidavit that Mr Wilson was the person who
carried out the negotiations with Munich Re and operated the Munich Re
facility throughout the whole period. They said he had told them he intended
the deductions should go to the Smith companies.
It seemed that the Smith companies took their name from Mr Graham Smith, an
English chartered accountant resident in Liechtenstein, and his wife Isolde,
a Liechtenstein citizen.
On October 30 1990 HSW started an action for fraud, against Mr Wilson and
others including Mr and Mrs Smith and the Smith companies, in respect of
diversion to the Smith companies of commissions payable by Munich Re.
It was not surprising that the inspectors wanted to question Mr Wilson about
the Munich Re commission and the Smith companies.
Mr Wilson had refused to answer.
Mr Brodie for Mr Wilson submitted that, as a matter of law, it was improper
for the secretary of state to appoint inspectors to investigate matters
which were the subject of allegations of fraud, because it was more
appropriate that suspected crimes should be investigated by the Serious
Fraud Office or the police.
That was an impossible contention in the face of the wording of Part XIV of
the 1985 Act.
Section 432(2) provided that the secretary of state might make an
appointment if circumstances suggested a company's affairs were being
conducted 'with intent to defraud'.
Where matters which came to light in the course of investigation had been
referred to a prosecuting authority, the secretary of state was not bound to
direct the inspectors to take no further steps. He just had power to do so
(section 437).
Moreover, he had power under the combined effect of sections 449 and 451A to
disclose information obtained by inspectors under section 434, to the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
Against that background it was impossible to conclude that there was any
basis in law which precluded the secretary of state from appointing
inspectors in the present case.
The first major question on the appeal was whether Mr Wilson was entitled to
rely on the Common Law privilege against self-incrimination as entitling him
to refuse to answer the inspectors' questions.
The privilege was deep-rooted in the Common Law. However, since R v Scott
(1856) 169 ER 909, it had been accepted law that parliament might take away
the privilege.
In Scott, where statute compelled a bankrupt to answer questions which might
show he had been guilty of felonies or misdemeanors, Lord Campbell CJ said
'the maxim of the Common Law has therefore been overruled by the
legislature'.
There was no express provision precluding officers of a company from relying
on the privilege against self-incrimination when questioned by inspectors,
either in the 1985 Act, or in the Insolvency Act 1986.
The court had to consider whether it was clear that parliament intended,
when enacting Part XIV, to take away the privilege.
Lord Campbell's judgment in R v Scott was an example of the sort of
reasoning which might justify the court in holding that the privilege had
implicitly been taken away.
Section 434(2) of the 1985 Act as amended by the Companies Act 1989 provided
that if inspectors considered an officer of the company might be in
possession of information relevant to their investigation they might require
him to '(b) attend before them, and (c) otherwise to give them all
assistance . . . which he is reasonably able to give'.
Section 436 provided that if he refused to answer, the inspectors might
certify that fact to the court, and '(3)the court may thereupon enquire into
the case and . . . punish the offender in like manner as if he had been
guilty of contempt of the court'.
On those provisions,the conclusion was that as (i) inspectors would in very
many cases have been appointed where the circumstances suggested fraud, (ii)
persons questioned were bound to answer their questions, and (iii) the
inspectors' report might lead the secretary of state to petition for
winding-up or to proceed in the company's name in the public interest, the
privilege against self-incrimination was impliedly excluded.
The second major question was whether it was fair for the inspectors to seek
answers, given that they admittedly would be self-incriminating.
It had long been held that the court was concerned to ensure that the
procedure of private examination was not exercised in a manner oppressive to
the person to be examined.
It might be that the court had power under section 463(2) to refuse to
compel a person to answer or to punish him for refusing to answer, if it
felt that the questioning was oppressive and therefore unfair.
But that was not this case.
If it was right that the privilege against self-incrimination was not
available to Mr Wilson, the mere fact that the answers might incriminate him
could not be enough by itself to make it unfair that he should be required
to answer.
In considering, in the absence of privilege, whether it was fair that
questions should be put to him, it was highly relevant that Mr Wilson's
position in the three companies made it likely that he knew the answers to
the questions the inspectors wanted to ask him, and highly relevant also
that because of that position he owed the fiduciary duty to the companies.
The appeal was dismissed.
Their Lordships agreed.
For Mr Wilson: Stanley Brodie QC, Stephen Nathan and Robert Howe (Tarlo
Lyons).
For the inspectors: Andrew Collins QC and Arthur Charles (Treasury
Solicitor).

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920117

