FT924-6460

FT  20 NOV 92 / Port of Tyne wins Nissan exports deal


   By CHRIS TIGHE


NISSAN, the Japanese car manufacturer, is to move its export and import
operations from Teesport to a new custom-built terminal on the Tyne near
Jarrow, it announced yesterday.
The arrangements will include the export of Sunderland-made Nissan cars to
30 countries, including Japan, a traffic contributing about Pounds 900m this
year in export earnings to the UK economy.
Winning the Nissan contract, initially a five-year deal from January 1994,
is an important coup for the Port of Tyne, which depends for nearly half its
annual cargo tonnage on highly vulnerable coal shipments.
Teesport is part of the port of Tees and Hartlepool, Britain's
second-biggest port. Nissan's decision is a blow for Teesside Holdings, the
consortium that bought the port for Pounds 180m early this year after a
privatisation battle.
The traffic of Nissan cars through Teesport originated in 1970 as an import
operation by the now defunct independent distributor Nissan UK. When Nissan
began exports from its Sunderland plant in 1988, it decided to use Nissan
UK's Teesport facilities.
When relations with Nissan UK broke down last year, the carmaker evaluated
its future shipping needs, assessing quality of service, cost and efficiency
levels offered by six north-east England locations. Criteria included deep
water, needed for Nissan's huge 5,500-car 'mother ships'.
Since 1988, Nissan has exported 357,000 Sunderland-made cars, nearly all
through Teesport, which this year is also handling 40,000 imported Nissans
built in Spain and Japan. Under the new deal, a few Sunderland-made cars
will still be exported through Southampton.
Output of Primeras and Micras at Sunderland - 175,000 this year - will rise
in 1993 to 270,000. At least 70 per cent will be exported. In 1994, Nissan
plans to export more than 200,000 Sunderland-made cars from the Tyne.
Mr Terry Hogg, director of production control at Sunderland, said the
working relationship with Teesport had been excellent but that Nissan's
operating conditions had changed dramatically, largely because of export
business growth.
'The Port of Tyne offered the most commercially viable alternative; that
included a purpose-built berthing facility dedicated to Nissan,' he said.
Because the Tyne is much nearer Nissan's Sunderland plant and adjacent
national distribution compound, car transporter movements will be reduced by
900,000 miles a year. Nissan's 37 Teesport employees will be offered
transfers to the Tyne terminal.
Neither party would disclose the deal's financial terms. Work will start
immediately on constructing three roll-on roll-berths for Nissan on 27 acres
of an 87-acre site.
In a terse statement yesterday, Mr John Holloway, chief executive of the
Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority, said the THPA was 'obviously very
disappointed'.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921120

