FT921-603

FT  28 MAR 92 / Man in the News: Many faces of Mr Moonbeam - Jerry Brown


   By JUREK MARTIN


It has always been easy to laugh at Jerry Brown and this week has proved no
exception for the nation's comedians. David Letterman, NBC TV's
neck-of-the-night talk show host was as good as any with his top 10 reasons
why the former governor of California won the Connecticut Democratic primary
on Tuesday.
These included: he was the 100th caller; many citizens thought they were
voting for James Brown, the soul singer; heavy Klingon turn-out (one for the
Star Trekkies); growing sentiment the western world should be run by a guy
in a turtleneck.
Funny stuff, a lot of which probably has already been said in the course of
the 25-year public career of a man who will be 54 on April 7, the date of
his next date with destiny, the New York primary. What is serious, this time
for Bill Clinton and for the Democratic party as a whole, is Brown's habit
of making double mockery of it. Reinvent himself every year or two he may,
as Clinton says, but the reinventions sometimes, somehow, catch on.
This election year it is as the voice of the alienated, but it has not
always been such. He was, after all, governor of California, the largest
state in the union for eight years, and running it was a qualification
deemed good enough to get Brown's predecessor, Ronald Reagan, eight years in
the White House. In 1976 he was mainstream enough to throw a big scare into
Jimmy Carter's outside march on Washington.
Brown does not succeed all the time, failing in subsequent cracks at the
presidency, for the California Senate seat in 1982, and getting nowhere last
year in exploring another such bid. But he has a good political nose -
inherited from his father, Edmund G Brown Sr, governor of California before
Reagan - and an eye for issues.
He can fairly claim this year that he is the only candidate with
environmental credentials consistently adhered to throughout the
environmentally unfriendly Reagan-Bush years. This is in the modern
tradition of the west and explains why Colorado, almost reflexively, voted
for him a month ago.
But consistency does not normally bother him. Over the past two years, he
has completely changed his mind on campaign financing, once opposing
limitations, now favouring them. As governor he first opposed, then came
round to, Proposition Thirteen, the property tax-cutting initiative that
swept the state in 1978. Perhaps impressed by its simplicity or perhaps to
demonstrate his eclecticism, he now advocates new flat rates of income and
value-added tax, which, together with the retention of a few core deductions
like mortgage and rent relief, would replace in toto the current US tax
code. The fact that he borrowed these ideas from the right-wing Hoover
Institute does not faze this nominally left-wing candidate at all.
Less easy to defend is his opportunistic switch from internationalism to
near xenophobia. As governor of California Brown was not insensitive to
Pacific Rim trade or the economy of neighbouring Mexico. This year, he would
have his audiences believe that Mexico is the primary source of job loss in
the US. Occasionally he makes the legitimate point that the proposed North
American Free Trade Area with Mexico and Canada is fundamentally flawed
because it lacks the labour market regulation that makes the European
Community work, but he knows that the sort of audiences he is appealing to
stop listening when he gets too technical. It is easier, as he has done, to
say that if the US can shelter the Kurds it ought to be able to look after
its own homeless.
This, of course, is precisely where he has had success so far this year  -
in mining a seam of discontent in the country that knows things are wrong
but has no answers. He has few either, but that is not the point, which is
to direct the finger of blame at those who are more responsible - the
political establishment, in all its manifestations. Even the Democrats, he
would have all believe, are now run by a politburo (yes, he uses the old
communist word), which has decided that Clinton should be the presidential
nominee.
But essentially his is a plague on all the houses, for only by tearing them
all down can he render all conventional political wisdom that he can never
be president, let alone nominee, null and void. It is pure populism,
leavened only occasionally by traditional political guile, such as in trying
to extract an endorsement out of Governor Mario Cuomo of New York this week.
And this must be prosecuted regardless of party or indeed the facts. For a
trained lawyer and a Jesuit seminarian, subsequently schooled in zen
Buddhism, Brown shows an astonishing lack of interest in the truth. He is,
however, quick and unscrupulous in argument.
What nobody knows is whether Brown actually believes in what he is saying or
whether he is just riding the whirlwind he has created for the hell of it.
For his is more than an Anybody But Clinton movement; it is the voice of
disaffection and protest and it has existed on the other side of the
political fence already this year in the person of Pat Buchanan, who also
ran mostly on words and not much money. The phone calls flooding in urging H
Ross Perot, the Texas businessman, to run as an independent are another
manifestation. But Buchanan at least had a specific political cause, the
revival of conservatism, and perhaps a political end-game, in the shape of a
candidacy in 1996. With Brown, it is impossible to be sure of either.
Or anything: for as the campaign moves on it probably is the case that the
Brown phenomenon will get closer scrutiny for what it stands for, rather
than against. It might stand that test, especially if Clinton continues to
be carved up by New York's tabloids.
But if not, then what? The second best political quote of the week (after
President George Bush's 'it has been a screwy year') was to be found in the
Wall Street Journal from Joe Scott, a veteran Brown-watcher. 'Jerry can't
win the nomination and he knows it. But these next few weeks are going to
look like the Russian retreat from the Ukraine. Nothing will be left
standing.' Except possibly Bush, which, for the Democrats, would not be
funny at all.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920328

