FT922-4155

FT  06 JUN 92 / Rise in jobless hurts Bush's poll chances


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


A SHARP and unexpected increase in US unemployment has thrown new gloom onto
President George Bush's already tattered re-election campaign. The Labor
Department said yesterday the unemployment rate climbed in May to 7.5 per
cent, its highest level for eight years.
The statistics provided little encouragement for Mr Bush's efforts to win a
second term in the White House, which have rested largely on the hope that
the US economy would recover from recession in time for November's general
election.
It has frustrated Mr Bush and his advisers that voters feel the recession
more deeply than the economic data suggest, and that they have been slow to
recognise that recovery has begun.
In a press conference on Thursday, the president gloomily cited a private
poll in which 70 per cent of those questioned thought the economy was
getting worse, although gross domestic product, industrial production and
payroll employment were all increasing.
'I think most people would concede that my problems stem from this sluggish,
anaemic economy. I assume the American people are fair enough to give credit
when there's recovery,' Mr Bush said.
Some of the discrepancy between the apparently mild recession and the sharp
plunge in popular confidence was explained this week by a substantial
revision to past employment data.
The revised statistics show employment fell by 2.2m during the 18 month
recession, 30 per cent more than previous data had suggested.
Mr William Barron, acting commissioner of labor statistics, said jobs were
now being created, but too slowly to absorb the growth in the labour force.
The department said the number of jobs in the non-farm sector rose by 68,000
in May, to total 108.45m, continuing a slow upward trend evident since the
beginning of the year.
But 331,000 people entered the jobs market - many of them young people
leaving school or college - and Mr Barron said the labour force had grown by
1.8m in the last six months.
Only the service sector is creating new jobs, with jobs still being cut in
the retail sector, and manufacturing employment showing little change.
'Manufacturers are expanding hours, not payrolls,' said Mr Ed Yardeni,
economist at brokers C J Lawrence, who noted that the average factory
working week of 41.3 hours was at its highest level since 1966.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

