FT923-9542

FT  05 AUG 92 / World Stock Markets: Spanish building stocks feel the pinch
 -Government efforts to rein in spending are bad news for the sector


   By PETER BRUCE


Between 1987 and 1990, shares in Spain's big construction companies were
probably the best measure of the country's unprecedented economic boom. They
are now a chillingly accurate barometer of the economy's rapid decline.
Since the beginning of the year, shares in most of Spain's 'Big Seven'
quoted constructors - Dragados, FCC, Cubiertas, Huarte, Ocisa, Agroman and
Lain - have fallen more than 50 per cent as it becomes clear that annual
Spanish growth rates of 5 per cent or more are a thing of the past. Gross
domestic product will, if the government is lucky, grow at 2 per cent this
year and 1.5 per cent in 1993.
In a relatively poor country such as Spain, any increase in economic
activity includes, almost by definition, the building of a road, a factory
or an office block. For the most part, the state has been the biggest
builder during the past six years, and it has also ensured that Spanish
contractors have the lion's share of the work. As the government puts the
brakes on new public projects, the danger of depending on the same
institution for both business and protection has become manifest.
In an effort to control public spending, the government has been forced to
announce tax increases and budget cuts for this year to save about Dollars
3.2bn. Interest rates have been raised and next year's budget, due to be
presented in the autumn, will allow spending growth of around 8 per cent,
the lowest in nearly 10 years. Most of that growth will probably be
concentrated on social services, not infrastructure.
Spanish equity analysts desperately hope that a 'yes' vote in the French
referendum on Maastricht will restore some confidence in their market. But
the current Spanish malaise may be beyond the power of French voters to
influence. In spite of determined declarations by the government to rein in
public spending in order to converge the Spanish economy with the rest of
the European Community, it has also been determined in the past but has
failed to do so.
Spending by regional governments and town halls, not affected by last
month's fiscal package, is hard to control. The government has admitted that
their spending was Dollars 3bn higher than thought in 1991 and has adjusted
its calculation of the overall government deficit for last year from 4.4 per
cent of GDP to 4.95 per cent.
Elections due to be held next year may mean that Mr Felipe Gonzalez, the
prime minister, will have to form a coalition with the Catalan nationalist
government and this would make it even more difficult to control regional
spending.
This is bad news for the construction sector. The government is already
delaying payments for completed work, and by the end of June it owed
constructors about Dollars 8bn. Dozens of sub-contractors have been put out
of business and share prices in cement companies have fallen sharply.
Fortunately for the construction companies, 1991 was a fat year as the
country rushed to complete building for the Seville Expo and the Barcelona
Olympics.
Investment in public works, however, is down almost 50 per cent so far this
year and the private housing market has come to a virtual standstill. 1992
started out appearing to be a temporary setback for construction companies
but it now looks like the beginning of a long haul.
Mr Paul Farrow, an analyst at brokers FG in Madrid, says: 'The economy could
go through two to three years of low growth, and for the constructors, size
will be a determining factor. The big ones are better placed to ride out the
problems.'
Although FG is forecasting no change in dividend policy from the big quoted
Spanish constructors - except, perhaps, at Agroman, which has borrowed
heavily - it is predicting a decline of around 9 per cent in net profits and
a 10 per cent fall in cash flow, for the sector this year.
It is hard not to sympathise with Spanish brokers, who have been declaring
through much of this year that the end of the market's slide has arrived. In
May, with the Madrid general index at around 270, a bottoming out was
confidently announced. By this week, though, the index was nodding along at
216 with still no end to its fall in sight.
Foreigners have deserted Spanish equities in droves, and attractive
valuations are not enough to lure them back. While the government struggles
to get its spending under control what matters most is whether investors
believe it can be done.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920805

