FT922-13310

FT  13 APR 92 / Management: How to keep up with the corporate Joneses - Why
companies are turning to benchmarking to measure their performance


   By PAUL TAYLOR


How does a company measure and improve its own performance? One way is by
'benchmarking' its competitors.
Benchmarking is becoming increasingly popular, even though some companies
are uncertain about how to do it, and others worried that it is somehow
unethical.
For the uninitiated, benchmarking involves comparing the performance of a
company to that of other companies. It is an alternative to the more usual
internal yardsticks of performance.
Despite the undertones of industrial espionage, benchmarking is completely
above board. There are two main ways of doing it, one which focuses on
customers, the other on processes.
Competitor benchmarking covers the performance and relative strengths of
direct competitors. The sources for the information include customer and
supplier interviews and published data from research reports, conference
reports, trade bodies and press comment.
By contrast, process benchmarking is not restricted to direct competition so
data may be easier to obtain. Information is exchanged between companies
with similar administrative and manufacturing processes - often through an
intermediary to preserve confidentiality.
This provides all the participants with useful benchmarks without
compromising competitive positions. British Steel's change from being a
nationalised loss-maker into a lean, low-cost producer is one success
claimed by benchmarking's fans.
British Steel began using benchmarking in 1988 before privatisation at a
macro level to compare performance against other companies, and at a micro
level to undertake detailed measurements against other steel plants.
Today, the company benchmarks costs, customer service, quality, reliability
and responsiveness. Teams of technical and operational managers identify
processes and plants and then measure them against comparable plants and the
'best in the world'. An action plan is then drawn up, perhaps linked to a
capital expenditure plan.
In the service sector, British Airways used benchmarking since 1987 to help
transform itself from a stodgy, state-controlled enterprise to a leading
world airline.
Project teams of senior and front line staff from various departments
analyse business processes and identify the weakest elements. They then
visit direct competitors and other relevant organisations with checklists
and questions.
British Airways has found that competitors are often willing to share
information in the pursuit of answers to jointly perceived problems.
Once the project teams have collected their information, they make
recommendations to senior management.
The proposals are made by the people who will have to live with them, which
British Airways says is an important factor in making benchmarking work.
The success of these benchmarking exercises depends on focusing improvement
in key areas, and setting targets which are challenging, but achievable. A T
Kearney,the international management consultants, have used benchmarking in
their client work for 10 years.
Companies increasingly recognise that motivating staff to improve current
processes and setting tough but achievable targets requires identifying and
quantifying 'best practice', says Steve Young, A T Kearney vice president.
'The problem is that terms like 'best practice' and 'world class' are widely
used and abused. Benchmarking gives a common framework by providing hard
data. We find it makes organisations sit up and appreciate - often for the
first time  - the degree of change required.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920413

