FT921-1180

FT  25 MAR 92 / Insurers fear spate of air crash claims


   By RICHARD LAPPER


A RECENT spate of air crashes may lead to multi-million-dollar claims to be
paid by aviation insurers, adding to pressure for rate increases.
News of the losses emerged yesterday as aviation insurers gave warnings that
premium rates were still not high enough in spite of recent rate increases.
Rates for aircraft hulls have been increased by between 200 per cent and 300
per cent. Rises of up to 100 per cent for liability risks were imposed last
October and November. Those are the months in which 60 per cent to 75 per
cent of airlines renew their policies.
One aviation insurance broker said that, with losses from 14 serious
accidents so far this year producing claims of about Dollars 170m, this has
been the worst first quarter for aviation insurers for some time. 'It is
looking like a very bad year,' one broker said.
The crash on Sunday night at La Guardia airport, New York, of a USAir Fokker
F28 airliner may leave insurers with losses of more than Dollars 50m.
The aircraft's hull was insured for Dollars 13m, with about a quarter of the
exposure in the London market.
Compensation claims from relatives of the 27 people killed in the accident
might be as much as Dollars 1m per head.
Aviation insurers also expect to pay out more than Dollars 7m as a result of
the crash of a Sudanese cargo aircraft near Athens yesterday. Insurers at
Lloyd's of London may be affected by the claim from Golden Air, which
operated the 27-year-old Boeing 707 aircraft.
Mr Graham Nichols, chairman of the Aviation Insurance Offices Association,
warned yesterday that claims from airline accidents amounted to Pounds 596m
in 1991, well ahead of premium income.
Mr Nichols said that poor underwriting results over the past few years have
led to a reduction in the number of companies underwriting aviation
insurance. Membership of the association has fallen from 25 to 17.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920325

