FT924-11445

FT  26 OCT 92 / Up to 150,000 join London rally to protest against pit
closures


   By ANDREW ADONIS


UP TO 150,000 protesters marched through the capital in driving rain to
London's Hyde Park yesterday to hear speakers from across the political
spectrum call for a national crusade to halt threatened pit closures.
Central London was jammed for several hours as the public marched alongside
miners, politicians and trade unionists. The police estimated that 150,000
took part; the Trades Union Congress put the figure at 200,000.
In a scathing personal attack, Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, told the
rally that Mr John Major should 'protect the national interest and start to
be a prime minister'. He urged him to 'go down the pits you want to shut and
look at the investment . . . which would be written off if this decision
goes ahead.
'Speak to the miners whose skills are unique and irreplaceable, and above
all visit their families and think of what will happen to them if your plans
go ahead,' he added, to loud cheers.
The rally was an effort by the TUC to sustain popular momentum against the
government's attempt last week to close more than half of Britain's pits,
which it was forced to shelve pending a three-month review to stave off a
near certain defeat in the House of Commons.
Mr Arthur Scargill, president of the National Union of Mineworkers, appealed
to the country not to 'leave us isolated in this struggle'. He urged the TUC
to 'take on board' the NUM's call for 'a national day of action' against the
closures. 'I want demonstrations like this in every town and city throughout
Britain until this government changes its policy and withdraws its threat to
close pits and sack miners,' he told the rally.
Neither Mr Smith nor Mr Norman Willis, TUC general secretary, made any
reference to the possibility of a day of action in their speeches. Mr Smith
simply pledged Labour to 'fight for Britain's interest'.
Mr Willis stressed the necessity of sustaining cross-party opposition to the
closures.
'We must form new alliances. We either learn to live together as sisters and
brothers, or we shall perish together as fools,' he said.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, condemned the government's
'callous indifference' to the plight of the miners, and said the 'real
heroes and heroines' of the last week were those who marched and spoke up
for the miners.
'They have given us the time to save 100,000 jobs, and they have done
something which no opposition politician has done in 13 years - got the
government to change its mind,' he said.
The rally was good humoured and the speeches were interspersed by a brass
band and a male voice choir. Most of the banners were from the NUM. The
Union of Democratic Mineworkers, which broke away from the NUM during the
1984 miners' strike, was barely in evidence.
Marching back in the limelight, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921026

