FT921-540

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Whatever happened to the wall of
money? - London markets


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial editor


MONDAY WAS one of those days when even the most swashbuckling equity
investor suddenly sees the attractions of a building society pass-book. The
FT-SE index dipped below its level of nearly five years ago, closing at
2,441.0, two points below the last decade's peak in July 1987.
If you had switched from big-company shares to cash four and a bit years
ago, you would have been able to buy back into the stock market this week
more cheaply than when you left it - having enjoyed double the FT-SE's yield
in the meantime, and missing out on a few heart-stopping crashes,
mini-crashes and false dawns on the way.
The argument is even more compelling if you look at the wider market,
reflected in the FT-Actuaries All-Share index. It is now under 1,200 - well
below its peak in July 1987, and not far off the level at which it was
selling on the day of the last general election.
Looked at purely in terms of stock market performance, therefore, the
outgoing government's record is at best flat, at worst a serious
disappointment.
One reason, of course, is that the heady equity market of the summer of 1987
stemmed partly from the belief that a 'wall of Japanese money' was waiting
to hit the UK stock market once a Conservative election victory was assured.
Even at the time, that seemed a pretty shaky argument; now, the most it
deserves is a hollow laugh.
Bubbles apart, the deeper reason for the equity market's poor performance
since 1987 is the same as the basic argument for buying equities: they
represent the most direct way of participating in the long-term growth of
the economy. If there is no long-term growth, the case for equities is much
diminished.
In the fourth quarter of 1988 the UK's gross domestic product was 0.6 per
cent lower than it had been in the corresponding period three years before.
Between the third quarter of 1987, when equities reached their short-lived
peak, and the last three months of 1991, the UK economy has grown at a
compound annual rate of 0.9 per cent.
Under the circumstances, the performance of the stock market is scarcely
surprising.
Those years of slow average growth are partly an arithmetical illusion: they
consist of seven quarters of rapid expansion followed by six quarters of
recession.
Similarly, the outlook for growth over the life of the next parliament hangs
in part on how long the recession continues. On that, good news: 'The
recession has about run its course,' said Gavyn Davies of Goldman, Sachs,
this week, illustrating his point with the charts alongside.
Retail sales volume is trending up, and labour force statistics are heading,
broadly, in the same direction: the stage is set for growth to resume.
On Wednesday, two businessmen close to consumer trends - Kingfisher's
Geoffrey Mulcahy and Sir Lawrie Barratt, the newly returned chairman of
Barratt Developments - took opposing tacks on the issue. Mulcahy said his
retailing chains had received 'no significant indication of any upturn in
consumer confidence'. Sir Lawrie said that a slow recovery had begun in the
UK. This should continue, he said, irrespective of the outcome of the
election, provided interest rates did not rise by more than two percentage
points.
Sir Lawrie was not the only person with post-election interest rates on his
mind. Throughout the week, short-term interest rates stayed high, reflecting
concern that an incoming Labour government might have to raise base rate to
protect the pound.
There was some ostentatious calming of the money market by the Bank of
England on Tuesday, but at the end of the week three month interest rates
were stuck at around 10.8 per cent, more than a quarter-point clear of the
10 1/2 per cent base rate.
Still, a post-election wall of pessimism may prove as illusory as 1987's
wall of money.
One big institutional investor argued this week that the market would
probably go up after the election regardless of the result - as long as the
vote produced a clear winner.
To find out which politician is a winner the market will have to wait for
another 12 days. It seems to have taken rather less time to decide on one of
1992's big losers: the award goes, by an overwhelming vote, to Tiny Rowland,
of Lonrho.
There were ominous signs at the Lonrho agm that even his perennial
supporters among small investors may now have developed second thoughts. The
shares closed the week at 87p, down another 15p - partly influenced, no
doubt, by reports that Lords Hanson and White have given Lonrho the
once-over and backed away shaking their heads ruefully.
It is hard not to sympathise with Tiny Rowland. Who else would have had the
wit to respond to institutional pressure to unlock shareholder value by
choosing Colonel Gadaffi as a suitable partner?
Selling Libya a minority stake in Lonrho's Metropole hotel subsidiary is the
stock-market equivalent of telling critics: 'Don't touch me or I'll shoot
myself'.
If institutional shareholders keep up the pressure, we can presumably expect
to find Cuba a co-investor in Lonrho's sugar plantations and Saddam Hussein
taking a minority stake in Western Platinum.
As an investment medium, the building society pass-book may have its
investment attractions. But for pure amusement, the stock market wins hands
down.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920328

