FT924-6354

FT  21 NOV 92 / Money Markets: D-Mark futures rally


   By JAMES BLITZ


EUROMARK futures yesterday continued the strong rise of recent days as
growing tensions in the European exchange rate mechanism added to
speculation that there will be a further easing of German monetary policy,
writes James Blitz.
The sterling cash market was a good deal quieter. Some period rates were
slightly firmer despite the speedy removal of a large shortage forecast by
the Bank of England.
The ERM tensions which followed the devaluation of the Swedish krona on
Thursday continued to cause serious adjustments in European exchange rates
and monetary policy yesterday. The Portuguese escudo was pushed towards its
floor against the D-Mark, and the Irish authorities intervened to support
the punt.
This prompted more intense speculation that the Bundesbank will cut interest
rates before the end of the year to ease tensions.
One commercial bank dealer said that he would not be surprised to see an
easing of 25 basis points in the rate at which the Bundesbank sets its
repurchase agreements in forthcoming weeks. Mr Neil MacKinnon, chief
economist at Citibank in London, believes that the week's events make it
even more likely that there will be a 50 basis point cut in the Discount
rate before the end of the year.
The December Euromark contract rose 9 basis points to a close of 91.45,
while the March contract closed up 15 basis points to a close of 92.51. At
this level, the markets are pricing in a fall of 34 basis points in the
price of 3-month money before the end of the year.
Conversely, French franc futures fell sharply yesterday morning as the
currency fell through the FFr3.39 level against the D-Mark. The December
contract dropped 16 basis points to a low of 90.50, but later recovered with
the currency to close unchanged at 90.66.
Sterling's suspension from the ERM meant that events on the continent
continued to have little effect on money rates. However, some dealers
interpreted the Bank of England's Quarterly Bulletin as giving slightly more
cautious view on interest rates. 'It is vital that a steady and stable
transition to price stability be maintained, ' the Bank said.
This may have ben the reason why the December sterling contract fell back 5
basis points at the start of trading to a low of 93.05. Three month money
closed  1/16 per cent firmer at 7 1/4 per cent offered.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921121

