FT922-3980

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (5): Venture capital, the
risks and rewards - Finance


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


NOTHING VENTURED by Robert J Kunze HarperCollins Dollars 22.95, 252 pages
ROBERT KUNZE'S lively account of US venture capital provides a timely
counterbalance to the poor press which the industry worldwide has received
of late. Kunze provides a graphic portrait of the dilemmas which face the
venture capitalist in deciding which deals to back and the pitfalls which
can trip up even the most promising venture.
His accounts of the deals which he turned down, often after months of
investigation - his book is subtitled The Perils and Payoffs of the Great
American Venture Capital Game - make fascinating reading as well as
providing a useful guide to entrepreneurs trying to raise equity finance.
Kunze is general partner (effectively managing director) of a San Francisco
venture fund specialising in medical products and biotechnology. Before
entering venture capital he held senior management positions in industry.
Even allowing for the inevitable bias of Kunze's version of events, his
account reveals that the world of the entrepreneur is peopled with more than
its fair share of dreamers and egocentrics. Such a story could appear
self-serving but for the fact that Kunze never completely loses his sympathy
for the characters on whom his livelihood ultimately depends.
The fallibility of the venture capitalist is pointed up even by the deals
which, eventually, come right. 'Venture capitalists usually feel euphoria
after they decide to invest: it is the greatest investment ever made] This
obsession can be a fatal flaw or it can be the single reason a company
succeeds,' Kunze writes. He illustrates the wild swings between euphoria and
despair in seven profiles of companies which raised venture capital finance,
which make up the middle section.
Despite lengthy due diligence, careful market studies and the apparent
suitability of the management team, one company profiled, Agrion, failed to
break into the markets envisaged, and teetered on the brink of collapse
before a sequence of lucky coincidences brought in financially powerful new
corporate partners. Even then the company was dogged by problems, most of
which it managed to solve, before finally selling out, at a very healthy
profit to investors, to a large German pharmaceuticals company.
Nothing Ventured begins with an account of the development of venture
capital in the US from the early days in the 1950s, through the 1970s, when
successful entrepreneurs started appearing on the cover of Fortune magazine,
to the excesses of the 1980s. By this stage the volume of money pouring in
pushed up the price of deals, depressed returns and meant too many marginal
ventures received backing. This process has been mirrored, though the time
scale has been compressed into just two decades, the 1970s and the 1980s, in
the UK.
Kunze highlights the important role of the US academic community in
producing the ideas around which many venture-backed companies were built.
Establishing links between academic institutions and venture capitalists in
the UK has never taken off in quite the same way and many UK science parks
have only tenuous links with the universities and colleges on their
doorsteps.
But even in the US venture capital has only thrived in a handful of centres,
Kunze points out. Silicon Valley in California and Massachusetts' Route 128
took 20 years to become established. And while venture capital has since
spread more widely in the north-eastern US and on the west coast, there are
huge gaps on the venture capital map. Austin, Texas and Washington DC are
the only other locations where venture capital seems set to develop on any
scale in the near future.
This limited geographical dispersion of US venture capital may give some
comfort to UK venture capitalists, continually criticised for concentrating
most of their activities in London and the south east.
As well as providing advice for the entrepreneur seeking finance -
businesses must be capable of producing sales of at least Dollars 25m
(Pounds 13.8m) within six years and tripling the value of the cash invested
 -Kunze also has useful suggestions for the trainee venture capitalist.
Beware of the 'great idea,' he warns. While most business plans are based on
a great idea it will only account for 10 to 20 per cent of what it takes to
succeed. Timely execution, market acceptance and reliability are far more
crucial.
On the future of venture capital in the 1990s Kunze has some warnings for
the industry. Poorly performing funds - most of those invested after the
early 1980s - will have difficulties raising new money, so there will be
less finance available to back new companies. Investors will become more
demanding (in the UK they already have).
But on the positive side Kunze believes that large corporations will invest
more money in independent funds after the past failure of in-house funds. He
also foresees a shake-out among portfolio companies, with venture
capitalists merging several competing, loss-making businesses into one
profitable company.
The book's sub-title makes clear that Kunze's concern is the US industry but
his perfunctory treatment of the industry outside the US is disappointing.
He writes off venture capital in the UK in two paragraphs. The British, he
asserts, will not work long hours to build up a business and are too wedded
to big company perks such as cars and pension plans. He is equally
dismissive of Germany and Japan.
This narrowly home-town view of the world apart, Kunze provides an
entertaining and instructive account of one of the most exciting new
financing mechanisms to emerge in recent years.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920609

