FT924-6109

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (11): Signs of the
long-awaited recovery - A look at the US industry after the worst year for
truck sales since 1983


   By KAREN ZAGOR


AFTER several years of hoping in vain for a reversal of slumping sales,
there are signs of the long-awaited recovery in the US heavy truck industry.
Demand for class eight vehicles was surprisingly strong through the first
half of this year, with truck sales for Paccar, Navistar, General Motors and
Ford at their highest levels in three years and overall new truck orders
coming in at an annual rate of more than 120,000 units. This compares with a
decline of 22.3 per cent in sales of class 8 vehicles for the first nine
months of last year. Indeed, 1991 was the worst year for heavy truck sales
since 1983, with only 98,730 units sold.
One reason for the improvement, according to Runzheimer International, a
company which tracks the transportation industry, is that fleet managers are
trying to reduce maintenance costs by replacing trucks at shorter time and
mileage intervals.
Heavy truck sales are expected to receive a further boost in the next few
years from the Intermodel Surface Transportation Efficacy Act to modernise
US highways, which is expected to stimulate the weak construction market.
The sector is also starting to benefit from the 1990 Clean Air Act, which
calls for tighter emissions standards by 1994. Fleets have started to
replace older vehicles with more modern trucks which comply with the new
standards.
While the Clean Air Act should stimulate sales even further next year, it is
not expected to be a panacea for all the industry's problems. Indeed, the
impact of the Clean Air Act may be less dramatic than initially expected
because engine makers can now do in-cylinder modifications which are less
expensive than replacing entire vehicles.
The US heavy truck industry continues to be plagued by over-capacity, with
manufacturing capacity estimated at more than twice the rate of sales. This
excess is the legacy of the 1980s when it was believed that retail sales in
the US would never slip below the 100,000 level and projections called for
annual sales ranging from 125,000 to 135,000 vehicles.
Competition among heavy truck makers also remains fierce, in a sector where
six players control between 9 to 30 per cent of the market.
Navistar is still the biggest player in the North American market, with a
combined market share of 29.3 per cent for heavy and medium trucks.
In spite of its commanding market share, Navistar is struggling to survive.
The company has not posted an annual profit since 1989, and it is expected
to remain in the red this year, with a nine-month net loss of Dollars 182m,
or 81 cents a share, including special charges of Dollars 89m.
Navistar's vertical integration, and the resulting high fixed costs have
contributed to the company's woes, but its main problem stems from steep
medical benefits for retired former workers. The company, which left the
farm equipment business years ago, is in the middle of a legal battle over
the healthcare benefits it is still paying former International Harvester
employees.
Both the company and the United Auto Workers' Union, which represents the
former employees, have said they hope to reach an agreement by early
December, but there are no guarantees of success and a protracted legal
battle could drive Navistar into bankruptcy.
The picture is less bleak at Mack Trucks, a wholly-owned subsidiary of
France's Renault Vehicules Industriels (RVI), which accounts for about 11
per cent of the North American market. Mack has undergone an overhaul since
Renault acquired full control of the company in October 1990 and Renault
recently said Mack was seeing a revival in demand in North America.
Paccar, with about 21.4 per cent of the class eight market, remains one of
the strongest players in the North American heavy truck market thanks partly
to the quality and dependableness of its heavy trucks. The company, which
makes Peterbilt and Kenworth trucks, saw third quarter profits rise 7 per
cent to Dollars 18.2m, or 54 cents a share, on revenues which grew 19 per
cent to Dollars 683.6m and its full-year earnings are expected to exceed
1991's figures.
But it is the light truck segment that remains the bright spot of both the
US truck and car industries. At a time when new car sales are expected to be
static, fourth quarter production of pickup trucks, mini vans and sports
utilities is expected to jump nearly 19 per cent to 1.05m.
The so-called 'baby boom' generation can take credit for the surge in light
truck sales by choosing to use utility vehicles and vans as family cars
instead of the traditional station wagon.
Ford has benefited from the popularity of its Explorer sport utility and
Chrysler has gained from the strong sales of its minivans, which are
officially classified as trucks although they are mainly used as cars.
The pickup truck segment now accounts for close to 48 per cent of the light
truck market, with sales expected to reach 2.2m this year.
US manufacturers now face their biggest challenge in the full-size pickup
sector. In contrast with the compact truck market, which was largely
developed by Japanese manufacturers, the big three US vehicle makers have
always controlled the full-size pickup sector. Ford and Chevrolet's
full-size pickups are the best selling vehicles of any type in the US.
Toyota, which has been eying the full-size pickup market since the
mid-1980s, is finally moving into the arena this year. In an attempt to
forestall anti-Japanese sentiment, the new Toyota pickup is slightly shorter
than the Ford models and has a V-6 engine instead of the more powerful V-8
engine found in most full-size pickups. Toyota will have to contend with the
more conservative nature of US pickup truck drivers, but in the long term it
will probably put pressure on US producers in this extremely important
sector.

The Financial Times


London Page V

921123

