FT921-12014

FT  29 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Cost-cutting helps Electron House improve
to Pounds 0.6m


   By ANDREW BOLGER


ELECTRON HOUSE, the electronic component distributor, reported an increase
in pre-tax profits from Pounds 219,000 to Pounds 595,000 on flat sales of
Pounds 60.1m, against Pounds 60.5m, in the six months to November 30 1991.
Mr Robert Leigh, chairman, said overheads had been cut by 6 per cent in the
face of continued adverse market conditions, particularly in the computer
industry. The number of employees had fallen from 550 to 480 in the past
year.
He said: 'A recent strengthening in order receipts has only marginally
exceeded the weakness experienced in the summer and early autumn. The
argument that there is evidence of a sustainable upturn is, therefore,
unconvincing.'
In view of this economic climate, the rise in profits did no more than
justify maintaining the interim dividend at 1p. Earnings per share rose to
1.03p (0.19p).
Control of working capital and lower base rates cut interest payments from
Pounds 1.62m to Pounds 1.17m. Gearing, including off-balance sheet debt, was
unchanged at 120 per cent.
Costs had been reduced in the computer hardware distribution business, in
which the dominant product was printers, and profitability increased.
Nevertheless, margins had been tight because of intense competition and
weakness in demand.
The computer systems companies performed well in some areas and poorly in
others. Success was achieved in certain niche markets, on which the group
intended to build.
UK component companies remaining in the group produced slightly lower
profits on marginally increased sales, the main losses being in businesses
from which the group withdrew last year.
Electron sold Kelvin Impex, the agency company, to its management earlier
this month. Because of new accountancy guidelines, it will be obliged to
write off an extraordinary Pounds 1m of goodwill on acquisition which was
previously written off to reserves.
Mr Leigh said this write off would have no effect on earnings per share in
the full-year results.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920129

