FT924-948

FT  21 DEC 92 / Japanese growth forecast for 1992 halved to 1.6%


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


THE Japanese government yest-erday belatedly revised down its growth
forecast for the current fiscal year from 3.5 per cent to 1.6 per cent, but
announced a target of 3.3 per cent growth in gross national product next
year.
A cabinet meeting approved the official estimates, prepared by Japan's
Economic Planning Agency, which also revised upwards the trade surplus
estimate from Dollars 96.5bn to Dollars 136bn for the current year to the
end of March.
For next year, the trade account surplus was forecast at Dollars 135bn,
giving the US and the European Community scope to complain that the Japanese
market remains partly closed to their products and that Tokyo has not done
enough to stimulate domestic demand.
The EPA has been attacked by business organisations for 'over-optimistic'
forecasts which slowed the government response to the decline in the
economy, but the agency is confident that a recovery will gather strength
next year. It does, however, decline to predict exactly when the recovery
will begin.
Mr Haruhito Arai, senior assistant to the EPA's director, conceded that the
forecast for next year 'is, in a sense, optimistic', but said it was
justified because capital spending would rise by an estimated 2.4 per cent,
after a fall of 3.8 per cent this year.
The importance of export growth in this year's expansion of GNP is an
embarrassment for the government, which has a formal policy of encouraging
domestic demand to reduce the trade surplus. For the first time since 1980,
growth this year in external demand (0.8 per cent) is expected to exceed
that of internal demand (0.7 per cent) as a contributor to the growth of
GNP.
Japan's current account surplus this fiscal year is estimated at Dollars
116.5bn, up from a previously modest estimate of Dollars 71bn, while the
surplus next year is forecast to be a still imposing Dollars 115.5bn, under
the influence of the large trade surplus.
'The issue at hand is how to shift smoothly to a sustainable
non-inflationary growth path centred on domestic demand,' the EPA said in
its annual report to the cabinet, reflecting the government's concern about
the expansion of the trade surplus.
Most of the agency's estimates for the current year were wide of the mark.
It had forecast a 3.7 per cent increase in private consumption, but that was
cut to 1.5 per cent. Corporate fixed investment had been forecast to rise
4.5 per cent, but this is now expected to decline by 3.8 per cent.
In defending the forecasts for next year, the agency admits that private
consumption and business fixed investment, which account for about 80 per
cent of domestic demand, will be relatively sluggish. It is certain only
about strong growth in public spending, which comprises about 7 per cent of
the total.
Government ministers approved the EPA's forecasts, but hinted that the
figures appeared to be over-optimistic. Mr Hiroshi Mitsuzuka, head of a
powerful faction in the ruling Liberal Democratic party, was sceptical: 'It
sounds like you are talking about another country, not our own.'
Most private estimates for GNP growth next year range between 2.3 per cent
and 2.8 per cent. Yasuda Trust and Banking forecast 2.3 per cent growth for
the 1993 fiscal year and 1.5 per cent for the current year, and called for a
cut in official interest rates and a public spending package to ensure that
those modest targets were met.
The emphasis on 'non-inflationary growth' reflects the EPA's concerns that
unusually low food and commodity prices this year have distorted pricing
patterns. The agency expects a fall of 1.3 per cent in wholesale prices this
year, and a 0.3 per cent increase next year, while consumer prices are
expected to rise 1.8 per cent this year and 2.1 per cent next year.
Survey: Japanese industry, Separate section

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921221

