FT924-7995

FT  13 NOV 92 / Clinton pledges to include more women in his cabinet


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT-ELECT Bill Clinton promised yesterday that his cabinet would 'look
more like America than previous administrations' by including more women and
members of ethnic minorities, and repeated his pledge to look beyond the
Democratic party in naming his administration.
But Mr Clinton said he was not yet ready to make cabinet appointments, and
was still discussing what he wanted the different government departments to
do.
The Clinton transition team showed the importance the new administration
will attach to the problem of controlling spiralling US medical costs by
naming a separate transition policy director for healthcare, alongside
directors for economic, domestic and foreign policy.
The transition team will oversee the formation of the administration which
takes office in January, under the chairmanship of Mr Vernon Jordan, a
Washington lawyer and civil rights leader. Mr Warren Christopher, a former
deputy secretary of state in the Carter administration, is in day-to-day
charge of the operation. Ms Judy Feder, who directed a recent study of the
US healthcare system, was named to lead the healthcare team.
Mr Al From, head of the Democratic Leadership Council, a grouping of
centrist Democrats which Mr Clinton helped found and which has worked hard
to elaborate a moderate policy for their party, will head the domestic
policy team. Mr Samuel Berger, deputy director of the State Department
policy planning staff in the Carter administration, was named as head of the
foreign policy team, and Mr Robert Reich, a Harvard economist and prolific
author, will direct the economic policy team.
Since winning last week's presidential election, Mr Clinton has appeared to
wind down after the gruelling pace of a year-long campaign, apparently
spending much of his time jogging, lifting weights or playing golf.
He has now picked up the pace, inserting substantive comments on defence
policy into a speech delivered on Wednesday at a Veterans Day commemoration
and accelerating the formation of his transition team with the string of
appointments announced yesterday at his first news conference since the
election.
Mr Clinton is due to meet Speaker Thomas Foley, Senate majority leader
George Mitchell and House majority leader Richard Gephardt on Sunday for
preliminary talks on the agenda that will await Congress in the new year. He
will have talks in Washington on Wednesday with President George Bush and
meet congressional leaders of both political parties.
Defence review, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921113

