FT921-15337

FT  10 JAN 92 / Technology: Sound and the fury - The way technology has
changed the nature of live music


   By CHRISTOPHER PRICE


Several years ago, acoustic consultant Jim Griffiths was watching the rock
band AC-DC in concert and told the sound engineer that the music was too
loud, distorted and muffled. 'He said 'brilliant' and thanked me,' says
Griffiths.
Not so these days. Quality is at the forefront of concert technology and the
archetypal modern sound engineer will be an expert technician, have a flair
for acoustics and be in bed by 9.00.
'The intelligent engineers are the ones still touring,' says Griffiths. 'The
physics might be the same, but the technology to tackle the problems has
changed and with it the role of the engineer. They can't afford to have
hangovers.'
The pace of technological change in the concert hall has been dictated by
developments in digital electronics and other equipment for recording
studios. There have also been advances in other facets of the sound process
and, in particular, the attention paid to acoustic technology.
Despite the engineers' metamorphosis, the actual procedure for staging a
concert has changed little over the past decade. All instruments are plugged
into a stage box - an electronic collection point - which contains a
pre-amplifer to boost the signal. The signal is split, one half going to the
main 'front of house' mixing desk and the other to a smaller mixing console
which serves the performers on stage. At the main mixing desk an engineer
processes the sound through filters, effects and the main amplifier. The
level of sound is then set and the signal passes to the main PA (public
address) speakers.
Concert sound quality of all musical persuasions in the 1960s, 1970s and
early 1980s was dictated by the size of the amplifiers, small by today's
standards, which were frequently turned up to full volume and carried
consequent distortion. Further sound quality was eroded by the use of
traditional electronic components like copper wires, valve technology and
the poor siting of speakers.
But in the early 1980s developments in digital technology began to filter
their way into the recording studio. Before long, artists had begun to
demand the same equipment live to reproduce their studio performance.
Most mixing consoles still use analogue technology, but augmented by an
increasing amount of digital equipment, particularly in effects units,
amplifiers and transformers. Technicians have also concentrated their
development efforts on nearly every other aspect of the production process.
'While there hasn't really been a great leap forward in any one direction,
there has been a great amount of fine tuning in most areas,' says Steve
Spencer, sales manager at Britannia Row, Europe's leading concert equipment
hiring organisation.
Speakers, for example, are being made lighter and more responsive by using
ceramic instead of alloy magnets. Harder kevlar cones are replacing
traditional paper ones. Many of the developments are being achieved by
small, independent companies specialising in one or two areas of the
production cycle.
Turbosound, for example, a Sussex-based company which has become a leading
supplier in the world concert market, has developed a bullet-shaped horn and
phase plug which sits at the face of the speaker cone, concentrating the
energy from the speaker and producing a crisper sound.
Other areas have also advanced. The stage box is now a complex centre of
active electronics, the sound signal boosted by a digital amplifier and
split electronically rather than simply by a division of the carrying cable.
The cables themselves are starting to benefit from fibre optics, replacing
the heavy copper wiring and producing a clearer defined signal.
Amplifiers have also benefited from development. 'The improvement in
amplifiers in the last 10 years has been quite considerable,' says Jon
Lemon, an engineer who has worked most recently with the Pet Shop Boys and
Level 42. 'They're now producing a sharper, cleaner sound with much greater
power due to better components.'
Technological developments are only part of the story. Griffiths, who works
for Travers Morgan, one of a growing number of acoustic consultancies, says
there has also been a change in attitude by production staff to the physics
of concert quality. 'Engineers are looking at acoustics much more. It's not
enough to have two stacks of speakers at a venue pointing at the audience
and hope the sound will be alright, because often it won't, even with the
most advanced system.'
The concept driving better quality is 'line array', which determines the
coverage pattern of the speakers and gets the best coverage of sound to a
particular area. To achieve this, engineers employ an Audio Spectrum
Analyser (ASA) which measures the depth and level of sound across a given
area. It divides the concert hall space into octaves in the range of 20Hz to
20KHz.
Pink noise - made by a sound generator and reminiscent of the hiss of
compression brakes - is generated through the speakers. Microphones,
connected to the ASA at strategic points in the auditorium, measures the
amount of pink noise. An LCD display then tells the engineer which areas of
the hall need compensating.
It is in areas such as sound compensation where the development of digital
technology, and in particular digital signal processing (DSP), has made
itself felt. DSP works by converting sound signals into a digital data
stream which is fed through computers and manipulated by the engineer.
Spencer reckons that a modern sound system for a major concert tour will
cost in the region of Pounds 750,000 - twice as much as it did a decade ago.
But there have been major savings along the way. 'Smaller and lighter
equipment has meant a considerable saving on transport and labour costs,' he
says. 'A major tour today will use just one articulated lorry for the sound
equipment where four would have been needed a decade ago.'
One effect of the improved quality has been the demands of performers. All
want the top-of-the-range, state-of-the-art systems at their concerts. 'Iron
Maiden and Frank Sinatra both used the same system on their last tours,'
says Spencer. 'Ten years ago one would have approached the problem of their
sound needs differently, but not any more.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8 Photograph Artists from Iron Maiden to Frank Sinatra demand
state-of-the-art systems at their concerts (Omitted).

920110

