FT924-6045

FT  24 NOV 92 / Punt hangs on after rates rise: Irish central bank action
with an eye on the election


   By TIM COONE


THE IRISH punt was spared an expected speculative assault in the foreign
exchange markets yesterday after the Irish central bank pushed up overnight
interest rates to 30 per cent. The move followed the devaluation of the
Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo at the weekend.
The bank suspended its normal overnight short-term facility (STF), which
carried a 13.75 per cent interest rate, and replaced it with a
straightforward secured overnight loan facility carrying a 'minimum' 30 per
cent interest rate.
Central bank one-week funds are available at 25 per cent. However, quotes
for one-week interbank rates in Dublin were yesterday reported to be running
as high as 100 per cent.
A rise in the STF would normally signal a rise in commercial bank rates and
its suspension yesterday was being viewed in the market as a means of
holding off a rise in those rates until after the general election tomorrow.
According to foreign exchange dealers in Dublin, the sharp rise in overnight
rates together with the continuation of exchange controls on
non-trade-related transactions made funds scarce in the money market and
resulted in only light selling of the punt yesterday.
'The onslaught on the punt has not materialised,' said Mr Jim Power, senior
economist at the Bank of Ireland group treasury. He said: 'It is now very
expensive to go short on the Irish punt. It is very difficult to get any
quotes for anything other than overnight funding and these range from 30 to
70 per cent.'
Nonetheless, yesterday afternoon, the punt fell to its floor against the
Belgian franc, at the moment the strongest currency in the ERM, at BFr54.02,
although it stayed between half a pfennig and a pfennig above its floor
against the D-Mark of 2.619. Unusually, the central bank refused to comment
on whether it had been intervening in the market to support the punt by
selling reserves, although under ERM provisions it would be obliged to
intervene once a floor level had been reached.
Light trading was reported on the Irish gilts market also, but with values
approaching their previous lows in October. The yield on the benchmark
9-year 2001 gilt rose to more than 10 per cent, indicating heavy discounting
by the market.
Irish share prices closed a further 1.66 per cent up yesterday, the ISEQ
index putting on 18 points to 1,152.92 after a 34.76 point gain last Friday
on expectation of a devaluation of the punt.
According to Mr Dan McLaughlin, senior economist at Riada stockbrokers in
Dublin, 'the (overnight) interest rate increase may succeed as a holding
operation, but it is now only a matter of time before a realignment.' He
said that the political uncertainty over the outcome of the election and the
lifting of exchange controls at the end of the year 'leave the punt looking
very vulnerable'.
If, as now seems likely, no party emerges with a clear majority from the
election this week, negotiations over the formation of a new government
could stretch well into the new year. Indeed, such negotiations could now be
complicated over whether a continuing defence of the punt can be justified
given the level of interest rates and their adverse effect on industry and
mortgages.
Mr Power said: 'The precedent (from September) would suggest that if the
high money market rates continue into next week, then retail rates will also
soon be pulled up.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921124

