FT923-9500

FT  05 AUG 92 / Management: Enterprise brews in Cambodia - Victor Mallet
looks at an unusual rehabilitation project


   By VICTOR MALLET


Foreign investors could be forgiven for shuddering at the mere thought of
embarking on an industrial venture in Cambodia, where the infrastructure is
in a shambles after two decades of war, skilled workers are dead or exiled
and Khmer Rouge guerrillas refuse to lay down their arms in accordance with
a UN peace plan.
Indeed, most of the businessmen thronging the hotels of the capital Phnom
Penh are traders, property speculators, bankers or UN contractors. But John
Harper, an energetic 50-year-old Australian entrepreneur, is about to start
making Cambodian beer.
The triumphs and travails of Harper and his Australian and Malaysian
partners in their 18-month-old project to rehabilitate the brewery in the
port of Sihanoukville (previously Kompong Som) demonstrate some of the risks
 -and potentially high rewards - of investing in a chronically unstable
developing country.
As a partner in Pacific Malting of Ballarat in Australia, who had spent 10
years working in Asia, Harper knew that Indochina was an important growth
area for the beer industry. He first heard of the Sihanoukville brewery on a
visit to Laos in late-1990 and assumed there would a chance to sell malt
when it re-started production.
Accompanied by officials of the ministry of industry and a military escort
on the dangerous 250km road from Phnom Penh, he went to see the idle and
neglected brewery and ended up taking it over himself.
The brewing and soft drinks complex overlooking the sea was built by a
French contractor in the late 1960s for the then Cambodian government, but a
few years after production began, the war in Cambodia overtook the town and
forced the French expatriate staff to leave. Angkor and Bayon, the regular
and premium brands named after the renowned Khmer temples in northern
Cambodia, were not to appear on the shelves again until this year.
During their reign of terror in the 1970s, the extreme-left Khmer Rouge
guerrillas emptied Cambodia's cities in pursuit of an agrarian revolution.
Local employees from the brewery were scattered and killed, and no more beer
was made. 'We found it 20 years later,' says Harper. 'It's like you've
bought a brand new Jaguar, driven it for 18 months and parked it in the
garage for 20 years. It's okay, but it's not a new model. The tyres are flat
and rats have got into the wiring. We knew we had taken on a formidable
task.'
He and his Australian partner, Stanley Ng, registered Cambrew Pte in
Singapore for the Dollars 5m (Pounds 2.6m) rehabilitation project, and later
sold a majority stake in the venture to a group of Malaysian investors.
'The most formidable problem was that there was not one drawing, not one
manual, not one piece of paper to identify the equipment,' says Harper.
Baffled by the unfamiliar French layout, Harper and his colleagues were
reduced to pouring red dye into the drains to see where it emerged.
The mystery of the missing documents was later solved by the few surviving
employees: China was the principal supporter of the Khmer Rouge, and the
guerrillas had turned to the Chinese brewers, Tsing Tao, in a vain attempt
to reopen the plant. According to the Cambodian workers, the Tsing Tao
experts took photographs and shipped all the manuals to China.
Harper became a detective. By noting the names on the various pieces of
equipment in the brewery, he discovered that Nordon was the main contractor
and travelled to Nancy in France, where he was rewarded with a pile of plans
and drawings. The laborious task of stripping down or replacing everything
from boilers to refrigeration units could begin.
'Given the choice I'd rather build a new plant,' sighs Vijayan Kuttan,
Cambrew's Malaysian production director in Sihanoukville. 'From a
manufacturing point of view it was a nightmare.'
Boilers had to be cut open and rebuilt, gaskets replaced, pressure lines
tested and a shell-hole in the soft drinks unit cemented over. 'Mechanically
it looked alright from the outside, but when you've got a plant that has sat
still for a very long time, it's got more damage than if it had been run.'
Cambodia's desperate economic straits made matters worse. 'Messages
initially had to be sent by taxi,' says Kuttan, who now has a satellite
telephone installed on the balcony of the brewery's administration block.
Even today, Sihanoukville produces no electricity in the daytime because of
a shortage of fuel, and soldiers wave down cars and trucks on the road to
Phnom Penh with their guns to beg for cigarettes or money. The UN operation
which has so far failed to eradicate such problems has also lured many
skilled Cambodians away from the domestic economy, and Harper says he lost
six of his 16 marketing staff to the UN.
In such circumstances it was inevitable that the brewery would have to
become a self-sufficient complex, generating its own electricity and
purifying its own water for a planned initial capacity of 250,000
hectolitres of beer a year. Harper has even taken over a Phnom Penh glass
plant - built by the Chinese in 1966 - and brought in Chinese partners to
produce the bottles, although the first batch will be imported when beer
production begins in the next few weeks.
Before the repairs to the plant could begin, Harper spent four months in
negotiations with the Cambodian government and it was not until April last
year that the two sides drank Russian champagne to celebrate a deal. Cambrew
was awarded a 20-year lease at what Harper calls 'a very acceptable rental'
and was granted tax and customs privileges for the project.
Australia's active role in the Cambodian peace talks which led to the
comprehensive settlement agreed in Paris last year was a helpful influence,
Harper says. He also says he applied two rules to the Cambrew operation: no
corruption - even if it means paying Dollars 50,000 for a satellite
telephone instead of a Dollars 3,000 bribe for a regular international phone
line - and no private security forces carrying weapons.
Cambrew appears to have few worries about the market for its beer. Apart
from strong demand from Cambodians themselves, Harper estimates that each of
the 20,000 UN soldiers and officials in Cambodia is consuming between a case
and a case and a half of beer each week. At present all beers and soft
drinks in Cambodia are imported in cans - mostly from Singapore - and
Cambrew is in the gratifying position of being wooed by various foreign
companies which are anxious to have their beers made in Sihanoukville under
licence. The Cambrew plant will also be bottling soft drinks for Pepsi-Cola
International.
Harper is understandably coy about how long it will take Cambrew to recoup
the cost of its investment, but it is unlikely to be more than a few years.
Critics can already be heard complaining that foreign investors like Cambrew
are making a financial killing out of Cambodia, but the risks remain
immense.
For a start, there is no guarantee that the authorities will be willing or
able to implement their promise to impose higher customs duties on imported
beer. At the moment there is supposed to be a levy of a mere Dollars 2.80 on
each case of 24 cans, but a cash bribe is said to be sufficient to ensure
inaccurate counting of the cases.
Khmer Rouge guerrillas are still roaming the countryside and refusing to
co-operate with the peace plan, and the Vietnamese-installed government with
which Cambrew struck its agreement is now regarded as only one of the four
Cambodian factions and has no legal authority to govern on its own.
Harper is quick to point out that Cambrew will be directly employing 1,000
Cambodians, that it will save the country millions of dollars in foreign
exchange each year and that reneging on the prestige brewery deal would
'destroy direct foreign investment' in Cambodia.
'We were dedicated to make it work in an environment which was very, very
tenuous. It wasn't easy when everyone was telling us we were crazy,' he
says. 'We will - unless something dramatically goes wrong - make a very
gracious return out of our commitment. But so it should be.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920805

