FT921-3845

FT  12 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Indians in a tangle over coir
yarn policy - Importers are upset over the minimum export price scheme


   By KUNAL BOSE


JUST AS signs are emerging of a revival in the world demand for Indian coir
yarn and products, major European importers have been upset by the operation
of the minimum export price scheme. Coir, the coarse fibre obtained from the
outer husk of the coconut, is used chiefly for carpeting material and twine.
In recent weeks the European Coir Manufacturers Association, the British
India Coir Mats Association and the German Coir Association have called on
India to dispense with the minimum price, which they say is 'now honoured
more in its breach.'
The German association has told the chairman of Indian Coir Board that
'unscrupulous exporters' are offering discounts ranging from 12 per cent to
20 per cent against the MEP, taking advantage of an improvement in margins
following the devaluation of the Indian currency. When the MEP was fixed in
US dollar terms last year, the exchange rate was arbitrarily taken as
Rs17.72 to the dollar. But the rupee value of exports has since gone up by
45 per cent.
According to Mr EB Unni, chief executive of Aspinwall & Company, a major
exporter of coir products, many of the 200 registered exporters are only too
willing to part with a portion of the benefits of rupee devaluation in
exchange for increased export orders.
Discounting against the minimum price is, however, a violation of Indian law
and the established export houses will not take the risk, says Mr Unni.
According to the British association, 'the widespread violation of the floor
price regulation is putting intolerable strain on both exporters and
importers who are seeking to abide by the rules'.
It is not that the Indian government does not suspect that some exporters
are offering discounts to foreign buyers, but booking the offenders is not
going to be easy. Interestingly, in the past, the importers have been in
favour of the minimum price scheme as they were ready to pay 'remunerative
prices' for quality products. The exporters are also expected to procure
coir goods at government recommended prices for sustaining the interest of
producers in the natural fibre. Unfortunately, not many exporters pay the
recommended prices to the producers, admits Mr Unni. Neither the export
minimum nor the recommended procurement prices for export have served the
interest of producers, who are mostly in the cottage sector.
In the circumstances, the Coir Board, which is coming under increasing
pressure from the importers and the established exporters to do away with
the minimum export price and other controls on trade is expected to review
the coir export policy soon. In the meantime, the board has given an
assurance to the importers that it is not planning any 'further upward
revision of MEP.'
The British and German coir associations have assured the Coir Board that
they are not asking for the withdrawal of the minimum price to bring prices
down, although a temporary fall is not ruled out.
The importers' associations are not averse to the idea of the Indian
government imposing a levy on coir exports in the post MEP period, the
proceeds of which would be utilised for product and market development.
In spite of the MEP related problems, India, according to Mrs Minnie Mathew,
secretary of the Coir Board, will be exporting 30,000 tonnes of coir
products, valued at Rs660m (Pounds 14m) in the year ending March 1992,
compared with 28,000 tonnes worth Rs490m in 1990-91.
The Indian coir industry, which employs nearly 500,000 workers, is
concentrated in Kerala, on the south-west coast. Its products are marketed
in more than 80 countries, but Western Europe alone accounts for nearly 70
per cent of the export total. The export target for 1992-93, the first year
of the eighth plan, is Rs730m. By 1996-97, the final year of the plan, coir
exports should reach about Rs1bn. The industry's failure to make better
progress in recent years has been largely because of the negative attitude
of the successive Kerala governments and the militant opposition of trade
unions to mechanisation.
The 'back to the nature movement' in the developed countries is no doubt
helping the cause of coir, according to Mr Unni. Even so, it accounts for
only 2 per cent of the European carpet market.
However, the Coir Board's initiative to promote the fibre as a decorative
material and as a geotextile for preventing soil erosion has met with
success. In the past couple of years India is estimated to have exported
nearly 2,000 tonnes of coir geotextiles.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920312

