FT921-1243

FT  25 MAR 92 / International Company News: Takeover drive puts TNT on road
to profit - The Australian transport group is winning back investors'
confidence


   By KEVIN BROWN


SIR Peter Abeles, chief executive of TNT, the Australian transport and
express mail group, has a message to the markets: after a year of hectic
deal-making, the group has sorted out its problems and is on track for a
return to profit.
Sir Peter, 68, flew back to TNT's Sydney headquarters from Europe this week
with three deals in his pocket. He believes these will put an end to
investors' concerns about the group's profitability and liquidity.
He also made clear his intention to go on managing the company, which he
transformed during the 1970s and 1980s from a small haulier into an
international shipping, aviation and trucking conglomerate.
'I have no plans to retire; I have not got time for it,' he said in response
to rumours that he intended to hand over management to one of TNT's younger
executives.
Under Sir Peter's guidance, TNT expanded rapidly through the 1980s, from
revenues of ADollars 1.7bn (USDollars 1.29bn) in 1984 to ADollars 4.5bn in
1990. At their peak, the shares were worth well over ADollars 4 on the
Australian Stock Exchange.
However, the group ran into trouble early last year when institutional
investors began to worry about the high level of debt incurred to finance
growth.
With bank debt and subordinated loans totalling ADollars 2.2bn, compared
with shareholders' funds of ADollars 1.1bn, TNT looked vulnerable to the
growing recession in its main markets in Australia, the US and the UK.
There were also worries about the group's entrepreneurial nature and its
close relationship with Mr Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, which was then
struggling to cope with severe financial problems.
Like Mr Murdoch, Sir Peter had shown himself willing to take big risks. In
the UK, for example, TNT's big breakthrough came when its trucks carried Mr
Murdoch's newspapers through the picket lines at News Corp's non-union
printing plant in London's Docklands.
Sir Peter has also been noted for dramatic moves into new markets, usually
in an attempt to establish domination as a precursor to improving margins
through economies of scale.
In one spectacular deal, he bought five years' production of the British
Aerospace 146 Quiet Trader, amounting to 72 aircraft at about ADollars 30m
each. Only 24 were destined for TNT's own transport activities - the rest
were to be leased to other users.
Investors were also specifically concerned about Ansett Transport
Industries, which runs Australia's biggest domestic airline, and Ansett
Worldwide Aviation Services, an aircraft leasing company.
The Ansett companies are jointly owned by TNT and News Corp, and both looked
likely to suffer falling revenue as the recession and an over-supply of
aircraft reduced demand.
Concern about the group was triggered by declining profits in 1989 and 1990
as European losses and the onset of recession squeezed margins. But it was
not until the shares fell to a low of 75 cents in January last year that the
board reassesed its growth strategy.
Since then, TNT has simplified its structure by refocusing on its three core
areas of international express, domestic express, and commercial
distribution.
It has sold holdings in non-core businesses such as Foster's Brewing Group
and Normandy Poseidon, the Australian resources group, and substantially
allayed fears about the exposure of the Ansett companies.
The group made a net loss of ADollars 197m in the 12 months to June 1991 and
a further ADollars 51m loss in the six months to appears to be over, and
investors have begun buying the stock again, propelling it to nearly
ADollars 2 in recent trading.
The key to TNT's revived confidence is four big deals, three of which were
concluded last week. The deals are:
The flotation of 70 per cent of TNT Freightways, the group's US trucking
business, to raise ADollars 400m;
The acquisition of Chronoservice, a leading French express carrier, which
fills a gap in TNT's network of domestic express businesses in Europe;
A sub-contracting agreement with Federal Express, the US carrier, for the
delivery of inbound packages to 10 European countries;
The setting up of GD Net, a Dutch-based joint venture which will merge the
express mail and parcel activities of TNT and the post offices of Sweden,
the Netherlands, France, Germany and Canada.
The FedEx deal, which cost less than USDollars 18m, removes a big competitor
from the European market and gives TNT access to additional revenues of up
to USDollars 100m, although the group says it does not expect to retain the
whole of FedEx's business.
However, the most significant deal is the formation of GD Net, which is
expected to generate additional revenue of USDollars 120m in the first year.
That will, in 1992-1993, help propel the European business into profits for
the first time.
In addition, the deal allows TNT to remove ADollars 600m in long-term debt
from its balance sheet, helping reduce the ratio of long-term debt to
shareholders' equity to about 1.3 or 1.4 to 1 from from 2.2:1 in 1990.
'We are on the way to a 1:1 debt to equity ratio by 1993. The majority of it
has been done, and there is no question but that we will meet that target.
Our debt has come down tremendously,' Sir Peter said.
TNT puts much blame for the group's problems on the 'unsophisticated'
Australian market, which executives believe failed to understand the express
business.
'The way we were perceived in Australia had a major impact on us overseas -
the post office deal nearly collapsed three times because of the perception
which built up, and other deals were also affected,' Sir Peter said. 'It did
not matter how many times we said we could pay our bills, people just did
not believe it.'
TNT says it sees no indications that the recession in its main markets is
easing, but hopes for a rapid return to profitability once the European
international activities move out of losses. 'That will remove the biggest
drag on our profits,' Sir Peter said.
He refused to say when profits might return to the record level of ADollars
274m, achieved in 1988. But he suggested the improvement might be more rapid
than expected. 'We don't want to wait five years. We want to do it fast,' he
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920325

