FT921-11949

FT  29 JAN 92 / Thyssen chief calls for pay compromise


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   DUSSELDORF


THE HEAD of Germany's Thyssen group yesterday appealed for compromise in
deadlocked steel industry pay negotiations. A strike was 'unimaginable' in
the current business situation, Mr Heinz Kriwet told journalists.
Forecasting a further fall in group profits this year, and revealing a fresh
slump in the core steel business during the first quarter's trading, he said
he could 'imagine no limits to the possibilities' for a deal to be struck.
These could include more talks, or even mediation by 'an independent
person'.
Mr Kriwet, who said recently he would rather tolerate a strike than pay more
than 6 per cent, was responding to internal company reports and unofficial
union estimates that a ballot was swinging in favour of strike action.
Thyssen, Germany's steel-maker, employs about a third of the industry's
135,000-strong workforce.
The IG Metall union immediately rejected suggestions of mediation, and said
it would be prepared to talk only if the employers put forward a new offer.
'He knows the address,' a spokeswoman said.
Mr Kriwet had stressed that any further talks or mediation should be on the
basis of the employers' offer and the union claim on the table when talks
collapsed last week. 'They are not so far apart that agreement is no longer
possible,' he said.
The two sides' calculations differ, but both agree that there is at present
only one percentage point or less between offer and demand. Employers and
government fear that settling above 6 per cent in the steel industry will
lead to a flood of more expensive deals in other sectors.
Reviewing the group's prospects for the current year, which ends on
September 30, Mr Kriwet said a further fall in profits was 'highly likely'.
Although group turnover in the first quarter was up 8 per cent to DM9.2bn
(Pounds 3.2bn), the two steel businesses were still under pressure.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920129

