FT921-14401

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Savings institution to apply
for bank status


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


THE St George Building Society, Australia's largest non-bank savings and
loan institution, yesterday said it planned to apply for a banking licence
and a full listing on the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX).
St George, with assets of about ADollars 9bn, (USDollars 6.6bn) will become
Australia's sixth largest bank if the application for a licence is approved
by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) and the society's members.
A banking licence would give St George improved access to the inter-bank
payments system, and lower its cost of funds by bringing it under the direct
supervision of the RBA.
'We have been operating like a bank and competing against the major banks
for many years. We believe that our members and shareholders are now
entitled to the benefits that banks have,' said Mr Jim Sweeney, managing
director.
He said he had spoken to the RBA, and expected St George to begin banking
operations on July 1. 'I have every indication that I should be confident,'
he said.
St George said it would continue to concentrate on its residential loans
business, which has helped protect it from the bad debts incurred by many
Australian banks through corporate lending activities.
The society is based in Sydney, but recently expanded into Victoria through
the acquisition of the Victorian Savings and Loan Society, based in
Ballarat. Further expansion into Queensland is likely if the society is
awarded a banking licence.
St George's application for a full listing on the ASX follows the exchange's
decision to exempt building societies from regulations requiring
shareholders' voting power to be proportionate to the number of shares held.
The change of rules will allow building societies and other mutually owned
financial institutions to maintain provisions in their articles of
association providing for one vote for each member.
St George shares were trading at ADollars 7 on the unlisted market before
the announcement, capitalising the society at ADollars 690m. St George
reported interim net profits of ADollars 20.3m for the six months to the end
of November, up 3.6 per cent on the comparable period of the previous year.
St George was one of several building societies to show interest in applying
for a banking licence after the successful transformation of the New South
Wales Permanent into the Advance Bank of Australia in 1985.
Bank of Melbourne, Perth's Challenge Bank, and Metway Bank in Brisbane also
once traded as building societies.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920116

