FT921-494

FT  28 MAR 92 / Placing the guilt on the victims: The courts are becoming
too lenient in cases of murder


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


THIS HAS been a most unusual election campaign: at no point have the
Conservatives mentioned the lady dubbed 'Laura Norder' by the author and
barrister John Mortimer. Laura Norder used to accompany Margaret Thatcher on
all her election campaigns, but Mr Major seems less keen on bringing her
virtues to the attention of the public. This may just be, of course, because
crime, both petty and serious, has shown no sign of abating under the
Conservatives' long period of rule - very much the reverse, in fact.
I was not surprised therefore when last week a leading policeman decided
that if the Conservatives could not bring themselves to mention Laura, he
would. Lyn Williams, the deputy general secretary of the Police Federation
said politicians of all parties are putting the interests of criminals
before those of victims. He blamed courts for 'travesties of justice', for
'not punishing violent crime' which 'disgusted both victims and police
officers.' He said: 'homicide is treated in our courts today as a rather
serious form of bodily harm.'
I think that Williams understates the case. Last week June Scotland who beat
her husband to death with a rolling pin - having first failed in her attempt
to poison him - and then buried the body in the garden, was freed, cleared
of murder. Thomas Scotland was slain in 1987 but the slaughter remained
undetected for four years because his widow - the term seems bizarre in the
circumstances - and his daughter, Caroline, managed to convince neighbours
that he was alive and well and working in Saudia Arabia. The truth emerged
only last Easter Sunday when a neighbour putting up a fence discovered Mr
Scotland's remains. The daughter had assisted Mrs Scotland in burying the
body at midnight the day after the killing.
Mr Justice Garland told Luton Crown Court that no good would come of jailing
Mrs Scotland. I am prepared to believe that no custodial sentence ever did
any criminal any good. But the point of prison is not to benefit the
criminal. It is to punish the criminal, and to satisfy society. It is also,
as Williams implied, to remedy the insult to the victim. But if the insult
is terminal, is there no need of such a remedy? Does a dead man have no
rights? I cannot imagine that if Mr Scotland, rather than being killed, was
left by his wife's beating a gibbering, brain-damaged incontinent wreck that
a court would not have wished to pass a custodial sentence. Or perhaps the
court would have been told that the assailant had shown rare mercy in
halting the beating before its effects became fatal.
What is still worse for the victim is that the judge, seeking to justify a
non custodial sentence - in this case two years probation - told the court
what a terrible man was the deceased. So the Luton court was told that the
late Mr Scotland 'was a severe disciplinarian with his children, once
throwing his daughter's toys on a fire after she wrote on a wall. He would
hit his children across the back of the head if they were not doing their
homework properly.' It was also alleged that Mr Scotland abused his
daughter; the evidence consisted of the statements of mother and daughter.
But who would speak for Mr Scotland? Was he really as bad as painted? He
could not be in court to defence himself against these charges. He had no
defence lawyer.
This is only the most recent of a spate of such cases. Last month a former
nun, Elizabeth Line was cleared of the murder of her 'drunkard' husband.
Again, her husband was not in court to answer the charges against him,
identified by the judge as 'violence and sexual abuse of the worst kind.'
At the end of January a businessman who strangled a 'nagging' wife in front
of their three children was freed at the end of a trial at the Old Bailey.
Judge Neil Denison told Rajinder Bisla: 'you have suffered through no fault
of your own a terrible existence for a very long time. You bore it better
probably than most people would have done, until finally your self control
snapped.' The court was told that the late Mrs Bisla was 'a very domineering
lady who wanted to rule the roost over the family, hurling insults in
Punjabi and English.'
Who will speak for the dead. For Mr Scotland, Mr Lines and Mrs Bisla, all
killed with the sympathy and understanding of the courts? Where is Laura
Norder, when we need her? Perhaps she has been secretly buried at dead of
night, killed - quite understandably of course - by a spouse driven mad by
her nagging.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920328

