FT921-497

FT  28 MAR 92 / Hawks and Handsaws: The voting floater


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


I DO NOT want to blind you with science, to befuddle you with arch
demographics or slick computer print-outs. But I have to tell you this: in
the view of Britain's political leaders, the UK election on April 9 is
likely to prove so close that the outcome will be determined by four
floating voters living in Westminster North. And one of them is me.
I live in St Stephen's Gardens, on the Notting Hill-Paddington border. This
is not as smart as it sounds, though my next-door neighbour is frock queen
Zandra Rhodes. (So encoiled is Zandra in the linaments of her own genius
that it never occurs to her that I am more famous than she is, but do I fret
and fuss?).
St Stephen's Gardens is in the Westminster North constituency, where the
Conservative MP finds himself waging a frontline battle against those who
would dethrone him. For reasons too complex to explain, the latest equations
being used by the party strategists tell them that the April 9 election now
hinges on the say-so of . . . four particular floaters living in four
adjacent streets in this particular constituency . . . me and three others.
This has shocked our political leaders. All these press conferences] All
this advertising] The blarney and ballyhoo] When all they needed to do was
concentrate their firepower, their flattery and promises, on four floating
voters in Westminster North.
On Wednesday, Wing Commander Paddy Ashdown phoned me from the Liberal
Democrat helicopter. He was somewhere over Birmingham, or somewhere equally
ghastly. Swiftly he came to the point. Dispensed with foreplay entirely. Was
there anything special I wanted in return for my vote on April 9?
'More traffic humps', I said promptly. 'A complete overhaul of London's
transport. The immediate scrapping of our nuclear weapons. Better weather.
Less money for the Royal Opera House and the silencing of its uppity
director, moaning Jeremy Isaacs. Then there's Margaret Beckett. Cheaper
books. Better food. More trees and window-boxes. Proportional
representation. A new mega-tax on the wretchedness that is ITV, and hands
off the BBC. An end to fox hunting and National Hunt racing. A tax on music
critics and other artsie-barksies. A state pension for poor Fergie. The
gagging of Margaret Thatcher. Rupert Murdoch outlawed. Harlequinades and
circuses. John Major fired from a cannon.'
'All those shall be granted you', said Wing Commander Ashdown.
On Thursday, Neil Kinnock rang, as jovial as an undertaker during a time of
cholera. Actually called me boyo. Not that I'm a snob. 'Is there anything
the Labour party can do for you, Michael boyo', he said, as glutinous as a
pudding, 'because we need your vote, desperately and passionately, with all
our fervour and soul, with all . . .'
'. . . Stop it, Neil', I said sharply. 'I have no time for that. I know why
you are calling. Your computers have identified me as the floater nonpareil,
the floaters' floater's floater, the key to the whole election. Here is a
list of the things I want.'
I will not bother you with it. It was a far longer list than the one I had
improvised for Wing Commander Ashdown, but Neil accepted it instantly, every
tittle and jot.
Later, shame engulfed me - shame that I was abusing my fulcrumatic role in
the election by concocting lists of petty favours, trinkets, pay-offs. I
knew I must sharpen my act, so when John Major rang last night I told him
there was nothing that I wanted, just four simple answers to four easy
questions:
'One: why, each month, is part of my salary confiscated to help pay for
nuclear submarines?
'Two: why does the state subsidise my ownership of an expensive London flat
when so many other people are living in poverty? When, in short, will you
acknowledge that the allocation of resources between prosperous and poor has
grown seriously askew?
'Three: is Margaret Thatcher a disgraced ex-leader of the Conservative party
or not? If not, why was she evicted from office? If she is, why won't you
apologise for the mistakes that prompted her downfall?
'Four: which dozen ministers do you plan to sack on April 10 if you win the
election?'
As usual, John Major was dignified and courteous. He promised to get back to
me. I do not believe that he will.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920328

