FT921-487

FT  28 MAR 92 / Leading US investor worriedby Lonrho's deal with Libya


   By ROLAND RUDD


LONRHO'S second-biggest shareholder, US-based Fidelity Management and
Research, yesterday voiced concern that it might be forced to disinvest from
the international trading group if the United Nations imposes economic
sanctions against Libya.
FMR's worries follow Lonrho's announcement on Thursday that it had sold a
one-third stake in its Metropole Hotels chain for Pounds 177m to the
state-run Libyan Arab Investment Company.
The warning came as a UK-based institutional shareholder, which asked not to
be identified, said it was reviewing its holding of about 2 per cent
following news of the Libyan deal.
Libya faces the growing possibility of economic sanctions and asset seizures
over its alleged role in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over
Lockerbie.
FMR has recently increased its holding in Lonrho to 65m shares, almost 10
per cent. Mr 'Tiny' Rowland, Lonrho's chief executive, is the biggest
investor, holding 92.1m shares or 14.6 per cent.
Along with Fidelity International, its UK operation, FMR bought 4 per cent
in Lonrho last month after the shares plummeted from more than 170p to just
over 100p. The shares yesterday fell 8p to close at 87p.
The UK institution which is reviewing its investment in Lonrho said it
feared the deal was part of a 'poison pill' to make it less attractive to
potential predators since no other company would wish or be able to deal
with the Libyans.
Mr Paul Spicer, Lonrho's deputy chairman, said institutional investors had
expressed support for the deal at a lunch hosted by the group after its
annual general meeting on Thursday.
In light of the warnings from Lonrho's chairman, Mr Rene Leclezio, that 'the
current half year will be a further disappointment', analysts yesterday
again downgraded their forecasts of pre-tax profits for the year.
UBS Phillips & Drew, one of Lonrho's own brokers, cut its forecast for the
second time in a month, this time by Pounds 25m to Pounds 125m. It also
forecast a 20 per cent cut in the dividend to 8p.
US extends its Libyan boycott list, Page 3

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920328

