FT921-394

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (25):
Pervasive signs of a new commercial spirit - David Barchard on the coming of
marketing


   By DAVID BARCHARD


IN MOST of the world, marketing and insurance are inseparably linked. At
Lloyd's of London, however, marketing is a new arrival.
Until very recently brokers brought business to underwriters and their
agencies more or less unbidden. But there are pervasive signs of a new
spirit. Old logos are being swept away and replaced by new ones. Sedgwick
and Willis Caroon, for example, have both revamped their corporate image
over the last two years.
Sedgwick's 'flying Christmas pudding' logo has been replaced by a crisper
global symbol. 'It gives us more co-ordination and synergy. Sedgwick people
give out the same business cards wherever they are in the world and the
corporation receives a stronger image,' Ms Julia Fish, Sedgwick's corporate
communications manager, explains.
There are other signs of change. In November 1990, Cassidy Davies became the
first Lloyd's syndicate to appoint a full-time marketing manager. Lloyd's
itself appointed a marketing manager, Beverley Landais, late last year.
Both moves reflect a growing awareness at Lloyd's that unless it develops
stronger marketing skills, it has little chance of regaining ground already
lost to outside competitors.
Such an attitude would have been almost unthinkable a few years back when
the supremacy of Lloyd's was taken for granted and the exchange was shrouded
in its own mystique. In January this year, the Task Force report noted that
the market needs to development a wider mix of more flexible distribution
channels to meet customer needs and competitive pressures in the various
markets in which Lloyd's operates.
In the Task Force's view, Lloyd's faces two basic marketing challenges.
One is to capture lost market share and to stem what seems from the outside
very much like steady decline. Lloyd's has lost share of world premiums over
the last quarter century, even though its overall share stabilised in the
1980s.
Business areas singled out by the Task Force include direct business, other
than motor, and, more worryingly, direct marine insurance, a market where
Lloyd's has traditionally been strongest.
The second challenge is to find new markets and expand into them. But how is
this to be done by an entity which itself consists of scores of smaller
competing units?
In Ms Landais' opinion, the first task is to build up outside awareness of
Lloyd's of London as a brand name. Last year, Lloyd's, working with
Citigate, spent Pounds 600,000 on the first-ever national advertising
campaign to enhance public awareness of the exchange.
At a second level, Lloyd's is trying to encourage regional brokers serving
particular markets such as aviation or motor insurance to put business its
way.
One way of doing this is to organise seminars in which groups of
underwriters visit large cities in the provinces and talk to brokers.
An underlying aim in the last few months is the desire to dispel the
after-effects of the unfavourable publicity surrounding Lloyd's during the
last few weeks.
The authors of the Task Force report seem to have envisaged marketing as an
activity to be handled centrally. But at the level of syndicates and
underwriters, attitudes are also changing. Underwriters have always been
client-conscious, but professional marketing specialists are now also
beginning to appear alongside the older generation of underwriters
specialising in client relationships.
Several agency groups have set up independent marketing initiatives to bring
in new business. Sturge Holdings and A J Archer have set up service or
marketing companies. Sturge's Paris office opened in 1990 and Archer has a
Copenhagen operation.
These offices are part of a drive to build up business in mainland Europe
and other international markets where Lloyd's is less well known than in the
US or UK. The Far East is another target for marketing activities.
There is also a lot of ground that can be covered at home in the UK.
Ms. Beryl Hobson is one of the first full-time marketing managers to be
appointed by a Lloyd's agency, essentially with the task of developing a
marketing culture where none had existed before. She joined Cassidy Davies
in November 1990. Before then, she had worked at Bradford & Bingley Building
Society and spent eight years with Royal Insurance.
With this sort of background in retail financial services, Ms Hobson
believes strongly in focusing on the customer and his needs.
'One of the first things I made us address was who is our customer - it's a
fundamental question, but one we often lose sight of,' says Ms. Hobson. 'On
all Syndicate 582's classes of business our customer is the Lloyd's broker.
We're the manufacturer selling to a wholesaler who sells to a retailer.'
Her starting point was the need to create a clear branding for Cassidy
Davies with a strong corporate identity. She selected a plain, rather
Classical, logo for the group and then set to work developing sub-brands
around it.
Whether or not changes of this sort are merely cosmetic will be hard to
judge for some years until it becomes apparent whether or not Lloyd's has
arrested the market erosion.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920330

