FT924-11512

FT  26 OCT 92 / Tajik rebels 'pulling out of capital': Fighting in Dushanbe


   By STEVE LEVINE and JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


ATTEMPTS by the supporters of the former communist president of Tajikistan,
Mr Rakhmon Nabiyev, to return him to power appeared last night to have
failed.
A report on Russian television, quoting a Tajikistan government adviser,
claimed that the capital, Dushanbe, was again under the control of the
republic's government, headed by acting President Akbarsho Iskandarov.
Troops loyal to Mr Nabiyev, who was forced from office at gunpoint last
month, earlier yesterday seized much of the city. But the television report
said the soldiers had now left the parliament and presidential palace which
they had occupied at dawn on Saturday.
However, other reports from Dushanbe said it was not clear if the rebels had
totally abandoned the parliament building and added that shooting
accompanied their withdrawal from the city centre.
As the fighting raged yesterday, the Russian government predicted
'catastrophic consequences' in former Soviet Central Asia if the fighting
continued in Tajikistan because it could encourage ethnic and religious
instability in countries in the other Central Asian countries.
The US closed its embassy after weeks of threats against its employees.
Leaders of the two-day assault against the capital said they wanted to
restore order to the country.
They complained it had been seized by 'a puppet government backed by the
Islamic fundamentalists'.
The fighting in Dushanbe over the weekend included an attack on its main
mosque, which is the headquarters of Qazi Ali Akbar Toradzon Zoda,
Tajikistan's paramount Islamic leader.
Mr Zoda, a moderate with ties to all of Tajikistan's warring factions, has
long been viewed as the country's most influential political leader.
Last month a coalition of pro-Islamic and secular democratic political
parties took power after protesters forced Mr Nabiyev to quit and sent him
to exile in the northern region of Leninabad.
The fighting in Tajikistan, which began soon after the Soviet Union
dissolved last December, involves two rival ethnic groups that back opposing
political factions. The weekend assault came from the conservative southern
region of Kulyab, whose population largely supports Mr Nabiyev. Forces
defending the government are mostly from mountainous Garm, a relatively poor
area where Islam remained strong throughout the 70-year Soviet period.
John Lloyd adds from Moscow: Mr Gaidar Aliev, president of the autonomous
republic of Nakhichevan - an area under the control of Azerbaijan but
located in a corner of Armenia  - said yesterday that units from Azerbaijan
attempted to stage a coup against him but had been beaten back.
The Popular Front, the ruling party in Azerbaijan, has been at loggerheads
with Mr Aliev for some months. Mr Aliev, a former leader of the Azerbaijan
Communist party, said he would now discuss outlawing the Popular Front in
Nakhichevan.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921026

