FT922-7295

FT  19 MAY 92 / Parliament and Politics: Civil servants reject 4.25% pay
offer


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


A PACE-SETTING pay offer to more than 120,000 civil servants ran into
difficulty yesterday when the annual conference of the Civil and Public
Services Association voted to reject it.
The vote against the offer, which provides for a rapid increase in
performance-related pay and a basic rise of 4.25 per cent, came in spite of
a recommendation by the executive for acceptance.
Last week, the annual conference of the National Union of Civil and Public
Servants, the second-largest Civil Service union, voted to ballot members on
striking over a similar offer.
Yesterday's vote on an emergency motion at the CPSA conference will not
necessarily lead to the union's rejecting the offer. Members will vote on
the offer next week.
Although the motion instructed the executive to reverse its recommendation
decision, Mrs Marion Chambers, president, said an inquiry would be held into
the conduct of union branches that submitted emergency resolutions opposing
the pay offer.
That might delay implementation of the reversal instruction, possibly until
after the ballot is concluded.
Under the offer, the pay bill of CPSA grades, mainly junior civil servants,
will rise by 4.75 per cent, with the extra 0.5 per cent accounted for by the
introduction of performance-related pay.
NUCPS grades have been offered basic increases of 4.1 per cent, although
their pay bill for the year will rise by 4.5 per cent.
The unions object to the level of the offers and some delegates oppose the
extension of performance-related pay which until this year has been
restricted to only a handful of civil servants - those at the top of their
grade.
Under the agreements proposed by the Treasury, civil servants will have to
earn payments above the standard rises. Previously increments were paid as a
matter of course.
Similar extensions of performance-related pay are being planned for all of
Britain's more than 500,000 non-industrial civil servants.
During the CPSA debate, Mr John Ellis, retiring general secretary, launched
a scathing attack on 'crackpot' activists and said the deal was the best one
that could be negotiated.
Union leaders of 37,000 white-collar workers at British Gas yesterday
rejected an offer to increase pay by 4 per cent. The company had previously
offered 3.9 per cent.
Mr Dave Stirzaker of Nalgo said it was a skinflint offer which would damage
staff morale.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920519

