FT921-12055

FT  29 JAN 92 / Arts: A contrast of cultures - Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


Dear heavens, don't Americans, or an awful lot of them, make you cringe?
Their obsessive self-regard is so embarrassing. Last week's 40 Minutes (now
run by a woman, incidentally) was about a 'Wild Man Gathering' for chaps who
wanted to 'get in touch with their feelings'. They spent a weekend in the
country living in tents, playing games in the woods, sitting around the camp
fire, and wearing silly hats. Other countries call it Scouting For Boys but
in the US this is called 'male bonding'. To be fair, no self respecting
Scout would be able to weep to camera with the readiness of this little lot.
It was yet another vivid example of the fixation on introspection among
Americans today, all of a piece with psychoanalysis ('I want to know all
about me, me, me') and the women's movement ('Never mind about anyone else,
the world is unfair to me, me, me'). Behind the programme there seemed to be
some idea that the 'real man' movement is a reaction against feminism, but
the more you watched the clearer it became that the feminists now have these
men exactly where they want them. 'There's something about having this man
come up behind you' said one of the Men 'and you can feel his whiskers, and
his arms around you, and he's telling you he loves you and he's fond of you,
that's what we need'. To be just like women, in other words.
And yet . . . it is very difficult not to admire Americans (or an awful lot
of them) because theirs is such a vigorous culture, however shallow and
transient some aspects of it may be. The thought was prompted by last
night's Without Walls on Channel 4, the first of five 'conversations' about
the 'fin de siecle' with Saul Bellow floating in some high glass tower in
Chicago, flanked by Conor Cruise O'Brien and Mario Vargas Llosa. Bellow, who
has always been a bit of an Eeyore, seems to get more pessimistic with age.
He began the programme by asserting that for the first time in the history
of the republic parents now doubt that their children will live as good a
life as they have (do they?) and later made it clear that it is the
demagogues of 'multiculturalism' and the awfulness of 'political
correctness' which induce gloom. But the producers had no trouble in
bringing us people such as writer David Rieff who see matters in an entirely
different light. The point is there is a debate going on, and in the US the
'culture' is something which changes and develops, and is a part of today.
Compare that with the picture of a national culture presented in The
Germans, a series beginning on Channel 4 tomorrow evening. In part, of
course, the contrast may come from the different approaches of the
producers, but whereas America emerges as a society which is troubled
because it is wrestling with the problems of today, Germany seems to be
hunting for a cultural identity which is hidden somewhere in its past,
whether in the church, politics, or social mores. Perhaps The Germans is too
predictable in its approach, but that is unlikely to be making the broad
picture desperately inaccurate. Give a bunch of Martians these two
programmes and ask them to choose one society to live in, and the bright and
lively ones would surely opt for the US. Of course a very, very bright
Martian might say 'If you really wanted us to begin to understand about
these societies you should have screened open-ended studio discussions with
the speakers against black backgrounds, instead of all those busy-busy
street scenes which told us so little. You could have called them After
Dark'.
Possessors of Astra satellite dishes will find that transponder 26 is
currently carrying advertisments for something called The Adult Channel
which, we are told, will open on Friday night, transmitting from midnight
until 4.00 am, seven nights a week. Those interested in a regular supply of
the sort of soft porn which is being illustrated in the advertisments -
nipple arousal seems to constitute an awfully large proportion - must write
to a Bristol address with a cheque for Pounds 28.50 for six months or Pounds
50 for a year. Two thoughts are prompted. First, Pounds 50 for a single
channel transmitting four hours a day, compares badly with the cost of BBC
television. BBC1 transmits about 20 hours a day and BBC2 about 16.5. A
colour licence costs Pounds 77. Thus the cost-per-hour of the Adult Channel,
if my arithmetic is right, will be about seven times the cost of BBC
television: 3.4p instead of 0.5p - and the BBC chucks in five radio networks
for nothing. Secondly, having watched the supposedly 'adult' material put
out on Astra by the Dutch and Germans on Saturday nights, and occasionally
Fridays, and assuming this is even a vaguely accurate guide to what is
available to the new Adult Channel, I wonder how long any real adult will be
able to stand it. The Germans have a regular strand, something like the
Carry On films but set in the Tyrol with lots of lederhosen and regular
bonking: this seems to set both the standards and the pattern for everything
else. The joky and mechanical nature of the sex is about as far removed from
(say) the truly erotic bed scene in Don't Look Now as it is possible to be.
Even in the more serious movies sex rarely has anything to do with love,
sensuality, or passion; it is unimaginative, repetitive, and gonad numbingly
boring.
How does Channel 4 continue so successfully to spread abroad the notion that
it is a 'special' channel, showing radically different material from other
channels, dealing largely in innovation and catering mainly for minorities?
Of course it gets low viewing figures, but is that on its own a good enough
argument? Consider this evening's schedule as displayed in Radio Times. It
begins with The Oprah Winfrey Show, a chat show imported from the US, and
goes on to a repeat of Laurel And Hardy. Then comes another American series,
Kate And Allie (Channel 4 has always screened more cheap American imports
than any other channel). Tonight With Jonathan Ross is the most flippant and
superficial chat show anywhere on British television, which is saying
something. It is followed by Channel 4 News which is good but would not look
out of place on other channels. Brookside is a soap opera which attracts
some 5.5m viewers, about 25 per cent of the ratings achieved by Coronation
Street and EastEnders. Travelog is a travel programmed much like other
travel programmers, Dispatches a good current affairs series, much like
others. He-Play is a series of 15-minute dramas by new writers, an admirable
idea, but one used by BBC2. Golden Girls is another American comedy and The
Secret Cabaret With Simon Drake a variety show. Drop The Dead Donkey
(another repeat) is very funny, but the sort of comedy which might well
appear on any channel. At 11.30 with 291 Club we finally come to an example
of material unlikely to be screened elsewhere: a (sort of) black talent
show. The Jonathan Ross show has another airing at 12.30 and is followed by
a 10-minute puppet show. BBC2 is a far more idiosyncratic network with much
greater success in getting specialist programmers into its Top 10, last week
Food And Drink, Perpetual Motion and Crufts 92 while Channel 4 filled its
Top 10 with three soaps, five game shows, and two American comedies.
Those who reckon that the spin doctors and media manipulators have pretty
well perfected the art of leading the populace by the nose might take note
of the fortunes of Kylie Minogue and Samantha Fox. Huge efforts have been
made to turn both into Madonna-style sex symbols but in both cases the
British have guffawed and changed channels. In her latest attempt to trade
up from the teenybopper market Minogue has made a video in which she pouts a
lot and flaunts her stocking tops, yet no one takes a scrap of notice. When
Fox appeared on the Jonathan Ross show last week and Ross explained what a
jolly big star she is in India, the London audience just laughed. After Ross
had shown a clip of her jerking her big hips in sequinned hot pants they
laughed some more. Perhaps the public is a bit less biddable than the doom
merchants believe.

The Financial Times


London Page 17 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph 'Wild Man Gathering',
(left), American men are intent on getting in touch with their feelings,
while in Germany the hunt is on for a cultural identity, Prince Louis
Ferdinand of Prussia would be heir to the German throne, if there was one
(Omitted).

920129

