FT924-847

FT  22 DEC 92 / Beirut refuses to give way over deportees: Lebanon will not
be a dumping ground for Israeli problems says prime minister


   By LARA MARLOWE and REUTER


   BEIRUT


ISRAEL'S expulsion of 415 Palestinians has inspired widespread sympathy for
them in the Lebanon, but the government in Beirut is none the less
determined that it will no longer be an unwilling accomplice in such
actions.
Mr Rafik Hariri, the Lebanese prime minister, said that Lebanon 'will not be
a dumping ground for Israeli problems'. Sixty-six Palestinians have been
deported to Lebanon in the past five years, and Lebanon has never before
refused to receive them.
However, the government yesterday issued a communique saying the Lebanese
army had instructed the 415 deportees to 'go back where they came from'. It
noted that humanitarian organisations had been ordered 'to stop all
assistance to the area where the deportees are located'.
The deportees had set up a makeshift camp in no-man's land in south-eastern
Lebanon. Reporters at the scene said the South Lebanon Army fired around the
deportees and over their heads as they attempted to return to Israel and
came within several hundred yards of the SLA positions at Zemraya on the
edge of Israel's Lebanese 'security zone'. Two Palestinians were wounded and
taken to hospital in the Lebanese government-controlled village of Rashaya.
Israeli prime minister Yitzak Rabin claims the 415 men are now Lebanon's
responsibility, but Mr Hariri firmly rejected liability for their
well-being.
'I feel sorry for the difficult and inhuman conditions under which the
deported Palestinians are living,' Mr Hariri said. 'But the position of the
Lebanese government has not changed. The Israeli government continues to
bear the responsibility for this decision which is contrary to the
principles of international laws, especially the Geneva Convention.'
Asked whether Lebanon intended to participate in Middle East peace talks
when they resume after US President-elect Bill Clinton is inaugurated on
January 20, even if the 415 Palestinians were still trapped in their camp,
Mr Hariri indicated it would.
'We have to discuss this matter in the council of ministers, but as a
principle we don't see why we will not continue the peace talks,' he said.
The Lebanese government was in some disarray over the order yesterday that
the deportees should move south.
An official told Reuters news agency: 'The orders by a (Lebanese) army unit
to the deportees to return to the Israeli-held area is not an official stand
by Lebanon.'
But Mr Mohsen Dalloul, defence minister, said Lebanon would 'use pressure'
if necessary to stop the deportees from entering government-controlled areas
 -and it would send them back to Israeli-held areas if it could.
Mr Michel Samaha, information minister, said Lebanon was not responsible for
the deportees because they were in an area not controlled by the Beirut
government.
'The Lebanese government is not responsible in any way for the deported
brothers as their present location is outside the geographic context in
which the Lebanese state practises its sovereignty,' he said after a meeting
with the prime minister, defence minister and and Gen Emile Lahoud, army
chief.
What has helped the government, however, is the support of the deportees
themselves. The Lebanese army officer commanding some 60 troops just north
of the deportee's encampment, Maj Omar Halaby, was applauded by the
Palestinians when he told them to return to the Israeli-occupied zone of
southern Lebanon yesterday.
The Lebanese foreign minister, Mr Fares Bweiz, criticised UN Security
Council resolution 799 for failing to include sanctions against Israel.
'The international community must realise that its credibility is at stake
if it remains silent in this affair, which resembles Nazi practices during
the second world war, Mr Bweiz said.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921222

