FT921-1169

FT  25 MAR 92 / County Hall deal is 'a gamble,' says buyer: Price agreed for
former home of GLC is Pounds 60m


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


SHIRAYAMA Corporation, a Japanese property company, said yesterday that its
decision to pay Pounds 60m for County Hall, former headquarters of the
Greater London Council, was 'a gamble'. But the family-owned company said it
was confident that 'whatever happens, London will be the centre of Europe'.
The company said that Mr Takashi Shirayama, its 55-year-old president, was
fond of a Chinese saying advising that one should test one's luck at least
once in a lifetime.
Mr Shirayama has a taste for things European. He drives a Mercedes-Benz,
enjoys French wine and says he appreciates the respect with which his
little-known company has been treated in London.
The building next to Westminster Bridge was the seat of London local
government for more than 50 years until the GLC, by then the biggest local
authority in Europe, was abolished in 1986. The County Hall complex has been
virtually empty since the departure of the Inner London Education Authority
in 1990.
The London School of Economics was widely tipped to take over County Hall
until the Shirayama deal was signed in Osaka on Monday by the London
Residuary Body, the organisation set up by the government to dispose of GLC
assets. Labour has threatened to overturn the Shirayama deal if it comes to
power on the ground that the building should be reserved for public uses.
Shirayama intends to turn part of the building next to Westminster Bridge
into a hotel and part into luxury flats and conference facilities. The
Osaka-based company, whose wealth is derived from extensive landholdings
near the city, bought a hotel in Spain for Pounds 48m three years ago and
has decorated its health clubs in Japan with British bricks and Spanish
tiles.
Shirayama was founded in 1921 and has about 100 full-time employees and
1,200 part-timers working behind the counters at its fast-food restaurants
and health clubs. The company, which is small compared with many other
Japanese property enterprises, runs a MacDonald's burger franchise in Osaka
and a golf driving range.
Apart from the Madrid hotel, the only other overseas investment is a Dollars
70m (Pounds 40.4m) golf resort under construction on Rota Island, near Guam,
a popular Pacific holiday destination for Japanese families. The company
reported income of Y2.5bn (Pounds 10.9m) for the 12 months to the end of
March last year.
The company originated in a money-lending business dating back to the 1800s.
Under Mr Shirayama, who is a former employee of Dentsu, the Japanese
advertising agency, the company has gradually expanded its interests.
Shirayama joined 27 other Japanese companies, including property offshoots
of Mitsubishi Trust Bank, in a bid for County Hall in 1990. The consortium
collapsed after the Mitsubishi companies withdrew.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920325

