FT921-15482

FT  10 JAN 92 / Two players take the stage after Georgia's one-man band bows
out: Neil Buckley identifies the new centres of power in Tbilisi


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


THE fighting may have stopped, but those who hoped President Zviad
Gamsakhurdia's flight from Georgia on Monday would end the republic's
problems have been disappointed.
Recent demonstrations in the capital, Tbilisi, have shown that support for
the president remains, and with the new military council resorting to force
to disperse them twice in the past week, it is clear that Georgia faces an
uphill struggle to re-establish democracy.
The military-political situation is, in true Georgian fashion, colourful,
complex and possibly dangerous. The republic is in effect being run by two
people: the leaders of the military council. Both are supported by their own
armed groups.
Mr Tengiz Kitovani, 52, a classmate of Mr Gamsakhurdia and previously a
close friend, is a former sculptor and dissident. He later became chairman
of the state defence committee in Mr Gamsakhurdia's government and created
the Georgian national guard last year. He commands remnants of that guard
who refused to obey Mr Gamsakhurdia's order to disarm during last August's
attempted coup in Moscow.
Mr Jaba Iosseliani, 65, was a member of a Georgian partisan movement in his
youth, and later a professor of dramatic art. Three years ago he founded the
Mkhedrioni, or Knights of Georgia, a shadowy group claiming to defend human
rights and ethnic minorities. The Mkhedrioni are believed to have provided
the masked gunmen who twice fired into crowds of Gamsakhurdia supporters in
Tbilisi.
This violence has damaged the reputation of the military council, as has
continued speculation about the two leaders' criminal records. Mr Iosseliani
and Mr Kitovani claim these contain only political charges in disguise. But
it is believed
There are two more armed groups, both commanded by former deputy defence
ministers.
The four militias have been united by their defeat of Mr Gamsakhurdia, and
the military council hopes to merge them into a new Georgian national guard.
Whether that can be achieved, given a history of mutual suspicion and
conflict, remains to be seen.
In civilian politics, the most important figure is Mr Tengiz Sigua, a former
engineer who was Mr Gamsakhurdia's prime minister until resigning last
August. He has been named caretaker prime minister by the military council
and has appointed a provisional government of 10 ministers.
The military council leaders have promised to hand over power to Mr Sigua's
government once stability has been achieved, and play no further part in
political life. They have not said how long that process might take.
Contradictory statements by Mr Sigua and the council, and his insistence on
holding separate press conferences, have led to speculation about friction
between them.
Certainly, the two sides envisage different routes towards new parliamentary
elections.
Mr Sigua has called for the old parliament to be reconvened by January 15 to
prepare for new elections. Mr Iosseliani has declared that parliament dead,
and talks of a transitional political forum containing invited
representatives of all parties.
This would include the two groups that Mr Gamsakhurdia represented but would
probably be less supportive of the ousted president than a reconvened
parliament.
There are two jokers in the pack. One is Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, former
first secretary of the Georgian Communist party and then Soviet foreign
minister. Both the military council and opposition deputies have said he
could be of great assistance to Georgia, but they are unsure how he would be
greeted by the people. Mr Shevardnadze is detested by Gamsakhurdia
supporters as an 'agent of Moscow'.
The other is Mr Jorge Bagration, descendant of the Georgian royal family
that ruled until 1807, who has been trying to contact the opposition leaders
after they spoke of a possible constitutional monarchy. It is not clear,
however, how Georgians might react to the idea of a Spanish-born racing
driver as king.

The Financial Times


London Page 2 Photograph Ousted President Gamsakhurdia ventures out of his
heavily guarded house in Armenia yesterday (Omitted).

920110

