FT924-1069

FT  19 DEC 92 / Food & Drink: The essence of Islay malt whiskies - It takes
more than new technology to distil good Scotch


   By GILES MACDONOGH


IAN HENDERSON, who manages both the Laphroaig and Ardbeg distilleries on the
whisky island of Islay, off the Scottish coast, tells a charming story about
a group of Japanese technicians who visited there.
'They were very bright lads,' says Henderson. 'They had put their doctorates
well behind them and had come to learn about whisky distilling first-hand.'
Every day for two weeks, they tailed Henderson, his stillmen and
warehousemen, observing the process from start to finish.
First, they saw the steeping of the barley to transform it into malt. They
watched the malt drying in the peat kilns and the preparation of the
porridge-like 'mash'; the sweet 'wort' being turned into a strong beer
called 'wash'; the wash distilled once to make the 'low wines' and then a
second time to make the clear spirit that was young whisky. Finally, they
went out into the warehouses where the spirit was run off into old bourbon
hogsheads or the occasional sherry butt.
The Japanese fed everything into their computers. After two weeks, a worried
member of the party requested a meeting with Henderson. They were sorry to
have to say this, they told him, but they were now absolutely certain that
something was being hidden from them: 'Please, when is it that you add 'the
essence'?'
I sympathise. The basic process of making whisky is not hard to understand.
For centuries, the roughest Irish peasant has known how to do it on an
exposed outcrop with a few potatoes and a kettle.
Great whisky, however, is a little more complicated. Much depends on the
shape of the stills, and few distillers can offer an adequate explanation of
why the distillery decided on a squat, onion-shaped still, or some more
elegant form with a thin, tapering stem. The one, they tell us, will make a
heavy, even coarse, whisky; the other a light, refined spirit.
Until comparatively recently, Islay was a remote place with a wild,
Gaelic-speaking population who responded only (and even then only
occasionally) to the authority of the exciseman.
Jim McEwen, who manages the Bowmore distillery in Islay's 'capital,'
remembers the days when the distillery played host to all sorts of strays
from the hills.
'They would take their cups and drop them into the 'deoch' (the strong beer
or wash which is called 'Jo' in Speyside), then settle down by one of the
many coal or peat fires which burned in the distillery and sing Gaelic
songs. When the exciseman returned from his tea, he would chase them away,'
McEwen said.
As a child, he and his classmates would steal lumps of coal from the
distillery and carry them back to his parents' house. At 15, he started work
in the cooperage. One of his jobs was to prepare the 'drams' for the thirsty
workers. Thinking they would appreciate something special, he dipped into a
sherry butt to find a particularly sweet, old whisky. But the workers turned
up their noses at the stuff. For them, the only drink was 'white' whisky,
straight from the still at a fiendish 65`.
With eight surviving large distillery buildings dating from the 19th century
(a ninth, Port Charlotte, was closed in the 1930s and the buildings
subsequently demolished or turned over to other uses), Islay whiskies
clearly were valued in the last century.
Until fairly late in the 19th century, Islay was something of a tax haven
for distillers by virtue of its remoteness. Another possible factor in its
rise was its proximity to Ireland (it is just 18 miles to Antrim).
Irish whiskey was rather more famous than Scotch a century ago and it is
feasible that Islay malts were passed off as Irish ones. Islay must have
come into its own, however, with the beginning of whisky blends at the end
of the last century.
Blenders appreciated Islay spirits for their 'peat reek.' The peat bogs of
the island always have been a cheap source of fuel, and malt kilned over
peat will develop a heavy, smoky character which will contribute a distinct
taste to the whisky. Both Bowmore and Laphroaig kiln about 20 per cent of
their malt. The rest, along with all the peated malt for the other
distilleries, comes from the maltings at Port Ellen at the south end of the
Island.
A little peat goes a long way when it is expressed in parts per million: a
great bruiser of an Islay malt such as Ardbeg will specify 50 parts per
million. Its stablemate, Laphroaig, requires 35, at which level the
peatiness will still be there but some of the delicacy of the spirit will
come through. Bowmore treads the middle way with 25-30 in the pursuit of
elegance. As for Bunnahabhain and Bruichladdich, their specifications are
1-2 parts per million for the former and none for the latter.
At the maltings, they assured me that Bruichladdich would still have some
peat character, just from the peat smoke travelling round the maltings. That
not withstanding, at these levels both Bunnahabhain and Bruichladdich could
be described as Speyside in style.
That leaves three. Port Ellen closed its doors in 1983 - although bottles of
its exceptionally fine malt are still available from specialists. Both the
remaining United Distillers' plants, Lagavulin and Caol Ila, used to ask for
45 parts per million. Three months ago, however, the instruction reached
Port Ellen to reduce the peating of the malt to 35, the same level as Allied
Distillers' Laphroaig. I was told this at the maltings.
Elsewhere on the island, I found few people were aware of United's decision
to alter radically the style of its whiskies. Many thought I had been given
privileged information. At Laphroaig, Ian Henderson had been told of the
move but was reluctant to offer an explanation.
Whereas Caol Ila is used chiefly for blending - a good deal goes into
Johnnie Walker - Lagavulin is marketed widely as an exquisite 16-year-old.
For the next 16 years, nothing will affect the taste, but what then?
Lagavulin is also the mainstay of the White Horse blend. Was the decision to
tone down Lagavulin taken with White Horse in mind?
In terms of value for money, the Lagavulin 16-year-old is one of the best
old malts on the market, with Threshers selling it at Pounds 22.99 a bottle.
Laphroaig's delicately fruity 15-year-old is more than Pounds 10 more.
Neither the rather angular Caol Ila nor the massive, robust Ardbeg is
distributed widely, which - in the case of the latter, at least - is a pity.
Now that United has begun to change the peat levels on its whisky, Ardbeg
assumes an even greater importance as the most uncompromising of the Islay
malts.
It should never be forgotten, however, that peat is just half the story when
it comes to present-day Islay malts. Like Bunnahabhain, Bowmore uses an
appreciable amount of sherry wood on its old whiskies, imbuing them with
sweet fruitiness which covers the peatiness of the raw spirit.
The 17-year-old is balanced superbly but the 12-year-old (Pounds 21.29 from
Peatlings, tel: 0284-755-948), with its notes of candied peel, is not to be
sneezed at, either. Bunnahabhain's warhorse is the 12-year-old (Oddbins
Pounds 19.99).
The big stills here run off a spirit at a higher strength, making the whisky
more delicate with a sweet honey and heather character.
Tasted 'blind,' few would recognise Bruichladdich as an Islay malt. The
15-year-old (Pounds 26.50 from Lea & Sandeman, tel: 071-376-4767) is the
favourite of the distillery manager, Ian Allen. I agree with him. The sea
there is everywhere, rusting the hoops of the casks before they are two
years old. The sea is yet another inscrutable part of Islay's essence.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921219

