FT922-7437

FT  19 MAY 92 / Suspended Bombay broker tries to embarrass authorities


   By DAVID HOUSEGO


   BOMBAY


THE BOMBAY stockbroker implicated in a financial scandal yesterday sought to
embarrass the Indian monetary authorities by declaring that his alleged
illegal transactions were common practice in the Indian interbank securities
market.
Mr Harshad Mehta, who was suspended from membership of the Bombay Stock
Exchange on Friday after his assets had been frozen by the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI), claimed yesterday that the Reserve Bank of India, the
central bank, was 'fully cognizant of these practices'.
In a letter to the CBI which he released publicly, he claimed that he had
violated no law. He said that all his transactions had been in line with
prevailing practice - 'a practice which is by no means secret or
clandestine'.
Mr Mehta's counter-charge is embarrassing the authorities because it is
increasingly clear that the channeling of funds out of the interbank money
and securities markets to finance share purchases has a long history.
It appears that Mr Mehta's operations were, however, on a much larger scale
 -including raising Rs6.2bn (Pounds 120m) from State Bank of India, the
largest commercial bank, on the basis of securities he allegedly did not
hold.
Mr Mehta's defence is strikingly - and perhaps intentionally - similar to
the one being used by ANZ Grindlays, the largest foreign bank, in a dispute
with the Reserve Bank of India over whether it violated RBI regulations.
Grindlays paid a cheque issued to it by another bank in the course of a
securities transaction into Mr Mehta's account - though the RBI does not
allow the use of brokers' accounts in interbank transactions.
The domestic commercial banks and the foreign banks are to meet today in an
effort to reconcile their accounts in the interbank securities market to
discover the extent of false and uncovered paper.
The foreign banks are meeting separately with Mr S. Venkitaramanan, the
governor of the Reserve Bank, to put their own views on tightening the
operation of the market.
In thin trading, the Bombay 30-share index edged up 61.68 points to 3,456.16
on the strength of institutional support. Brokers said private investors
stayed away from the market.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920519

