FT923-9597

FT  04 AUG 92 / Retirement age of 65 proposed for men and women


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


THE state retirement age for women should be raised to 65 to equal that of
men and the cost savings should be used to help the poorest pensioners, the
government's own advisers urged yesterday.
The recommendation from the Social Security Advisory Committee, which
advises the government on pensions policy, increases the likelihood that
women will have to work another five years before becoming eligible for
state pensions.
Last December, the Department of Social Security published a discussion
document outlining plans for equalising pension ages, allowing men to retire
earlier at age 60 or men and women to retire at age 63. The report said that
retiring at 60 was estimated to cost roughly Pounds 3.5bn per year in
additional expenditure, while a common retirement age of 63 would have no
revenue effect.
The SSAC suggested that the political unpopularity of its recommendation be
mitigated by a promise to use the estimated Pounds 3bn in annual cost
savings to help the (mostly women) pensioners penalised by low pay and
interrupted service in their working lives. They also suggested that the
government begin phasing in the equalisation policy 15 years from now,
rather than 10 years as suggested in the DSS report.
This would mean that no one currently older than 52 would be affected by the
changes and that no one over 42 would feel the full effect of equalisation.
Since 1940, women in Britain have been allowed to retire on full state
pension at age 60, while men have had to wait until 65.
In rejecting the proposal to lower men's retirement age to 60, Sir Peter
Barclay, chairman of the SSAC, said: 'It gives a huge gift to men regardless
of their need.' Nearly three-quarters of British men are eligible for
occupational pensions already so that their need for state benefit is less
than that of women.
The committee rejected the option of age 63 because it would cut women's
benefits while providing no additional funds to help those who need aid
most.
The SSAC also rejected pensions industry suggestions that the government
adopt a so-called flexible decade of retirement between the ages of 60 and
70.
Ageing process, Page 6
Editorial Comment, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920804

