FT921-3783

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: Labour set to push 'time for a change'


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


MR NEIL KINNOCK will today kick off Labour's election campaign with a news
conference to promote his party's 'time for a change' message, followed by a
rousing rallying call to his MPs at Westminster.
The Labour leader dusted off what was once described as the 'oldest and most
potent slogan in politics' yesterday when he welcomed the election
announcement.
Exuding confidence, he told a television interviewer: 'The country needs an
election, the country needs a new government and new leadership.'
Later, Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, took up the theme in a
television broadcast condemning the Tories for using tax cuts to win votes.
In a softly-spoken presentation, he claimed that the Budget had offered a
simple if important choice between 'consumption and investment, between
borrowing to spend now and borrowing to invest in our future.'
Labour's election machine was up and running long before yesterday's
lunchtime announcement, as frontbench spokesmen weighed into the
government's Budget as 'a shallow, transparent and weak attempt to gain
favour'.
Mr Jack Cunningham, the party's campaign co-ordinator, said the Budget was
intended to see the Tories through until election day, but had withered
under widespread criticism within 24 hours of its delivery.
He was backed by Mr Gordon Brown, the shadow trade secretary, and Mr Tony
Blair, the shadow employment secretary, who both attacked the package for
failing to address rising unemployment and the need for investment.
As all eyes turned to Downing Street, Labour campaigners across Britain had
begun delivering some 14,000 opening electoral addresses. A total of 4m are
expected to have been posted across the country by the end of the weekend.
In the Commons, Mr Smith launched a bravura attack on the Budget to the
delight of his backbenchers.
Pouring scorn on the government's record with a sheaf of statistics on the
country's economic performance, he said: 'The hallmark of Majorism is to
promise that good times are round the corner.
'Unfortunately, we never seem to turn the corner.'
Instead of a Budget for recovery, he said, the Tories were 'borrowing money
they don't have to buy votes they don't deserve'. He concluded: 'Time has
run out for a government living on borrowed money and borrowed time.'
Throughout the day, it was clear that the slogan - 'It's time for Labour' -
will be mercilessly promoted throughout Labour's campaign. Several Labour
MPs conceded privately that the party's greatest obstacle in the coming
campaign would be voters' nervousness of change.
'Our job is to persuade people we don't bite,' one MP said.
Mr Kinnock will speak at the Scottish Labour party conference in Edinburgh
on Friday while other senior shadow frontbenchers are due to make platform
appearances at a London rally throughout the weekend.
The first important hurdle for Labour will come on Tuesday when Mr Smith is
due to submit the party's alternative Budget plan to the close perusal of
economists.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920312

