FT921-1438

FT  24 MAR 92 / Japan's money growth slows again


   By STEVEN BUTLER


   TOKYO


THE RAPID cooling of the Japanese economy was underscored yesterday when the
Bank of Japan reported that money supply growth in February fell to a record
low for the third month running as a result of weak credit demand from the
corporate sector.
Broad money - M2 plus certificates of deposit - rose by just 1.6 per cent
compared to February last year, reinforcing expectations that the official
discount rate (ODR) will be cut soon, perhaps this week, for the fourth time
since July. The ODR is now 4.5 per cent, compared to 6 per cent a year ago.
'This is a very good reason why they should cut interest rates sharply,
rather than just tinkering with 50 basis points,' said Mr Russell Jones,
economist at UBS Phillips & Drew.
Money supply growth, which was slower than the Bank expected, was pulled
down by weaker-than-expected corporate demand for funding, the Bank said.
Corporations are cutting capital investment and trying to reduce surging
inventories of unsold goods. Inventory adjustment, which is pulling down
industrial output, was expected to continue into the third quarter. The bank
appears to accept that the economy may not hit bottom in the second quarter,
as had been suggested earlier.
The severity of the industrial slowdown was highlighted by figures from the
Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association yesterday showing vehicle
production in February down 7.1 per cent to 1.06m units. Money supply growth
is now running well below the central bank's projections of 2-3 per cent
growth in the first quarter. This is unlikely to be met after January's 1.8
per cent growth rate.
'It (the money supply figure) reinforces the view that the Bank of Japan
needs to act quickly to reinforce credit expansion,' said Mr Kermit
Schoenholtz, economist at Salomon Brothers Asia. 'Credit is not expanding
rapidly enough to support sufficient economic growth in the months ahead.'
Moves by the central bank to stimulate the economy, however, will be
tempered by fears of reigniting inflation in asset prices. Broad money was
also reduced by a continuing shift of money into Postal Saving deposits,
which are outside the banking system. However, broad liquidity, which
includes the postal savings, also grew at a record low of 4.5 per cent.
Savers have been shifting money out of the banking system in order to lock
in high interest rates as they decline.
Broad money fell in February to Y500,500bn from Y507,000bn in January,
amounting to an annualised month-to-month decline of 6.3 per cent,
seasonally adjusted basis. M1, which includes cash and demand deposits,
expanded by 7.8 per cent compared to February 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920324

