FT923-15663

FT  01 JUL 92 / International Company News: Dollars 1bn merger of US food
wholesalers in balance


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


A PROPOSED Dollars 1.1bn merger between two of the largest wholesale food
distributors in the US - Super Valu and Wetterau - hung in the balance
yesterday as the two companies tried to agree terms.
Under the outline merger agreement announced last month, Super Valu would
have made a cash offer of Dollars 30.20 for each Wetterau share, valuing its
common stock at Dollars 643.3m. It would also have taken on Dollars 440m of
outstanding Wetterau debt. Ahead of this transaction, Missouri-based
Wetterau would have 'demerged' its retail subsidiary, called Shop 'n' Save.
Yesterday, however, Wetterau said that Super Valu wanted to revise terms.
The new proposal was not disclosed, but Wetterau acknowledged that there
would be a reduction in the amount offered to shareholders. Wetterau shares,
which were briefly suspended, had fallen by Dollars 4 1/4 to Dollars 26 3/8
by lunchtime in New York.
The Wetterau board was due to meet during the afternoon to consider the
reduced offer, and a decision was expected by early evening. It said that
the new terms would only be disclosed it decided to go ahead with the deal.
Analysts, however, were not over-optimistic that the transaction would be
pursued.
Wetterau, quoted on the Nasdaq over-the-counter market currently ranks as
the national third-largest grocery wholesaler, while Super Valu has the
number two spot. Together, the combined operations would outstrip
Oklahoma-based Fleming Companies as the nation's largest wholesale food
distributor.
Separately, Super Valu announced first-quarter profits for the three months
to June 20, totalling Dollars 45.6m after-tax. This represented a sharp
improvement on the Dollars 31.6m seen in the same period a year earlier.
However, earnings per share increased more modestly, from 60 cents to 64
cents.
Food wholesaling enjoyed a 13 per cent operating profit improvement, despite
'a sluggish selling environment and deflation in the cost of products sold'.
Retail operations showed a 75 per cent profits advance, but this was helped
partly by acquisitions.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920701

