FT923-10808

FT  28 JUL 92 / London Stock Exchange: Wellcome deals disappoint


   By COLIN MILLHAM, CHRISTOPHER PRICE and STEVE THOMPSON


AN AIR of disappointment pervaded the Wellcome share sale yesterday as the
syndicate of backers to the issue struggled to hold the stock above the 800p
strike price in busy trading of 23.7m shares.
At first, German, and then some Japanese institutions were said to be
unloading stock, although US activity later in the day was said to have
brought some stability.
Wellcome opened at 826p, before the 270m shares sold by Wellcome Trust came
to the market at 800p. The share price went into freefall, being marked down
to 807p within 15 minutes, and finally ending the day languishing
fractionally above the issue price, at 800 1/2 p.
Observers remained divided over how the price will fair over the coming
days. Robert Fleming, Wellcome's broker and administrator of the issue, is
operating a stabilisation operation. However, further weakness in the equity
market could stretch Fleming's nerve and force the price down.
One helpful note about the drugs sector came from Kleinwort Benson, which
yesterday turned positive on the prescription drugs groups, believing them
to have reached a level where they offer 'fundamental value' to investors.
Glaxo firmed a penny to 706p and SmithKline Beecham 7 to 456p.
Lasmo sceptics
A suggestion in the weekend press that Shell may be lining up a bid for
Lasmo, the troubled oil and gas exploration and production group, saw the
shares race ahead in spite of general scepticism by analysts.
Specialists said a bid from Shell was unlikely and that the shares had
responded more to a growing feeling that Lasmo may maintain its interim
dividend when reporting half-year figures tomorrow. They also pointed to two
encouraging drilling reports announced last week.
Assessing the chances of a Shell bid, one analyst said such a move would not
tie in with the group's culture and noted that Shell is already committed to
a Dollars 65bn capital expenditure programme over the next five years.
British Gas, which launched an unsuccessful 'dawn raid' on Lasmo in the late
1980s, was viewed as much more likely to make a bid. Lasmo touched 135p
before closing 15 up at 132p, leaving the stock as the market's best
individual performer of the day.
Allied-Lyons dipped 9 to 605p as the company declined to comment on
speculation that it is discussing a takeover or joint venture involving
Martini & Rossi, via the vermouth group's Luxembourg-based private holding
company, The General Beverage Company.
Analysts pointed out, however, that Allied has debts of about Pounds 1.9bn
and that a rights issue might be required to make an acquisition on this
scale. Martini & Rossi is estimated to be worth about Pounds 1bn and a joint
venture is, therefore, considered more likely.
Dealers reported very heavy trading in BTR, down 11 at 412p. One securities
house was said to have bought a block of 4.2m shares at 405p and placed them
in the market at a 5p premium. Turnover totalled 10m shares.
Trafalgar House, the conglomerate, suffered from stories suggesting that the
group may cut its dividend because of sharply reduced profits. The shares,
heavily sold last week, closed 6 weaker at 57p after turnover of 3m.
Stakebuilding stories continued to circulate around Mirror Group Newspapers
shares, which maintained their record of progressing on every trading
session since the relisting last Friday week. The price ended 2 higher at
74p, having touched 74 1/2 p. Turnover remained heavy, reaching 5.8m shares.
Dealers eagerly await responses to a series of Section 212 notices,
regarding share ownership, served on a number of broking firms in recent
days.
Several other media stocks fell sharply, with dealers blaming the sector's
depression on a dismal UK economic outlook. Pearson finished 11 lower at
337p, after 334p, on relatively high turnover of 2.7m shares. United
Newspapers slipped 6 to 376p and Telegraph 2 to 275p. Reuters dropped a
further 25 to 986p on 1.8m traded, while Reed International weakened 19 to
478p.
The takeover rumours surrounding Lasmo prompted support for Enterprise Oil,
2 firmer at 329p. The oil leaders, however, continued to decline, BP easing
2 to 205p and Shell, still weakened by the County NatWest profits downgrade
last week, losing 7 to 451p.
Utilities, traditional beneficiaries of a falling equity market, were also
under pressure, dealers reporting a general lack of confidence and a number
of unusually large long positions. More unravelling of the Electricity
Package, which ceases to be traded in the autumn, left it 78 off at Pounds
2995.
TSB initially moved ahead to 142p after reports that a predator could be
stalking the bank, but it later slipped to close unchanged at 138p.
Specialists said a bid was by no means unlikely but could well be some time
away.
Weakness ahead of this Thursday's results undermined ICI, which receded 30
to 1068p. Hoare Govett said it would consider turning a buyer of the stock
if it reached the 1050p level, believing the 7 per cent yield would
represent a good opportunity to institutions to buy on income and security
considerations.
Milk was a big factor weighing on the shares of Clifford Foods and Northern
Foods yesterday. Clifford ordinary shed 48 to 410p and the 'A' shares 25 to
123p in spite of a statement from the company that it expects to pay an
unchanged dividend of 11.5p for the current year. The shares reacted badly
to news that a delay until July in raising selling prices for milk to major
retailers will cut first-half profits to just above Pounds 1m, from Pounds
2.54m for the same period last year.
Northern fell 13 to 567p as County NatWest trimmed its 1992/93 profits
forecast to Pounds 161m from Pounds 165m. County said it was concerned about
how the increase in milk prices to manufacturers will affect profits, and
was also worried by a squeeze on suppliers by Marks and Spencer, one of
Northern's biggest customers.
Fyffes added 4 at 80p on news that it is to take a 50 per cent stake in Saba
Trading, a subsidiary of Axel Johnson, a leading Swedish distributor of
fresh fruit and vegetables.
A line of stock in regional hotel group Friendly Hotels sent the shares into
retreat to end 23 off at 120p.
Bullough, the engineering group, plummeted 21 to 114p after an 18 per cent
decline in interim profits.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (4).
ELECTRICALS (1) Magnetic Mtls., MISC (1) Norbain, PROP (1) Lon & Edinburgh 8
7/8 pc Pf '13, MINES (1) Sons Gwalia.
NEW LOWS (273).
AMERICANS (2) Bethlehem Steel, General Elect, BREWERS (4) Grand Met.,
Guinness, Highland, Merrydown Wine, BLDG MATLS (13) BMSS, Blockleys, Epwin,
Evered Bardon, Explaura, Hepworth, Heywood Williams, Do Cv Pf, Marley,
Meyer, Needler, Newman-Tonks, Wolseley, BUSINESS SERVS (3) BNB, Holmes
Protection, Inchcape, CHEMS (5) Caird, Courtaulds, ICI, Laporte, Leigh
Ints., CONGLOMERATES (2) Ensor, Trafalgar Hse. A, CONTG & CONSTRCN (15)
AMEC, Do 6 1/2 pc Pf, Barcom, Donelon Tyson, Dunton, Galliford, Gleeson
(MJ), Lilley, McAlpine (A), Prowting, Raine, Taylor Woodrow, Westport,
Wilson Bowden, Wimpey (G), ELECTRICALS (4) BICC, Dowding & Mills, LPA,
Oxford Instrs., ELECTRONICS (4) Harland Simon, Kalamazoo, Logica, Vtech, ENG
AERO (1) Brit. Aerospace, ENG GEN (9) Aerospace Eng., BSS, Booth, Bridon,
Fenner, Hopkinsons, Howden, Simon, Verson, FOOD MANUF (10) Armour Trust,
Assoc. Brit. Foods, Booker, Borthwicks, Clifford, Do N/V, RHM, Tate & Lyle,
Do 7 1/4 pc Pf, Utd Biscuits, FOOD RETAILING (3) Ashley, Brake Bros, Watson
& Philip, HEALTH & HSEHOLD (8) Fisons, Life Sciences, London Intl., Mayborn,
Medeva, Smith & Nephew, Wellcome, Whatman, HOTELS & LEIS (10) Brent Walker,
Buckingham, Chrysalis, Compass, Euro Disney, First Leis., Friendly Htls.,
Magnolia, Queens Moat 7 1/2 pc Pf, Rank Org., INSCE BROKERS (2) Hogg, Lloyd
Thompson, INSCE COMPOSITE (1) Gen. Accident, INV TRUSTS (110) MEDIA (6) City
of London, HTV, Pearson, Reed, Reuters, Thomson, MTL & MTL FORMING (4) ASW,
Apollo Metals, Cook (Wm), Firth (GM), MISC (7) Abbeycrest, Assoc. Brit.
Consultants, Attwoods, BLP, Excalibur, UDO, Waste Mngemt., MOTORS (2)
Kwik-Fit, Vardy (Reg), OTHER FINCL (1) Ivory & Sime, OTHER INDL MATLS (8)
English China Clays, Expamet, OMI, Suter, Vinten, Whitecroft, Williams, Do 5
5/8 pc Pf, PACKG, PAPER & PRINTG (3) Arjo Wiggins Appleton, Dolphin Packg.,
Stat-Plus, PROP (10) Greycoat, Hambro Countryside, McInerney, Mowat, Mucklow
(AJ), Ossory Ests., Town Centre, Trafford Park, Wates City of Lon., YRM,
STORES (7) Asprey, Austin Reed, Do N/V, Hughes (TJ), Kleen-E-Ze, Liberty,
TEXTS (3) Beckman (A), Parkland A, Utd. Uniform Servs, TRANSPORT (3) Davies
& Newman, Norex, Transport Dev., MINES (13) AFMIN, Anglo Amer Coal, Anglo
Amer, Buffels, De Beers Lnk Units, Genbel, Gencor, Jo'burg Cons., Kells
Mnrls., Minorco, Northam Plat., Sthn. Pacific, Western Deep.
Other market statistics, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920728

