FT922-7262

FT  19 MAY 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equities concentrate on positive news


   By STEVE THOMPSON


THE EQUITY market moved into the second week of the long three-week account
in confident fashion. It shrugged off lingering worries caused by last
week's news that Olympia & York, the international property development
group, had filed for insolvency protection, preferring to concentrate on
good news emerging from Germany and the UK.
In Germany, the threatened strike by engineering workers was called off,
while in London, the market was cheered by an encouraging report issued by
the Confederation of British Industry.
The one slightly disturbing piece of news on an otherwise splendid day for
the equity market came from share turnover revealed by the Stock Exchange.
Volume yesterday - 442.8m shares - was well below recent levels of activity
and may well see the value of customer business carried out for the day drop
below the Pounds 1bn mark. Customer business has only fallen below the
Pounds 1bn figure on two occasions since the general election.
There was no real mood of optimism at many of the morning meetings held at
leading London broking houses, and the FT-SE 100 Index opened in negative
territory, down around 3 points at about 2,680.
Traders were only partly mollified by Wall Street's performance last Friday
evening, and other international markets had wobbled on the Olympia & York
situation.
However, a strong opening by the Footsie future; news that Germany's
engineering unions had accepted a two-year pay deal, thus avoiding a
damaging strike; and the mildly bullish news from the monthly CBI survey,
which provided some evidence that high street sales had risen to their
highest levels for around two years, quickly lifted share prices.
The Footsie was showing a rise within an hour of the start of trading, and
thereafter accelerated to move confidently back above the 2,700 level before
encountering a bout of profit-taking as the session drew to a close. At the
finish the Footsie was 21 points ahead at 2,703.6, having earlier reached a
day's peak of 2,704.5.
The German news, seen by many as removing any near-term threat that the
country's interest rates would move higher, was viewed by leading
marketmakers as providing the real momentum for the UK stock market to
resume its upward push. Sterling performed well all day, especially against
a rapidly appreciating D-Mark, and climbed sharply against the dollar.
Long-dated gilts improved by around  1/4 .
In a day singularly lacking in strong stories, it was left to broker
recommendations to provide much of the impetus for individual stocks,
although there was said to have been some interest in the blue chips due to
report this week.
Arjo Wiggins Appleton, the paper and packaging group, was again the weakest
member of the FT-SE 100 constituents in percentage terms, the shares still
feeling the effects of the departure of the company's chief executive.
Suggestions that one of the big US investment banks had extolled the
attractions of the power generators left National Power and PowerGen as the
Footsie's best individual performers.

The Financial Times


London Page 40

920519

