FT924-11381

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (10): Technology
breaches the barriers - The challenges facing the global custody business


   By RICHARD WATERS


THESE days, intermediaries in the securities markets are so busy encroaching
on each other's turf that it is not easy to see where global custodians
start and where they stop. Fund managers, brokers, settlement houses,
custodians: technology is breaking down the barriers between all these
intermediaries so fast that the shifting profile of the industry is
sometimes difficult to pin down.
The latest of these developments is taking fund managers increasingly into
areas which until now have been the preserve of custodians. Last year, after
a rearguard action by a number of large US banks, fund managers were
admitted to Swift, the international financial communication system. In
theory, that gives them access to the same messaging system used for
interbank payment and other instructions, allowing them to bypass banks
should they so wish.
The second advance has been the move by a number of big fund managers,
prompted by Fidelity, to sponsor the development of a number of competing
electronic trade confirmation systems. These will allow fund managers to
confirm details of bargains they have entered electronically, rather than
waiting for slower fax or telex messages.
By the 1993, three confirmation systems will have been launched, all of them
aimed at the European market. The fund managers who have promoted the
development of these systems hope their specifications will be used as the
basis for similar products in the US and Japan, making it possible (once
bridges between the systems have been created) to confirm trades in all
principal markets around the world.
The creation of such electronic services - and the admission of fund
managers to communication networks such as Swift - point to a move by large
fund management groups to take greater control of the process that follows
the completion of a securities trade. The desire to reduce costs and risks
has motivated such developments. Membership of international settlement
houses such as Euroclear and Cedel could be the next step, as fund managers
cut out even more of the work done by the middlemen.
These developments have come against a background of price-cutting by
custodians. Like other activities in the securities industry, success
depends on volume: faced with the high fixed costs of building and
maintaining the necessary technology, it is the custodians which can push
through the largest volumes of transactions that will do best. Most have
built proprietary systems for their custody clients, and now face the added
problem of amortising the costs of these systems faster as the clients
demand more flexible systems that allow them to communicate with a number of
different custodians.
Despite these pressures, there are still plenty of opportunities for making
a profit out of the custody business. These come either from the extension
of the basic custody service into new markets - the emerging equity markets,
for instance, or derivatives - or from the kinds of extra services
custodians can sell on the back of custody.
The emerging markets have become one of the biggest headaches for the
back-office staff of fund management firms. The cost of dealing in these
markets, and the risks incurred in failed trades, are difficult to control.
Not surprisingly, the charges made by custodians are higher for this type of
business. 'Margins are higher the further away from mature markets that you
get,' says Mr Julian Gibbs of Barclays Bank.
Despite the higher costs, it is difficult to find custodians willing to take
on the settlement risks in emerging markets. When offering 'contractual
settlement', under which investors are guaranteed settlement on the due
date, custodians also retain the right of recourse against the investor if
trades fail.
Derivative markets provide a different opportunity. Many financial
institutions around the world are still trying to come to grips with the
difficulties of valuing their derivatives portfolios and finding ways of
measuring and managing the risks they entail. Those banks which have been
longest in the derivatives business and which also act as global custodians
are well positioned to offer help in these areas to investment managers.
Meanwhile, custodians continue to make money out of services which have
traditionally sat alongside custody: stock lending, foreign exchange and
cash management.
The first of these services has come under scrutiny in the UK in recent
months in the wake of the stripping of assets from the Maxwell pension funds
under the guise of stock lending. Under review now is whether fund managers
should themselves be able to control the movement of stock, or whether this
should rest with separate entities. Any such development would partially
reverse the process which has seen fund managers encroaching more on the
custodians' territory.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921026

