FT924-6284

FT  21 NOV 92 / Sport: Autumn in summer's realms - Terry McLean makes a
November tour of England's county cricket grounds / Cricket


   By TERRY MCLEAN


I HAVE always thought November is a dismal month; dark early, cold all day,
harbinger of a long, bleak winter without any cricket.
The county cricket staff who work all year round chat cheerfully about the
players and summertime staff, with just a whiff of moral superiority. Not
for the all-year-round brigade the soft options of migration or hibernation
when the cold weather bites.
'Oh, we're a hive of industry,' boasted Phillip August, Gloucestershire's
secretary, when I asked him what the county ground at Bristol was like in
November.
'We work a bloody sight harder in winter than summer,' laughed the Rev
Michael Vockins, secretary of Worcestershire.
The Headingley style was more dour. It was raining in Yorkshire. 'We're at
it 52 weeks a year.'
Most players and staff take their holidays in late September and early
October, when the season is safely over. Then from mid-October until April
the non-playing staff come into their own.
'It's different sort of work,' mused Vockins, with the air of one who enjoys
thinking about his job. 'The summer is six months of peaks and troughs, home
games and away games. The winter is six months of steady work towards the
target of the new season. That's why it's hard.'
For groundsmen it is always hard, whatever the season, whatever the weather.
It is intrinsic in their job to be battling against nature. Whereas office
staff work comfortably, inside, groundsmen start their 'rescue work' on the
grass as soon as the season is over and keep it up all year round. When I
rang Bristol on a bitter November afternoon, their groundsmen were out,
working on the square. August described with relish their spiking, trimming,
treating, feeding, filling and repairing.
Surrey's press secretary (now known as a public relations executive), Kate
Hempstall, gave a more openly sadistic appreciation. 'When it's really,
really cold or frozen, we let them in,' she chuckled. 'They can sew up
nets.'
Surrey are not a typical county because the Oval is a Test as well as county
ground. It has four full-time groundstaff, led by Harry Brind, a man of few
words, cold knuckles and long experience. But even in small counties the
head groundsman often has an assistant, who is usually part-time, often a
player looking for winter work.
'This is a grim time for players in search of jobs,' said August, losing his
good cheer for a moment. It soon returned. 'We've been trying to get
unemployed cricketers to help with jobs here - painting, mending seats,
fixing fences - that sort of thing.'
Surrey's November newsletter includes a list of 20 first and second XI
players, with a description of what they are doing this winter. Only two are
working their own way through until next spring. Alec Stewart (England),
Graham Thorpe (England 'A') and Waqar Younis (Pakistan) are going on tour,
to India and Sri Lanka, Australia and the West Indies respectively. Eight
others are going overseas, for playing and coaching purposes. Seven are
working at cricket schools and leisure centres in the wilds and heartlands
of Surrey, from East Moseley to Guildford. Thanks to the tireless efforts of
the National Cricket Association and of counties and local sponsors wanting
home-grown players, an increasing number of players spend their winter
months like these seven, as 'cricket development officers'.
'With the help of a local sponsor, we had an assistant coach last year, for
the first time,' Vockins told me from Worcester, 'spreading the word in
schools. It was such a success that we're doing it again this year. This
year he's a cricket development officer.'
Next year a positive cricket person? The only thing as widespread as the
jargon polluting cricket's language is the re-building of pavilions. Almost
everyone seems to be re-building their pavilions. But it is not called
re-building; re-builds and repairs are out of favour. It is called
re-shaping, re-fashioning, up-grading or, best of all, 'activating the
pavilion restoration scheme' (Surrey).
All this pavilion work is partly for the comfort of members and players and
partly because modern cricket grounds get a good share of their income from
renting out their pavilions in autumn and winter, for use as conference
centres and exhibition halls, for wedding receptions, sports club lunches
and dinners and a variety of other entertainments. Most county grounds can
provide parking and catering for large numbers. All that is then required is
a re-fashioned pavilion. That is why the marketing men make good in the cold
and dark. The more depressing the weather, the more attractive the pavilions
and 'sporting social facilities' they can dangle in front of their
customers. Or is it clients?
There are bookings for next season's hospitality boxes, there are health and
fitness centres (gyms) and even stretches of open ground on offer. Bristol
has a bigger crowd for the huge firework display staged there on Guy Fawkes
weekend than for any of its cricket matches.
The marketing of counties' off-season attributes is such an intense business
that it was quite a relief to return to the determinedly everyday atmosphere
of Headingley. Whatever the big financial operations going on, the man who
answered the phone only wanted to talk about life in the office where he
worked. That is: the preparation of brochures, year books, newsletters,
membership forms, diaries and Christmas raffle tickets and, the biggest
boost of the non-cricket season so far, the launch of the Sunday League's
1993 technicolour kit in all its nylon glory, with all its mail-order,
chat-show mystique. 'Quite a thing, that.'
It was quite a thing at most grounds, where the office staff are the silent
perennials whose labours keep first-class cricket going. The public launch
of the new outfits made a change from everyday routine. Nowadays that
routine includes the regular tightening up of security. Trouble often
amounts to no more than 'splashing a bit of paint around the seats', as at
Bristol.
At neighbouring Worcester, Vockins spoke almost nostalgically of the bad old
days. 'Twenty years ago we used to say that all Worcestershire burglars
began their careers here.' But crime is not what it used to be. 'Things are
quieter now.'
At bigger grounds the problem is bigger and the response tougher. At the
Oval, where break-ins are frequent and the new Ken Barrington sports centre
was broken into and looted a few weeks ago, the whole security system is
being strengthened. Surrey, like all the counties I contacted, has a
fellowship of loyal office staff who mourn their counties' misfortunes, with
an eye to an improving future. At the Oval they are already selling tickets
for next season's Test Match against the Australians. In the office at
Glamorgan they are adept at hoping for the best, or at least for better,
next season. Even in Yorkshire, apparently, 'you never know.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921121

