FT923-9718

FT  04 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Nafta teams haggle over final details


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


US, CANADIAN and Mexican trade ministers and their negotiating teams were
haggling in Washington's Watergate Hotel yesterday over the final details of
the North American Trade Agreement (Nafta).
While they worked to 'capture the momentum', in the words of Mrs Carla
Hills, US trade representative, opponents of the pact were keeping the fax
lines busy with press releases. Mr John Cregan, president of the
protectionist-leaning US Business and Industrial Council, warned: 'Los
Angeles could burn again, and the fire may spread to dozens of US cities if
Nafta becomes law. Hundreds of thousands of semi-skilled and unskilled
manufacturing jobs held mainly by minorities will be lost to Mexico.'
Ms Lori Wallach, a lawyer with Mr Ralph Nader's Public Citizen, saw the
Watergate, focus of the scandal leading to President Nixon's resignation, as
'the perfect location to wrap up the Nafta talks: a symbol of secrecy,
broken promises to the American people, and ultimately, the end of a
presidency.' She said a poll released by the San Diego Union Tribune Latinos
and people living on the US-Mexico border opposed Nafta (two groups on which
the Bush administration was relying for support).
Many US companies are excited about Nafta. Mr Ari Bousbib, of Booz, Allen
and Hamilton, a New York consulting company, is busy arranging 'strategic'
alliances between US or foreign and Mexican businesses. A number of Mexican
groups, accustomed to a quasi-monopolistic environment, were shoring up
their competitive positions. US companies were looking at their networks to
overcome distributional problems in doing business in Mexico.
He believed US prices would fall because of competition but that would be
balanced by a 4 per cent rise of consumption in the US and 8 per cent in
Mexico. The US would gain jobs as US companies expanded to service the
Mexican market. Production costs would fall, making North American products
more competitive. If the pact failed in Congress, it would have short-term
consequences in the financial markets, delaying some investments.
A study by the Mexican office of Arthur D. Little management consultants
shows that if Nafta is agreed, US exports to Mexico will keep growing at
20-30 per cent a year for 1993-1996. Without a pact, exports would grow at
perhaps half the 22.3 per cent annual compounded rate of the last four
years.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920804

