FT922-3962

FT  09 JUN 92 / Serbia suffers under sanctions


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BELGRADE


THE impact of United Nations sanctions imposed a week ago on Serbia and its
tiny ally Montenegro will bite much sooner than expected, according to Serb
economists and western diplomats.
They say this is because the Serbian government did not build up adequate
reserves of raw materials and spare parts, even though it saw how the war in
neighbouring Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina had severely disrupted the
entire transportation system throughout the former Yugoslavia.
The sanctions have forced the government of Montenegro to introduce petrol
rationing which took effect from last Saturday. Serbia is expected to follow
suit by issuing ration coupons this week.
In Montenegro, private car owners are allowed 30 litres of petrol a month,
transport vehicles 400 litres and tractors and taxis 250. In both republics,
the price of petrol increased last week by between 80 and 100 per cent. A
litre of petrol now costs 750 dinars or one US dollar at the official rate.
Serbia's oil fields produce between 20 per cent and 25 per cent of the
country's total needs. The rest was imported from Romania, Greece, Iran, and
the former Soviet Union. A Serb economist yesterday said Serbia might not be
able to keep domestic production at present levels. 'We were in the process
of concluding contracts for importing exploration equipment to maintain that
production. The sanctions put paid to that,' he said.
Serbia has abundant hydroelectric supplies. However, the sanctions mean that
Serbia will not be able to import turbines from Croatia, one of its
traditional suppliers. 'We do not have extra turbines. The sanctions show
just how inter-dependent the Yugoslav republics were,' the economist said.
He added that petrol shortages will exacerbate food price rises, because
petrol rationing could reduce the volume of food supplies coming into
Belgrade, the Serbian capital. Belgrade newspapers yesterday reported that
the price of 7,200 goods were increased last week. In addition, the
agricultural sector depends on imported chemicals and oil derivatives. Mr
Andras Vince, a Hungarian economist in Belgrade, said Hungary supplied
Serbia with the bulk of its chemical needs. The steel industry is likely to
be hit hard by sanctions. Any steel shortages could soon affect the arms
industry, and the military effectiveness of the Serbians.
For instance, the steel works in Niksic, Montenegro, produces between
250,000 and 280,000 tons of steel a year, including high quality alloyed
steel, most of which goes directly to the defence industry. Mr Samo
Markovic, an official at the Yugoslav Iron and Steel Federation, said the
plant had stockpiled only about 20 days of finished products.
'The steel mills are not self-sufficient,' said Mr Markovic. 'Serbia and the
other republics had to import almost all their iron ore and coke from
eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union, and Latin America,' he explained.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920609

