FT923-9759

FT  04 AUG 92 / Government Bonds: European bond investors take heart from
French poll


   By RICHARD WATERS and TRACY CORRIGAN


FRENCH voters sent a strong, positive message to European bond investors
yesterday, helping to repair some of the damage done in all the major
European government markets last week. According to the latest official
poll, 57 per cent of voters intend to back the Maastricht proposals on
economic and monetary union at the referendum on September 20.
The French bond market itself was one of the strongest gainers. Bond prices
leapt by up to a point, pushing the yield on the 10-year benchmark OAT due
2002 down to 9.11 per cent, compared with 9.24 per cent at the end of last
week. This helped to narrow the gap between French and German bond yields,
although at around 95 basis points the differential reflects concern about
the September referendum.
IN THE Italian market, the news from France put further weight behind a
strong rally which had been under way since trading opened. After the gloom
of recent weeks, prompted by fears of a lira devaluation, the market was
cheered by the first concrete sign that the new Italian administration may
be able to achieve economic reform, rather than simply talk about it. This
was the deal, agreed with trade unions, to scrap the scala mobile, which
automatically inflation-proofs the wages of Italian workers.
The Italian bond futures contract on Liffe gained two points on the day.
Having ended last week at 91.58, the contract opened higher at 92.10 and,
with over 30,000 contracts traded during the day, settled at around 93.59 by
the close.
In a surprise move after the markets had closed, the Bank of Italy took the
opportunity to cut its discount rate - raised twice in recent weeks to
defend the lira - to 13.25 per cent from 13.75 per cent. It also cut the
Italian Lombard rate from 15.25 per cent to 14.75 per cent.
GERMAN government bonds also bounced sharply yesterday after last week's
losses, thanks both to the news from France and a technical rally in the
futures market. On Liffe, the bund futures contract, which had opened at
86.58, jumped to nearly 87.00 before settling at around 86.93 for the day.
However, an issue of 10-year bonds due tomorrow from the Bundespost is
likely to hold back any further gains. The German postal authority is
expected to raise between DM4bn and DM6bn, issuing bonds at par with a
coupon of 8 1/4 per cent.
IN THE UK, gilts ended half a point higher after a weak start, as traders
pushed prices higher on news of the French poll. With little domestic news
on the horizon, traders were pleased to find a reason to push the market
higher, after its recent weak performance. However, the rally did not appear
to spark substantial investor interest.
Comments by prime minister John Major over the weekend, which stressed his
commitment to maintaining the strength of the pound, did not influencethe
gilts market.
On the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange, the gilt
future contract closed at 97.06, up  5/8 point on Friday's close.
US Treasury prices were little changed across the maturity range yesterday
in the wake of a purchasing managers' report that reaffirmed the softness in
the economy.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  1/8 at 106
1/2 , to yield 7.445 per cent, having recovered from early weakness. The
two-year note was up  1/32 at 99 23/32 , yielding 4.382.
The market was looking for a direction in early trading but the report from
the National Association of Purchasing Management that its index improved
marginally to 54.2 in July (from 52.8 in June) provided little inspiration
for investors. The figure was in line with expectations, although analysts
noted the decline in the NAPM index's employment component suggested July's
employment report, out on Friday, could show continued weakness in the
labour market.
The only other feature of the morning was some selling of short and
intermediate-dated securities as players continued to make room for last
week's auctioned issues of two-year and five-year Treasuries.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920804

