FT923-15578

FT  01 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Euro-rebels angry at tax'betrayal'


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


A CLEAR indication that the UK is ready to go along with a European
Community plan to set a minimum 'floor' rate for Value Added Tax provoked
outrage among Euro-sceptic MPs on both sides of the Commons yesterday.
Critics claimed that Mr Norman Lamont's readiness to do a deal at a meeting
of EC finance ministers in Luxembourg on Monday represented the 'thin end of
the wedge' in handing over fiscal powers to Community decision-making.
In the Commons chamber, Mr Tony Marlow, Conservative MP for Northampton
North, and Mr Bob Cryer, the Labour MP for Bradford South, both called
points of order challenging the constitutional ramifications of the move.
Demanding a government statement, Mr Cryer described the concession as 'a
betrayal of the British people by handing over power to the European
Community on an unprecedented scale'.
Later, he added that Mr Lamont's position represented a fundamental shift
from that held by Mr Nigel Lawson, the penultimate chancellor, who had
always rejected EC interference on VAT rates.
Several Euro-sceptic Tory MPs backed the claim, arguing that precedent
showed the 'ratchet effect' of Community decision-making meant it would be
almost impossible to claw the power back without other substantial
concessions.
Such views were fiercely rejected by Downing Street and the Treasury. They
said that Mr Lamont had agreed such a move only on the ground that the
decision would be reviewed in four years' time by the EC Finance Council in
a decision that would require unanimous agreement.
Acceptance of a minimum 15 per cent VAT limit would have no impact on the UK
and did not require Britain to forgo its zero-VAT policy on items such as
food, children's clothes and transport.
Instead, it had been agreed as a means to persuade the UK's EC partners to
make concessions on whiskey taxation and was now withdrawn after a failure
to reach an accord.
However, there was some disagreement between the prime minister's office and
the Treasury over why the four-year limit had been imposed.
While Mr Lamont's office said the timetable was to prevent this parliament
tying the hands of its successor - disallowed by parliamentary convention -
Downing Street said it was linked to more pedantic requirements for a
planned VAT review.
A Whitehall official added that the principle of some EC control over VAT
had been established as long ago as 1977 and was a key element in the
efforts to create a single EC market.
Editorial Comment, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920701

