FT921-1473

FT  24 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Bulgaria far from solving
energy equation - Problems have worsened since the collapse of the Soviet
Union


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


BULGARIANS LOVE March 20. It heralds the beginning of spring, even if it was
snowing on that day this year. Spring also brings some hope to Bulgarians
that the energy shortages will end.
But their optimism is not shared by Mr Lulin Radulov, who as president of
Bulgaria's Committee of Energy has the task of co-ordinating the country's
energy needs. This involves buying energy from the Commonwealth of
Independent States and selling it to Bulgarian enterprises, which is more
easily said than done. The republics of the CIS have their own energy
problems.
Since the 1950s, Bulgaria has been heavily dependent on energy supplies from
the CIS. Until recently, 70 per cent of its energy requirements, including
electricity, and all its oil and gas, were imported from the CIS.
'In the past, we imported about 12m tonnes of oil each year from the former
Soviet Union, and about 3m tonnes of coal. We obtained about 500,000 tonnes
of coal over the past three months. I do not know if these supplies will
continue,' said Mr Radulov.
The CIS, which used to supply about 10 per cent of Bulgaria's total
electricity needs, is now providing less than 3 per cent.
'You cannot even talk about negotiating with the CIS. There is no central
authority with whom to negotiate,' said Mr Radulov.
As a result, Bulgaria's committee of energy, and Bulgarian enterprises, are
now trying to deal directly with the enterprises in republics of the CIS.
But neither have money.
'We can hardly pay for our energy imports. We are owed about 1bn lev
(USDollars 42m) from Bulgarian enterprises. The greater the energy cutbacks,
the greater the fall in industrial output, and revenue for our enterprises,'
he explained.
Because of the energy shortages, about 60 per cent of Bulgaria's heavy
industrial sector is operating at 50 per cent capacity.
Some enterprises have found a way of breaking this vicious circle by
resorting to barter with energy suppliers in the CIS. But Mr Radulov added
that there were still problems in transporting the energy to Bulgarian
enterprises.
'For instance, if enterprises deal directly with enterprises in the Ukraine,
the supplies have to pass through the former Soviet republic of Moldova,
which can demand high transit fees. It is very costly,' explained Mr
Radulov.
Bulgaria's own energy sector is in no position to compensate for the
shortfall in supplies from the CIS. Under the recommendation of the
Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, two of the five reactors at
Kozluduy, near the Romanian border, which were built in 1974 and 1975, were
shut down last autumn because of very poor safety standards. The two 440 Mw
units had supplied 10 per cent of Bulgaria's electricity.
'There is nothing wrong with the construction of these Soviet-designed
reactors. The problem is that under the communist system, the management was
very poor. Pressure to increase production levels took precedence over
safety standards. It was really awful,' explained Mr Radulov.
'Maybe the IAEA should have identified these problems at a much earlier
stage. Maybe the IAEA did not fulfil its (monitoring) obligations over the
years. But much of the blame must be placed on the communist-controlled
management at Kozluduy,' said Mr Radulov. The management was replaced last
year.
An international team of experts that has been working on the two reactors
for the past few months says the units fall below western safety standards.
It points out, for example, that the two reactors lack emergency cooling
systems. Unlike their Bulgarian counterparts, the experts are not convinced
that the reactors should start operating again in the autumn. 'It would cost
about Dollars 200m to bring these two old units fully up to western
standards,' one expert said.
A sixth unit, with a 1,000 Mw, is undergoing tests before going into
operation.
The shutdown of the two reactors, and the cut in energy supplies from the
CIS, has meant that the Bulgarian government has had to consider boosting
output from its own domestic hydro-electrical plants, increasing coal
production and finding new foreign suppliers. None of these options look
particularly promising.
For one thing, water in the hydro-electric plants' reservoirs has been
depleted because of consecutive years of drought. Second, three quarters of
Bulgaria's lignite coal production, which is earmarked for generating
electricity, contains a high moisture and ash content. This has led to an
increase in atmospheric pollution. The use of dry-burning and other
technical options could help reduce the pollution. But the technologies are
costly.
The third possibility, importing regular supplies of oil at world market
prices, is not yet feasible. Bulgaria is in the process of negotiating the
rescheduling of its Dollars 9.6bn debt with its western commercial bank
creditors. Until these talks have been concluded it cannot expect fresh
loans.
As an interim measure, the first tranche of a World Bank loan of Dollars
150m, which was released late last year, has been used to pay for imports of
petroleum products, including heavy fuel oil.
In the long term, Mr Radulov says a strategy for Bulgaria's future energy
requirements is urgently needed.
He dismisses suggestions that the economic reforms, which have already led
to the liberalisation of prices, including energy, will in the short term
make enterprises and domestic consumers more sparing in their use of use of
energy.
'We have to address two issues. First, we have to move away from a
heavy-industrial sector which uses a great deal of energy. Second, saving
energy must be linked to the efficient production and use of energy.
'Let me give you some examples,' he said.
'Apartments are badly insulated. Local residential districts, or apartment
blocks, are controlled by a centralised heating system. This means there are
no thermostats in the individual apartments. A room's temperature is
regulated by opening or closing the windows,' he explained.
But the energy loss began much earlier in the system than that, said Mr
Radulov. 'We waste about 30 per cent of electricity because of the
inefficient way we produce it. Another 10 per cent is wasted as it runs
through the grid system. Gas is wasted as well. The domestic supply is not
linked to a grid system. Consumers use gas cans,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920324

