FT921-1477

FT  24 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Lead and zinc produced at a
loss


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


MIM HOLDINGS of Australia is not making money from lead and zinc at present
prices of 22 cents a lb and 55 cents a lb respectively, according to Mr Norm
Fussell, the chief executive.
MIM accounts for 10 per cent of lead produced outside the former communist
bloc and 6 per cent of the zinc. It also produces 4 per cent of the copper
and Mr Fussell said these operations were profitable at present prices of
about Dollars 1 a lb.
During an interview in London where he was meeting institutional investors
he warned that the recession in metals markets would continue to be felt for
some time. MIM was not relying on a recovery in prices to solve its problems
 -'we must do that ourselves by cutting costs and improving productivity'.
Mr Fussell said there were very clear signs that metals demand was improving
in the US. In Europe, although demand for metals was as poor as at the end
of last year, there was more optimism in the markets. However, slowing
economic growth in Japan was becoming more accentuated. He suggested: 'There
is every chance of a recession there'.
What this would mean for metals demand was difficult to judge, however,
because so much of Japan's output was exported. The good, solidly-based
recovery in the US would help Japanese and European exports.
He said that a world-wide move to 'just in time' stocks meant that the
recovery process would be much more transparent than after the previous
recession in 1982. Then there were six months stocks of metals and it was a
long time after recovery started before the trend was widely recognised.
Mr Fussell recalled that a year ago MIM set itself a target of reducing
annual costs at its Mount Isa operations by ADollars 100m within two years.
'After one year we are now 70 per cent of the way there. We also have
targeted a 40 per cent improvement in productivity by 1995. After one year
we are half-way towards this longer range target. Since the Dollars 100m
cost reduction objective for Mount Isa was announced, productivity, as
measured by tonnes treated per man shift, has risen by 21 per cent.'
He said that MIM's diversification from mining into downstream operations
helped it to overcome the volatility of smelting and refining charges, which
fluctuated widely as economies swung from full capacity to recession and
back again.
He reported on some of the downstream activities in Europe in which MIM has
stakes. The Rheinzinc, zinc products, and Norddeutsche Affinerie, copper
smelter and refinery, were operating profitably. However, the Ruhr-Zink and
Duisburg refineries 'are suffering from depressed zinc and lead prices and
will turn round as economies recover'.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920324

