FT921-14158

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK Company News: QED first possible MBO from MCC


   By ANDREW JACK


QED TECHNOLOGY, a systems integrator and software supplier for the
publishing industry, could be among the first management buy-outs from
Maxwell Communication Corporation, it emerged yesterday.
Mr Charles Croker, QED's managing director, said he had been told by Price
Waterhouse, administrator to MCC, that non-core businesses like his 'could
be for sale'.
The news came the day after Mr Jonathan Phillips, one of the joint
administrators of MCC, told Norsk Data, the Norwegian mini-computer group,
that an offer from QED made last August to buy one of its loss-making
subsidiaries could not proceed.
However, Norsk Data confirmed that it was still willing to sell ND Comtec,
the subsidiary, to QED if the sale could take place before the end of
January. The offer depends on QED's ability to buy itself out from MCC
before then.
Mr Svein Sognen, executive vice-president at Norsk Data, said that a US, a
UK and a Norwegian company were also interested in buying the subsidiary.
ND Comtec, which also provides software to the publishing industry, was to
be sold to QED last November for an undisclosed sum. But Mr Croker said MCC
refused to approve the deal at the last minute.
It has also emerged that Berlitz International, MCC's language training and
travel publishing company, has been removed from the 'M&O' group of
companies controlled by Mr David Shaffer under the joint US/UK
administration procedures agreed on Wednesday. M&O is the vehicle under
these joint proceedings to handle Macmillan, Official Airline Guides and 15
other subsidiaries of MCC.
The announcement came after a hearing in the New York southern district
bankruptcy court that approved arrangements governing the control of MCC
jointly under UK administration and US Chapter 11 bankruptcy legislation.
Five US banks have claimed ownership of most of the 55.6 per cent stake in
Berlitz that is also claimed by Macmillan. Mr Shaffer said it would not be
appropriate for Berlitz to be within M&O while there was dispute over its
ownership.
Credit Suisse, Swiss Volksbank, Advest of New York, Morgan Stanley and
Shearson Lehman are believed to claim ownership of the Berlitz shares as
collateral for loans extended to companies within the Maxwell empire.
The previous order governing control of MCC had been ratified in the UK and
US courts for just two weeks and was subject to approval by the group's
creditors. Nimbus Records pension funds, UK and US, have not been part of
the MCC pensions funds since the company's acquisition by MCC in December
1987.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920117

