FT923-15408

FT  02 JUL 92 / French ready to approve Maastricht


   By IAN DAVIDSON


   PARIS


THE French referendum on whether to approve the Maastricht treaty, fixed
yesterday for September 20, is likely to secure a solid majority in favour,
according to the latest public opinion poll.
The poll, published in the Figaro newspaper, points towards a 60-40 majority
in favour of Maastricht, which is consistent with the trend of previous
opinion polls.
But the most encouraging feature of the survey, from the government's point
of view, is that only a small minority of voters intend to use the
referendum as a platform to express their opinions of President Francois
Mitterrand and the government.
The government's main fear has been that the referendum on Maastricht would
turn into a plebiscite against Mr Mitterrand, whose unpopularity still
stands at rock-bottom in the opinion polls.
The Figaro poll still leaves a large margin of doubt, since 23 per cent said
they would not vote, and 17 per cent gave no reply. Of the remainder, 37 per
cent said they would vote 'yes', and 23 per cent said they would vote 'no'.
But over two thirds of the sample (68 per cent) said that the electorate
should vote in terms of the construction of Europe, and only 21 per cent
that the referendum should be used as an opportunity for passing judgment on
Mr Mitterrand.
The official campaign for the referendum will last only two weeks, starting
on September 6. But knowing that the opponents of the treaty will be
campaigning against it throughout the summer, the government is launching a
heavy information campaign starting next week.
One million copies of the Maastricht treaty, together with an eight-page
explanatory leaflet, will be available in town halls throughout France, as
of next Monday.
At the same time, 300,000 copies of an explanatory brochure, entitled
'France at the Heart of Europe - Understanding Maastricht', will go on sale
in news kiosks at FFr10 (Pounds 1) apiece.
A second printing of 1m copies of the treaty, together with the accompanying
leaflet, will later be made available in departmental prefectures, as well
as in holiday resorts.
Finally, at the start of the official campaign, the government will
circulate a copy of the treaty to every single voter.
The French government plans to freeze defence spending in real terms during
the next three years, according to the medium-term defence programme it
approved yesterday.
The army will be cut from 280,000 troops now to 225,000 in 1997.
The cost of nuclear deterrence will be reduced from 30 per cent to 20 per
cent of the budget, partly by shelving the Hades short-range
surface-to-surface missile, partly by postponing modernisation of the
land-based intermediate missile force, and partly by reducing the patrol
levels of the submarine nuclear missile force.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920702

