FT921-11698

FT  30 JAN 92 / Hopes fade for BCCI sale in Hong Kong


   By SIMON HOLBERTON and RICHARD DONKIN


   HONG KONG, LONDON


HOPES that Bank of Credit and Commerce International's Hong Kong subsidiary
could be sold to a local bank lessened yesterday after it emerged that the
Abu Dhabi owners of BCCI had not yet provided a guar-antee promised last
Nov-ember.
Abu Dhabi had promised to guarantee the unrecorded liabilities of BCCI Hong
Kong (BCCHK) for an unlimited amount of money and for an unlimited time.
According to businessmen familiar with the negotiations, the Abu Dhabi
owners' position has changed over the past two months and to date the
guarantee has not materialised.
However last night Abu Dhabi claimed that the negotiations on the sale were
proceeding in an orderly manner.
In November the Indonesian-owned Lippo Group, through its subsidiary,
Hongkong Chinese Bank, undertook to create a new banking company, into which
the assets and recorded liabilities of BCCHK would be transferred.
Mr John Lee, managing director of Lippo Group, said yesterday: 'If the
unrecorded liabilities problem is solved, we are ready to take over the
bank.'
It is understood that the receiver has not discovered a 'bank within a bank'
in BCCHK, as have other investigators of BCCI's affairs around the world.
However, BCCHK is believed to have a 'considerable' exposure to other units
of the BCCI empire as well as being subject to numerous holding claims from
interested parties both within and outside Hong Kong.
Meanwhile, 100 angry BCCHK depositors held a rally yesterday outside the
offices of the government-appointed provisional liquidator, Mr Noel Gleeson,
demanding he make a determination on the bank's future by noon tomorrow.
Mr Gleeson said he would have news for depositors 'quite soon.'
It is highly unlikely, however, that by tomorrow he will be able to tell
them whether the bank is to be liquidated or placed under a sell-off
arrangement.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Illustration (Omitted).

920130

