FT921-1250

FT  25 MAR 92 / International Company News: Hoechst unable to find any
signal of recovery


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


   FRANKFURT


HOECHST, the German chemical giant, yesterday warned that there had been no
sign of an upturn during the first two months of 1992.
Group sales increased by 3 per cent during the first two months compared
with the same period last year, said Mr Wolfgang Hilger, chairman. However,
more than half of the increase was due to an improved dollar exchange rate,
while the rest was made up by pharmaceuticals, which continued to sell well.
Demand and production in Germany and Japan had declined, while the economic
recovery in the US was faltering, said Mr Hilger. During the second half of
the year, the company was hoping for a recovery led by the US. Any
improvement was likely to be weak and gradual. The German market would be
the last to recover, he said.
Demand for plastics and plastic film had so far been very weak. Mr Hilger
warned a good profit could not be earned when overall demand was at a low
level and prices were poor.
The situation called for determined action, he said. The company was
continuing its rationalisation programme, particularly in Germany, and
expected the number of job losses there to be at least equal to the 2,149
lost over the past 14 months.
A number of plants were also being closed, he said. Production of phosphorus
and detergent phosphates in Germany would cease.
Mr Hilger again attacked German environmental legislation that disadvantaged
German-based companies without producing any measurable environmental
benefit. He said the cost of further improvements was disproportionately
high and that the money could be better spent improving environmental
performance in eastern Germany.
During 1991 operating costs for the environment increased 10 per cent to
DM1.6bn (Dollars 960m) while capital expenditure increased DM18m to DM343m.
He also criticised the debate in Germany about genetic engineering, which he
described as absurd. He said pharmaceutical research in the future was
inconceivable without the technology. Hoechst could afford no more delays
and was transferring an anticoagulant project to France and a manufacturing
plant for Factor XIII, vital for haemophiliacs, to Japan.
Mr Hilger said Hoechst had stood the test of 1991, but not without wounds.
Pre-tax profits, already reported, fell 20 per cent to DM2.56bn while
turnover improved 5 per cent to DM47.2bn from DM44.8bn. Sales volume
increased by about 2 per cent while prices were only slightly above last
year's.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920325

