FT921-1213

FT  25 MAR 92 / Survey of North Wales (7): Old towns in search of a future -
The progress of urban regeneration across the area


   By RHYS DAVID


THE Deeside towns of Queensferry, Shotton and Connah's Quay on the Welsh
bank of the River Dee offer an illuminating cameo of 1980s industrial
Britain.
The economy of the area - population 35,000 - was shattered in the early
part of the decade when steelmaking at Shotton was shut down with the loss
of 8,000 jobs, still the biggest ever plant closure in Britain.
In the mid-1980s boom years, new jobs were quickly found. The 600 acre
Deeside Industrial Park, built on land adjoining the steelworks, now
provides employment for some 5,000-6,000 people.
Once on the short list for Nissan's plant which eventually went to
Sunderland, it has since won the Toyota engine works. Iceland Frozen Foods,
one of the very few Welsh companies in the FT UK Top 500, started there in
1979, and one of the biggest employers, Shotton Paper, has now spent Pounds
250m on its plant.
Yet, having fallen back from 19 per cent at the start to only 4.5 per cent
in the late 1980s, unemployment has since risen with recession, and is now
again around 10 per cent and climbing in the local travel to work area.
The area has many assets which will enable it to bounce back as before. It
has large quantities of high quality industrial land reclaimed from the Dee
estuary, it is close to the population centres of north west England, and
has excellent road, rail, air and port communications. In good times, it
acts as a release valve for pressure within the nearby Chester economy,
taking in businesses forced to leapfrog over the city's green belt.
Its town centres - Shotton, Connah's Quay, and, further inland, Buckley -
also have severe weaknesses, however, as places to live or shop, as well as
work, making it difficult for the area to capitalise on its natural
advantages. Shotton and Connah's Quay straggle and merge together along the
heavily congested A548, and present a depressing, poor quality urban
environment which has seen little modern good quality investment. With one
or two exceptions, multiple retailers have been reluctant to move in, and
service industries are seriously under-represented.
A similar problem exists at Buckley, a former brickmaking centre, where the
somewhat non-descript town centre is both congested and lacking in car
parking. Most of the income earned in the area is as a result spent outside
it, mainly in Chester.
Hopes that this situation can be changed rest with plans being set in motion
in conjunction with the Welsh Development Agency, which was invited last
year by the local council to advise the area on a comprehensive approach
which could revitalise both the economy and the environment.
The WDA's answer, which has been successfully tried out in parts of south
Wales, has been to borrow the joint venture approach from the private
sector. 'We are looking at a number of places in north Wales which share two
characteristics. They are all economically stressed but they all have strong
potential', Mr David Farnsworth, executive director, development projects,
at the WDA points out.
In the rest of the 1990s, Mr Farnsworth points out, a policy based, as in
the past, simply on seeking to attract new investment will not suffice. A
quality dimension has to be added so that the lifestyle as well as the
industrial benefits of relocating can be sold to potential investors. This
is what the WDA hopes can be achieved on Deeside and in other locations in
Wales, including, in the north, the towns of Rhyl and Holyhead, both of
which are also seen as having both potential and problems.
The joint venture approach, which was brought by Mr Farnsworth to the WDA
from property and leisure group, Ladbroke, where he previously worked,
involves analysing with the local authority and other advisers the action
needed to re-position the local economy so that it can take advantage of
opportunities. Once these have been decided, other bodies, such as prominent
local companies and professional firms, are invited to join, and an
agreement is drawn up.
Each party is expected to make a contribution whether in terms of resources,
land or expertise, and a professional team, usually headed for the first
year at least by a WDA officer, is set up to oversee the plans.
Essentially, whatever is decided upon has to make sense to the private
sector, as the aim of the exercise is to rekindle its interest in the
opportunities which will become available. When the objectives set for the
joint venture have been met, and the various parties have derived the
benefits they were seeking, it will be disbanded.
On Deeside, following a series of meetings with the local authorities,
outside partners are now being sought, and over a period of several years a
total of roughly Pounds 15m will be committed by the agency, which, it is
hoped, will attract an even greater response from the private sector.
Though concrete proposals remain to be worked out, the scheme will involve
efforts to concentrate and upgrade retail activities and to attract other
new commercial opportunities to the town centres, accompanied by a range of
environmental initiatives.
Road schemes due to take place during the next few years around both
Connah's Quay and Shotton, and near Buckley, will also play a major part,
taking traffic away from the town centres. Larger scale shopping facilities
are also planned, for the Alyn and Deeside district as a whole, inland at
Broughton, where a private developer is proposing a 296,000 sq. ft. retail
scheme, incorporating 41 shops, and parking for 2,400 vehicles.
Further along the coast in the seaside resort of Rhyl, the problems are
those affecting most traditional British holiday towns, though the council
made an early attempt to stave these off with the development of an
all-weather wave pool complex, the Suncentre. In recognition that more
needed to be done, however, a joint venture partnership was created last
year bringing together the WDA, the Wales Tourist Board, the local authority
and other interests. Its objective is to secure developments which will help
to move the resort upmarket and thereby increase its income from visitors.
So far, investment has been mainly by the public sector in pedestrianisation
and the provision of parking, and improved facilities for entertainment.
Private sector investment is following, however, in the form of a Pounds
2.5m. scheme by Sealife Centres on the main promenade, and several proposed
new retail developments, including a 50,000sq ft Sainsbury store, for which
a planning application has been submitted.
Hotel accommodation, too, has been upgraded. Over the next financial year
some Pounds 7m of public money will be spent in West Rhyl on environmental
improvement schemes, and on upgrading housing, tourist and other public
facilities.
It is probably in Holyhead, however, that the area's urban renewal problems
are at their most complex.
Stuck out on the northwesternmost tip of Wales, its raison d'etre is its
position as the nearest point in the centre of Britain to Ireland. The
decline in passenger numbers using the port as a result of cheaper airline
fares, competition from other ports for car and ro-ro traffic, British
Rail's withdrawal last year of its Railfreight operation, and the purchase
of Sealink by Stena Line have all contributed, however, to a prolonged
period of uncertainty in the town where unemployment currently stands at 18
per cent
The largest centre in Anglesey, but still with a population of only 15,000,
Holyhead has a poor urban environment with bleak housing, a small and
congested town centre, and undistinguished warehouses, bars and other port
buildings lining the harbour road.
Yet, Holyhead, too, has its saving grace. While it may be Britain's
backdoor, it is Ireland's front entrance, a fact of some significance as the
EC single market next year approaches.
It not only offers the shortest sea crossing to the Republic, but connects
directly with Dublin, in the region of which some 80 per cent of Ireland's
population lives. As a result the future of Holyhead, and the facilities it
can offer, are regarded as being of crucial importance by the Irish
authorities and the EC.
This new interest in the port has coincided, too, with a significant change
in transport technology. The market requirement is now for new much larger
ferries, such as are being introduced on cross channel routes to France.
Similar investment on the Irish Sea routes seems likely.
Thus, the various pieces in a new Holyhead jigsaw are starting to fall into
place, which another joint venture set up last year by the WDA, has helped
to arrange.
Though detailed plans have not yet been made public, one proposal would see
Sealink Stena creating new deep water berths to the east of its existing
harbour facilities, and linking its existing operational area by a new
causeway to Salt Island to the north. A cutting to the west would create a
new access channel to the present shallow draught harbour, originally built
in the middle of the last century for sailing vessels. This would then be
made available for leisure and pleasure craft use. Total cost of the scheme
is put at around Pounds 50-Pounds 55m, a substantial proportion of which the
company would expect to receive from Government or EC sources.
Independently, the Welsh Office is being pressed to bring forward the
promised upgrading of the A5 through Anglesey to dual carriageway standard.
Once completed this will connect with the already dualled A55, giving a high
standard road through to the UK motorway network, shortening hauliers'
travelling times to and from the port. British Rail is also being pressed to
electrify the line from to Chester.
Within the town the local authority, with Welsh Office and WDA help, is
working on improvements to the housing stock and to the environment,
including pedestrianisation of parts of the shopping centre. A new station
complex has already been provided.
Visitors staying on Anglesey and passing through to Ireland will also be
encouraged to spend more time in the Holyhead area. The former Marine Yard
complex which is no longer used for engineering is being considered as a
possible site for a museum focusing on Holyhead's and Anglesey's maritime
tradition.
Most excitingly, however, if the proposed re-siting of ferry services does
go ahead, traffic heading to and from Sealink Stena and B & I vessels could
be diverted away from the harbour road, and the town could develop down the
hillside towards a revitalised marina in the old harbour.
If all these plans come to fruition, Holyhead could in the not too distant
future be attracting visitors for its own sake and not just because of its
position astride the route from Britain to Ireland.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920325

