FT924-11370

FT  26 OCT 92 / Arts: Which Witch - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


   HERE it is


the musical from Hell. Which Witch has been sent as a punishment on all
those who scoffed too harshly on poor feeble little Bernadette two years
ago. Bernadette, a martyr to muddle-headedness, at least meant well; it was
merely Dr Jekyll. But Which Witch, brash and cynical, is Mr Hyde. Although
replete with witches' sabbat, exorcism, inquisition, torture scene and
burning at the stake, it manages to be excruciatingly dull.
The composers, the Norwegian Ingrid Bjornov and Benedicte Adrian, are the
chief perpetrators. They met in a sandbox at the age of two (no comment),
and have been hard at work on Which Witch since 1986. Albums have already
been released, concert performances have been given, and hype is busy.
In addition, Bjornov also conducts the music from the pit, and Adrian
performs the leading role.
But the music for Which Witch is not only bland, it is also ludicrously
inconsistent. It has a pop-baroque overture, a funky-rock executioner's
song, numerous operatic trimmings and pretensions (even a coloratura mad
scene), and whole fallow acres of sub-tuneful declamation that tread the
murky borderline between Les Mis. and Lloyd Webber.
It even has, to accompany a Renaissance wedding dance, a tango accompanied
by rock drumming.
Which Witch fails even to tell its narrative well. Maria Vittoria,
fosterdaughter to a noble Roman house in the era of Farneses and Gonzagas,
is in love with Daniel, a priest, and her love does not fail even when she
is rejected by her adoptive family or when, after eloping with Daniel and
then losing him again to God, she is arraigned as a witch.
Bjo/rnov and Adrian call it 'the powerful story of a woman who refuses to
conform - choosing instead to follow her heart and recognise that her
consuming love for a man for the Church cannot be denied.' But it is unclear
whether the big witches' scene that closes the first half is real or dreamt.
The overall pace is far too slow, the very ending much too sudden.
The words are by Kit Hesketh-Harvey (no Widow in attendance here). The line
in his programme bio which reminds us that he studied with Sondheim should
be suppressed: what did he learn? These lyrics are sheer doggerel,
alternating between cheap comedy (two girls we never see again chant
'Chastity's extremely dull, God, I want to be a bride') and plodding
exposition. Here's a typical couplet: 'We can-not af-ford to wait,' 'I'll
find you at the ci-ty gate.' And the music weights every syllable like a
tombstone.
Richard Hudson's designs and Mark Bailey's costumes are the show's only
commendable feature. As Maria Vittoria, Adrian looks pretty but sings -
painfully flat - in the worst kind of undernourished squeezed tones. Graham
Bickley, as Daniel, has a better voice, but not enough power. As his
scheming sister, Vivien Parry demonstrates severe problems with moving in
and out of her chest register. There are moments when you can giggle at
Which Witch, but not many. It is a just a very dreary melodrama.
Piccadilly Theatre (071) 867 1118

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921026

