FT922-706

FT  26 JUN 92 / Time-bomb grannies


   By JOE ROGALY


The government's policy on community care is potentially as damaging as it
is little-noticed. It could evolve into a juicy election issue for an alert
opposition. The fateful decisions were taken at a special meeting of
ministers on Tuesday.
The policy affects all except the very richest of infirm elderly voters,
and, potentially, all families with retired grandparents. When Mrs Margaret
Thatcher came to office in 1979 there were half a million people aged over
85 in Britain; when Mr John Major next faces the electorate in 1996 or 1997
there will be twice as many. What was decided this week was to remove the
power of choice from this great grey army.
Old folk who cannot afford to pay for care, and whose families will not
undertake it, will be delivered into the hands of officials. Trained
'caseworkers' will decide what is good for them and prescribe it. What?
Surely that is wrong. I am afraid not - although it is true that when you
consider the results of Tuesday's deliberations you have to shake your head.
Perhaps Labour won the election after all? Surely it could not be a
Conservative cabinet committee that deliberated on Tuesday? Not under the
chairmanship of Mr Citizen's Charter Major?
You need to step back to understand what happened. Local authorities stopped
expanding the provision of old people's homes before 1979, just as the
explosion of the elderly population began. Of necessity, a new system was
created. Pressure groups worked on the administrators.
What were called 'board and lodging allowances' were gradually extracted
from local social security officials, a practice formalised under Mrs
Thatcher in 1983. Anyone dependent on income support and in possession of
less than Pounds 3,000 (now Pounds 6,000) in capital could get much of the
cost of accommodation in a home paid for by the department of social
security. The middle classes quickly learned how to impoverish Granny, take
the government's money and top it up to meet the cost of placing her in
residential or nursing care.
The result was the growth of a new industry. Since 1980 the number of places
in private residential homes has more than quadrupled, to over 160,000,
according to Laing & Buisson, specialists in healthcare publishing.
Meanwhile, the number of local authority places has fallen by 14,500 to
120,000. Since 1987 the number of private nursing home places has risen from
52,000 to above 135,000. Meanwhile NHS long stay geriatric places have risen
by a mere 2,000, to 45,000. This new private sector business is just what
Tories are supposed to favour. There are a few big players, and a great many
mom-and-pop shops. You will have guessed the flaw: Laing & Buisson estimates
that about 40 per cent of the revenue is taxpayers' money.
It is the size of that subsidy that lies behind the move to community care.
It has grown from a mere Pounds 10m or so in 1980 to over Pounds 1.6bn now.
I am told that when Sir Roy Griffiths first advised Mrs Thatcher of the need
for a change he intimated that it would not save any cash. He saw his new
system as a means of improving care. Mrs Thatcher bought the idea because,
like the Treasury, she saw it as a means of capping costs. She delayed its
implementation because she did not want local authorities to have a hand in
administering the system, but gave in when it was demonstrated that all
other options were worse. For example, if the NHS took it on it would be
harder to decant geriatrics from very expensive hospitals to less expensive
homes or the relatively cheap 'community'.
Mr Major delayed implementation last year because he did not want poll tax
bills inflated. Some ministers - among them, it is said, Mr Kenneth Clarke,
Mr John Patten and Mr Michael Howard - voiced doubts on Tuesday but the now
familiar argument, that all other options are worse, won the day. The health
secretary, Mrs Virginia Bottomley, may have won agreement that the
transitional costs will be earmarked, so that the recipient local
authorities do not spend the money on other things, but her department will
not be sure until the minutes are circulated. If there is 'earmarking',
pressure groups will be able to see how much, or how little, is spent on
care for the very old.
The Treasury motivation is simple. It wants to hide what it is doing. There
is no soppy talk of 'open government' in that department. The present
system, which continues until the end of March 1993, is demand-driven.
'Community care' will be cash-limited. It will be phased in over about four
years, as those on existing grants die off. Local authorities will
administer it, but they will be capped. They will have an in-built incentive
to employ caseworkers who recommend the provision of 'home helps' and
meals-on-wheels at a far lower cost than paying for places in residential
homes. When they do select homes they will use their purchasing power to
drive prices down. It is a political time-bomb.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920626

