FT924-6406

FT  21 NOV 92 / Councils attack cut to Urban Programme


   By CHRIS TIGHE and PAUL CHEESERIGHT


THE DEPARTMENT of the Environment has angered local authorities with a
notice that it is not prepared to support financially any new schemes to
help economic, environmental and social projects through the Urban
Programme.
The Urban Programme, for which during the current financial year there is a
budget of Pounds 237m, has been used to help the poorest urban areas of 57
local authorities. But it is being scaled back by 66 per cent over the next
three financial years as the government makes economies in its own spending
and reorganises its urban spending.
A previously unpublished letter to the 57 local authorities from Mr Robin
Squire, the junior environment minister for local government and inner
cities, sent after the Autumn Statement, said that the government's new
Capital Partnership scheme would supersede the Urban Programme.
But, the letter said, 'we will continue to meet Urban Programme commitments
arising from approvals in this and previous financial years'.
Ms Jane Todd, manager of Nottingham's Urban Programme, said: 'The government
is getting us to jump through smaller and smaller hoops to get to a smaller
pot of money.' And such concerns will be raised when local-authority leaders
meet Mr Michael Howard, the environment secretary.
The leaders are Mr Jeremy Beecham, leader of the Newcastle City Council and
chairman of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities; Mr Bill
Dixon-Smith, chairman of the Association of County Councils; and Lady
Elizabeth Anson, who chairs the Association of District Councils.
Mr Beecham complained that Mr Squire's letter had been 'rather obfuscatory'
and that there had been no consultation about the Urban Programme cuts.
Mirroring comments from other councils, he was sceptical about the
government's commitment to inner-city regeneration.
He said: 'It's not evident on the resources being devoted to it. They've
gone for the cosmetic. The fundamental problems are getting worse.'
Next financial year the Urban Programme budget will be Pounds 176m, but the
government is holding back Pounds 20m of that as a specifically urban
element of Capital Partnership.
Under that scheme, local authorities may use recently accumulated capital
receipts as a base for urban schemes run jointly with the private sector.
They will have to bid competitively for portions of the Pounds 20m to
supplement their own spending.
Underlying the concern of council leaders is the fear that they will not be
able to replace the Urban Programme funding through the competitive process.
The switch in funding methods will mean that Newcastle will lose Pounds 2m a
year in Urban Programme funding.
Nottingham's Urban Programme budget will decline from Pounds 5m this year to
Pounds 3m next year, to Pounds 1m in 1994-95 and to zero the following year.
Coventry expects to lose a third next year of its present Pounds 4.65m Urban
Programme budget.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921121

