FT924-6098

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (7): International identity -
Strasbourg, capital of Alsace


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


STRASBOURG is the most western city in Mitteleuropa, according to its
forceful young mayor, Mrs Catherine Trautmann (see personality profile,
below).
Strasbourg, the capital of Alsace, looks and feels almost like a German
provincial town, with its steep tiled roofs and half-timbered houses. Yet
its identity is firmly international.
The city's traditional European credentials - as the venue for the plenary
sessions of the European Parliament and the base of the Council of Europe -
were recently re-inforced when its citizens produced a 72 per cent 'yes'
vote in the September referendum on European political and monetary union -
the biggest pro-Maastricht majority in France.
President Francois Mitterrand was no doubt grateful for this, but the result
was unsurprising, because many thousands of Strasbourg residents owe their
living to various forms of European co-operation.
The parliament, the fast-expanding council, the European Court of Human
Rights and the institutions associated with them have been joined over the
past year by the planning team for Europol - the Franco-EC police
co-operation unit - and Arte, the new Franco-German cultural television
channel.
It was partly a recognition of Strasbourg's diplomatic and intellectual
richness, as well as France's busiest conference centre outside the capital,
that the French government chose it as the new site for the elite civil
service college, the Ecole Nationale d'Administration. The college will move
there from its Paris headquarters next January.
The city is, however, far more than a think-tank on the Rhine. It also
happens to be France's second banking centre after Paris, harbouring the
headquarters of nine big regional banks, representing a balance sheet total
of FFr220bn.
This is a reflection of the town's long history of innovative banking,
founded on Franco-German trade and its skill in adapting the concept of
mutual banking from the German invader at the end of the last century.
Credit Mutuel, Alsace's largest bank, broke new ground again in the early
1970s by becoming the first French bank to offer insurance policies,
launching the idea of 'bancassurance' now widely followed by its national
competitors.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921123

