FT923-15687

FT  01 JUL 92 / BP quickens pace of debt reduction


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


BRITISH Petroleum said yesterday it would accelerate the cost-cutting and
debt-reduction programme it had in place before last week's surprise
resignation of Mr Robert Horton, chairman and chief executive, and hoped to
be cash positive by next year.
Mr Steve Ahearne, chief financial officer and a BP board member, was giving
the first presentation of corporate strategy since Mr Horton's departure,
though the meeting was arranged well before last week's boardroom coup. He
told analysts the company would accelerate its asset disposal programme, cut
capital spending and continue to improve productivity. He refused to comment
on dividend policy.
Speculation that BP may halve its dividend has seen its share price fall
from 243p to close at 203 1/2 p yesterday.
One analyst said yesterday's presentation was of a 'steady as she goes'
programme, which showed that while the style of management might alter, the
substance - with the likely exception of dividend policy - would remain
little changed.
Mr Ahearne said BP hoped by next year to begin reducing its Pounds 8.5bn
debt burden. This would be achieved by improving productivity, and
continuing cutting operating costs by Dollars 750m (Pounds 395m) a year by
1994, although competition might dilute that.
Capital expenditure would be reduced by 25 per cent to Dollars 5bn in both
1993 and 1994, from Dollars 6.5bn this year. New investments would have to
be profitable at a crude oil price of Dollars 18-Dollars 20 a barrel.
The third prong of the programme is an acceleration of asset divestment in
non-core businesses, with a target of between Dollars 1.5bn and Dollars 2bn
this year and in 1993. Most of the disposals are expected to be in the
marketing, chemicals and nutrition businesses.
Mr Ahearne said BP's second-quarter performance in exploration and
production had been good, although but profit margins in the refining
business were lower. The outlook for the chemicals business was likely to
remain difficult for the rest of the year, but there were some signs of a
pick-up in demand.
Analysts said the City would be reassured by what was seen as a prudent
programme, although the possibility of a dividend cut remained the most
pressing concern. Most managing directors in BP are now believed to support
a 'rebasing' of the dividend to a sustainable level.
Market, Page 46

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920701

