FT924-6007

FT  24 NOV 92 / Agenda sets out bottom line / Review of the policy document
issued yesterday by the Auditing Practices Board


   By ANDREW JACK


THE FIRST significant policy document from the newly established Auditing
Practices Board is certainly not muted in its recommendations.
The 21-page document on the future development of auditing was whittled down
from a 60-page original based on about 60 submissions.
Mr Bill Morrison, the board's chairman, said yesterday: 'I started with a
blank sheet of paper, and it was the hardest task I have undertaken in a
lifetime of auditing.'
The document sets out an agenda for the board over the next few years. What
chance the issues it raises have of materialising successfully is open to
question.
The board is funded by the professional accountancy bodies, as was its
predecessor, the Auditing Standards Committee. Its broader membership,
including non-accountants, gives it a more independent feel.
Its document begins with a comprehensive summary of perceived difficulties
with the state of auditing, most notably concerns about lack of
independence, poor quality and gaps in scope.
It ends with eight 'enduring principles' for auditing: integrity,
independence, competence, rigour, accountability, judgment, communication
and providing value.
There is also an overall mission for the audit profession: 'To give
confidence in the integrity of corporate reporting by public and
private-sector entities, for the benefit of stakeholders and society as a
whole, by providing an external and objective view on the reports given by
directors of companies' activities, performance, viability and prospects;
and to contribute to improving standards of corporate governance and
behaviour.'
There is not always a perfect link between the different sections. For
example, it touches on the potential threat to the independence of an
accountancy firm conducting consulting or other work for an audit client. It
does not, however, discuss the risks when the auditor might have to
criticise work conducted by professional colleagues.
There is not much offered on ways to achieve aims, although the board
emphasises that it is still 'floating' ideas.
More fundamentally, there is little attempt to quantify the extra costs of
extending the scope of the services auditors are being expected to provide.
Much of the material in the document sounds familiar. It endorses findings
of other recent inquiries - such as the call for audit committees in the
Cadbury committee on the financial aspects of corporate governance.
Mr John McFarlane, managing director of Citibank UK and chairman of the
board's working party, said the bulk of current auditing was good, but
criticised the accountancy profession for not responding to calls for reform
in the past.
His recommendations will be broadly welcomed. Above all, the call for legal
reform to divert some of the burden of responsibility away from auditors
will bring cheers from the accountancy firms.
That merely echoes proposals made in the Likierman report in 1988, which
still sit largely unimplemented on Whitehall desks.
Perhaps the most radical proposal is for greater emphasis on reasserting the
role of companies' shareholders, the auditors' true 'clients' in law.
Mr Donald Brydon of BZW Investment Management, another member of the working
party, said this was the first examination of the relationship between
shareholders and auditors.
As with legal reform, that throws the onus far beyond the remit of the
Auditing Practices Board and into an unpredictable environment that is far
more difficult to control.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921124

