FT923-15739

FT  01 JUL 92 / Thai PM faces deadline on economic reform


   By VICTOR MALLET


   BANGKOK


THAILAND'S parliament was dissolved yesterday ahead of a new general
election on September 13, leaving Mr Anand Panyarachun, the interim prime
minister, only 10 more weeks in which to consolidate his economic reform
programme and curb the influence of the military in politics and business.
Mr Anand, appointed after the killing of at least 50 pro-democracy
demonstrators by troops in May and the resignation of Gen Suchinda
Kraprayoon, his unelected predecessor, said his administration would
continue to function at full capacity.
'We get used to the term 'caretaker government',' he said. 'There is nothing
in the constitution which states that after the dissolution of parliament,
the government in charge is a caretaker government.'
Although his government cannot introduce new laws, his cabinet and the
monetary authorities have already shown themselves determined to build on
the economic liberalisation measures fostered by his previous administration
between February 1991 and the elections in March this year:
The Transport and Communications Ministry has ordered an investigation into
allegations of corruption at Thai Airways International, the national
airline whose shares are due to start trading on the stock market next
month.
The Bank of Thailand, the central bank, is this week studying plans to allow
foreign banks more scope to operate in Thailand and considering tax
incentives to encourage them to finance projects in Indochina from Bangkok.
Thailand's new Securities and Exchange Commission says it is establishing a
team of 100 investigators to examine dubious stock market deals, and is
already probing suspected irregularities by an unnamed, listed stockbroking
company believed to have lent money to one of its related companies to buy
its own shares.
A privatisation drive continues despite the bad blood over the flotation of
Thai International. Electricity Generating Co, a subsidiary of the
state-owned Electricity Generating Authority of Thailand, is to buy Egat's
Bt20bn Rayong power plant and be sold to the public next year in the first
stage of Egat's privatisation.
The cabinet this week approved the award of a contract for 1m telephone
lines in the provinces to a consortium led by Loxley of Thailand.
On the political front, Mr Anand is expected to seek the resignations of
senior military commanders blamed for the killings in May before he steps
down.
He urged Thai voters to elect decent representatives in the September poll.
The elections in March which brought Gen Suchinda, himself not an MP, to
power at the head of a coalition of pro-military parties were marred by
widespread vote-buying.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

