FT921-14349

FT  16 JAN 92 / Sale of port delayed for investigation


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


PRIVATISATION of the port of Tees & Hartlepool is to be delayed for about
two weeks while the government investigates allegations that the process has
been conducted unfairly, the Department of Transport said yesterday.
In a Commons debate on Tuesday night, Ms Joan Walley, a Labour transport
spokeswoman, said there were 'serious allegations of fraud, bribery and
corruption'.
Mr Patrick McLoughlin, shipping minister, told MPs no decision would be
taken until the allegations had been studied. Ministers had indicated that
the sale to the Teesside Holdings consortium for Pounds 180m would be
approved by the end of this week.
A furore over the conduct of the sale has forced a postponement while
Department of Transport officials investigate allegations by the losing
bidders and MPs.
The sale of the port was entrusted to the non-executive members of the Tees
& Hartlepool Port Authority. They chose the winning bid in preference to
three others: a higher bid of Pounds 210m from Maritime Transport Services,
a strongly tipped bid of Pounds 150m from a management-employee buy-out team
and a bid of Pounds 155m from Ocean Group, the freight management company.
Allegations about the contest include the following:
Teesside Holdings promised to include a port authority representative on its
board if it won the bidding, thus confronting the adjudicators with a
conflict of interest.
Teesside Holdings was given the opportunity to change its name, bring in
other investors and increase its bid twice during the contest, so giving it
an unfair edge.
Two of Teesside Holdings' directors had previously been directors of port
service companies that were put into liquidation in 1989, landing the
taxpayer with their obligation to meet redundancy payments of Pounds 6.6m
under the Dock Labour Scheme.
Mr John Hackney, leader of the buy-out team, said he was pleased the review
was taking place, 'certainly more pleased than I thought I was going to be
on this day two weeks ago.'
He still intended to seek a judicial review of the decision if it went
against the buy-out.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920116

