FT921-15298

FT  10 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Nymex pulls out of relocation
project


   By BARBARA DURR


   CHICAGO


THE NEW York Mercantile Exchange, the world's largest energy futures market,
has decided to withdraw from a Dollars 450m relocation project with four
other New York-based commodity exchanges.
Late on Wednesday, Nymex's board voted unanimously to pull out of the move
to a new building in New York City.
Its officials cited economic conditions, escalating costs and lack of
progress in consolidating operations with its relocation partners.
The four other exchanges involved in the project - the Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa
Exchange, the Commodity Exchange (Comex), the world's largest precious
metals market, the New York Cotton Exchange, and the New York Futures
Exchange - pledged that they would continue with the project.
They said that Nymex's claims about problems with the project were
'unjustified'. In a joint statement, the four exchanges said the plan was
ahead of schedule and that the complaints of a lack of progress on
consolidation were unfounded given an agreement to form a joint clearing
body and work under way to implement it.
Nymex also expressed concern about the cost of leasing space for member
firms. But the other exchanges said that the planned new facility, which was
to alleviate overcrowding at their current site, would accommodate the
requirements of member firms and that this would have no impact on the cost
of the new building.
Nymex's decision appeared to signal that it wished to establish itself in a
separate location apart from the other exchanges. Mr Patrick Thompson, Nymex
president, said that the exchange would develop a new relocation plan in New
York City if feasible. Nymex had preferred a New Jersey site.
The New York Cotton Exchange has announced that it will introduce a new
futures contract for world cotton in the next few months. The contract will
be cash-settled and based on the European world index, or index 'A', which
includes 12 growths and is derived daily by averaging the five cheapest. The
contract must be approved by Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the US
futures industry regulator.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920110

