FT921-468

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: An effort to make some capital in vital
marginals - The Conservatives are on shaky ground in south London


   By DAVID OWEN


MR John Smith, a cleaning inspector with Merton council, has always voted
Conservative. But not this time. 'There's every danger of me losing my job
next year,' he says, explaining the Labour poster above the wistaria in his
front-room window.
If enough recession-hit Tory voters break the habit of a decade and follow
Mr Smith's example, Mitcham and Morden (Conservative majority 6,183) will
fall. Such a result would not be without irony: it was on the back of the
last recession that Mrs Angela Rumbold, home office minister, won the seat
in 1982, in the Conservatives' only by-election gain during 13 years in
office.
Mrs Rumbold is one of three ministers in marginal south London seats facing
stiff challenges from Labour. A 6.5 per cent capital-wide swing to Labour
could account for her, Mr Colin Moynihan, a junior energy minister, in
Lewisham East, and Mr John Maples, the number five in the Treasury, in
Lewisham West.
Although Mitcham and Morden has more of the air of suburbia than the partly
inner-city Lewisham seats, what will largely determine the outcome in each
contest is who most strongly appeals to the C2s, the skilled working class.
Many of these people have been hit hard by the recession, by unemployment -
which has risen sharply over the last year in all three seats - or by
tumbling property values, coupled with unmanageable monthly mortgage
repayments. It is hardly surprising that Mrs Rumbold is 'extremely anxious
to see a stable lowering of interest rates'.
The three campaigns will accordingly be linked by several common threads.
Labour's strong suits will include the state of the south-east economy and
the decrepitude of much public transport - the constituencies are home to
thousands of commuters.
The people's party will also seek to play the health card by highlighting
voters' concerns about the centralisation of hospital facilities. It will
hammer away, too, at its popular proposals for a strategic London
government, which the Tories are portraying as tantamount to reviving the
Greater London Council.
Constant Conservative themes will be charges of inefficiency in the
Labour-run Merton and Lewisham councils and the perniciousness of opposition
tax proposals as set out in the shadow Budget.
As a sub-text, the Tory campaigns are all likely to impress upon voters that
having a minister as your MP has its privileges. 'We are trying to get
across to people that it helps to have a voice in the lobby,' says a
Moynihan aide. The proof, both Lewisham MPs will argue, lies in the
re-routing away from their constituencies of the planned Channel tunnel rail
link.
The three contests throw up intriguing contrasts of style.
In Mitcham and Morden, Labour's Ms Siobhain McDonagh is as cheerfully
personable as Mrs Rumbold can sometimes appear forbidding. She is steeped in
the local politics of the neighbourhood, but cannot match Mrs Rumbold for
gravitas or authority.
A housing consultant, she is well placed to attack the government's record
on this potent local issue. The value of homes in Merton is estimated to
have fallen 11 per cent in the last three years.
In Lewisham West, the urbane and telegenic Mr Maples faces Labour's Mr Jim
Dowd, who has been a local councillor for 20 years, exudes local knowledge
and is clearly a practical politician down to his fingertips. 'We are the
only London borough with wheeled dustbins,' is a typical claim. He contends
that the Channel tunnel link fiasco has put back on the agenda Lewisham's
lack of Tube stations.
In a contest that may turn personal, Mr Dowd will attack his opponent's
north-of-the-river residency: 'The way he tells it, you would think it was
the transarctic expedition to get here.'
In Lewisham West, the energetic Mr Moynihan's campaign is picking up after a
slow start. Confronted by Ms Bridget Prentice, a wry Scot whose husband is
contesting Pendle for Labour, his strategists say he will similarly question
his opponent's commitment to Lewisham.
In 1987, Ms Prentice ran in Croydon Central against Mr John Moore, one of Mr
John Major's predecessors as Mrs Margaret Thatcher's heir-apparent.
Having won more than 20 per cent of the vote five years ago, the Liberal
Democrats may be more of a factor here. The party held on to a seat in a
council by-election last week in spite of what Mr Julian Hawkins, the
party's candidate, describes as a real improvement in the other parties'
campaigning.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920328

