FT924-8328

FT  11 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Industrial sugar users seek end
of EC quotas


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


RADICAL REFORM of the 23-year-old European Community sugar regime, including
the abolition of the national quota system, is being demanded by Europe's
industrial sugar users.
The Committee of Industrial Users of Sugar yesterday launched a campaign for
change of the regime, which it said costs the EC taxpayer and consumer
Ecu6bn (Pounds 4.85bn)a year. The present regime is due to end next summer
after being rolled over for two years last in 1991.
Members of the CIUS, which represents the sugar buying interests of Europe's
food and beverage industries, account for more than half the EC's sugar
consumption. Its call for reform comes a year almost to the day after a
savage attack on the regime by the EC Court of Auditors. In a report last
November the court said the regime had failed to establish a common market;
had generated the highest degree of overproduction of any community farm
policy; had inhibited the rational organisation of output according to
comparative advantage within Europe; and had depressed world sugar prices
while passing on excessive charges to EC consumers.
The CIUS is calling for the abolition of both national quotas and the
guaranteed price for sugar beet. A guaranteed price of white sugar should be
retained, it argues, but should be progressively reduced until supply
equates to community consumption.
At present the combination of quotas, high prices and imports each year
provides the EC with about 40 per cent more sugar than it needs.
However, if a balance between supply and demand were to be achieved,
efficient EC producers 'may well be able to demonstate their efficiency in
world terms by selling on those markets without need of subsidies,' the CIUS
believes.
Mr Tom Harrison, president of the CIUS, said that failure to implement
radical reform would demonstrate the European Commission's inability 'to
provide the framework for a competitive, efficient market required to meet
the needs of the consumers.' Such a framework could not be achieved simply
by rolling over the current arrangements again, he warned.
EC prices were 35 per cent above what they should be because of a system
designed 'to encourage and ossify inefficiency'.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921111

