FT921-15199

FT  11 JAN 92 / Books: Made rich by a little nymphet - From Nabokov to
Tolkien, the FT critics review the most interesting of the recently
published volumes of biography and memoir / The ironies of Nabokov's life


   By DAVID PRYCE-JONES


VLADIMIR NABOKOV, THE AMERICAN YEARS by Brian Boyd Chatto & Windus Pounds
25, 832 pages
FREELY Brian Boyd throws words like genius and perfect at Nabokov. 'In sheer
beauty of form,' he writes for example, 'Pale Fire may well be the most
perfect novel ever written.' He equates him with Kafka and Joyce among the
greatest writers of the century. That is how we Nabokovians speak. You have
been warned.
This second volume of a tower-block biography begins with our hero, his wife
Vera and son Dmitri, sailing in May 1940 from France to America, a step
ahead of the invading Germans. The first such escape had been from Bolshevik
Russia in 1919. Vera was Jewish, and the second escape was another narrow
squeak.
From now on, Nabokov's art was broken-backed. His early books had been in
Russian, which he used to describe as if it were some thoroughbred animal,
docile to his touch. Now it could no longer race away with his imagination.
He had a living to make, and in dollars. Nabokov dropped into English in the
manner of an exotic bird which had never before migrated to these shores.
Erudite and lexicographical as his mastery became, it never acquired the
free flow of someone whose maternal tongue is English. That is part of the
attraction. He honoured and expanded the language, at a time when native
writers were mostly abusing and shrinking it.
Wellesley, then a woman's college, and afterwards Cornell, gave him a job
teaching world literature - and this was someone who waved aside Henry James
as 'a pale porpoise' and thought Dostoevsky a writer of cheap thrillers.
America and Americans come out of this book extremely well for the
generosity and open-mindedness with which they received this unusual man.
The New Yorker became his first literary platform, thanks largely to the
appreciation of Katherine White, an editor there. Speak, Memory, his
marvellous memoir of a Russian childhood, was published there chapter by
chapter. Bemused by the material, the editors comically interfered with his
prose.
His one influential contact was Edmund Wilson, a Janus-headed friend. It is
a surprise to learn how little he actually did for Nabokov. When finally he
attacked Nabokov's translation of Eugene Onegin in what was the cause
celebre of its day, the motive was envy, or so Boyd finds.
Boyd is the first writer to have unrestricted access to Nabokov's papers,
and he received help from Vera and Dmitri. From him can be learnt the names
of the class rooms in which Nabokov taught, the hours involved; also the
type of tins in which he killed the butterfly specimens which he chased with
such passion in spare moments; and which motels and lodgings he stayed in,
and when.
The Nabokovs were indifferent to material possessions and never owned a
home, but they were closely attached to memory. Nothing, no image, no idea,
no fortuitous connection, seems to have been lost or to have been too
fugitive for Boyd. Trivial details rise in towering layers of prose. Think
of the diligence. To the back of the class, Michael Holroyd]
Perhaps a third of 783 pages are devoted to such intimate analysis of the
novels that they have to be read simultaneously. C'est magnifique, of
course, but it is what the universities clamour for. Perhaps an
up-and-coming don like Boyd could not winkle out some other way to do it,
but the reader is certainly put to the test of true love for the subject.
Nabokov, be it recalled, wrote a mere 150 pages on Gogol, in what is the
most original and illuminating biography ever written.
Then there was Lolita. The novel was a long time in the writing, and Boyd
gives his usual full account of it. What with denunciations of immorality
and Maurice Girodias selling it as a dirty book in Paris, the explosion was
bound to be high altitude. In the event, publishers and politicians behaved
quite courageously in seeing the novel through. Unwittingly, the old
fashioned and aristocratic Nabokov may well have done more than anyone else
to usher in democratic standards of anything goes, which he actually
despised. Boyd makes the good point that he became dated in his own life
time, overtaken by feminists and Third Worlders, or what he called 'boring
ethnopsychics.'
The little nymphet made a world celebrity and a rich man out of him.
Unmelted if ever an immigrant had been, he jumped straight out of the
American melting pot back to unregenerate old Europe. In the Palace Hotel at
Montreux, he settled down to be playfully Garbo-esque, with a sub-stratum of
melancholy, I suppose. No less fascinating a character was Vera, by
temperament a Great Man's Wife, which is a very special category all to
itself. Boyd's minute researches have not broken their privacy. One is left
to admire courtesy, and imagination and curiosity about life. What ought to
have been another 20th century disaster about immigration and persecution
turned into a fairy story.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920111

