FT922-13392

FT  11 APR 92 / Entertainment: Bumper bundle for the new minister - The UK
arts scene / Off the Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


SO THE people have decided.
They want a bumper Ministry of Culture, encompassing the arts, heritage,
broadcasting, sport and tourism. One of the lesser ironies of the election
campaign was that the Conservatives were offering the radical reform of the
arts industry, with a seat in the cabinet for the new supremo.
Of course this totally reverses the Tories' recent practice in office, when
the arts minister has been a politician whose career has peaked, and who is
seeking a soothing run down towards retirement.
But if the Conservative manifesto commitment is taken seriously, what does
it mean for the arts?
Well, at a stroke, running the extended arts brief becomes an important job,
attractive to a politician on the up. If he is sensible, David Mellor - who
had an enjoyably revolutionary few weeks in the job in 1990 - would return
to the department, where he could make his name reorganising broadcasting,
introducing the lottery, planning the Millennium celebrations, and generally
becoming as popular (and as reviled) as Jack Lang, the celebrated French
cultural minister.
Another name in the frame is John Patten. But the arts would also provide a
comfortably soft post for the token woman in John Major's new cabinet -
perhaps Virginia Bottomley who, after all, is known in her constituency as
Mary Poppins.
It seems likely that the current arts minister, Tim Renton, will give up the
job. He seemed to sense as much before the election, when he stirred things
dramatically by tearing up the enshrined arms-length principle, and
suggesting that the Arts Council's control over funding for the big national
companies like the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden, and the Royal
National Theatre, should be taken over by the minister.
The Conservative victory will worry the Arts Council, which has slimmed down
greatly in the past year as it hands over funding responsibilities to the
regional arts boards. The Arts Council sees its role as the advocate for the
arts and the paymaster of regional touring and the big national companies.
But the Conservatives have pledged a review - and it could be reviewed out
of existence.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920411

