FT922-13457

FT  11 APR 92 / De Klerk visit to Nigeria wins rapturous reception


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   ABUJA, NIGERIA


MR F W de Klerk, the South African president, yesterday declared a historic
breakthrough in relations with Pretoria's former enemy, Nigeria, as he ended
a two-day state visit marked by surprising cordiality and high emotion.
General Ibrahim Babangida, the Nigerian president, showered Mr de Klerk with
extravagant praise during his visit, the first by a white South African
leader to Nigeria. At a state banquet on Thursday night, he declared that Mr
de Klerk deserved a place among the most famous black South African
anti-apartheid fighters: Mr Nelson Mandela, president of the African
National Congress (ANC), Mr Steve Biko, the black consciousness leader who
died in police custody under a previous white government, and Archbishop
Desmond Tutu, the anti-apartheid cleric.
These were extraordinary words from a Nigerian given the open hostility
which has characterised Nigeria's relations with South Africa for decades.
But Gen Babangida went beyond mere rhetoric to physical embrace: he grasped
Mr de Klerk's hand and the two men stood swaying to the strains of Nigerian
music, a remarkable demonstration of their new-found reconciliation.
Nigerian officials say President Babangida wants to establish diplomatic
relations with Pretoria and to sponsor South Africa's entry into the
Organisation of African Unity, of which he is currently chairman. This would
be possible only after a multi-racial interim government is established in
South Africa, likely within months.
Reconciliation with South Africa is likely to prove the largest foreign
affairs achievement of President Babangida's career. He is due to hand over
to a civilian government at the year end.
Both President Babangida and Mr de Klerk repeatedly stressed their joint
vision of a brave new future for Africa built around a Lagos-Pretoria axis
which they hope will give the continent new clout in international
relations.
There were frequent protestations of African brotherhood from both sides,
with each eyeing the economic benefits of closer co-operation. President
Babangida said: 'We are delighted that we have at last found someone in
South Africa with whom we can do business.' Indeed, the real prize of the
trip will be normalised commercial relations between Africa's two regional
superpowers.
The leaders of South Africa's three largest business organisations
accompanied Mr de Klerk to Nigeria, where they met Nigerian business leaders
to discuss renewing trade ties.
They said clandestine trade with Nigeria had carried on throughout the
sanctions period but could be much increased, perhaps to more than R200m
(Pounds 40.2m) a year.
Nigerian crude oil is not suitable for South African refineries, but
Nigerian manufacturers are keen to import South African steel and industrial
chemicals.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920411

