FT922-4244

FT  06 JUN 92 / The peace that bypasses all understanding: Twenty-five years
after Israel seized Arab Jerusalem in the Six-Day War, Hugh Carnegy walks
through the Holy City and finds that old hatreds die hard


   By HUGH CARNEGY


'Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love thee. Peace
be within thy walls, And prosperity within thy palaces.'
 - Psalm 122
JUST down the hill from my house in Jerusalem, past the Greek Orthodox tomb
of St Simeon, stands a low stone villa set in a shady garden. It is one of
few in San Simon, as the locals call the area, that have not been knocked
down and replaced by a big block of flats. The Jewish family which lives in
it fills the clay flower pots on the steps brimful with scarlet geraniums.
A mile or so away, in the Old City, I know a woman who says the house is
hers although she has not lived in it for 44 years. Mrs Joanna Ninos  - then
Joanna Zaphiriadis - fled with her father and mother during the battle of
San Simon in 1948, one of the bloodiest in the struggle between a nascent
Israel and Arab forces for control of the Holy City. The Zaphiriadis family
was among many from the 'Greek colony' cut off from their homes after the
1949 truce that left Jerusalem divided by the Green Line, the tangle of
barbed wire and concrete which split the city into Israeli and Arab halves
until 1967. By then, when the Green Line was felled by a triumphant Israel
in the Six Day War, their houses were occupied by Israelis. Attempts to
recover them, or gain compensation, have come to nothing.
The melancholy little villa was a poignant place to start my walk through
the city, reflecting on the changes wrought by the 25 years which have
passed since the most recent of the many conquests in its long history. It
was on June 7 1967 that Israeli paratroopers swept down from the Mount of
Olives, burst into the Old City and completed the capture of all Jerusalem
from the Jordanians, who were foolish enough to provoke the assault by
shelling across the Green Line two days before. But that elusive 'peace of
Jerusalem' did not follow - something brought home by a sign in fluorescent
paint pointing to a neighbourhood miklat, or air-raid shelter, close to the
little villa.
In Jerusalem, the festering enmities of the Arab-Israeli conflict come
together in a cocktail of territorial, religious and historical rivalries.
No political settlement in the Middle East will be complete without some
settlement in the Holy City; and without that, the world will not be free of
the threat of a conflict exploding into war, as it did in 1967.
Cynics might say the Israeli conquest was just one more in a line going back
many centuries. But, looking south from San Simon to the rocky ridge that
divides Jerusalem from Bethlehem, you can see dramatic evidence of one
difference that marks out the Israelis from previous conquerors. They did
not destroy, they built. Where once there were olive groves, ranks of
apartment blocks march down the hillside. They mark Gilo, one of the
fortress-like suburbs the Israelis have built on captured land.
But I am walking in the other direction, towards the walled Old City, the
heart of Jerusalem, where I am going to visit Dr Nick Ninos, son of Joanna.
My way takes me down Emek Rafaim, a busy street that is the hub of a once
predominantly Arab area now inhabited mainly by secular Israelis. The
elegant Arab houses that make this neighbourhood so attractive have few, if
any, Arabs living in them.
There is one Arab shop on the street, the Diplomat butchery with its
prominent 'non-kosher' sign, where elderly Ashkenazi (or European) Jewish
women drop in to buy a little forbidden schinken (ham). Further along, a
bedouin woman sits cross-legged on the pavement selling fresh vine leaves
and mint. But even an area with a liberal reputation such as this does not
break through the new, invisible green line that the Palestinian intifada,
the four-year-old uprising against Israeli rule, has once again built
through the city.
From Emek Rafaim, it is a short step past the railway station to the brow of
the Hinnom valley. Here, perhaps, Jerusalem is at its most beguiling. Across
the deep valley, along which the old Green Line used to run, sits the Old
City, its walls stretched out atop banks of dark green rosemary. On the near
side, gardens of roses and honeysuckle have been laid out around Yemin
Moshe, a picturesque jumble of stone houses founded as the first Jewish
settlement outside the city walls by Sir Moses Montefiore, the 19th century
British philanthropist.
In these parks, it is easy to believe in Jerusalem as an extraordinary
mosaic, not just of the Jewish, Christian and Moslem faiths but of cultures,
too. Where else can Hebrew, Arabic, English, Armenian, Greek, French,
Russian, Amharic and other languages be heard commonly? 'Shalom,' says an
elderly man as I pass. 'Hello, mister, how are you?' shouts an impish Arab
boy. Arabs and Jews both stroll in the Hinnom gardens. But not together.
And, across the wadi, reality is waiting.
Inside the Old City, belted since the 16th century by sturdy walls build by
Suleiman the Magnificent, the Ottoman sultan, the atmosphere is transformed.
Tourists jostle in the alleyways leading from the Jaffa Gate. Cheerful Arab
merchants hawk Palestinian and Jewish souvenirs. 'Of course - it's
business,' laughs one as he sells me a kippa, a Jewish skullcap which I must
wear to visit a rabbi later. Very few of his customers are Israeli, however.
Apart from the Jewish quarter, the Old City is predominantly an Arab town
into which few Israelis venture for fear of an intifada knife in the back.
Those that do are the well-armed men of the Border Police, a paramilitary
force deployed heavily in the Old City and feared by many Palestinians for
its brutality, So, also, do the bands of Jewish religious zealots in the Old
City who recently have stepped up their provocative drive to move into the
Arab areas, upsetting the fragile status quo. No Arab is allowed to do the
reverse in Jewish districts. These settlers, as they are called, scurry
through the crowded Arab markets clutching their guns and the crackling
walkie-talkies they use to summon aid if they are attacked.
I turn into the Christian quarter, focus for the 30-odd Christian sects
represented in Jerusalem but dominated by the Greek Orthodox, Greek Catholic
and Latin Catholic churches which have the biggest local Arab congregations.
Within earshot of the sonorous bells of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre,
hunched over Calvary and the tomb of Jesus, I climb the steps up to Nick
Ninos's surgery in a characteristic Old City building of cool stone and high
ceilings.
His family came to Jerusalem a century ago. His late father, a dentist like
himself, remembered watching General Allenby entering the Jaffa Gate when
the British ousted the Turks in 1917. He and Vivica, his Greek-Palestinian
psychiatrist wife, live with their three young children in a small house
tucked in behind one of the Old City's narrow streets. It looks rather
idyllic; but the tensions of living here, and the lack of prospects, make
them contemplate leaving as thousands of Jerusalem's dwindling Christian
community have already left - Nick's two brothers among them.
'We are the only Greeks left with children the age of ours,' says Nick. 'We
are among the romantic Greeks here. There is something that keeps us here. I
am very traditional. I had my children baptised in the Jordan river - even
in December. I feel this is my home. But maybe we are too romantic. My kids
speak Greek but there are no other children for them to talk to in Greek.
Maybe we will have to go.'
No doubt Teddy Kollek, the mayor of Jerusalem since the 1967 war, would
encourage them to remain. His office, in the still bullet-pocked
municipality building, lies just outside the Old City, a short walk from
Ninos's clinic. Aged 81, Kollek is an abiding symbol of liberal Zionism who
insists that Jew and non-Jew can live together in Jerusalem. The city's
surviving physical beauty owes much to his efforts.
He admits, though, that he fears he is 'swimming against the stream.' His
vision of Arabs and Jews living in respectful harmony is hard to sustain in
the face of the intifada and the gun-slinging settlers. 'Our task is not to
try by some Messaianic urge to drive out Christians and Moslems,' Kollek
says angrily about the settlers.
It could be that demographics also are against Kollek. Under the Israelis,
the population of Jerusalem has doubled from 268,000 in 1967 to 545,000 now
 -72 per cent of it Jewish, perpetuating a Jewish plurality that has held
since late Ottoman times. That pleases the mayor, who wants to consolidate
Israel's claim to sovereignty over all the city. But Arab growth rates are
faster, and the gap is closing.
In addition, there is a tendency among secular, professional Jews to leave
the city where the Jewish population is becoming increasingly religious.
Haredim 'ultra-orthodox' Jews constitute a quarter of the Jewish population
and are the fastest-growing sector. They are an intriguing, integral part of
Jerusalem in their black hats and long black frock coats, bustling in and
out of their Yeshiva religious colleges.
These trends do not, however, appear to bode well for the 'peace of
Jerusalem.' Political divisions have not been blunted and could sharpen
further as the growing Arab population, which has refused stubbornly to take
Israeli citizenship, becomes more overwhelmingly Moslem and the Jewish
population more strongly religious.
Down the street from Kollek's office, I catch a bus for Jebal Mukaber, an
Arab village on the southern fringe of Jerusalem with a spectacular view of
the Old City and the Mount of Olives. An Arab friend, Amer Abu Solb,
introduces me to his father, a man of 90 who recalls the days when, he says
with some venom, the Turks treated the Arabs like animals.
Abu Amer is a devout Moslem who still goes often to pray at the Al-Aqsa
mosque, the third-holiest shrine in all Islam, in the Israeli-held Haram
al-Sharif. He gives Kollek some credit for his efforts to be fair to Arabs.
But age and experience have not tempered his belief that the Jews have
'taken my country.' He is especially bitter about the tough security the
Israeli authorities impose on the Haram. He does not believe Arabs and Jews
can live in peace. 'No. Because the Jews have different ways and believe in
different things.'
One of the most striking sights in Jerusalem is the dramatic physical
proximity of the Jewish and Moslem holy places. Moslems believe the prophet
Mohammed ascended into heaven on his winged horse from the Haram - the same
spot where the great Jewish temple once stood. The dulled gold of the Dome
of the Rock looms immediately above the massive stone blocks of the Western
(or Wailing) Wall, the original retaining wall of the temple and the Jews'
holiest place.
In this century, much blood has been spilled here. But for centuries before,
Jew and Moslem co-existed in Jerusalem. Even today, the proximity of the two
faiths seems more than physical. As I watched at the end of the day, a group
of Sephardim, or oriental, Jews celebrated a boy's bar mitzvah at the Wall.
A young man beat an eastern rhythm on a small drum. A woman ululated. They
danced in a swaying circle. I have seen Moslem and Christian Arabs celebrate
family occasions in almost identical fashion. Perhaps it is possible that
the people of Jerusalem will one day see what binds them, not what divides
them.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920606

