FT921-1223

FT  25 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: US soyabean growers' patience
runs out - Producers say they will wait no longer for EC action on subsidies


   By NANCY DUNNE


'OUR NEIGHBOURS had a little dog that yapped all day until 8 o'clock at
night,' said Mr Ken Bader, a spokesman for the American Soybean Association.
'It kinda annoyed us, but we didn't say anything. Then they got a Great Dane
and the two dogs barked until 10 at night. When we complained they said,
'Why didn't you ever say anything before?' It's the same with the EC and its
oilseeds regime.'
The soyabean producers had waited until 1987 to go to the General Agreement
Tariffs and Trade with their complaint against oilseeds, but the annoyances
had been building up for years. In 1962, US negotiators had won them a zero
binding (duty free status) on soyabeans in the Kennedy Round, and for years
they had made full use of the advantage. In 1970s there was 'a little spike'
in the European Community's subsidies programme. In the early 1980s there
was a 'tremendous spike' and then the subsidisation began 'in spades', said
Mr Bader.
'They kept telling us, they'd keep importing American beans, and we kept
waiting for things to get better.' Ultimately, the sector's sales fell by an
estimated Dollars 2.3bn a year.
US soyabean exports to the EC fell from 9.97m tonnes in 1987-88 to 5.42m
tonnes in 1990-91. Soyabean meal sales went from 3.09m tones in 1986-87 to
160,000 in 1990-91.
In December 1987, the ASA filed a Section 301 Unfair Trade Petition in the
Gatt, charging that the EC had 'nullified and impaired' their duty-free
commitment for soyabeans and soyabean meal by offering lucrative subsidies
to growers and processors of EC oilseeds.
Two years later the Gatt dispute panel ruled the EC programme illegal. The
ruling was formally adopted by the Gatt Council in January 1990, and EC
authorities promised to implement the report starting with crops harvested
in 1991. The EC failed to act until late last year, however, and, according
to the US government, the new plan it proposed continued to violate previous
trade agreements.
The original Gatt panel was reconvened to rule if the new EC oilseeds
programme complied with the original panel finding. It ruled last week that
it did not.
Now the soyabean producers say their patience is exhausted and they will no
longer wait for the EC to take action. Although rapeseed has already been
planted, they are insisting that a real reform programme be addressed to
1992 crops. There is still spring rape to be seeded as well as some
sunflower seeds, Mr Bader said.
Either the US and the EC would reach an agreement before the next Gatt
Council meeting on April 21 or the US would begin to draw up lists for
sanctions.
However, said Mr Bader, the ASA wanted market access, not retaliation.
'The EC must realise that this issue is not going to go away,' said Mr Gary
Riedel, president of the ASA. 'If the US cannot depend on trade agreements
already in effect, what is the point of pursuing additional agreements? The
integrity of existing and future trade agreements is on the line.'

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920325

