FT922-4459

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Capital Markets: The rise and fall of Swiss
junk bonds - A spate of UK defaults has spread fresh gloom


   By IAN RODGER


THE collapse of the junk bond market in Swiss francs, once one of the most
active debt markets for high-risk companies, has been confirmed by a spate
of defaults by UK companies, including the formal insolvency of the
Mountleigh property group.
The market had already been in the doldrums for several months because of
high interest rates and the weakness of the Swiss franc, but the latest
round of British corporate collapses has spread fresh gloom.
The rise of the Swiss franc bond market for high-risk foreign companies was
one of the stranger phenomena of the late 1980s. Until 1985, the Swiss
corporate bond market had been one of the safest in the world, with a
monopoly underwriting syndicate preventing all but the highest quality
issues from being launched.
Then the Swiss National Bank indicated that it would allow non-Swiss banks
to form underwriting syndicates, and the Geneva-based Soditic, then an
affiliate, now a subsidiary, of SG Warburg, the UK merchant bank, rushed in.
Over the next few years, Soditic brought a surprisingly large number of
foreign companies to the Swiss market, including some, such as Mountleigh,
Polly Peck and Bond Corporation of Australia, of obviously speculative
quality.
'Until Soditic set up its syndicates, Switzerland had the highest standards
in the world for bond issues. Now it has the second largest junk bond market
in the world,' one Zurich fund manager says.
The main attraction for the companies was a remarkably low cost of
borrowing. Soditic and others found that they could float unrated issues in
Switzerland with less than a 1 per cent premium over interest rates on blue
chip issues. A 1988 Polly Peck issue went at 5 3/4 per cent, a Maxwell
Communications issue at 5 per cent.
In the long years of a tightly-controlled market, Swiss bond buyers had
become accustomed to tiny differentials in coupon rates. Thus, when they saw
something bigger they were too thrilled to look too carefully at the health
warnings on the prospectuses.
Some criticise Soditic for exploiting this blind spot, but Mr Serge
Ledermann, of Geneva private bankers Lombard Odier, disagrees. 'I would not
throw any stones at them. They proceeded honestly. Fund managers have to do
their homework like everyone else.'
When the 1980s boom ended, the market was inevitably hit, and Soditic issues
have been prominent among the failures, including those of Bond Corporation,
Polly Peck, Heron Corporation and Mountleigh.
The latest victim is Trizec, a Canadian property company with close links to
Olympia & York.
In the wake of the collapse of Olympia and York Developments in the UK,
Trizec's Swiss franc bonds plunged. A 1985 5 5/8 per cent issue due in 1995
slumped from SFr56 before the news to SFr40 on Friday, and a 1989 5 per cent
issue expiring in 1999 went from SFr45 to SFr30.
Dealers are reluctant to put too much blame on company collapses for the
sorry state of the market. The spread of less than 1 per cent between Swiss
and German interest rates is the main culprit, they say. 'We have never seen
that before,' one dealer said.
But there is a cumulative effect, especially as issuers default - something
hitherto unheard of in Switzerland.
Holders of bonds that have gone into default have been startled to find that
no one is obliged to represent their interests. There is no trustee function
under Swiss law.
Soditic and other lead managers have tried to be as helpful as they can, but
there are limits. 'We are on the creditors' committee of Polly Peck, but we
cannot vote because we have no mandate,' the Soditic official says.
The problem is intensified because most of the bonds are held by investors
who stuff their savings secretly into the Swiss private banks and do not
want to identify themselves.
It all spells bad news for the future of the market. 'It will be a long time
before anyone can float anything with less than a double A rating,' Franz
Ruegg of Bank Julius Baer in Zurich says.
Meanwhile, Soditic is now attracting attention for its moves on the Swiss
equity market rather than on the bond market.
Last week, it placed Swissair's 35.8 per cent stake in the travel agency
Kuoni, worth close to SFr120m, with institutions in Switzerland and
elsewhere in Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920605

