FT924-11327

FT  27 OCT 92 / Heseltine raises hopes on coal jobs


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


MR Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, held out some hope for
miners threatened by pit closures yesterday by promising that his planned
energy review would take account of employment prospects in the coal
industry.
Announcing details of the review, he said it would be wide-ranging and open,
and would culminate in a white paper on energy policy in the new year.
He said the main purpose would be to consider each of the 21 pits left on
the closure list in the context of overall energy policy, 'including the
consequences of that policy for British Coal and the employment prospects
for the industry'.
He would want to ensure that the case for closure of each pit 'had been
fully made'. Terms of reference for the review were:
Whether the prospects for coal had been correctly assessed. Professor
Stephen Littlechild, the electricity regulator, would be consulted to see
whether any company was abusing its position in the market.
The consequences of the 'dash for gas' in power generation, how gas compared
to coal in cost and the size of the UK's gas reserves.  The implications of
the statutory obligation on electricity distributors to buy a proportion of
power from sources other than coal, oil and gas - which would also include
nuclear power.
The opportunities for private-sector production of coal and the position of
coal imports.
Regional needs in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Mr Heseltine said talks would take place with the providers and consumers of
energy, trade unions and other interested parties.
Independent consultants would be appointed to report on the prospects for
British Coal, to look at its competitiveness and at alternative markets for
coal.
Mr Heseltine is to appear this afternoon before the Commons all-party select
committee on trade and industry, which is conducting an inquiry of its own.
The deadline for submissions to the DTI is December 1.
View of regeneration, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921027

