FT923-15407

FT  02 JUL 92 / Sweden likely to cut corporate tax


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


   LONDON


SWEDEN'S non-socialist government is expected today to back a proposal to
cut the country's corporate level of taxation from 30 to 25 per cent from
January 1 1993, in a move designed to encourage foreign and domestic
investors in Sweden and adapt the tax system to that of the European
Community.
Speaking to a Financial Times conference in London yesterday Mr Urban
Backstrom, under-secretary of state at Sweden's Ministry of Finance, also
revealed that Sweden would have to cut its current value added tax level
further. It is already to be reduced from 25 to 22 per cent for January 1
1993 and will have to fall to 19-20 per cent over the next few years to come
into line with EC practice. 'We simply cannot have a rate which greatly
exceeds the rate prevailing in continental Europe,' he said.
In his address to the conference Mr Per Westerberg, Sweden's industry
minister, said the government's new competition laws, to be announced this
autumn, would force public sector welfare authorities to compete in the
market for the purchase of any services they are expected to provide, in
what promises to be a comprehensive shake-up of Sweden's welfare state.
Mr Westerberg said the government, elected last October, intended to stick
to its current programme of deregulation and tax cutting despite the
country's economic difficulties.
He also said the next Swedish state-owned company to be privatised would be
announced next month. This follows the Swedish Steel, in May. Mr Westerberg
said the government intended to privatise only state-dominated commercial
companies which were operating already in a competitive market, and no state
monopolies would be sold. Instead, he said, the public utilities would be
turned into corporate entities and their areas of operation deregulated and
opened to competition, and then they would be privatised.
Mr Peter Wallenberg, Sweden's leading industrialist, told the conference
that he 'really wished more foreigners would find it worthwhile to acquire
Swedish companies, thus further enhancing the internationalisation of the
country's economy and at the same time giving Swedish industry the
opportunity to find solid partners abroad with whom it could develop itself
further'.
However, he defended strongly Sweden's current system of A and B share
ownership which enables companies such as those in the Wallenberg sphere to
maintain control with a small equity stake but dominant voting rights.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920702

