FT924-11415

FT  26 OCT 92 / Japanese Bonds: Hopes rise of cut in interest rates


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


THE Japanese government bond market is poised for monetary easing by the
Bank of Japan, with the yield on the No 145 10-year benchmark fluctuating
around the 4.8 per cent level.
The fall in money market rates, due to funding operations by the central
bank, encouraged hopes of an imminent cut in the official discount rate and
the overnight call rate fell to 4 per cent, the lowest since February 1989.
While lower short-term rates have supported government bonds, market
participants have remained cautious about a fully-fledged rally because of
concern over higher long-term rates in the US.
Long-term yields were affected by the rise in US long-term interest rates,
as investors remained uncertain about the effects a Democratic victory in
the US would have on global interest rates.
However, further indications of a weaker economy have provided underlying
support for the bond market, with economic figures indicating a further
downturn increasing pressure on the Bank of Japan to ease rates.
Money supply growth for September announced last week, fell 0.4 per cent
from the previous year, its first decline on record, prompting Mr Kiichi
Miyazawa, the prime minister, to call for lower money market rates.
An increase in bankruptcies and lower consumption figures have also added to
the gloom. Interim earnings announcements by leading retailers have pointed
to a sharp fall in consumer confidence, as sales and profits at most
department stores posted double digit declines.
In addition, a survey by the Economic Planning Agency (EPA) indicated that
capital spending by corporations will fall 3.2 per cent for this fiscal year
to March. The EPA said cutbacks on capital investment by manufacturers are
especially severe, with a 10.3 per cent decline.
The Bank of Japan's projection for zero money supply growth for the current
quarter, however, may cool some hopes of monetary easing. Mr Robert Feldman,
economist at Salomon Brothers in Tokyo, said the figure indicated there
would not be a cut in the official discount rate this year.
The central bank predicted a gradual recovery in the economy, while Mr
Kagehide Kaku, head of the bank's research and statistics department, denied
the possibility of an imminent rate cut.
The turmoil within the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, however, has hardly
affected the country's financial markets. Some investors fear the opposition
parties may try to delay the approval of the supplementary budget in
parliament by calling for Mr Shin Kanemaru, of the Liberal Democratic Party,
to testify as a witness over his violation of the Political Funds Control
Law.
However, a long delay is regarded as unlikely because of the criticism that
is expected to arise if the opposition parties were to delay the fiscal
support package.
The bond market is now focusing on decisions over monetary policy to be made
at the Bank of Japan's branch managers' meeting, which starts tomorrow.
Concerns of over-supply, however, may temporarily depress the long-term bond
market, as the government is expected to auction 20-year bonds worth some
Y300bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921026

