FT923-6385

FT  25 AUG 92 / Arts: Berlioz and Teixeira - London Promenade Concerts


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS and MAX LOPPERT


THE intimacies of Berlioz's sacred trilogy are not obviously suited to the
expanses of the Albert Hall nor to the generally bullish atmosphere of a
prom. But Sunday's performance with the BBC Symphony Orchestra conducted by
David Atherton was in every respect a success  - paced and tended by
Atherton with great care and affection, with decent if unspectacular
orchestral playing and (on the Radio 3 relay at least) singing of immaculate
clarity and passable French from an entirely Anglophone cast.
Berlioz evidently touches a chord in Atherton, a conductor whose treatment
of the 19th-century repertory often seems lacking in the spark he brings
regularly to later music. While still a student at Cambridge in the 1960s he
conducted a memorable performance of Beatrice et Benedict, and the sympathy
seems to have been preserved intact. It would have been easy to over-egg
L'Enfance du Christ in these circumstances, to inflate its moments of pomp,
sentimentalise its rapt inwardness. Atherton allowed a natural unfolding,
ensuring detail was clearly articulated and even undercutting the sweetness
of the 'Shepherds' Farewell' with sharp-edged oboes.
The cast was led by Martyn Hill's narrator, light-toned, impassioned,
humane, and Ann Murray's beautifully poised Mary, investing every phrase
with exact weight and diction. Stephen Roberts was Joseph, soft-grained and
self-effacing, and David Wilson-Johnson made much of the role of Herod,
vividly realising his monologue. The BBC Symphony Chorus, despatched to the
gallery beneath the Albert Hall's dome for the chorus of unseen angels at
the end of the first part, was in attentive form. A pleasing, quietly
rewarding occasion.
*****
One of the most imaginative pieces of planning in this year's Proms schedule
was the filling of Friday's late-evening slot with church music by an
18th-century Portuguese composer all but unknown. That sounds hardly
enticing; but, as given by The Sixteen Orchestra and Chorus (this time
numbering 20), Antonio Teixeira's 80-minute-long setting of the Te Deum
(1734) proved a winner.
Teixeira was born in 1707 and not heard of again after the Lisbon earthquake
of 1755, of which he is thus presumed a victim. Since he merits only one
small paragraph in The New Grove, it breaks all the rules  - happily]  - for
his Te Deum to be at once so grandly structured, so intricately fashioned
for large forces, and so continuously exhilarating.
A boy prodigy sent by King John to study in Rome from the age of ten, he
appears thereafter to have devoted his attentions to the church and opera
house equally  - as anyone might guess who quickly learns to relish the
mixture of rigour and ornate brilliance in the Te Deum succession of
movements. The use of spatially separated choirs and groups of soloists
builds up a momentum that looks back to Monteverdi; the charm and vivacity
of the melodic layout look forward to much later 18th-century church music;
and yet the impact of the whole is utterly 'personal', distinctive and
fresh.
The Proms performers seemed to revel in exactly those qualities (not
surprising: Christophers has already put this work on record). Among the
eight solo singers, two each of soprano, alto, tenor and bass, there should
be a particular word for Lynda Russell, joyously and expertly dispensing the
first soprano's rococo flourishes.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920825

