FT921-14212

FT  17 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Italians rush to build ties with Moscow -
The search for business opportunities in the former Soviet Union


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


WHEN Russian President Boris Yeltsin visited Rome just before Christmas, the
Italian government and the country's captains of industry rushed in almost
unseemly haste to obtain his ear.
Recognising that Mr Yeltsin had finally emerged as the strong man of the
former Soviet Union, they were anxious to lay claims to play a leading part
in the new commonwealth dominated by Russia. The Italian treasury obligingly
waived earlier objections over credit guarantees and unblocked credits worth
Dollars 1.2bn (Pounds 670m) to purchase essential clothing, footwear and
foodstuffs. Formal approval from the Italian export credit guarantee
institute Sace was given yesterday to cover 90 per cent of the credits.
For his part, Mr Yeltsin made grandiose promises of collaboration, including
an early agreement with Fiat on an automotive joint-venture. He also assumed
the all-important responsibility for the unblocked Italian credits.
Such Italian self-interest is not surprising. Both the Italian public and
private sectors spent much time and money cultivating links with the former
Soviet Union. Only Germany among European Community countries devoted as
much attention as Italy to building commercial ties with Moscow.
Italy and Germany shared a common interest in importing energy, but the
Italians also regarded the Soviet Union as particularly apt for a whole
range of intermediate technology goods as well as cheap consumer items.
By the time of the Soviet break-up, Italy accounted for a quarter of all EC
trade. Between 1989-90 Italian imports rose from L2,471bn to L4,938bn
(Pounds 2.3bn), almost half of which consisted of oil and gas; exports grew
more slowly, from L2,403bn to L3,104bn, leaving a substantial deficit.
Although this is only 2 per cent of total Italian trade, Italy, anxious to
narrow the deficit, went to great lengths to provide credit guarantees to
stimulate business. The government agreed to guarantee credit lines worth
L5,000bn between 1990 and 1995.
Italian business therefore now wants to ensure existing contracts are not
overtaken by events and to take quick advantage of new opportunities backed
by the government commitment to provide export credit guarantees.
Government officials and public- and private-sector businessmen all say the
main problems are:
confusion over the juridical nature of the ties within the new commonwealth.
doubts over the extent to which Russia can act as leader, both in assuming
responsibility for old and new debts, and in catalysing contracts which span
more than one republic.
This is highlighted by the refusal of the treasury to unblock a L1,200bn
credit line agreed in September 1990 with the former Soviet foreign trade
bank, VEB, of which less than 10 per cent has been disbursed. Officials at
Mediocredito, the medium-term credit institute responsible for disbursing
the funds, say no organisation has been satisfactorily identified as capable
of assuming the responsibilities which the VEB would have discharged, unlike
the Dollars 1.2bn unblocked during the Yeltsin visit.
Despite these difficulties, contacts are going ahead on a number of deals.
Fiat is keen to negotiate a joint venture with Vaz, the former Soviet state
automotive producer, and believes a letter of intent could be initialled
shortly. The terms of the proposal involve Fiat in taking a 30 per cent
stake in a privatised Vaz, modernising and retooling the plant to produce a
new car model. No price tag has yet been placed on the proposed investment.
Fiat had for some time sought to strengthen its ties with the Soviet Union,
where the potential demand for cars is seen as quadruple the present level,
but the Vaz deal was put on hold in early 1990 because of political
uncertainties. The Turin-based group now clearly hopes it can reap advantage
from obtaining a privileged position in an undemanding, expanding market.
Meanwhile, the need to balance trade and secure energy supplies is a key
strategic consideration in a number of Italian state companies active in the
former Soviet Union.
Mr Franco Nobili, head of the Italian state holding company IRI, laid
special emphasis in his December talks with Mr Yeltsin on going ahead with
energy-based deals. Principal among these is a joint venture between
Ansaldo, its power engineering subsidiary, and Russia, Belarus (formerly
Belorussia) and Ukraine, to convert exist power stations against the supply
of electricity.
Before the Soviet Union broke up, Ansaldo formed the joint venture
Energo-Engineering, envisaging the reconversion to gas of some 16 power
stations in these republics. Payment was to be in the form of electricity
supplies carried by a new power line through Hungary, Austria and
Yugoslavia. Ansaldo would build new sub-stations in an overall arrangement
worth L5,000bn.
Ansaldo says Russia is anxious for the deal, but there is considerable
confusion over how the Ukraine part of the proposal can be incorporated.
Also with an eye on payment through energy supplies, the Italian state oil
concern ENI has agreed to set up a co-ordinating committee with the Russian
authorities.
ENI is expected to go ahead with negotiations to modernise the Russian
gas-pipeline network, help upgrade seven Russian refineries and assist in
the development of Siberian oil.
While big projects are likely to be given priority and benefit from
counter-trade payments, many small business deals (other than the purely
speculative) are expected to be delayed until the situation is clarified. As
it is, the Soviet political turmoil saw Italian exports fall in the first
nine months of last year by 22 per cent to L1,853bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Photograph Franco Nobili, stress on energy-based deals
(Omitted).

920117

