FT923-9767

FT  03 AUG 92 / Letter: Significance of BMW plant in US


   From Mr GEOFFREY MAZULLO


Sir, The article, 'Union hits at BMW plans for US plant' (July 29), fails to
place the proper emphasis on the significance of IG Metall's opposition to a
BMW non-union plant in South Carolina.
The entity which the author refers to as BMW's 'oversight council' (a direct
translation from the German word 'Aufsichtsrat') is in fact BMW's
supervisory board.
The supervisory board plays a significant role in the German corporate
governance system. German companies are governed by a two-tiered board
structure composed of a management board and a supervisory board.
As the title implies, the supervisory board is responsible for the
supervision or oversight of the management board, which in is responsible
for the daily management of the company. Approval of the supervisory board
is required for a number of corporate actions, and the supervisory board
influences corporate policy.
The composition of the supervisory board is determined by German Securities
Law and German Co-determination Law, the latter of which prescribes employee
representation on the supervisory board. BMW's 20-member supervisory board
consists of ten shareholder representatives and ten employee
representatives.
Mr Klaus Zwickel, second chairman of the board of management of IG Metall,
is an employee representative on BMW's supervisory board. As such, he
advocates the union's labour relation policies, and therefore is pressuring
BMW to employ union workers at its South Carolina plant.
BMW's decision to open a non-unionised plant in the US is a major event in
German industrial relations. It will be interesting to follow IG Metall's
efforts to secure union representation at the South Carolina plant, both
through Mr Zwickel's impact as a member of BMW's supervisory board and
through co-operation with US unions.
Geoffrey Mazullo,
analyst,
Institutional Shareholder Services,
3333 K Street NW,
Suite 230,
Washington DC 20007, US

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920803

