FT924-806

FT  22 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Japan in the doldrums


AS THE tortuous Japanese budgetary process grinds into motion again this
week, with the Ministry of Finance revealing its plans for the 1993 fiscal
year, the same nagging doubts present themselves. Has the official machine
really got the measure of the problems that afflict the economy? And can
Japan adapt to the very different environment that it faces in the aftermath
of the bubble economy?
While the growth forecast for the current year has finally been revised
downwards from 3.5 per cent to 1.6 per cent, next year's budgetary
arithmetic rests on the cheerily implausible assumption of a return to
growth of 3.3 per cent. The Bank of Japan, meantime, has foolishly continued
to resist calls for a further reduction in interest rates despite
overwhelming evidence of increasing fragility in the banking system.
With industry potentially facing a fourth year of declining earnings and the
personal sector throttled by debt, the prospect for growth is more than ever
dependent on domestic budgetary stimulus or a boost from external demand. No
doubt the battle over the 1992 supplementary budget, which was finally
approved by the Diet on December 10, will have to be fought all over again,
with next July's G7 Tokyo summit providing an obvious pressure point.
The unsustainability of the present policy mix is underlined by a current
account surplus now well ahead of the level considered intolerable at the
time of the Plaza accord that preceded the Japanese bubble. With Mr Clinton
en route to the White House, Japan's historic penchant for exporting its way
out of recession is even more politically controversial this time.
Impetus for change
Yet it is possible to underestimate the impetus for change. One straw in the
wind is the state of public opinion. The Japanese were prepared to tolerate
corrupt relations between politicians, businessmen and the criminal
fraternity as long as the system delivered. But since the bursting of the
bubble at the end of 1989 the disillusionment over the failure to translate
high economic growth into a better quality of life has become palpable. That
feeling is reinforced by anger over stock market losses and an oppressive
burden of debt. While the government of Mr Kiichi Miyazawa is committed to
enhancing housing and infrastructure, its half-hearted measures have so far
failed to convince.
As people have lost patience with the low ethical standards that
characterise Japanese public life, the much criticised system of one-party
democracy has been forced to demonstrate a self-corrective capacity -
witness the shedding of prime ministers and party bosses, when the pressure
from an angry press and public has become overwhelming. The break-up of the
leading faction in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party also reflects a
reformist tendency among the younger politicians in the party. There have,
of course, been realignments and rumours of a break-up in the LDP before.
All that can be said at this stage is that the climate for change is more
propitious than at many points in the past.
Perverse effects
The new assertiveness of the Japanese public may accelerate structural
economic change in more perverse ways. Hostility towards the banks, after
the excesses of the 1980s, has scuppered a government lifeboat for
over-stretched banks. If the under-capitalised private sector lifeboat that
is now being pressed into service proves less adequate for the task,
economic recovery will be impeded. The longer recovery takes to emerge, the
greater the pressure on industry to sacrifice hallowed employment practices,
since fixed costs are too high after the investment binge of the 1980s.
Increasingly, top companies are talking openly about abandoning seniority
pay in favour of merit pay.
Similarly, the enforced departure of key members of the LDP's old guard
could make striking a deal on rice market liberalisation much harder. A
hostile US response could in these circumstances prove a catalyst for more
rapid change. The longer it takes to pull out of recession, the greater the
pressure for economic and political reform. The agenda looks more open for
Japan than it has done for many years past.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921222

