FT921-656

FT  27 MAR 92 / Plugging into each other's strengths: The trend to
international strategic alliances


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


Last week, Philips, the Dutch electronics group, and Grundig, the German
consumer electronics company in which it owns a 32 per cent stake, said they
would join their video and cordless telephone operations.
On the same day, Olivetti, the Italian computers and office equipment group,
announced an alliance with Canon, the Japanese camera and electronics group,
to produce bubble ink-jet printers.
These moves are part of a growing trend among Europe's ailing electronics
manufacturers to seek alliances in the hope of regaining their
competitiveness in the marketplace.
They include another recent announcement by Philips that it was joining
forces with Motorola, the US group, to design and develop semiconductor
chips for Compact Disk Interactive, a new CD-based medium combining
graphics, data, CD audio and video.
The Dutch group is now also looking for a partner to invest in a plant to
manufacture liquid crystal displays, a product of increasing strategic
importance.
A spate of similar links has also taken place in Europe's semiconductor and
computer industries over the past year as difficult market conditions forced
companies to adopt measures to stem failing fortunes.
Earlier this year Groupe Bull of France, the computer group, announced a
link with IBM of the US to develop advanced semiconductor chips. And
SGS-Thomson, the Franco-Italian semiconductor group is to collaborate with
GEC Plessey Semiconductors of the UK in chip development, and with Philips
in a semiconductor plant in Grenoble.
Nokia, the Finnish group, has been restructuring its consumer electronics
division, and has also been talking to a number of unnamed parties about
possible links.
Such partnerships have been spurred by the growing recognition among
Europe's indigenous manufacturers that their US and Japanese competitors
could be the main beneficiaries of the single European market. European
electronics companies have accepted they need help to survive in
increasingly competitive markets otherwise they will not be able to fund the
R&D needed to keep pace with technology.
This is particularly true in the semiconductor industry, where most European
companies are suffering losses. 'That is the area in which European
companies are crying out for help,' says Mr Andrew Haskins, industry analyst
at James Capel.
Even cash-rich Siemens has realised it cannot afford the investment needed
to stay in the race and recently announced ventures in chip development with
both IBM and Toshiba of Japan.
The move towards alliances follows the failure to build a European
electronics champion through the merger of the semiconductor activities of
Siemens, SGS-Thomson and Philips. The three groups were unable to reconcile
their differences and, after months of talks, Siemens decided to link with
IBM, effectively dashing hopes for a major European electronics group.
It is not only that the Europeans find it difficult to agree on broad
co-operation; there has also been a spreading conviction that simply joining
the weak operations of three big groups will not lead to a strong business.
Having abandoned the idea of a European champion, manufacturers have
embraced less grand alliances, both among themselves and with outside
groups, as the logical solution to their problems. Olivetti has set up a
division specifically to look for possible technological co-operation.
Such alliances offer manufacturers the chance to pool resources and
rationalise operations, at a time of spiralling costs and stagnant growth of
key markets.
The situation is particularly dire for financially stretched European
groups. Last year, although Philips returned to profitability, its income
from consumer electronics declined 33 per cent. Thomson, Nokia and Olivetti
also suffered losses last year and the situation is equally bleak among
European semiconductor and computer manufacturers.
If they are to remain in the invest in R&D, Europe's manufacturers need to
join forces or seek help from outside.
Ms Angela Dean, industry analyst at Morgan Stanley, expects Philips to
announce further alliances as it moves to rationalise its operations. 'What
we hear from Philips in the future will be more general and not just
restricted to video equipment,' she said.
Alliances with strategic partners also offer manufacturers the chance to tap
demand outside their own national markets. This is important for European
manufacturers, which have often blamed their woes on the lack of a large
indigenous demand base to support economies of scale.
Pan-European alliances will help to rationalise operations and share costs.
But they will have limited impact on raising the competitiveness of European
manufacturers. For that, European companies will have to look to US and
Japanese companies for the key technologies necessary to remain competitive
and profitable.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920327

