FT922-7093

FT  20 MAY 92 / Investors uneasy over Thailand's stability


   By Financial Times Reporters


LEADING foreign investors in Thailand suggested yesterday that although
coups and attempted coups are part of the country risk profile, economic
policies had remained generally stable in spite of the periodic political
upheaval.
However, in Japan - the biggest source of direct investment into Thailand -
the Keidanren, the federation of economic organisations, said Japanese
companies now contemplating an investment in the country are likely to
rethink their plans. The military crackdown has harmed Thailand's image, it
warned.
Thailand has had an important role in the Japanese corporate strategy of
relocating manufacturing operations to low-cost south-east Asian sites.
Japan's direct foreign investment was Dollars 1.28bn in fiscal 1989 and
Dollars 1.15bn in 1990, sharply up on the Dollars 124m of 1986.
Japan accounts for about a quarter of all the country's inward direct
investment, followed by the US, Taiwan, Hong Kong and the UK.
Thailand has also become a leading trade partner for Japan, with exports to
Thailand rising 3.4 per cent last fiscal year to Dollars 9.4bn and imports
from Thailand 26.6 per cent higher at Dollars 5.2bn, with a significant
percentage of the increase being components for Japanese products exported
to third countries.
Matsushita Electric Industrial, the electronics company, has four factories
in the suburbs of Bangkok and two sales offices in the city. It said that
factory production had not been disrupted, but 'there has been some
disturbance to our sales activities'.
'We think the situation is not very serious, but we are watching closely.
According to our previous experiences, the Thai people know when to pull
back during times of upheaval. We expect that the protests will stop soon,'
it said.
Toyota Motor, the leading car maker, runs three factories and a sales
company in Thailand, which is central to the company's strategy of producing
components in a range of south-east Asian countries to create a regional
car. 'We are continuing to run our factories, but long-term political
stability is important to the success of our operations.'
British companies with interests in Thailand echoed similar sentiments. 'The
Thais have done well up until now. But if they blow this one they'll be
turning the clock back,' said one UK businessman with extensive involvements
in the region. 'We managed to brush off last year's coup, but this latest
incident goes much further,' he added.
Although Germany is by far the leading EC exporter to Thailand, the UK is
becoming more important as a trading partner. UK exports in 1991 were Pounds
463.5m (Dollars 820m), up from Pounds 410.5m the previous year. Main exports
included machinery and transport equipment - totalling Pounds 219.5m in
1991. UK imports from Thailand were Pounds 625.4m from Pounds 484m.
Historically, Thailand has not been a starting point for British companies
seeking a toe-hold in south-east Asia, but that has changed over recent
years. Bangkok's British Chamber of Commerce is now said to be one of the
most active in the world, with more than 250 members.
Mr Iain Dale, chief executive of Yorkshire-based Dale Electrics, which has
an office and a factory in Bangkok, said: 'Thailand must offer stability to
investors.'
Dale's offices, which are on the Airport Road, and its factory in the
capital's Yannawa district, have been closed 'because our 50 employees there
would have had to have fought their way to work,' Mr Dale said. 'We'll
decide on Thursday when to re-open them.' Dale manufactures power generating
equipment, and Thailand accounts for about Pounds 3m of the group's annual
turnover of Pounds 55m.
BICC, the engineering and construction group, recently completed the Pounds
7m international trade centre in the capital and is currently working on a
building of similar size for Thailand's biggest newspaper. It also has a
Pounds 6m cabling contract with the Bangkok post and telecommunications
authority. The company said: 'We will be watching carefully events in the
country.'
Wall Street analysts said most US interests in Thailand were in
manufacturing plants - assets that could not be liquidated quickly. US
companies with operations in the country were, therefore, likely to wait
until the situation had become clearer before taking any longer term
decisions.
The two closed-end country funds quoted on the New York Stock Exchange, Thai
Capital Fund and Thai Fund, showed no significant initial reaction to the
violence in Bangkok, although one fund manager privately expressed concern
that if the troubles persisted the long-term commitment of US investors
could suffer.
Far East equity analysts in New York also noted that interest in Thailand
among US investors had levelled off, and perhaps even declined, since the
coup last year.
The most immediate impact was being felt by world airlines and holiday
companies, in the light of advice by several western governments that its
nationals should avoid travel to Bangkok. British Airways suspended flights
for 24 hours and Kuoni, the Swiss-owned tour operator, stopped operations
into Thailand for a day because of difficulties in moving people to hotels
from Bangkok airport.
By Robert Thomson in Tokyo, Andrew Slade and Andrew Taylor in London and
Patrick Harverson in New York.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920520

