FT922-460

FT  27 JUN 92 / Walking over England: a foot-slogger's diary - Charles
Leadbeater braved blisters, fell-runners and bed and breakfast accommodation
galore in a coast to coast marathon


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


St Bees Head to Ennerdale Bridge, 14 1/4 miles.
A HUGE jellyfish washed up on the ribs of sand on the beach at St Bee's Head
formed my starting point as I set out to cross England to the North Sea. I
headed up the steep cliff path, decked in flowers, which marks the edge of
the bleak industrial belt of Cumbria in north west England.
I was steered to and then away from the Whitehaven chemical works - which
announces itself with billowing smoke and violent eruptions of effluent in
the sea hundreds of feet below - into a string of working class villages,
the rows of terraced houses unrelieved by the comforting homogeneity of
tourism. No welcoming signs offered bed and breakfast or bar meals; these
are enclosed, hard places. A man working on his allotment next to the River
Ehen confided: 'It took a long time to put down roots. For 10 years after I
moved here I was desperately unhappy.'
From the village of Cleator and over the rounded hill of Dent one descends
into the hidden valley of Nannycatch, its steep sides threaded by a stream
which leads into Ennerdale, the gateway to the grandeur of the Lake
District.
Ennerdale Bridge to Rosthwaite. 14 1/2 miles.
From the farm where I had lodged for the night, I skirted the lake, so still
that it might have been newly-laid that morning. Walkers emerged from tents
along the way which leads into Ennerdale forest. I escaped the pained whine
of an industrial saw only when I climbed up on to the fells, drinking most
of my meagre water supply in the sun's glare on a saddle of land just below
the peak of Great Gable.
After lunch I scrambled down the scree of Aaron's Slack to sleep in the
afternoon sun by Sty Head Tarn. My little toes were starting to ache, my
mouth was parched, my pack felt every pound of its 40lb weight. The pains
grew in step with my anticipation of a cup of tea at the cafe at Seathwaite
farm. At the bottom I found walker's nightmare No. 1: the cafe was closed.
Rosthwaite to Patterdale Bridge, 17 3/4 miles.
I breakfasted in my guest house with Noel, 70 years old, disabled by a
stroke, passionately jealous of my ability to walk. He is one of a
generation for whom rambling in hills is not just walking but a joyous
release from urban entrapment.
Beyond the cloud which hung on the floor of Langstrathdale I clambered up to
the lip of Green Up Edge. It proved to be walker's nightmare No. 2: a series
of plausible false horizons, each beckoning as the end of the climb, each
disappointing, until a flat stretch of ground opened out on to a view of the
easy descent to Grasmere.
A steady ascent from the tourist village where the poet William Wordsworth
lived led to Grisedale Tarn; it provided, in blazing sun, a collective
swimming pool below the mighty bulk of the mountain Helvellyn. Here three
public school boys were upstaged by a working-class lad - after taking the
plunge he announced to the hillside thronged with walkers: 'It's a good job
I'm wearing my thermal jockstrap.'
Walker's nightmare No. 3 passed me on the long descent to Patterdale: a
60-something fell runner with enough breath to give me a cheery greeting as
he swept past for his evening run up to the tarn and back.
Patterdale to Shap. 16 miles.
My bed and breakfast was a bungalow called The Struggle, so named after the
battle the owners fought with the Lake District planning board to get it
built. The board insisted upon Lakeland slate for the roof. At Pounds 1,800
a tonne, the 11-tonne roof must be one of the most valuable bungalow roofs
in the UK.
A long traverse took me to the peak of the High Street range, the
easternmost edge of the Lake District. The steep descent to the ugly,
half-full Haweswater reservoir tormented my frail calf muscles as I tried to
compensate for blisters on my heels by putting more weight on my toes.
Result: blistered toes and wrecked calf muscles. Hobbling along the
reservoir shore I was joined by walker's nightmare No. 4: an 18-year-old
travelling at jogging speed. At Shap, in a newsagent well stocked in
walkers' medicaments, I acquired some magic spray which I liberally applied
to my calf muscles. I slept for 12 hours.
Shap to Kirkby Stephen. 22 miles.
The magic spray seemed to have restored some spring to my legs as I crossed
the M6 motorway and headed over the rolling limestone hills into the
delightful village of Orton. A stunning traverse along an escarpment showed
the way to Kirkby Stephen, but after 16 miles my legs began to collapse, my
knees grinding like unoiled gears beneath the weight of my rucksack.
Kirkby Stephen to Keld. 12 3/4 miles.
At breakfast in the Black Bull inn the landlady fussed over two huge farmers
who had driven overnight from Devon to buy sheep at the town market that
day. Between massive mouthfuls they complained bitterly about the depths to
which sheep prices had fallen.
The walking was becoming more painful. As I entered Keld, a tiny village at
the head of the Swale, my walking style was that of a human beetle. But I
had reached half-way.
Martin and Olwyn, owners of my bed and breakfast stop for the night, had
previously run a pub in Basingstoke but had fallen foul of recession. Now
they virtually spit at the mention of the town's name. I admitted -
sheepishly - that Basingstoke was my home town.
Keld to Reeth. 11 1/4 miles.
I was driven back to Keld to rejoin the path. It was flat, easy walking
beside the Swale; part of the route followed the old Corpse Way, along which
mourners used to carry the dead from churchless Keld, to be buried at Reeth.
That evening in the King's Arms in Reeth all the walkers on the coast to
coast route gathered spontaneously - accountants, builders, library clerks -
to exchange tales of woe, anecdotes and horror stories about blisters.
Reeth to Bolton-on-Swale. 16 miles.
After a hearty breakfast I found it easy to walk the 10 gentle miles to
Richmond by lunchtime, following the banks of the Swale until a gentle climb
took me into the town's narrow streets and alleyways. Richmond stands at the
mouth of the Yorkshire dales as they open out on to the flat expanse of the
Vale of Mowbray. Beyond Richmond the Swale is despoiled, polluted, dirty,
dank. Along one stretch I spied a man about his Sunday afternoon pleasure,
violently wielding a huge spade above a rabbit hole, ready to smash the
skull of the stricken animal as it was driven out by ferrets.
Bolton on Swale to Ingleby Cross. 19 miles.
I breakfasted with a criminal court judge from Portland, Oregon, who
revelled in recounting the tale of how his boss had had his Dollars 60,000
sports car stolen at knife point. After about two miles walking I met Derek
and Edith, part of a seven-strong team from Northamptonshire police, doing
the cross-coast walk for charity. They said they were disillusioned with
what they saw as the de-professionalisation of police work, and planned to
start their own business: photographing weddings.
That afternoon, ploughing across the Vale's flat broad acres, came the first
rain of the walk, which accompanied me into Ingleby Cross. I had nowhere to
stay, but on hearing this the woman running the Post Office put me up in her
spare room.
Ingleby Cross to Clay Bank Top. 12 1/4 miles
A beautiful undulating walk in crisp air and sharp sun took me along a ridge
of the Cleveland Hills, broken by granite outcrops, with clear views up to
the chemical and steel plants of Redcar and Middlesborough to the north.
It was so exhilarating that at the day's end I gladly walked an extra two
miles to my stopping place, a farm B&B run by a resourceful woman who told
me that she was the first woman priest in the north-east of England. The
farm was started in 1938 by the lady vicar's father, who sat in the living
room, paralysed by a stroke. He asked me to tell him when the Second World
War was, as if he were finding out for the first time.
Clay Bank Top to Glaisdale. 18 3/4 miles.
Urra Moor was covered in mist and blown by driving rain. Utterly alone, I
set my face into the wind as if to cleanse myself. After four miles, I
reached Bloworth Crossing. Headlights emerged out of the mist. At first I
thought it was an army convoy on manoeuvres, but it turned out to be a
column of 16 vehicles in a shooting party. Later, a helicopter swept over to
deliver the host, Rocco Forte, the leisure industries millionaire.
A comfortable walk along the long-disused track of the old Rosedale iron
mine railway led me to the famous Lion Inn at Blakey, windswept and alone on
the moor. The police team arrived, disorganised: one was very ill and two
failed to make it because they had got so drunk the night before.
Glaisdale to Robin Hood's Bay. 19 miles.
I stretched out the last day of my walk for as long as possible. I chatted
to a local farmer, who pointed out how years of drought were killing the
trees and hedges. I gazed at the giant 'golf ball' buildings of Fylingdales,
an early warning system against nuclear attack made defunct by the collapse
of the Soviet Union. And finally, I ambled down Eskdale, across the moors
and along the cliff-tops into the fishing village of Robin Hood's Bay, where
I joined a stream of smiling walkers soaking their feet in the sea.
My journey - almost 200 miles - was over. As I rested, six men ran down to
the sea at a pace which I could not have maintained for more than 20
minutes. The walk had taken me 16 days - they had run it in six. It did not
matter. I was content to feel that I knew at least one path through England.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920627

