FT921-15225

FT  11 JAN 92 / Finance & The Family: Simple duties of pensions trustees -
The straightforward but little understood obligations of the UK's 300,000
fund trustees


   By DEBBIE HARRISON


THE responsibility for more than Pounds 300bn of pension fund assets rests
on the shoulders of 300,000 trustees in the UK, yet all too often this vital
function is performed by people who have no clear idea of their legal
duties.
All occupational pension schemes in the UK are written under trust, for
three important reasons:
To separate the pension fund from the rest of the company's assets. This in
theory protects the fund - for example from creditors if the company goes
bust;
To manage money on behalf of others. In this case the money is managed on
behalf of the scheme members who for tax reasons cannot gain access to their
portion of the fund until retirement.
To get Inland Revenue approval to qualify for tax benefits, for example tax
relief on employee and employer contributions and tax free roll up of the
fund.
A trust cannot exist without a trustee who, as legal owner of the fund, is
obliged to look after the assets on behalf of the beneficiaries. In the case
of pension funds the beneficiaries are the scheme members, including retired
employees drawing pensions and ex-employees with deferred pensions. The
dependants of scheme members also are classed as beneficiaries.
It is worth stressing that the responsibility of the trusts is to the
beneficiaries and not to the employer, the trade union or any other group
within the company.
Most companies appoint between two and four trustees. In the case of small
companies the trustees tend to be drawn from the management team, for
example the managing director, the finance director or company secretary.
Larger companies often have works' trustees as well who are elected by
scheme members. Trustees may receive expenses but otherwise they are not
paid for their work except where a professional firm undertakes the task.
Lay trustees are not expected to be pension experts, but to do the job
properly it is vital to understand the main legal and financial duties.
Unfortunately, companies are not obliged by law to provide training and
according to a recent survey carried out by the Alexander Consulting Group,
almost a third of trustees receive no formal preparation for the job. The
same survey found that almost half of the trustees in the UK take no role in
the decision making process of funds.
The real victims of this waste of talent are the pension scheme members who
depend on the trustees to prevent foul play or sheer incompetence on the
part of the employer and professional advisers.
Robin Ellison, senior partners with pensions solicitors Ellison Westhorp,
and author of a guide on the subject,* stressed that trustees should not be
deterred by the apparent complexity of the job.
'The job of trustee is a legal one and not actuarial, managerial or
accounting. Providing you are honest, sensible and take proper advice you
can do a lot of good and come to very little harm,' Ellison said.
The trustee's first job is to read and, if possible, understand the trust
deed which, among other points, sets out how the fund is to be invested and
the winding up procedure. The deed also gives guidelines on contributions to
the fund and benefits paid out.
Ellison's guide highlights the five most important clauses for the trustee
in this deed:
The delegation power. This allows the trustee to appoint professionals such
as actuaries and investment managers to see to the fund's day to day
running, although overall responsibility rests with the trustee;
The indemnity provisions. This should exclude trustees from liability and
legal costs if they are sued, provided they can demonstrate they were acting
in good faith. Some trustees also take out individual trustee indemnity
insurance to cover these costs if the employer goes bust and is unable to
pick up the tab.
The trustee's power. It is vital to know where the balance of power lies
between the trustees and the employer in decision making.
Power to resign. The trustee should be able to do this in writing without
having to apply to the court.
Effect of wind-up. To avoid future conflicts between the company and scheme
members it is vital to check the deed is specific about the treatment of
deficits and surpluses if the scheme is wound up.
The art of good pension fund trusteeship lies in successful delegation.
Providing information about the scheme to members, for example, can be
delegated to employee benefits communications experts. Likewise the trustee
will need to appoint lawyers, actuaries, accountants, consultants and
pensions managers. The trustees meet regularly to examine and approve
reports from these professional advisers and to exercise discretionary
judgments where an issue cannot be delegated.
Discretionary powers play an important part in the structure of UK pension
schemes. For example, the trustees can award discretionary increases to
scheme pensioners or they can decide who receives the lump sum benefit when
a scheme member dies and there are several beneficiaries with conflicting
claims. Professional advice can be sought on these issues but the final
decision rests with the trusts.
Training for trustees is provided by unions and many of the large firms of
actuaries and employee benefits consultants. Courses are essential for
beginners but even experienced trustees need to be kept up to date about
current issues.
An important new rule is expected to come into play this month when the
Department of Social Security will introduce regulations which require all
trustees to read a government guide to trustee duties. Details on this new
government booklet 'Pension Trust Principles: the Occupational Pensions
Board Guide for Pension Trustees' will be announced by the DSS shortly.
In view of the Maxwell case, trustees may wonder how far their
responsibilities extend. Alex MacIntyre, national director for the Alexander
Consulting Group, said: 'If it is a question of covert theft, then it would
be very difficult for the trustee to spot that. However, the trustee should
ensure that the investment decisions are not only legal but that they are
also prudent.
'If the trustee has a serious concern he or she should alert the appropriate
authorities, for example Imro (Investment Managers Regulatory Organisation)
or the Occupational Pensions Board. The trustee's ultimate sanction is to
resign and go public with the information,' MacIntyre said.
* The Pension Trustee's Handbook, Pounds 19.99 from Hawkemere Publishing.
Tel: 071-824-8257.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920111

