FT923-9761

FT  04 AUG 92 / International Company News: GE in top executive appointments


   By MARTIN DICKSON


GENERAL Electric, the US manufacturing, services and technology company,
yesterday underscored the increasingly global nature of its business by
appointing Mr Paolo Fresco as the first non-American member of its top
executive team.
Mr Fresco, a 59-year-old Italian who runs GE's international business
development operations from a London base, has been appointed a
vice-chairman of the group and one of four members of GE's policy-making
corporate executive office.
Mr Frank Doyle, 61, a senior vice-president of GE and a labour relations
expert, was also named yesterday to the executive office and given the new
title of executive vice-president.
The two existing members of the office are Mr Jack Welch, GE's chairman, and
Mr Edward Hood, the company's other vice-chairman. They had been its only
members since the departure from the group of two other executives over a
year ago.
Mr Fresco, who became the first non-American member of the GE board in 1990,
has been with the group since 1962 and has headed GE International since
1985. This arm is responsible for developing new international business
alliances and acquisitions and liaising with foreign governments.
Important deals in which he was involved include GE's acquisition of a
controlling interest in Hungary's Tungsram light bulb company and its joint
ventures with Britain's General Electric Company.
Mr Fresco, who spends up to 50 per cent of his time travelling worldwide,
will retain his position at GE International. He said yesterday his
appointment would give him further opportunity to foster globalisation at GE
and bring a non-American perspective to the company's decision-making.
GE also announced yesterday that the heads of the group's 13 business units
would now have the title of president and chief executive officer for their
particular businesses.
Mr Welch said the change recognised the fact that all 13 businesses were the
size of Fortune 500 companies and five were the size of Fortune 100
companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920804

