FT921-1171

FT  25 MAR 92 / Working mothers seek role as main breadwinner


   By DIANE SUMMERS, Labour Staff


MORE THAN half of working mothers would welcome the chance to become the
main breadwinner of the family while their partners stayed at home to look
after the children, according to a Mori poll published yesterday.
The mothers surveyed were almost equally split on whether women or men were
better at looking after children. As for housework, 67 per cent thought
chores would not be done if men were in charge.
The survey, carried out for BHS, the retailing chain, and the Working
Mothers Association, a charity, also found the women evenly split on whether
they thought men would be likely to agree to stay at home.
Women wanted their partners to work shorter hours so they could help with
the family. Women would not want to relinquish all domestic responsibilities
even if they were the main breadwinner, the survey found.
The commonest troubles listed by the sample of more than 400 working mothers
were: lack of time for self; still having to do the majority of housework;
high cost of childcare; guilt about leaving child; and difficulty of
attending school events. More than three in four of the sample worked
part-time.
More than four in five thought there should be tax relief on childcare.
The poll, conducted between February 25 and March 2, found that 25 per cent
of the women said they would vote Conservative and 30 per cent said they
would vote Labour.
Almost all respondents thought employers should have more flexible working
hours and provide more part-time work. Job-sharing was favoured by 88 per
cent, while 85 per cent thought employers should provide workplace
nurseries.
BHS employs 15,000 staff, 85 per cent of them women. It has flexible working
and maternity benefits above the standard required by law. It does not have
job-sharing or provide help with childcare, although BHS said the survey
results would be examined 'at board level'.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920325

