FT922-7157

FT  20 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Pounds 0.5m exceptional charge checks
advance at Anglo Irish Bank


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


AN EXCEPTIONAL charge of IPounds 500,000 relating to the aborted purchase of
Hill Samuel Bank's subsidiary in Ireland, has held down profits at Anglo
Irish Bank Corporation which published its results yesterday for the six
months to March 31.
Pre-tax profits for the period were virtually static at IPounds 3.25m
(Pounds 2.96m sterling). Earnings per share declined to 2.69p (3.33p) due to
the exceptional item and the 1-for-1 rights issue last January. The issue
was 92 per cent subscribed.
Mr Gerry Murphy, chairman, said 'these results are highly satisfactory in
what is a tough banking climate worldwide. Our advances are up 30 per cent
and deposits up 24 per cent . . . We have continued to reduce our emphasis
on leasing and we have regrouped into two new divisions, corporate banking
and retail banking. Results in Ireland are well ahead of targets'.
Negotiations over the purchase of Hill Samuel Ireland broke down last month
after failure to agree on a cash price for the merchant bank. It has total
assets in excess of IPounds 500m. Anglo Irish Bank's total assets are
IPounds 831m. Mr Murphy said the decision to withdraw from the Hill Samuel
deal 'shows our determination to only make acquisitions at the right price
for our shareholders'.
The family interests of Mr John Clegg continue to hold the largest stake in
Anglo Irish with 14 per cent, despite continuing efforts by the board and Mr
Sean Fitzpatrick, the chief executive, to persuade them to sell.
Mr Clegg resigned from the boards of Wace and Anglo Irish Bank earlier this
year, because of allegations concerning shares dealing by members of Mr
Clegg's family.
A senior executive of the bank apparently travelled to South Africa recently
to talk to relatives of Mr Clegg who control the 14 per cent holding, to try
to persuade them to sell to interested institutional shareholders. The offer
was rejected.
Senior Anglo Irish executives believe that such a large private stake in the
company overhangs the market for its shares and depresses their price. The
Clegg family have consistently followed Anglo's successive rights issues.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920520

