FT924-6083

FT  23 NOV 92 / Arts: Killers - Theatre


   By CATHERINE MILTON


Adam Pernak's electric first stage play, Killers, is about the distinction
between permitted killing - by soldiers - and murder, and indeed whether
such a moral distinction can or should exist.
Killers is set in the north of England during the Gulf war and traces the
fortunes of two brothers. On the day that the elder, David Shand (Mark
McGann), is sent to fight for Kuwait, the younger, Jonathan (Stephen McGann)
murders a man with whom his girlfriend has had a casual affair.
The rest of the action concerns the effect of the double-trauma on the
family, especially Mrs Shand (Rowena Cooper).
The relationship between the parents, unable to face the pity and horror of
their neighbours at the civilian killing and at the absence of their other
son in a war they do not understand, eventually snaps.
The tone is anti-war, anti-prison and anti-establishment. What else would
you expect from a writer who juxtaposes killing for your country and
civilian crime?
Yet there are also ironies. As the real war goes on, father (Sam Kelly) and
sons wage their own private war for control of the stereo system.
Even in the depths of parental misery, where mother and father seek refuge
at the allotment, there are acts of comic violence. As Mrs Shand bears the
brunt of her husband's disappointment with his life, she suddenly hits back,
sweeping away the row of vegetables he has just meticulously planted - again
perhaps a reflection of the wider anarchy.
The character of the mother is a study in the English inability to put
feelings into words. She disapproves of herself for feeling proud of her
sons and is unwilling to admit her fears for them.
The play suggests that parents who legitimise their own powerlessness
through aspirations of their children's glories run a serious risk of
disappointment. Maternal pride is a heavy burden, perhaps too heavy, for
young people to bear.
There is passion and poignancy. The real life brothers McGann deliver strong
performances as both sons are haunted by the ghosts they have created. They
fail to come to terms with what they have done, but do come to terms with
each other.
Their mutual understanding is based on both being killers. In the end they
have a deeper relationship than any other in the play.
Pernak is only 22 and Killers is part of the 20th young writers' festival.
Of course, the play has flaws. The attempted equation between the two
killings is ambitious, perhaps pretentious and does not completely come off.
David kills because it is his professional duty to do so: Jonathan kills
merely in a fit of pique.
Nevertheless, the excitement is sustained throughout. Direction is by Ian
Rickson and there is an effectively unobtrusive set designed by Lucy Hall.
Royal Court Theatre Upstairs (071) 730 1745

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921123

