FT924-6302

FT  21 NOV 92 / Books: Fire power


   By MARK ARCHER


FIRE AND CIVILISATION by Johan Goudsblom Allen Lane Pounds 20.00, 247 pages
IN the ancient philosophies of China, India and Greece, fire was regarded as
a living spirit, one of the primal elements, of which the world was
composed. In certain of these civilisations the ancient philosophy of fire
still survives - in the Hindu funeral pyre, for example, as compared with
our hygienically out-of-sight cremations.
Western culture, Johan Goudsblom argues in this engrossing new book, long
ago lost its reverence for fire. When Hesiod, in the eight-century BC,
advised couples not to 'lie down besides the fire when you have just made
love, and show your naked parts,' he was respecting the gods of the hearth,
not issuing a health warning. By Shakespeare's day, though, the poet John
Donne could write that: 'The Element of fire quite put out.' He blamed
science, forerunner of modern day thermodynamics, for stifling the flame.
Whether our forefathers learnt the secret of fire by subterfuge, as
Prometheus' legend has it, or good luck, all the worldwide fire myths
suggest that by obtaining fire and being able to cook, people became truly
'human.' Freud's theory was that the acquisition of fire demanded the
renunciation of certain spontaneous urges, chief of which was the supposedly
irresistible urge felt by primal man when he came in contact with fire 'to
put it out with a stream of urine.'
Goudsblom is less dotty, but he does argue that fire was a crucial part of
the civilising process. Whenever it was first used to turn the tables on
animal predators (opinions vary, but Goudsblom, like Bruce Chatwin in The
Songlines, settles for a cave in Sterkfontein, South Africa, four million
years ago), fire soon had to be institutionalised if people were to live
together. The origin of our word 'curfew' ('couvre feu' in French) was the
ordinance requiring all citizens to cover open fires at night. The Romans
had it both ways, instituting the Vestal Virgins as a watered-down cult of
the eternal fire of Mount Olympus, as well as organising the first fire
brigade.
Goudsblom's book, which ransacks the history and literature of fire from the
ancient world to the present day, is full of arcane facts. When you are next
browning the sausages on the barbecue, spare a thought for the fire gods
Hestia and Hephaestus looking on.

The Financial Times


London Page X

921121

