FT921-1192

FT  25 MAR 92 / Virgin Atlantic wins right to begin Johannesburg flights


   By PAUL BETTS and PHILIP GAWITH


   LONDON, JOHANNESBURG


VIRGIN Atlantic, the airline owned by Mr Richard Branson, plans to start
flying from London to Johannesburg before the end of this year, in a move
signalling South Africa's intentions to adopt an 'open skies' airline
policy.
The route has been the sole preserve of British Airways, Virgin's bigger UK
rival, and South African Airways (SAA) since 1945. It has long been one of
the most lucrative long-distance services for both airlines.
Mr Branson said yesterday, after meeting Mr Peter Welgemoed, the South
African transport minister, that he had been told Virgin 'can gear up and
start flying later this year'.
Virgin officials said the airline planned to start its London to
Johannesburg services in October or November with five flights a week. The
airline hopes eventually to operate daily services and has applied to extend
its Johannesburg flights to Cape Town and Durban.
The new services are expected to intensify the fierce competition between
Virgin and BA on international routes out of London's Heathrow and Gatwick
airports.
They are also expected to bring down fares on what has traditionally been
one of the most expensive long-haul routes. Virgin said economy fares could
be reduced by 35-40 per cent.
Mr Branson said Mr Welgemoed pledged to free up the current airline fare
structure entirely by October and develop an 'open skies' policy over the
next few years.
The new Virgin flights still have to be ratified by the South African
cabinet.
Under the new bilateral air service agreement negotiated last year between
the UK and South Africa, the two UK carriers will be entitled to a 60 per
cent share of frequencies on the London to South Africa route, and SAA to 40
per cent. However, this could change to 50-50 if a second South African
carrier decides to compete on the route.
Virgin also confirmed Mr Branson had been approached by a South African
investor interested in acquiring a stake in Voyager Travel, the holding
company which controls his airline. Mr Branson is considering selling a 20
per cent stake for about Pounds 50m and has also been holding discussions
with potential UK investors.
Virgin is expected to acquire two more Boeing 747s to operate its new
services.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920325

