FT922-7282

FT  19 MAY 92 / Surge in support for Perot shakes Bush and Clinton


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


MR ROSS PEROT, buoyed by the first national opinion poll to put him ahead in
the race for the presidency, said yesterday that 'grassroots America' was
less interested in his stand on various issues than in his promise 'to take
out the trash and clear out the barn' in Washington.
Mr Perot brandished a large shovel emblazoned with the American flag to
prove his point in the course of an extraordinary breakfast television
interview. He said he would formally declare his independent candidacy
'whenever the time feels right'.
The Texas businessman's surge in the polls has clearly shaken the campaigns
of both the Republican and Democratic candidates. The latest Time-CNN poll
gave him 33 per cent against 28 per cent for President George Bush and 24
per cent for Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Mr Perot was sufficiently emboldened to break what was to have been a 60-day
purdah devoted to boning up on policy issues. Asked if that time had been
well spent to date, he responded in a way that goes to the heart of his
appeal.
'Well, it's interesting. As soon as I said that I was going to spend some
time, the phone banks went crazy. The volunteers said: 'We're not interested
in positions. Everybody has detailed positions. Nobody implements them.'
Then the next wave I got from informed people, kind of close to the
(Washington, DC) Beltway, says: 'Perot, there are good positions all over
the place. You don't need to create new ones.' So I started reading the
positions that exist. They've got an interesting point. There are great
ideas that could fix most of the problems our country faces.
'Everybody sits around and talks about them. Nobody does anything about
them. So getting the good positions is not the problem. Taking action in
Washington is apparently an unnatural event. But that's what the people
want. If they put me there, that's what we'll do. We'll have action.'
In another interview yesterday, Mr Perot attacked Mr Bush for his earlier
support of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. 'My position is, if you don't
like guys like Saddam Hussein - and obviously the president didn't in the
end - don't spend 10 years and billions of dollars creating him.
Vice-president and President Bush made Saddam Hussein what he is today.'
Both the Bush and Clinton campaigns hope the Perot bubble will somehow burst
of its own accord, or be punctured by media scrutiny.
Neither candidate has yet worked out a way to attack Mr Perot. Both suffer
from the difficulty that national interest in the remaining primaries, in
which Mr Perot is not taking part, has declined with the respective party
nominations assured. The public already seems to be looking ahead to the
election proper in the autumn.
The president, additionally, has made little impression in his many public
appearances since the Los Angeles riots. This is been tailored to different
audiences and lacked coherence, and partly because, after a brief truce, the
old political divisions are resurfacing in Washington about how to deal with
inner city deprivation.
Who might be No. 2?, Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920519

