FT921-1335

FT  25 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Austria's EC entry carries trade risks,
Gatt report warns


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


AUSTRIA's prospective membership of the EC will result in more open markets
for other Community countries but risks increasing still further its
reliance on preferential trade arrangements, a Gatt report warned yesterday
The report notes that about 75 per cent of Austrian imports originate in
preferential sources, mainly members of the EC or the European Free Trade
Association (Efta), to which Austria belongs. Trade under Gatt's
non-discriminatory 'most-favoured-nation' (MFN) principle 'is therefore the
exception rather than the rule'.
Discussing the report in Gatt's governing council yesterday, trading
partners focused on Austria's plans for closer European integration, through
EC membership, participation in the EC/Efta European Economic Area and a
growing number of free trade accords with central and eastern European
countries.
The report says EC membership and introduction of the common external tariff
will result in a substantial cut in Austria's tariff barriers to third
countries, which for industrial goods are well above the
industrialised-country average.
But Japan and the US were among those countries expressing anxiety yesterday
that closer economic ties with Europe could be at the expense of Austria's
trade with others.
The council urged Austria to ensure further European integration was fully
compatible with Gatt obligations and that liberalisation measures opened
markets on an MFN basis. In reply, Mr Gerhard Waas, director-general of
Austria's federal economics ministry, said EC membership would improve
competitive conditions in Austria and should help create trade.
Gatt's review of Austrian trade policies, part of a series eventually
covering all Gatt's 103 members, notes the contrast between its relatively
liberal trade regime for industrial goods and its restrictive farm trade
policies. Domestic farm prices are more than twice world levels for some
products, the report says.
Other criticisms related to Austria's import licensing and surveillance
schemes; the wide-ranging but informal powers of the 'social partnership'
(government, employers and trade unions) in trade-related matters; and price
controls and the high degree of cartelisation of the Austrian market. This
reduced competition and benefits of open trade.
The council said market-oriented policy reforms by Austria in recent years
had laid the ground for strong economic performance in growth and employment
but expressed concern over high levels of protection and discriminatory
policies in some areas.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920325

