FT922-4320

FT  05 JUN 92 / Government Bonds: Selling of European bonds balanced by
bargain-hunters


   By TRACY CORRIGAN and SARA WEBB


EUROPEAN bond markets ended above their lows yesterday as bargain-hunters
mopped up cheap paper. However, the recovery followed further concerted
selling, with Ecu, Italian and Spanish bond markets again bearing the brunt
of selling pressure in the after-shock of Denmark's referendum result.
Selling at the start of European trading gained impetus from substantial
overnight liquidation of European bonds by Japanese investors.
The Ecu bond market ended half a point lower, having sustained losses
earlier in the day of 1 1/2 points. For the second day running, the Ecu bond
futures contract on the Matif, the Paris futures exchange, had to be
suspended when the price fell its full 1 1/2 -point limit, but the market
subsequently recovered most of its losses.
In the run-up to the Danish referendum, Ecu bonds had been trading at yields
substantially lower than their theoretical yield levels based on component
markets: because of expectations that the market would benefit from monetary
union, investors were prepared to pay more for Ecu bonds than their basket
value would suggest. But following this week's sell-off, the spread between
real Ecu bond yields and theoretical yields narrowed to about 15 points, at
the 10-year area of the yield curve.
When valuing Ecu bonds, dealers are now likely to pay greater attention to
component bond markets, and the Ecu market may not be able to sustain a
premium to theoretical levels, according to analysts. However, there will be
natural support for the Ecu market at the theoretical yield level, according
to traders.
SPAIN, once one of the most popular high-yielding bond markets among those
investors hoping to benefit from the convergence of European interest rates,
dropped nearly one point but later picked up to close about 20 basis points
lower on the day.
Ten-year yield spreads of Spanish government bonds over German bunds have
widened dramatically in the last two trading days. The spread, which stood
at 286 basis points late on Tuesday, widened to 324 basis points yesterday
morning and ended the day at 313 basis points.
Traders warned that the peseta bond-German bund yield spread could widen
even further on fears that the Spanish government will be under less
pressure to meet the convergence criteria in future, and on concern that
there could be a realignment of the EMS currencies.
Italy's high-yielding government bonds also suffered heavy losses yesterday,
as traders focused on the country's economic problems. However, the market
made some recovery later in the day to close slightly lower. The yield
spread over 10-year German government bonds widened from 497 basis points on
Wednesday to 508 basis points yesterday.
GERMAN government bonds closed higher as dealers and investors continued to
shift out of the higher-yielding European bond markets and into D-Mark
assets in the wake of Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht Treaty.
The Liffe bund futures contract, which opened at 87.73, climbed as high as
87.98 yesterday, before slipping back to 87.94 in late afternoon.
THE FRENCH bond market ended  1/8 point lower, having regained  1/4 point
after early losses, in active two-way trading. The French market held up
well, since it is considered one of the low-yielding markets, and a
potential beneficiary of a two-speed Europe, if France were to join an
advance party of European countries moving towards monetary union, as some
analysts suggest may happen. However, concern about a French referendum on
Europe announced on Wednesday is likely to inject a slightly negative note.
'It will be a summer of political uncertainty, against a background of
extremely encouraging economic fundamentals,' said Mr Kit Juckes,
international economist at SG Warburg. 'Occasional jitters are bound to
resurface.'
THE UK government bond market witnessed another day of turbulent trading,
particularly in the futures contract. However, traders reported some buying
interest as bond prices touched their lowest levels during the day and, as a
result, the market closed almost unchanged.
Volumes in the Liffe gilt futures contract were very high for the second
consecutive day at 67,000 contracts. The volume reached about 80,000
contracts on Wednesday, compared with a normal level of 18,000. The futures
contract opened at 98.13 and ended at around 98.16 yesterday.
In the cash market, the benchmark 11 3/4 per cent gilt due 2003/07 opened at
116 21/32 and traded at 116 5/8 by late afternoon. Although the gilt market
fell quite heavily at the opening, traders noted buying interest once the
yields on long-dated issues moved above 9 per cent. The buying interest came
from UK investors, many of whom switched money out of Spain and Italy, the
higher-yielding European markets, into gilts.
'We expect to see a weaker trend in the gilts market until we get a much
clearer idea about what is happening (to Maastricht),' said one trader.
TRADING in US Treasury markets was subdued yesterday as investors held their
fire ahead of today's crucial employment report for May.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government issue was down  1/32 at
101 13/32 , yielding 7.870 per cent. The two-year note was down 1/32 at 99
27/32 , yielding 5.192 per cent.
In the morning, the weekly jobless claims data, showing a 4,000 increase in
the third week of May, provided no clues as to how the May employment report
would look. Forecasts for today's numbers focus on a rise in non-farm
payrolls of about 100,000. Only if the rise falls well short of that, or if
payrolls show an absolute decline - which is highly unlikely - is there a
chance of the market making any gains.
Caution ahead of the afternoon's money supply figures was another factor
behind the quiet trading yesterday, although analysts did not expect the
market to display much reaction to the data, unless there is a dramatic fall
in M2 - the most closely watched measure of money.
JAPANESE government bonds edged lower yesterday, and dealers said the market
was likely to remain trading in a narrow range until the release of the US
jobs data for May today.
The yield on the benchmark No 129 issue opened at 5.48 per cent, traded in a
range of 5.47-5.505 per cent, and closed in Tokyo at 5.49 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920605

