FT924-11968

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (4):  Baby-talk at
the checkout - The Plowshares / In which John plans a nest-egg for his
godson, and Mr Stagge suggests the friendly approach


   By BEVERLY CHANDLER


JOHN PLOWSHARE is spending a happy Saturday morning at his favourite
domestic chore, the weekly family shop at the supermarket.
He is rarely allowed to do this on his own, but today he has managed to
shake off his wife Alison at the garden centre. He is ensconced at the
biscuit section, when a hearty voice hails him from tinned goods.
It's Mark Stagge, of John's stockbroker Stagge & Hoppitt, clearly in relaxed
weekend mode.
John realises that their encounter is fortuitous. 'I've been meaning to give
you a ring,' he tells Mark. 'I'm going to be godfather to the child of a
friend of ours. I thought it would be a good idea to put a bit of cash away
for him on a regular basis, and I wondered if there was a more intelligent
way of doing it than just putting it in the building society.'
Mark's gives a large grin. 'It's interesting you should ask, because I've
just been through exactly this decision-making process for my nephew.'
The pair advance round the supermarket, pushing their trollies and
discussing ways of giving money to a child. By the time they reach frozen
foods, they have agreed on the main point: that this is money the child must
not be able to touch until he is at least 18, by which time it should be
sufficient for him to use in paying for further education or as a deposit on
a house.
John is interested to hear that Mark is not keen to commit too much money to
his nephew: 'I think about Pounds 200 a year should do it. And I feel that I
want to make small regular payments, rather than a lump sum.'
John, still feeling rather short of cash in these recessionary times, is
happy to agree.
Mark explains that one of the most popular ways of saving on a child's
behalf is through National Savings, particularly the Children's Bonus Bond.
However, despite its many attractions, the bond is not available as a
regular savings plan. Moreover, the maximum holding for each child is Pounds
1,000.
Nor is Mark convinced that a fixed-interest savings product will produce the
best returns for his nephew's savings. 'Longer term,' he says, 'I believe
equities will provide a better return.'
Consequently, Mark had asked around, and found that a friend of his was
saving for his niece through a friendly society. 'This,' he explains, 'is a
society registered under the Friendly Societies Act, which exists for the
provision of certain mutual benefits and tax-exempt savings products for
children and families.
'Apparently, this friend got a mailshot with teddy bears all over it, and
found that friendly societies offer regular savings plans for children.
'These are designed to run for a minimum of 10 years, but they can be
adapted to allow for saving over 15 years - which is perfect timing for me,
because my nephew is six at the moment, so he'll be 21 when the plan runs
out. You can contribute up to a maximum of Pounds 200 a year and, best of
all, you can pay by direct debit.'
Mark and John have now reached the wine department, and there is a lull in
the conversation as they engage in that part of the shopping which requires
particularly serious thought. As they reach the tonic water, Mark resumes:
'These plans are totally tax-free. This means that, when young Tarquin
reaches the ripe old age of 21, he can either sell the policy and take all
the proceeds tax-free, or elect to take a regular tax-free income and leave
the balance to grow further. Alternatively, he can leave the money to grow
tax-free until the lump sum is most needed.
'A further advantage is that the money can be invested in a managed equity
fund, which suits my investment approach, combining both aims of achieving
security and above-average capital growth. What's more, the tax-free
environment means that growth could be even higher.'
'Need all the money go into equities?' asks John, warily.
'No. There's a choice of a unit-linked or a with-profits plan. I've chosen a
managed fund, in which case, the money goes into a mixture of UK and
international equities, fixed-interest stock, gilts and property.'
The pair have finally reached that place of great stress, the supermarket
check-out. So it is not surprising that John's thoughts turn in a certain
direction:
'What about charges?'
'You might at first consider them a trifle high,' admits Mark. Typical
charges on a unit-linked regular savings plan with a friendly society would
be: the 5 per cent bid-offer spread, a 0.75 per cent annual management
charge, and a 40p-50p handling charge on each premium if you pay monthly.'
John is slightly taken aback. 'I hope that's all?'
'Not quite. The initial cost is between 40 and 50 per cent of the first
year's premium - that's the cost of setting up the plan.'
'Yes, they do sound a bit on the high side,' observes John, signing his
credit-card slip with the check-out girl's ballpoint.
'But what you must remember,' explains Mark, 'is that these plans are meant
to run over 10 to 15 years. Then the charges don't seem nearly as fierce.'
As they push their trollies across the car park, a further thought occurs to
John: 'What if I want to stop the contributions? Say I can't afford it - or
I find that I have a prodigal godson?'
'You can stop at any point and cash it in, and as godparent you'll get the
money in trust for your godchild. But during years one to 10, because it's a
tax-free device, you can't have back more than you put in. After year 10,
you can have the value of the units tax-free.
'Alternatively, you could make the plan paid-up, so that the money stays
where it is until the child is 16, when he can have it.'
Since their cars are at opposite ends of the car park, the conversation
ends.
'Give me a call if you want any more advice,' says Mark, as he moves off in
the direction of his K-reg Granada.
John, persuaded that the friendly society route at least deserves
consideration, pauses to make a note on the back of Alison's shopping list:
'Ring M at S & H'
Help in compiling this feature was provided by Andrew Jones, of David M.
Aaron, personal financial advisers.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921023

