FT922-13386

FT  11 APR 92 / Without benefit of hindsight: Why the Tory campaign was such
a disaster


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


Note to Editor: Here is my piece for Saturday's FT. I'm afraid I've had to
file on Wednesday: I have pressing financial matters to attend to in the
Cayman Islands and there's only one flight a week. But the polls are
remarkably consistent that there will be a Tory defeat, so this piece should
hold.
SO, as all the pundits predicted, the Conservatives have suffered a crushing
rebuff from the electorate. It is, as the polls forecast so unanimously, the
biggest swing against a party in power since the war.
Now the Tory inquest must begin - although it had begun unofficially over
the past three weeks as it became increasingly clear that John Major's
campaign was running into the sands.
I am not writing with the benefit of hindsight when I say that the
shortcomings of the Tory campaign have not been the result only of poor
presentation. Rather, they reflect a real weakness at the heart of Tory
policy-making. The party has not yet come to terms with the departure of
Margaret Thatcher and is suffering an identity crisis as a result. It had
almost nothing to say about the need to reform the way the country is
governed, even though it is now clear that change was both inevitable and
desirable.
As the electorate has correctly sensed, a healthy democracy requires change
and choice in the character of government. It would have required very
compelling arguments to re-elect any party after 13 years in power: the
Tories looked as if they had run out of steam and needed to re-think their
priorities away from the cares of office.
For all that, the Conservatives might have won this election had they run
the campaign with even half the verve and style of their opponents, both
Labour and Liberal Democrats.
But John Major cannot compete with Neil Kinnock as a platform orator and the
contrast was there for all to see on the television news. Major's attempt to
counter this by standing on a soap-box at every opportunity was a gimmick
which, we can now see, back-fired horribly. It was un-prime ministerial and
undignified. In the purge which will now take place at Conservative Central
Office, the first person to lose his job will be the one who thought-up the
soap-box - that is, if anyone can be found to admit to it.
John Major himself, however, must take much of the blame on to his own
shoulders. The greatest challenge that faces a prime minister is the
loneliest one: the responsibility of choosing when to go to the people.
John Major funked it on two occasions. First, in the immediate aftermath of
the Gulf War. That was when Margaret Thatcher would have dissolved
parliament. Indeed, had Michael Heseltine been elected leader of the
Conservative Party that is what he would have done, too. And either would
have won a khaki election.
Even less forgiveably, Major failed to call a General Election in November,
as many of us advocated, before the full depth of the recession became
evident. That was probably his last chance ahead of the tidal wave of
mortgage re-possessions and business failures which ate into the traditional
Tory bedrock of support in the south-east.
The sad truth is that Major is not quite the asset he once was to the
Tories. There was a time when Central Office regarded him as the
election-winner. His decency and compassion were what would get the Tories
through, even though they were fighting in the middle of a recession. But
the lack-lustre Tory campaign, coupled with the fact that Major, himself, is
not a naturally impressive campaigner, has diminished the Conservative
leader in the public's eye. Kinnock has survived the election unscathed,
indeed enhanced - that is the true measure of just how bad the Tory campaign
has been.
The judgment of history may well be thus: that John Major was elected leader
of the Conservative Party because he was not Margaret Thatcher but failed to
be elected as prime minister for the same reason.
Hope that's OK for this weekend. Should the unimaginable happen and John
Major is returned to Downing Street with a workable overall majority, just
scrap this and run my Easter piece "Humility: An Unfashionable Virtue".
Best. Dominic.
Dominic Lawson is editor of the Spectator

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920411

