FT924-999

FT  21 DEC 92 / Poll blow for Taipei rulers: Results herald era of
compromise after corruption backlash


   By SIMON DAVIES


   TAIPEI


TAIWAN dealt a blow to President Lee Teng-hui's ruling Kuomintang party in
parliamentary elections on Saturday, heralding an era of compromise and
accountability for the party which has governed the island virtually
unchallenged for 43 years.
The official KMT candidates, primarily Taiwanese-born liberal supporters of
Mr Lee, took only 53 per cent of the vote, compared with 71 per cent in
elections last year for the National Assembly, a separate body whose sole
tasks are to select the president and amend the constitution.
The opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), the once-outlawed
organisation many of whose members have been jailed, was a prime beneficiary
of anti-Lee sentiment. It picked up 31 per cent of the vote, compared with
24 per cent in the National Assembly election last year.
But the biggest swing was towards President Lee's conservative opposition
within his own party: the descendants of Chiang Kai-shek's Mainland army who
took control of the island in 1949 and have only recently relinquished their
authoritarian rule.
The largest number of votes went to Mr Wang Chien-shien and Mr Jaw Shao-kan,
two former KMT cabinet ministers who stood without the support of the party
and who campaigned strongly against KMT corruption.
Taiwan's multi-seat constituency system makes it possible for more than one
KMT candidate to stand in any one constituency.
The conservative faction, known as the Non-Mainstream, is seen as less
corrupt, and less biased towards the business community, and they benefited
from the election's focus on 'Money Politics'.
This year's election campaign is believed to have cost a total of TDollars
20bn (Pounds 498m), much of which has gone on illegal vote-buying. More than
200 cases of vote-buying are currently being investigated.
The mainstream KMT members are seen as the main culprits, using the huge
financial resources of the party (which owns banks and television stations),
and its support from the island's big businessmen.
Mr James Soong, KMT secretary general, said: 'Our party is very dissatisfied
with the outcome, but we have to accept the voters' choice.' Yesterday, one
conservative KMT faction called for Mr Soong's resignation.
The pro-Mainland backlash is good news for beleaguered Taiwanese premier Hau
Pei-tsun, a Mainlander who looked set for departure in the event of strong
support for President Lee's Mainstream KMT. Given the backing for Hau's
supporters, it seems likely he will remain as figurehead for a big minority
group.
DPP support was also fervent, showing recognition of its evolution into a
serious opposition party.
The lack of support for President Lee is bound to cause consternation in
Beijing. China has been keeping a close eye on the elections in what it
considers to be a renegade province, and General Secretary Jiang Zemin last
week warned the KMT to oppose any support for the independence movement.
The DPP campaigned on a platform of 'One China, One Taiwan' urging greater
independence. Its 50 seats in the 161-seat legislature will therefore smack
of defiance towards the Mainland rulers.
But President Lee looks likely to retain control of an increasingly divided
legislature. Official KMT candidates retained 96 seats. In addition, the
non-Mainstream may be keen to force compromises but they will want to retain
the advantages of party membership, while the DPP agrees with many of the
economic and political reforms proposed by President Lee.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921221

