FT921-14041

FT  17 JAN 92 / Book Review: Mid-bridge in the Middle East


   By ROGER MATTHEWS


NO TRUMPETS, NO DRUMS By Sari Nusseibeh and Mark Heller IB Tauris. Pounds
12.95
Any two people from opposite sides of the Arab-Israel divide who succeed in
agreeing on more than a vague outline of a resolution of the longest-running
Middle East conflict deserve credit. For the attempt to be made jointly by
an Israeli citizen and a Palestinian assures the project of greater
credibility and, hopefully, wider circulation. And for the authors to have
concluded their task by liking and respecting each other was a bonus that
even they had not contemplated.
What they would now like is for the involved parties to study their efforts
and to consider those areas where mutually acceptable solutions are shown to
be possible.
It was none the less tempting to abandon No Trumpets, No Drums after the
first few pages. The disappointment was provoked by the realisation that,
although setting out on a marathon course, the two runners had started at
the halfway mark.
Mr Heller, a Canadian-born Israeli, quickly admits to having supported for
some time the concept of an independent Palestinian state on the territory
occupied by Israel in the 1967 war. For his part, Mr Nusseibeh knew of Mr
Heller's position from the outset, and says that he could not have worked
with an Israeli who refused to accept the necessity of a two-state solution.
For him and, he says, the Palestinian people, the bottom line must be a
sovereign state with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Contrast this with the starting point of the peace negotiations in Madrid
last November and in the third session of talks in Washington this week. Not
only does the Israeli government refuse to contemplate the emergence of a
Palestinian state, it refuses to negotiate with a separate Palestinian
delegation and will not concede the principle of returning any part of the
occupied territories.
Mr Yitzhak Shamir, Israel's prime minister, has said repeatedly that all
that is on offer is peace for peace. As if to reinforce that assertion,
Israel is accelerating the pace of its housebuilding programme in the West
Bank and Gaza, regardless of mounting American anger and the increasing
probability that President George Bush will seek to deny Israel the Dollars
10bn it is asking for in loan guarantees to help settle the wave of new
immigrants from what was the Soviet Union.
Of course, Mr Shamir is taking his most extreme position at the outset, both
as a negotiating stance and in the hope that he might persuade the Arab
delegation to abandon the process. But it would be nave to expect Mr Shamir,
the Likud party he leads, or anyone else from the Israeli right to do what
Mr Nusseibeh has required and received from Mr Heller: that is, to recognise
the principle of what they describe as 'equitability and mutuality' between
the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
If that were achieved, then Messrs Heller and Nusseibeh would be more likely
to be observing and chronicling the progress of the official negotiations,
rather than coming up with solutions of their own. Finding a way to cross
the bridge from the reality of today to the point at which the authors have
chosen to begin their own negotiations is what the present American-led
peace process is about.
For Arab leaders, the past decade has brought a relentless narrowing of
choice. The demise of pan-Arabism, the Gulf war defeat of Iraq's President
Saddam Hussein, the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the pre-eminence of
the US in the Middle East have left no way forward for them, other than
through negotiation. If Mr Nusseibeh was able to deliver to them in fact
what he has negotiated in print, songs in his honour would be sung
throughout the Arab world.
He may not have achieved everything that the Palestinians want, but he has
progressed further with Mr Heller than did President Anwar Sadat in his
attempt to win concessions from Mr Menachem Begin, the former Israeli prime
minister, at the Camp David negotiations which brought the first
breakthrough in Arab-Israeli peace efforts.
Mr Heller will have a harder task in selling the results of his labour to
fellow citizens. He questions, as do they, whether the Palestinians and
other Arabs will ever truly reconcile themselves to Israel's existence. But
he is also convinced that Israel, faced by the choice between stalemate and
a two-state solution, must choose the latter.
He and Mr Nusseibeh cannot agree on the precise borders between the two
states, but they do not back away from solutions for scarcely less
contentious issues, such as the return of Palestinian refugees, Jewish
settlements, security, water resources, and even the future of Jerusalem as
the jointly administered capital of both nations.
They have done what intelligent, fair-minded people should always be capable
of. Sadly, as the Middle East daily demonstrates, their voices remain faint,
and the need to make such a fundamental choice is far from being actively
debated by the majority of Israelis. If ever it is, No Trumpets, No Drums
can make a reasoned contribution to what will be an emotional and divisive
debate.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920117

