FT921-383

FT  30 MAR 92 / Ethnic clash looms in Moldova: Attack feared after state of
emergency declared


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE government of Moldova has declared a nationwide state of emergency to
try to bring to heel an enclave of Russians and Ukrainians who have declared
independence.
Mr Igor Smirnov, president of the self-proclaimed Trans-Dnestr republic,
immediately responded by declaring a 10pm to 6am curfew and called on his
forces, which include Cossack mercenaries, to prepare for an attack.
The state of emergency, declared at the weekend, provides for direct
presidential rule through special local committees and empowers police and
fledgling army units to take all necessary measures to disband and disarm
illegal armies.
Ms Alina Demakova, a spokeswoman for the Trans-Dnestr government, said
Moldova was 'not yet ready for a fullout attack but was readying forces for
one.' She said the Moldovan government planned decisive action within 48
hours.
The Russian foreign ministry appealed to all parties to 'act in accordance
with international law', avoid further bloodshed and show respect for
minorities.
Forty people have died in clashes between Moldovan and Trans-Dnestr forces
over the past month. Ms Demakova said Trans-Dnestr was quiet yesterday
although two of its guardsmen had been injured in overnight skirmishes.
Moldova's Popular Front, the opposition movement which wants reunification
with Romania, expressed puzzlement at President Mircea Snegur's announcement
of a state of emergency.
Ms Natalya Paskal, a Front spokeswoman, said she suspected the declaration
could prove as ineffectual as a government ultimatum issued two weeks ago
demanding that the Trans-Dnestr forces lay down their arms.
But she noted that it had come just in time to ban rallies planned by the
Front yesterday to support the goal of reunification with Romania. The
Trans-Dnestr republic, a sliver of industrialised territory on the left bank
of the Dnestr River, does not want to live under Romanian rule and has also
rejected legislation to make Romanian the republic's official language.
Ms Demakova, said the Russians and Ukrainians were prepared to remain part
of Moldova if it was turned into a federal state but she said the
government's refusal to accept such an arrangement meant it was heading
towards unification with Romania.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920330

