FT924-6422

FT  21 NOV 92 / Lone farmer blocks Japan's gateway to the world: A system of
consensus that means things sometimes do not happen at all, even
international airports


   By GORDON CRAMB


IT COULD almost be England. Sturdy hedgerows flank the narrow lane. A Boeing
grinds overhead through a grey sky. At the farmhouse, a marmalade cat
appraises arrivals.
But the farm, owned by 69-year-old Mr Kohei Ogawa, lies in Japan's Chiba
prefecture. Chiba is also home to Narita airport - the scruffy, overcrowded
first port of call for most of the 3.5m visitors to the country each year.
For more than 20 years Narita has caused a bitter dispute between farmers
and those who want their land for a bigger airport.
Mr Ogawa and seven other farmers whose land is directly threatened by the
extension plans have been locked in battle with the government for 26 years.
The dispute has the hallmarks of a Japanese political tussle - intrigue,
faction fighting, hidden agendas, dirty tricks, even death.
Last month the Tokyo high court ruled that the government was entitled to
procure land for the project. Rejecting a complaint by 39 farmers (most of
whom were contesting the expansion on noise grounds), Mr Shigeru Sato, the
judge, said that 'public benefits from the construction of the airport
outweigh the disadvantages to local citizens.'
But the ruling will go to appeal. The building of the first of two
additional runways, with which Narita wants to double its capacity to
220,000 flights a year, is no nearer. A total of 23 other lawsuits are
pending, and Japan's civil legal system - the latest case stemmed from a
lower court finding in 1984 - can be as circular and slow-moving as a
baggage carousel.
The Narita dispute vividly demonstrates that Japan's consensual way of
getting things done sometimes means they do not get done at all. 'A few can
hold up something which would benefit the whole country,' observes Ms
Victoria Menendez, airline analyst with Jardine Fleming in Tokyo.
Even if all went well, a new runway would not be ready before 1996.
Meanwhile, carriers are being required to provide funds for terminal
facilities which cannot until then be properly used.
Inside the farmhouse where the runway would be, Mr Ogawa brings out a
dog-eared ring-binder containing an application from the airport authority
dated September 13 1969. The submission tells the Transport Ministry that
three quarters of the land has been bought and the rest will be no problem.
Completion is expected in March 1974.
The protestors' main ground for objection is that the government pushed
ahead with the project - Narita with its one runway opened eventually in
1978 - without securing adequate local backing. But the issues are muddied,
and Mr Ogawa has grudges against the government which go back much further.
After the war, the family lost land in a government reorganisation of
agriculture. In 1969, he took the government to the supreme court to
challenge his father's death duties, arguing unsuccessfully that these did
not recognise that the property was farmland.
'This has been going on for the past 26 years, I'm still here, I have been
deceived by the government but not defeated,' he says. 'The government
started from the wrong place - like buttoning a shirt, if you get it wrong
you have to go back to the beginning.'
Although Mr Ogawa is one of only eight farmers whose land is under threat,
such is the faction-ridden nature of even the most localised Japanese
politics that the eight are split into three camps.
They differ, family feuds aside, on the use of violence and the extent of
the involvement of 'outsiders' in the campaign. The 39 who lost their case
last month were the residue of more than 1,600 original plaintiffs, most of
whom were affected on noise grounds. Some Y5bn (Pounds 27m) a year from
airport revenues goes on local environmental spending, most of it funded
through landing charges.
Mr Ogawa speaks for four households, the more radical Kitahara faction for
another two, and the Atsuta faction for the remainder. Atsuta, the only
faction to be involved in round-table talks with the authorities - which
began a year ago and on which both pin wan hopes - is now deemed the most
moderate. Its spokesman, Mr Hiromishi Ishige, admits his own commitment has
also led him to the borders of legality. 'In the past we and the government
fought even dirtier than the yakuza,' Japan's tattooed and intimidating
gangsters. 'People were killed.'
Four policemen and two protesters died in the early 1970s, three of the
police in a 1971 incident where the government demolished a house. A friend
of Mr Ishige (and the apparent culprit) committed suicide immediately
afterwards.
Incidents continue. The new home of a former airport opponent was bombed
this summer after he sold up and moved three years ago.
The talks have brought a pledge from the government not to take land by
force, although Mr Ishige concedes that the legal power to make a compulsory
purchase order does exist.
'The Narita issue is something to do with the whole trend of the world,' he
argues. 'Ten years ago the government ignored our proposals to solve it by
negotiation. The Japanese economy was growing fast and the government
thought it could take the leadership. This was neo-nationalism. After the
cold war ended, there has been and there must be less emphasis on conflict.'
At the Transport Ministry an official says only that the authorities will
'continue negotiations with landowners peacefully and rationally.' And, it
still appears, inconclusively.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921121

