FT923-9851

FT  03 AUG 92 / A flight back to basics: BAe is preparing a radical
restructuring


   By PAUL BETTS and TONY JACKSON


Visitors driving in to central London from Heathrow airport used to be
greeted by a stylish billboard advertising British Aerospace executive jets.
This summer, it has been replaced by a poster plugging an American fast-food
chain.
It is a small but telling reflection of what is happening in Britain's
biggest manufacturing company and exporter of manufactured goods.
From the City's point of view, BAe is in bad shape. In the past year its
share price has fallen by about two-thirds, from 570p to 209p at last
Friday's close. Its total market value is less than Pounds 800m (Dollars
1.5bn). At this rate, it is set to fall out of the FT-SE index of the UK's
100 biggest companies.
Late next month, with the company's interim results, the new chairman, Mr
John Cahill, will reveal further drastic measures to restructure the
company. His first move will involve the troubled regional aircraft
business.
'We have been working fairly feverishly for the past six weeks on a
solution,' Mr Cahill says. 'By September we will have one. That will be a
new beginning for this company. It's been dragging baggage behind it for a
number of years, and we're just starting to face up to it.'
The company has been searching for international partners to acquire a stake
in its regional jet and turbo-propeller commuter aircraft activities. If
these efforts fail, the regional aircraft business is likely to be scrapped.
But that is likely to be only the first stage of a broader programme to
refocus the company around its military aircraft operations and its 20 per
cent stake in the European Airbus consortium.
Central to the group's problems is its chronic inability to generate cash.
Last year it shocked the City with a surprise Pounds 432m rights issue. Even
after that cash injection, its net debt was nearly Pounds 400m higher by the
end of the year.
It is a problem which Mr Cahill should be qualified to address. The company
in which he spent most of his working life, the conglomerate BTR, is
renowned for its tight financial controls.
'We have to get the company cash-positive,' he says. 'Otherwise it eats
itself alive. My view is that there is around Pounds 250m stuck in the
system here. We've got to drive it out. Then we can close the warehouses and
turn the lights out. And we need to keep de-manning.'
The roots of the problem, he concedes, lie in the company's history. 'The
company for years was a cash cow. It was a defence business, with research
and development funded by Her Majesty's Government and by payments for work
in progress.
'It has probably never been managed for profit or for cash. All that used to
take care of itself. That's now changing. In the 1990s, we're not going to
get high inflation or explosive volume growth. So you've got to get the
costs down. If you look across the road to BTR, that's exactly what we did.'
In strategic terms, the process of re-shaping the company could take three
or four years. It may also have far-reaching implications for the group's
other activities, including the Rover car operations, its property business
and perhaps even some of its defence interests.
Mr Cahill's room for manoeuvre is hampered by depressed demand across the
group's businesses. 'That is the other thing that is bugging the business,
besides regional aircraft,' he says. But he cannot afford to wait too long
before wielding the scalpel.
'Radical surgery is required,' says Mr Keith Hodgkinson, aerospace analyst
at Shearson Lehman, the US investment bank. 'It's the old story: there can
be no gain without pain and the incoming chairman must attempt to get
everything right in the first year. He can't have a second crack at it.'
A revealing insight into the history of the group's problems is contained in
a letter in the latest edition of the Royal Aeronautical Society journal
from Professor Ivan Yates, a former head of BAe's aircraft group and the
group's deputy chief executive responsible for engineering until 1990.
According to Prof Yates, things started to go wrong in the late 1980s after
government aid was cut to the point at which it no longer covered the
financial risk of the company's commercial aircraft programmes. BAe's
response was to diversify into armaments, construction, motor manufacture
and property.
'This strategy underpinned the acquisition of Royal Ordnance (the armaments
company, acquired from the government for Pounds 190m in 1987), Ballast
Nedam (the Dutch construction concern, also bought in 1987), Rover (bought
from the government in 1988), and, by extreme extrapolation, the property
company Arlington (bought for Pounds 278m in 1989),' Prof Yates explains.
But, he claims that strategy had two significant drawbacks. 'First, it used
up cash which would otherwise have been invested in the aerospace business .
. . Second, it exposed the company, as is now clearly demonstrated, to
increased risk in other markets such as the highly volatile consumer and
property sectors.'
BAe's recovery strategy was set out in its rights-issue document last year.
The group is to be focused round its four main businesses: defence,
commercial aircraft, cars and property. Mr Cahill's challenge is to
accelerate this strategy by selling off non core-activities and shedding
loss makers.
This is likely to involve heavy write-offs. The City estimates that the
company will write off about Pounds 750m with its interim figures. But the
gloom should not be overdone. BAe has two big strengths - defence and
Airbus.
Defence. Although the defence market is contracting, this remains the
company's largest profit centre. 'BAe is one of the world's best
manufacturers of military aircraft and even without the European Fighter
Aircraft this business will continue to make decent profits over the next
four to five years,' says Mr Hodgkinson of Shearson Lehman. BAe is the
world's third-largest defence contractor and the biggest in Europe.
The defence activities, which made Pounds 550m in operating profits last
year, are also underpinned by the company's long-term relationship with
Saudi Arabia, which will continue to provide BAe with some Pounds 2bn in
annual revenues over the rest of the decade. However, BAe's overall military
business is likely to shrink as a result of defence spending cuts. The
company would clearly suffer a huge blow if the European Fighter Aircraft
were cancelled, but the new fighter would not have any significant impact on
profits and revenues until 1995-96.
While building on its military aircraft and systems strengths, BAe may again
seek a joint venture for its missiles business after failing with
Thomson-CSF of France two years ago. In the long run, the Royal Ordnance
armaments group does not appear to constitute a core activity. In France,
the aerospace and armaments industries are separated, and some analysts
believe this would also make sense for the UK.
Airbus. Although in the past BAe has been anxious about its participation in
the European Airbus programme, it now regards its 20 per cent stake in the
consortium as its second big asset. It would like to increase its stake, but
it is difficult to see the two lead partners, Aerospatiale of France and
Deutsche Aerospace, giving ground.
Airbus has firmly established itself as Boeing's main rival in the market
for large airliners. Its extensive family of aircraft, built up over the
last 20 years, has given it a 26 per cent share of the world market. That
could grow to around 30 per cent. Last month Airbus made a spectacular
inroad into Boeing's domestic market by winning a Dollars 5bn order from
United Airlines, a traditional Boeing customer.
BAe now clearly intends to concentrate its efforts in the commercial
aircraft business on Airbus and its wing-manufacturing activities for the
European consortium. Last year, BAe picked up about Dollars 45m of the
consortium's Dollars 260m operating surplus.
BAe has also decided to sell its profitable corporate jet business because
it no longer sees this as a core activity. If it had decided to remain in
the corporate jet market, it would have been forced to invest heavily in the
development of new products at a time when it is seeking to keep a tight
rein on capital expenditures. The sale will also help reduce company debt.
The two other legs of the group are Rover and property. Although the company
does not appear to be in any rush to make any radical moves, both are
unlikely to remain with BAe in the longer term.
Rover. The vehicle business is expected to report another loss this year,
with few encouraging signs of market recovery. Rover is continuing to cost
BAe significant sums in the modernisation of new plant and the introduction
of new models.
BAe is still bound by a five-year standstill agreement with the government
until August next year, when it could sell Rover if it chose to. But the
company is concentrating on making Rover as lean and competitive as any
company in the world market. Once this process is complete, and Rover starts
achieving good profits, BAe is expected to look for a buyer. This could be
either a bigger European manufacturer, or possibly Honda of Japan, which
already owns a 20 per cent stake in Rover's manufacturing operations.
As BAe sees it, Rover's problem is one of volume. It builds about 400,000
vehicles a year, many in car market segments which require volumes of 1m to
2m a year if development costs are to be properly amortised. 'Whatever
ultimately happens, Rover is unlikely to remain in BAe's portfolio,' one
City analyst forecasts.
Property. BAe's hopes that property development profits would become a big
cash generator for the group have disintegrated. In the depressed state of
the market, the company is marking time, hoping that the market will
eventually recover and its property assets become more liquid.
Mr Cahill's task of restoring BAe's sense of direction is by no means
impossible. Others have succeeded. In the US, Lockheed and General Dynamics,
two of the biggest defence contractors, appear to be well on the way to
achieving successful restructurings focused on their core defence
businesses.
But the new chairman cannot afford any error. 'This is probably the last
chance for BAe, just as Mr Cahill won't be given a second chance if he gets
things wrong now,' says one executive of another large UK aerospace group.
The problem is that building aircraft has always been a seductive process
and the industry has traditionally suffered from over-optimism. Mr Cahill
can clearly continue to hope for the best, but in the present circumstances,
he must also expect the worst. The trouble with BAe has been that it has
always hoped for the best and expected it.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
BRITISH AEROSPACE: A PRESSING CASE FOR REFORM
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Sales 1991           Profit (loss) before tax &
                       (pounds m)               exceptional items
                  Including    Excluding           (pounds m)
                intra-group  intra-group         1991     1990
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Defence               4,226        4,036          553      504
Commercial aircraft   1,667        1,651         (56)       28
Motor vehicles        3,744        3,744         (83)      103
Property development    291          287         (34)     (18)
Construction            781          592           38       22
Other business
& headquarters          363          252         (80)     (53)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                     11,112       10,562          338      586
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Less: intra-group     (550)
Unallocated interest                            (184)    (186)
& borrowing
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                     10,562       10,562          154      400
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920803

