FT924-5926

FT  24 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Recovery at revamped Marling


   By ANDREW BOLGER


THE NEW management team at Marling Industries, the safety belt webbing and
industrial textiles group, said their reorganisation and recovery plans were
progressing well, even although some businesses faced difficult trading
conditions.
Pre-tax profits increased from Pounds 593,000 to Pounds 659,000 in the six
months to September 30, in line with forecasts made at the time of June's
Pounds 18m rights issue.
At that stage, the group announced sweeping changes after reporting pre-tax
losses of Pounds 11.9m for the year to March 31.
Mr David Abel Smith, who became chief executive in January, said yesterday:
'Our policy of focusing on our core businesses with their leading market
positions is proving successful. We are increasing the efficiency of our
operations, improving gross margins and we view the future with optimism.'
Marling has sold Boalloy, its loss-making subsidiary which makes commercial
vehicle bodies, and stopped funding a joint venture to make automotive
safety airbags with Electrolux Autoliv, which would have required investment
of between Pounds 6m and Pounds 7m over the next 18 months.
Total turnover fell from Pounds 51.6m to Pounds 38.8m, but sales of
continuing businesses rose marginally from Pounds 33.9m to Pounds 34.4m.
While markets throughout Europe had deteriorated since the summer, the group
said planned rationalisations at subsidiaries in the UK, Germany and Spain
were all on schedule.
The total workforce had been reduced by 105 to 1,140 and would fall further,
but these redundancies were covered by provisions made at the year-end.
Elsewhere, Marling said action had been taken to cut costs without reducing
gross margins, to respond to the new reduced level of demand, particularly
from the European motor industry.
Mr Abel Smith said he was considering a number of acquisition opportunities
in the group's chosen field of industrial webbing and narrow fabrics, but
emphasised they would only be pursued if they generated cash and enhanced
earnings.
Marling hopes to appoint a non-executive chairman to replace Mr Peter Held,
the 69-year-old founder of the group, who stepped down as chairman in
September.
Mr Abel Smith said it had not proved easy to find a candidate who could
bring suitable skills to the post, but he hoped that an announcement would
be made soon.
Earnings per share worked through at 0.57p, compared with losses of 0.86p
last time.
The interim dividend is passed (0.3p), but the group said it intended to pay
a final distribution.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921124

