FT921-1318

FT  25 MAR 92 / Business and the Environment: Third world city, first world
smog - Urban Air Pollution / Bangkok chokes on success


   By VICTOR MALLET


YOU DON'T need to be a scientist to know that Bangkok's air is filthy as
well as hot. Choking clouds of building dust, diesel smoke and burnt engine
oil from two-stroke motorcycles assault the lungs and nostrils of
pedestrians. Traffic policemen often wear face masks and bus passengers
unable to afford the luxury of air-conditioned transport hold a handkerchief
to mouth and nose as they crawl to work in the city's notorious traffic
jams.
A group of US and Thai experts recently confirmed what some people had
already guessed: Bangkok's environmental problems are legion (only 2 per
cent of its 9m inhabitants are served by sewage facilities, for example) but
air pollution probably has the worst impact on human health.
Their report, Ranking Environmental Health Risks in Bangkok, published by
the US Agency for International Development (USAID), concludes that both
airborne dust and lead pollution are particularly serious problems.
Reliable data on pollution in Bangkok are rare, but the authors describe the
level of particles as 'a serious threat to public health' which could lead
to 1,400 deaths a year. According to the Thai government, even the lowest
reported average blood lead levels in Thailand are three times as high as
those in the US or western Europe.
The reasons for Bangkok's environmental crisis are not hard to find.
Thailand has undergone very rapid economic expansion and industrialisation
over the past two decades. Much of the growth has taken place without the
benefit of planning and has been centred on the Bangkok metropolitan area.
Its infrastructure has been overwhelmed by an influx of factories, vehicles,
people and the residential and office blocks thrown up by property
developers.
Vehicle sales in Thailand have been growing at about 35 per cent a year  -
with 500 vehicles added to the streets of Bangkok each day - and the Bangkok
region now accounts for three quarters of the country's industrial gross
domestic product. Environmental regulations which do exist in Thailand are
as often honoured in the breach as in the observance.
As Bangkok began to choke on its own economic success, however, increasingly
prosperous city residents resentful of pollution found common cause with
businessmen worried about profits and officials anxious to lure more
tourists to Thailand. Non-governmental organisations sprang up to fight for
green causes and the newspapers started to publish a torrent of articles
about the environment.
The authorities were forced to take note, and the last government -
installed by the armed forces to run the country between their coup d'etat
13 months ago and this week's general election - has been active in
implementing environmental projects.
Anand Panyarachun, the outgoing prime minister, boasted this month of his
cabinet's record in championing the introduction of unleaded fuel in May
last year and creating an environment fund to help businesses adapt to new
environmental demands.
At the same time the government has required local refineries to reduce the
lead in petrol and to adjust crude oil distillation procedures in order to
make lighter diesel which produces less smoke when burned. This week new
rules come into force requiring the use of low-smoke lubricants for
two-stroke engines.
Perhaps just as important in a city with no underground railway system are
the government's efforts to push through three mass transit projects worth
some Dollars 6bn. If the conflicts between the proposed Hopewell road and
rail project, the long-delayed SNC-Lavalin skytrain and the Bangkok
Metropolitan Authority light railway can be resolved, the city's road
traffic problems and the associated pollution might be eased.
Bangkok may yet turn out to be a city so horrified by its own environmental
degradation that it starts to correct mistakes with the wealth that
Thailand's economic development has generated. 'If you walk on to the
streets of Bangkok, the seriousness of the pollution issue is evident,' says
Dhira Phantumvanit, director of the Natural Resources and Environment
Programme at the Thailand Development Research Institute. 'At least with
countries at our level of development you have money to invest in pollution
control.'
Previous articles in the series appeared on February 19, 26, March 4, 11 and
18.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920325

