FT921-3690

FT  13 MAR 92 / Highlands enterprise jobs cut


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


HIGHLANDS and Islands Enterprise, the government body which handles economic
development and training in the north of Scotland, is to cut staff at its
Inverness headquarters by more than a quarter.
It will create a smaller number of new posts in its 10 local enterprise
companies (Lecs), some of which are at far-flung sites.
The move will accompany a large transfer of responsibilities and funding
control from the headquarters to the Lecs. This is in line with the original
aim but is to be achieved a year ahead of schedule.
Staff at the headquarters listened in silence yesterday as Mr Iain
Robertson, HIE's chief executive, told them that 55 of the 200 jobs there
would go in the next year.
A total of 41 jobs are being created in the Lecs, which already employ 110
people. Efforts will be made to find Lecs jobs for people who will lose
their posts at the headquarters but there will be no guarantee of
employment.
HIE hopes to avoid compulsory redundancies but some headquarters staff are
not qualified for the jobs being created and some are likely to be be
reluctant to move from Inverness.
The enterprise body took over last year from the Highlands and Islands
Development Board.
Lecs were set up with chief executives and private-sector led boards in
places such as Lerwick in Shetland, Stornoway in the Western Isles, Thurso
in Caithness and Invergordon in Ross and Cromarty.
Lecs controlled by Scottish Enterprise in lowland Scotland were allocated 83
per cent of the funds in Scottish Enterprise's budget, but Lecs under HIE
were given only 25 per cent of its budget - although they were allocated
larger amounts to be spent under control from Inverness.
Mr Robertson said yesterday that the HIE network had achieved 'rapid
success'. He added: 'The momentum and clear need now is for the early
transfer of sufficient people and powers of decision to the Lecs.'
Details of how the Lecs will share HIE's budget of Pounds 78m for the next
financial year and their extra responsibil-ities have not yet been
disclosed.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920313

