FT921-611

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Ashdown to stand firm on Europe


   By RALPH ATKINS


MR PADDY Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, last night stressed his
party's commitment to a single European currency and criticised Britain's
delay in joining the exchange rate mechanism.
Because Britain was late to join the ERM, 'we were late in the battle
against inflation and under Mr Major and Mr Kinnock, we will be late to join
a single European currency. But join we must,' he told a rally in Leeds.
He is expected to make clear at the weekend that the Liberal Democrats would
insist on a more pro-European stance if they were to form a government with
either Labour or the Tories.
The Liberal Democrat leader will use a trip to Bologne tomorrow, where he
will meet other European Liberal party leaders, to set out his party's
policy on Europe and indicate how he would use any negotiating muscle he has
after April 9 to push for Britain to back a single European currency.
Mr Ashdown also heightened yesterday the priority he would attach to
Scottish devolution in a hung parliament. 'It is inconceivable that we would
agree to a programme for the next parliament which did not include a
commitment to legislate for a Scottish parliament,' he said.
In the course of the campaign Mr Ashdown has made proportional
representation the main condition of any pact, but has also gone some way to
outline other elements of the deal he would seek. These would also include a
significant increase in spending on education. He said more conditions may
be set before April 9.
The education, PR and home rule policies are all areas Labour would have
less difficulty than the Tories in accommodating.
His comments at a press conference in Edinburgh came as opinion polls showed
a further slip in Liberal Democrat support in Scotland. Mr Ashdown described
Scottish home rule as 'the first step' in the reform of the UK political
system.
However, he again insisted that law for PR at Westminster remained the
overriding condition for a post-election pact.
Mr Ashdown denied that his stance was alienating Scottish voters. There was
a growing perception that a Scottish parliament could not become entrenched
until electoral reform ensured a government was able to pass the legislation
in the first place and then prevent it from being repealed.
A System Three poll for the Glasgow Herald newspaper showed Liberal Democrat
support tumbling to 7 per cent, compared with 19 per cent at the 1987
general election. The party is defending 10 seats in Scotland, almost half
its parliamentary strength. Mr Ashdown knows he would not hold his party
together if he did not insist on home rule should he have influence over the
government after the election.
In many of their Scottish seats, the Liberal Democrats originally won
support because they had the best chance of beating the Tories. Now the
Conservative vote has shrunk, and some former supporters may switch to
Labour or the Scottish nationalists.
Mr Ashdown will not say what he compromise on in the event of a hung
parliament.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920328

