FT923-15626

FT  01 JUL 92 / Right wing to block Chile reforms


CHILE'S right-wing opposition is preparing to block a vital package of
constitutional reforms proposed by President Patricio Aylwin, in retaliation
for its humiliating defeat in municipal elections on Sunday.
The reforms seek to expand the limited scope of democratic rights set out in
the 1980 constitution, a legacy of General Augusto Pinochet's 16-year
dictatorship.
Mr Aylwin can draw only limited comfort from the 53.3 per cent polled by his
centre-left coalition in Sunday's contest. The opposition, which controls
the Senate, said the vote did not give him a mandate to 'steamroller the
country with political reforms'.
The draft amendments seek, among other things, to weaken Gen Pinochet's
constitutionally unassailable hold over the armed forces and what is, in
effect, his and the military's control over the Senate and the National
Security Council.
'Without the proposed changes,' says Mr Sergio Bitar, a leading socialist in
Mr Aylwin's coalition, 'Chile risks being saddled with an emasculated
democracy, a rubber stamp parliament and a president subject to being
pressured by the armed forces.'
Renovacion Nacional, the largest opposition party, says the reforms are a
'political time-bomb'. The extreme-right Union of Independent Democrats
regards the 1980 constitution as one of the finest achievements of military
rule and says it will not sanction any changes.
The hostility of right-wing parties to constitutional reform signals the end
of the 'democracy of consensus' that marked the first two years of Mr
Aylwin's administration. Back then the government won important tax and
labour reforms with the co-operation of opposition leaders, who were keen to
establish their democratic credentials.
But the mood for compromise has evaporated following the right's setback in
the municipal elections, where it polled less than 30 per cent.
The opposition's chances of winning next year's presidential and
congressional elections look slim, which is why it will do everything in its
power to torpedo the government's programme.
Even before the package was sent to parliament, government officials were
admitting the amendments would founder in the opposition-controlled Senate.
They implied that their presentation was a mere formality to comply with Mr
Aylwin's electoral pledges.
The president has begun to back out of some of his proposed reforms.
Designated senators will be allowed to complete their eight-year terms. He
has also promised he will not fire Gen Pinochet, now 76 and fitted with a
pacemaker, from the army command if Congress restores the president's power
to decide military appointments.
But Mr Aylwin's about-turn has disappointed the left flank of the ruling
coalition. They believe a booming economy and the government's popularity is
blunting the president's reforming zeal.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920701

