FT924-817

FT  22 DEC 92 / Technology: Cutting the cord of power tools - New models
need to be recharged less often


   By DELLA BRADSHAW


Among the pairs of socks and festive chocolates, many weary executives are
likely to find a power tool stuffed into their Christmas stockings. But
rather than a model with yards of rubber-clad cord attached to it, the
chances are that this year's drill or screwdriver will be cordless.
These days, that should raise a smile rather than a grimace. Developments in
battery and charger technology mean that cordless tools can easily perform
most of the handyman's tasks.
'Over the past 10 years, cordless tools have developed to the extent that
they are 200 per cent more efficient,' believes Brian Neighbour, technical
services development manager at power tool maker Bosch.
'When cordless tools first came on the market in the early 1970s, the idea
was right but the technology was not there, ' says Neighbour. 'A man would
go up a ladder to put in a dozen screws, but would have to come down again
when he'd only done five because the tool needed recharging.'
Just how long a do-it-yourself enthusiast can now work with a cordless tool
before the power runs out is as long as the proverbial piece of string. It
all depends, say the manufacturers, on the size of the bit, the material
that is being drilled into, and even the weight of the person using the
tool. But as a rule of thumb, they reckon that one of the more powerful
cordless screwdrivers could drive in 80 screws before needing a re-charge.
Developments in cordless power tools have been incremental rather than
revolutionary. The nickel cadmium batteries - similar to those used in
portable telephones - have become smaller and are able to pack an
increasingly powerful punch.
A lot of work has also gone into the development of circuitry in the charger
which powers the batteries. When cordless tools first came on to the market,
it took 12 hours to re-power them. That was reduced to three hours, then one
hour. Today, manufacturers boast of the 'coffee break' charge - just 12 or
15 minutes.
Like portable computer makers, power tool manufacturers have been trying to
ensure that the tools use as little power as possible, so the batteries last
longer. They have developed a way of lubricating the tools with a special
low-friction grease, which ensures that the drill bit or the screwdriver
twist as easily as possible and so use less power.
Black & Decker estimates that 30 per cent of its tools sold these days are
cordless, with most people buying them as a second tool to use alongside
their existing mains-powered model. Nor is it just drills or screwdrivers
that are cordless: sanders, circular saws, metal shears and even glue guns
are now cutting the cord.
At the more powerful industrial end of the market, not only carpenters and
decorators are using cordless tools - although they have proven particularly
popular in private house building where they can be used before the mains
electricity supply is switched on. These days, even car manufacturers are
beginning to realise the advantages of going cordless.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921222

