FT922-13373

FT  11 APR 92 / De Klerk wins plauditsfrom Nigerian leader


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   ABUJA, NIGERIA


SOUTH AFRICA'S President F W de Klerk yesterday declared a historic
breakthrough in relations with Nigeria after a two-day state visit marked by
surprising cordiality.
General Ibrahim Babangida, the Nigerian president, showered Mr de Klerk with
praise during his visit, the first by a South African leader.
He said Mr de Klerk deserved a place alongside the most famous black South
African anti-apartheid fighters: Mr Nelson Mandela, president of the African
National Congress (ANC), Mr Steve Biko, the black consciousness leader who
died in police custody under a previous white government, and Archbishop
Desmond Tutu, the anti-apartheid cleric.
These were extraordinary words from a Nigerian, given the open hostility
which has characterised Nigeria's relations with South Africa for decades.
But Gen Babangida went beyond rhetoric to physical embrace: he grasped Mr de
Klerk's hand and the two men stood swaying to the strains of Nigerian music,
a remarkable demonstration of their new-found reconciliation.
Nigerian officials say President Babangida wants to establish diplomatic
relations with Pretoria and to sponsor South Africa's entry into the
Organisation of African Unity, of which he is currently chairman. This would
be possible only after a multi-racial interim government is established in
South Africa, likely within months.
Reconciliation with South Africa may prove the largest foreign affairs
achievement of President Babangida's career. He is due to hand over to a
civilian government at end of the year.
Both President Babangida and Mr de Klerk repeatedly stressed their joint
vision of a brave new future for Africa built around a Lagos-Pretoria axis
which they hope will give the continent new clout in international
relations.
There were protestations of African brotherhood from both, each eyeing the
economic benefits of closer co-operation. President Babangida said: 'We are
delighted that we have at last found someone in South Africa with whom we
can do business.' Indeed, the real prize of the trip will be normalised
commercial relations between Africa's two superpowers.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920411

