FT923-6628

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: Cloudy future for Taurus


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE small print of resolutions put to shareholders at company meetings
seldom attracts much attention. Votes go through on the nod. Formalities are
tidied up and everyone goes home.
The small print sometimes bears closer examination, though. By next summer
most UK companies will have asked their shareholders for permission to do
away with share certificates and the transfer forms used when shares are
sold. The changes are needed for companies to join Taurus, the Stock
Exchange's long-delayed paperless trading system, which is due for launch
sometime next year.
Around 30 companies have sought - and got - their shareholders' support for
the switch, among them BT, Lonrho, Yorkshire Water and Argyll. Most
companies, though, have delayed, many because they have yet to be persuaded
that Taurus will get off the drawing board or because they lack confidence
in the system.
Marks and Spencer's chairman, Sir Richard Greenbury, said at the company's
annual general meeting last month that he was not asking shareholders to
approve a switch to Taurus. The system is untried, and it would be better to
wait to see if it works first, he said.
Should shareholders withhold their support when other companies ask them to
vote on the switch? Certainly, there are still many things about Taurus
which are unclear. One is the compensation scheme for investors who lose
money through the system.
The government has bullied the Stock Exchange into agreeing compensation of
up to Pounds 250,000 for each claim. It is not clear yet, though, whether or
how the brokers and others who are plugged into Taurus will be able to
provide this sort of cover. Nor is it clear what types of losses will be
covered, and which will not.
There is also uncertainty about when all the technical obstacles will be
overcome, and whether any computer network that is used by several hundred
banks, stockbrokers and other institutions can be made secure.
There are also other considerations that may give shareholders pause.
Dealing will not be any cheaper, and may even get more expensive as banks
and brokers try to recoup the cost of joining Taurus. Shareholders will be
able to sell shares without signing anything: anyone who wants the added
assurance that shares will only be transferred on his or her written consent
will have to pay for the privilege.
Taurus is not all bad news for the private shareholder. You will no longer
have to worry about the safekeeping of share certificates, or pay for
replacement certificates when old ones are lost.
Not convinced of the benefits? Well, resistance may be useless. Most
companies are largely owned by institutional shareholders, who have more
powerful reasons for supporting Taurus and who have the muscle to out-vote
private shareholders. But that should not stop some brave soul standing up
at an AGM, share certificates clutched to the breast, and shouting: 'What's
in it for me?'

The Financial Times


London Page V

920822

