FT921-15209

FT  11 JAN 92 / Sport: The fools who killed off the Hill - Cricket / The sad
slide of Test cricket in Australia


   By KEVIN BROWN


THERE used to be a grassy mound more or less opposite the pavilion at the
Sydney cricket ground. They called it The Hill, and for generations of
working class Sydneysiders it was a second home for the five days a year
when Australia met its touring opponents in the Sydney Test match.
By all accounts they were a rough lot on The Hill, but they knew about
cricket. The most famous habitue of The Hill was Stephen Gasgoigne, fondly
known as Yabba, whose stentorian voice carried clear across the ground from
his position under the old scoreboard.
Even Douglas Jardine, England's captain during the 1932 bodyline series, is
said to have smiled when Yabba spotted him swatting bluebottles and roared:
'Jardine, leave our flies alone.' So great was Yabba's fame that Sir Jack
Hobbs sought him out and shook his hand across the boundary fence after his
last Sydney innings.
The Hill was still there 12 months ago, when Graham Gooch and David Gower
nearly batted England to victory over Australia. But it was no longer a
storehouse of wit and colour; sadly, it was infested by drunken gangs of
English yobs whose grimy flags and football chants smacked of soccer fans at
their worst.
The English antics played some part in the end of The Hill, which had become
a source of concern to the New South Wales police and the cricket
authorities, because of the growing number of hooligans it was attracting.
The area was concreted over last winter, and now sports the same anonymous
rows of beige plastic chairs as the rest of the ground.
It remains an institution, if only because a nameplate identifies it as
Yabba's Hill in the same type allotted to the adjacent Doug Walters and
(Bill) O'Reilly stands. And there were plenty of would-be Yabba's there
during the classic Test match against Mohammad Azharuddin's Indians which
finished in a draw on Tuesday.
Fortunately, there was no repetition of last year's boorish English
behaviour, or of the near-riot at the Melbourne Cricket Ground recently,
when spectators in the upper stands threw whatever came to hand at those
seated below. But Yabba would surely have been shocked by the drunken chants
of 'boring' which punctuated even those periods when India were scoring
quickly, and by the ignorance of a large body of spectators - exemplified by
repeated demands for local hero Mike Whitney to bowl after he came on as
substitute.
For their ADollars 20 (Pounds 8.50) a day, the fans on The Hill saw
Australia race to 234-for-4 on the first day, only to slump to 313 all out
after a terrific exhibition of swing bowling from Kapil Dev, Manoj Prabhakar
and Subroto Banerjee, who was brought in to strengthen the bowling after
India's defeats in the first two Tests in Brisbane and Melbourne.
India made 483 all out, thanks to a wonderful 206 by Ravi Shastri, a solid
54 by Dilip Vengsarkar, and an imperious 148 not out by 18-year-old Sachin
Tendulkar who treated the crowd to every shot in the coaching manual except
the hook.
On the last day, Australia collapsed to 173-for-8 as Shastri took 4-for-48
from perfectly flighted left-arm spin on a turning wicket. At the last gasp,
Australia were saved by a captain's innings of 53 not out by Border. Even
so, India could fairly claim they would have won but for the loss of five
hours to rain, mostly on the third day.
How any cricket lover could find all this boring would be beyond
comprehension but for the surfeit of one-day international cricket which now
dominates the Australian summer. More than 50 one-day internationals will be
played in Australia and New Zealand between January and the end of March as
first the World Series Cup and then the World Cup dominate the sporting
headlines.
All guarantee a result, plenty of big hitting and an exciting run-chase in
the final hour, even if the price is several hours of medium-pace trundling
to defensive fields.
The World Series Cup, played in coloured track suits with a white ball under
floodlights, is a particularly inane spectacle to the purist, especially
since there appears to be no reason for its existence other than the
programming demands of Kerry Packer's Channel Nine TV network.
This year the participants are Australia, India and the West Indies. No
doubt one of them will win, but will anyone remember once the lights are
turned off?
The World Cup will be more interesting, if only for the reappearance of
South Africa in Australia after some 20 years. Curiously, they will be
captained by Kepler Wessels, who played more than 20 Tests for Australia
after migrating from South Africa. That will at least remind Australians
that England is not the only country willing to take advantage of South
African expatriates.
Meanwhile, the increasingly arcane world of Test cricket moves to Adelaide
on January 25, and then to Perth on February 1. The Indians showed in Sydney
that they are capable of outplaying Australia in every department, including
fielding, where they appeared to have absorbed the lessons handed out by
Australia in Brisbane and Melbourne.
Then, back in Sydney, the denizens of The Hill will be roaring as the yellow
track-suited Australians struggle to overcome the blue-suited English, and
so on in the World Cup.
It will be an opportunity for a number of great players, including Gooch, to
play a final innings on a great ground. But can anyone imagine Gooch walking
down to The Hill afterwards to shake hands across the fence?

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920111

