FT923-9758

FT  04 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Platinum and gold prices fall
despite S African strike


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


THE START of a two-day general strike in South Africa, the world's biggest
producer of gold and platinum, was followed yesterday by sharp falls in the
prices of those precious metals.
Dealers suggested that this was because there were no reports of widespread
violence. 'Fears of supply disruptions were heavily exaggerated,' said one.
Gold closed in London last night at Dollars 353.50 a troy ounce, down
Dollars 4.45 from Friday's close. Dealers reported that the price tested
Dollars 352.50 an ounce in late trading.
Ms Rhona O'Connell, analyst at Williams de Broe, part of the Banque
Bruxelles Lambert group, pointed out that yesterday's gold price movement
was predictable. Many investment funds had bought the metal two weeks ago at
Dollars 343 an ounce and were disappointed when the price failed to break
conclusively through Dollars 360 - although it did briefly touch Dollars
361.
The funds were consequently expected to take their profits as the price fell
back to Dollars 355.
Dealers confirmed this happened yesterday. 'Two weeks ago the funds were
buying. The reverse happened today,' said one. 'Probably they expected more
from the South African day of action.'
Whereas dealers reported good two-way trade in gold yesterday, activity in
the platinum market was very subdued as traders sifted through news from
South Africa and attempted to analyse the implications. South Africa
supplies about two-thirds of the world's platinum requirements.
Platinum closed in London at Dollars 379.50 an ounce, down Dollars 5.75 from
Friday's close.
Although the Confederation of South African Trade Unions claimed that 60 per
cent of miners stayed away from work yesterday, Mr Tony Warwick-Ching,
analyst at the London-based Commodities Research Unit, pointed out that two
days was 'pretty irrelevant in terms of platinum production'. Also the
platinum price had risen strongly last week because of the strike threat so
'most of the news has been accounted for by the market for some time'.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920804

