FT921-1292

FT  25 MAR 92 / Downhill from the Maastricht summit: The outlook for
European bond markets


   By RICHARD WATERS


The Maastricht glow has well and truly faded from the European bond markets.
Four months ago, most investors thought that bond prices were heading only
one way - up.
Today, that view looks distinctly tattered. The strong rally in all European
bond markets that followed November's Maastricht summit on economic and
monetary union and continued to drive bond prices up early in the new year
has gone into reverse. In the UK and France, virtually all the
post-Maastricht gains have now been wiped out, largely during the past
fortnight (though yesterday brought some relief).
'The European bond markets can't really get going again until the third
quarter (of the year),' says Mr Andrew Burtenshaw, a fixed income fund
manager at Norwich Union, the UK insurer. In the meantime, he says, the
outlook in all markets is 'either bad or uncertain'.
Lower bond prices mean higher yields. As the charts show, yields in the main
European government bond markets, which fell after Maastricht, have been
heading up. That means higher borrowing rates, and a longer haul out of
recession in countries such as the UK.
What went wrong? Two factors accounted for the rally, and explain why the
market has now lost its shine. One was the widespread belief that German
interest rates would fall by the spring, as the Bundesbank succeeded in
re-exerting its normal vice-like grip on German money supply (a grip which
had loosened after reunification).
The other factor was the agreement in principle on economic and monetary
union reached at Maastricht, which led to a consensus among bond market
participants: that interest rates across the community were set on a path
which would bring them ever-closer.
Both hopes have faded. High wage settlements and rapid growth in the German
money supply mean that a relaxation in German interest rates has been put on
hold. This week, Bundesbank officials warned that it may be late summer
before German rates come down. Some investors say that, in the meantime,
they may well have to go up.
That view is not shared everywhere. DWS, the fund management arm of Deutsche
Bank, one of the biggest bond investors in Europe, says it is increasing its
weighting in German bonds. 'The growth rate is coming down a bit, but we are
not worried about inflation,' DWS said. 'We do not think inflation will rise
much more.'
Meanwhile, the fashionable view of convergence between EC bond markets has
faded a little as investors have realised that economic and monetary union
is still a long way off. Political uncertainties in France, which held
regional elections last weekend, and Italy and the UK, both of which hold
elections early in April, have added to the disquiet.
As a result, the gap between interest rates in Germany and some other
European countries, which had been narrowing, has started to widen again.
French bonds had recorded some of the best gains: the difference between
French and German yields fell from 69 basis points (hundredths of a
percentage point) at the end of November to 51 basis points at the start of
the year. Now, that gap has opened up to 70 basis points again.
Taking inflation into account, the move is even more marked. French
inflation levels moved below those in Germany last year: that means the gap
between 'real', after-inflation rates in France and Germany have opened up
even wider.
The sell-off in the bond markets may already have been overdone, many
investors say. Most still expect German interest rates, once they start to
fall, to decline sharply, pulling down interest rates across the community
in their wake. 'We have been buying into the weakness,' says Mr Burtenshaw.
'Looking over the next 12 months, yields look very attractive.'
Some markets look a better prospect than others. The decline in French
inflation and the feeling that last weekend's elections were not as bad as
they might have been has encouraged some, such as DWS, to increase their
investments. Others, such as the UK, seem set for a troubled ride, at least
until political uncertainties and devaluation fears are out of the way.
The general optimism about the outlook for the rest of the year is not
shared by all.
Legal and General, one of the UK's largest insurers, says it took a decision
to reduce its exposure to European bonds earlier this year, and sees no
reason yet to change its view. German commitment to the Maastricht proposals
is still uncertain, says Mr David Shaw, head of fixed income investment: a
rejection of the deal could yet lead to a nasty backlash in other European
bond markets. 'It's too early to get the flags out and wave goodbye to high
interest rates,' he said.
International bonds, Page 28

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920325

