FT924-1058

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: Jazz Collection


   By GARRY BOOTH


THE Collection is three nights of comedy and music in aid of Friends of the
Earth, held in Islington's Union Chapel. Unusually, for 'a benefit', and a
popular one at that, the music part is entirely jazz and not entirely
mainstream.
Saxophonist Barbara Thompson has long inhabited the mainstream usually
veering towards the funk/fusion aspect of the music with her touring band
Paraphernalia. The new outfit Sans Frontiers is a more eccentric and
cosmopolitan vehicle, however, and is currently parading a jointly written
suite. The six pieces, arranged by Thompson, which includes Michael
Urbaniak's electric violin and the keyboards of Jasper Van'T Hof, creates a
dense wall of sound.
On Monday, her own persuasive tenor voice spoke clearly on 'Into The Eye Of
The Storm', the soprano taking a back seat for Enrico Rava's rip-roaring
trumpet in 'Stuttgart'. 'Secrets', written by Rava, opened with a wiry bass
solo from Bo Stieff set against the meshing cymbals of Jon Hiseman, giving
way to more fat notes from the trumpeter. 'Over the G', written by Stieff,
commenced with a threatening and industrial rhythm which blossomed into an
opening for Urbaniak's extraordinary instrument. The gum chewing Urbaniak
has the better of it though, and even exchanged melodramatic sawing for an
electronically induced alto saxophone sound at one stage.
The scene for Thompson's heavyweights was set by the weltering piano
technique of South African Bheki Mseleku and later the likeable whimsy of
British pianist Django Bates. Mseleku arrived wearing a tenor sax and
accompanied himself competently at the keyboards for a couple of bars before
dedicating himself to the poignant chords, trickling notes and nasal
utterances which have brought him to prominence this year. As an improvisor
he is full of ideas and the moaning top line he sings adds surprisingly much
to his pieces. Hopefully, sustained success will enable him to fulfill one
of his burning ambitions - to own a piano.
Django Bates and saxophonist Iain Ballamy's cranky, out of kilter tunes  -
'Potato Picker', 'Serendipity' - fitted nicely in between Mseleku and
Thompson. An energetic performer, either at the keyboard or the curious peck
horn, Bates' quartet is a pocket version of the tumultuous 18 piece
Delightful Precipice and swung precariously. Indeed, it would have been
better to hear more of his wistful meandering material and less of compere
'personality' Jools Holland, whose facile remarks and boogie-woogie
tinkering filled in the gaps.
Sponsors: GLR and Time Out

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921219

