FT922-742

FT  26 JUN 92 / Guangdong sets sights high


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


GUANGDONG, the fastest growing province in China, plans to expand at a real
rate of nearly 13 per cent a year for the next 20 years in its drive to
catch up with Asia's other high-growth economies, Zhu Senlin, its governor,
said.
Zhu's prediction, which was made in Beijing on Wednesday, follows a
reassessment of the province's growth potential occasioned by the visit at
the beginning of the year of Deng Xiaoping, China's 87-year-old leader.
Deng encouraged provincial authorities to be more bold and strive to reach
the level of development of Asia's four 'dragons' - Hong Kong, South Korea,
Taiwan and Singapore. Soon afterwards officials began to redraw plans for
economic development.
This year Guangdong's economic performance has been impressive. In the first
five months of this year industrial production has risen by 26 per cent
compared with the same period last year.
Trade is also growing strongly. In the first three months of this year the
value of exports was 35.3 per cent higher than in the January-March period
last year. The province produced a trade surplus of Dollars 1.67bn in the
period - 13.4 per cent higher than in the first quarter of 1991.
But there are also signs the economy might be over-heating. Retail sales in
the first five months were 17.7 per cent higher than for the same period
last year. Property prices are rising strongly. Within the past year they
have increased more than 30 per cent.
Economists in Hong Kong said Zhu's prediction for the overall growth rate
was reminiscent of the language of the central planner.
But Mr Enzio von Pfiel, economist at Smith New Court, a British brokerage,
said: 'I could well see Guangdong growing annually in the range of 10 per
cent to 13 per cent over the coming years.'
Between 1984 and 1991, Guangdong posted an annual growth in GDP of 13.9 per
cent. Industrial production grew at an annual rate of 23.8 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920626

