FT922-738

FT  26 JUN 92 / World Trade News: US-led group wins Java power contract


   By WILLIAM KEELING


   JAKARTA


MISSION ENERGY of the US is to head a consortium to build the 2,400 MW
Paiton power project in East Java. The decision by the Indonesian government
is a rebuff to Intercontinental Electric Inc (IEI) of the US which has been
negotiating for at least part of the Dollars 3.6bn (Pounds 1.9bn) project.
Paiton would be the first instance in Indonesia of a private
build-own-and-operate scheme linked directly into the national grid. The
project's output would be purchased by PLN, the state utility, at an agreed
rate.
Such schemes are regarded by the World Bank as the way forward for Indonesia
which requires investment of about Dollars 20bn in electric power between
1994 and 1998, a third of which is expected to come from private sector. The
government had planned to split the Paiton project into two separate
contracts, each for two 600 MW units worth about Dollars 1.8bn, and had been
talking with consortia led by Mission Energy and IEI since last year.
In a recent confidential meeting with both companies, the government said it
would accept just one consortium and 'expressed a clear preference for
Mission Energy', a government official has said.
The Mission Energy consortium had a better technical proposal, and showed
greater capability to raise equity finance and loans necessary for the
project's completion, the official noted.
The project will still be built in two stages, the first to be completed by
1997, but the consortium will have a first option on construction of the
second stage.
At the meeting, the government suggested some members of the IEI consortium
should be taken on board by Mission Energy. The IEI consortium includes the
Bimantara Group - led by President Suharto's second son - Westinghouse and
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries.
Industry officials say Bimantara is negotiating with Batu Hitam Perkasa, an
Indonesian coal-mining company and local partner of the Mission Energy
consortium, for an equity stake of up to 10 per cent in the project.
Other members of the Mission Energy consortium include General Electric of
the US and Mitsui of Japan. Negotiations between the government and the new
consortium are expected to begin in August with the contract finalised early
next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920626

