FT922-4124

FT  06 JUN 92 / UK Company News: A big step on HSBC's long journey home


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


HONGKONG and Shanghai Bank took another step in its long journey home
yesterday when Lloyds capitulated and left the way free for Hongkong to
acquire Midland Bank.
It is a journey the bank has wanted to make for the best part of a decade
and it must be of some satisfaction to Mr William Purves, the bank's
chairman and the man who conceived the Midland deal, that he was in London
on the day Lloyds' board took its decision.
Hongkong Bank has played a dominate role in the colony since its founding in
1864. But, with China set to resume sovereignty of Hong Kong in 1997, it is
a role with a definite terminus.
Along with the old British that controlled the colony's trade and the Royal
Hong Kong Jockey Club, which still today strikes the beat to which polite
society marches, the bank is a quintessentially British institution in a
place that is daily coming under the influence of China.
That was seen most graphically last week when a group of mainland Chinese
local governments stumped up the lion's share of HKDollars 3.8bn (Pounds
270m) to buy an office block on the colony's central business district. It
is also seen in the mainland's ownership of significant stakes in Swire's
Cathay Pacific and Cable and Wireless's Hongkong Telecommunications.
The bank's acquisition of Midland is, therefore, more than just a
'strategic' move to give it global reach and a role to play in facilitating
trade in Europe's single market. Important as that is, its acquisition of
Midland is about corporate and cultural survival in a world made uncertain
by China's resumption of sovereignty of Hong Kong.
Swire and Cable and Wireless have made their peace with the colony's future
owners by selling substantial stakes of their key businesses to mainland
interests. Hongkong Bank has sought protection through moving offshore, and
in doing so has displayed more finesse than Jardine Matheson, the trading
house that rocked the colony in the early 1980s with its sudden announcement
that it would move its domicile to Bermuda.
The proposed structure for the new banking institution to be created out of
the takeover makes that plain. The head office will be in London, together
with the top executives. Hong Kong will be a subsidiary - the most
profitable to be sure - of the enlarged London-based group.
The bank realises the need for that and so does the colonial government, if
for different reasons. The Hongkong Bank has had its wings clipped since
Britain signed the 1984 Joint Declaration.
The informal, club-like, manner in which the colonial government managed
Hong Kong's financial affairs - often using the bank as its public agent in
times of crisis - has given way to a more transparent and formal set of
arrangements. That is seen in the nascent development of a monetary
authority that has taken over many of the central banking responsibilities
once seen as the bank's birthright, such as the setting of interest rates.
Its former position in the colony was not an arrangement China could really
tolerate inheriting. Hongkong Bank understood that.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920606

