FT922-3968

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (19): A lobbyist's guide to
Euro-success - Management


   By DOMINICK COYLE


INFLUENCING THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY by Cecilia Andersen Kogan Page Pounds 35,
349 pages
IF the EBIC and the CVMP (more anon) leave you cold or, worse, ignorant,
then this highly practical and informative work is for you. It is, in a real
sense, a definitive business book; it contains hard business news, or at
least tells you what to look for, and where - often down to detailed
addresses and telephone numbers - if your company or organisation is doing
business in Europe.
The European Community increasingly affects the operational environment of
all firms doing business in it. Corporations big and small need to influence
European policies before they are finalised, and it is argued cogently in
this study that the Commission in Brussels needs to consult widely with
business in advance of policy decisions. Bureaucrats with little or no
knowledge of the real world of business will make bad decisions if business
does not seek to influence policies before they are finalised. Companies
should be plugging into the thinking of the Brussels Commission long before
it gets to the doing stage; early information and lobbying should be the
name of the game.
Cecilia Andersen's work, aided by a lot of detailed research by some of her
students at Boston University in Brussels, certainly shows the way, even
down to telephone numbers for accessing Community data bases, and it
contains interesting mini case histories of some of the more successful
commercial lobbying operations on behalf of the European automobile
industry, food and drink manufacturers and the big pharmaceutical companies.
The Japanese Automobile Manufacturers' Association was quick to learn; it
moved its main European office from Paris to Brussels in 1990.
Andersen, a consultant to a number of major multinational companies (by her
own terms, a lobbyist) and a professor at Antwerp University, insists that
business involvement in Community decisions requires that companies
determine what they want to achieve, know the openings provided by the
Community policy-making structure, and use established if not always
well-known channels to express their views.
This approach should not be at the margins of corporate policy but at the
very core of strategic planning. She illustrates the case of the Swiss
pharmaceuticals giant, Bayer, which set up a special Steering Committee
1992, chaired by a main board member, to study - and seek to influence -
European Commission policies. 'The task of the committee was to formulate
and propose Bayer's strategies and to support decision-making. Members fed
into the committee their analyses and judgments on new proposals and draft
regulations. The committee identified issues and allocated them to
appropriate committees or working groups. At corporate level, issues such as
procurement and energy, anti-trust legislation, finance, tax, and insurance
were analysed. Various sectors of the company, business groups, and regional
organisations studied the impact of 1992 on production, sales and marketing,
acquisitions and logistics.'
But the business world is not made up of big Bayers. This book also
addresses the needs of small businesses, and points them in some useful
directions, such as the need to plug into trade associations, and indeed to
encourage them in turn to link with collective lobbying agencies in Brussels
 -often staffed by former employees of the Commission. The larger firms of
accountants and lawyers now have offices in Brussels and offer both advisory
and consultancy services.
The European Commission itself maintains almost 200 Euro-Info-Centres
throughout the Community providing 'cheap sources of information, rapid,
up-to-date information on the internal market and on all Community services
for enterprise'. The book stops short of listing all the centres, but it
does contain a lot of useful addresses; it is a near-essential item on any
corporate book shelf.
(As for EBIC and CVMP: respectively, the European Business and Innovation
Centre and the Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products . . . and
Andersen will tell you a lot which is even more useful.)

The Financial Times


London Page X

920609

