FT922-726

FT  26 JUN 92 / Lloyd's underwriters rein back spending


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THERE WERE two signs yesterday of retrenchment among professionals at the
Lloyd's insurance market, where record losses of Pounds 2.06bn were
announced on Wednesday.
In a radical move AJ Archer Holdings, one of the largest agency groups which
manages 10 of the market's 278 syndicates, announced a 10 per cent
across-the-board salary cut for underwriters.
Separately, Steel Burrill Jones, the insurance broker, confirmed that two of
its directors had sold shares partly in order to pay insurance losses at
Lloyd's.
At Archer, Mr Chris Burton, joint managing director, said the pay cut was 'a
positive step on behalf of Names'. He added: 'Underwriters should share with
the fortunes of syndicates.'
Archer underwriters are paid an average of more than Pounds 100,000 a year,
with substantial extra benefits in the form of pension contributions.
The move by Archer followed similar but less severe action on pay by other
large agencies. Octavian Group introduced a 10 per cent pay cut for senior
underwriters in April and other agencies have frozen salaries.
Figures released last year showed that more than a third of Lloyd's
underwriters received in excess of Pounds 100,000 in 1987, the last year for
which Lloyd's as a whole has reported profits.
Mr Paul Archard, chairman of Lloyd's Underwriting Agents Association, said
wages accounted for between 25 per cent and 30 per cent of syndicate costs.
He added that agencies were now tending to reduce basic salaries and
increase the amount offered in profit commission.
At Steel Burrill Jones, Mr Tony Keys, finance director, and Mr George Boden,
chief executive, have sold 100,000 SBJ shares - worth about Pounds 300,000.
Both men are members of loss-making syndicates that are involved in 'spiral'
reinsurance business - reinsuring the high-level catastrophe exposures of
syndicates and London companies.
Mr Keys, who resigned from Lloyd's at the end of 1990, had a Pounds 15,000
share in Gooda Walker syndicate 290, which has left him with losses of more
than Pounds 45,000. 'I'm that rare phenomenon - an insider Name on Gooda
Walker,' said Mr Keys, who is also a member of Pulbrook syndicate 90, which
reported heavy losses in its 1982 year.
Mr Boden has a slightly bigger stake on one of the Feltrim spiral
syndicates, which also suffered losses in 1989.
Meanwhile, Lloyd's yesterday announced that its extraordinary general
meeting requested by Names on Monday will be held on Monday July 27 at its
City headquarters. Mr David Coleridge, Lloyd's chairman, is scheduled to
appear before a joint meeting of the Tory backbench finance and industry
committees on July 14.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920626

