FT924-8137

FT  12 NOV 92 / World Trade News: Delors in Maastricht-Gatt trade-off -
David Gardner reviews an extraordinary week of manoeuvres in Brussels and
abroad


   By DAVID GARDNER


MR John Major, the UK prime minister, is not the only European leader
performing U-turns. Mr Jacques Delors, president of the European Commission,
has just done a volte-face on the Uruguay Round in what one of his main
opponents was gracious enough to describe as a 'statesmanlike' way.
Three weeks ago Mr Delors reckoned there was no chance of concluding the
world trade reform talks this year, echoing the government of his native
France which overtly opposed a settlement.
One week ago he was accused by Mr Ray MacSharry, the EC agriculture
commissioner, of deliberately undermining a real chance of settling the
EC-US food export battles on which the Uruguay Round hangs, and to which the
alternative is transatlantic trade war.
Yet on Tuesday in the Hague, Mr Delors said an understanding with the US on
the Uruguay Round must be reached by the summit of EC leaders in Edinburgh
on December 11-12. And yesterday in Brussels, the Commission formally
announced Mr MacSharry would be resuming talks with the US next week, a role
he angrily relinquished to Mr Delors last Wednesday. So what has happened in
the interim?
In summary:
France is having its bluff called on how far it will go in opposing a Gatt
deal;
Germany, strongly backed by the UK, at last is coming out in favour of a
deal; and
Mr Delors appears to have concluded that there was no better deal available
than the one Mr MacSharry was close to in Chicago last Tuesday night and
that intra-Community blood-letting over trade risked spilling into the row
over ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
When EC foreign ministers met in Brussels on Monday, France was not
isolated, but it was politically bereaved. Even before the meeting,
ministers were openly nervous about where Germany would line up on Gatt.
The Bonn-Paris alliance is the EC motor, and France had pulled out every
stop to get Germany to back delay on Gatt, arguing that the government would
fall and rioting by French farmers would ensue if the agriculture subsidy
cuts in the Uruguay Round were agreed. France obtained the support of Spain,
Belgium, Portugal and Greece, and had resorted to desperate tactics.
According to a senior Spanish official, Paris reminded Madrid that France
had been co-operating in rounding up Basque terrorists on its side of the
border, and that the future of French farming was an equivalent matter of
national security.
Yet some French officials admit Paris would not in the end carry out its
threat to 'veto' a Uruguay Round deal, citing 'overwhelming national
interest' to block agreement.
Moreover, there appears to have been a shift in the hitherto unshakeable
Bonn-Paris axis. Although opinion inside the German coalition government has
hardened on the need for a Uruguay Round conclusion, the assumption until
now was that Germany would never risk its all-important relationship with
France by pushing it into a Gatt corner.
German and French officials now concur that a more updated bet is that it is
Paris which is unwilling to risk a breach with Bonn - at a time when the
overriding priority of both Chancellor Helmut Kohl and President Francois
Mitterrand is to salvage the European Union treaty agreed at Maastricht.
Mr Delors shares the Maastricht priority, the vital next stage in his
enormously successful drive for European integration. Yet he can rarely have
been more under siege in his eight years as president; in the Gatt row he
risked opening a second front while his main (Maastricht) defences were
crumbling.
Mr MacSharry put Mr Delors on the spot, partly, it seems, to flush out the
Anglo-German alliance which defeated the French on Monday, and partly to
erase all doubt about his mandate to negotiate - which Mr Delors accused him
of overstepping in the terms being discussed with the Americans.
The two men met, along with external affairs commissioner Frans Andriessen,
on Tuesday night. It was a close-run thing. Mr MacSharry had prepared a
dossier on his allegations that Mr Delors had undermined him. 'If Delors so
much as lights a match, I'll have the gunpowder,' he told one official.
The combative Irish commissioner also extracted a letter from Mr Delors
which at least acknowledged Mr MacSharry's own letter of last Wednesday
resigning because of 'betrayal of trust.'
Mr MacSharry now has a free hand to reach a deal. Success depends on whether
any package he brings back can be demonstrated to be compatible with the
reform of the Common Agricultural Policy agreed in May - including by
France.
It clearly also hinges on the outgoing US administration, which has twice in
the last month backed away from almost done deals under pressure from its
powerful farm lobbies. As of yesterday, however, senior US officials were
saying they thought they could reach an understanding with Mr MacSharry as
soon as next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921112

