FT922-13410

FT  11 APR 92 / Gardening: Your guide to the guides - Forget the election,
it's flower power that counts


   By ARTHUR HELLYER


   ALL essential guide books


revised and updated  - are to hand, and the garden visiting season is in
full swing again. Not that it stops completely: there are many gardens which
remain open throughout winter; but the full pageant of those open to the
public is revealed between April and October.
The most useful guides are:
Gardens of England and Wales, the familiar yellow book of the National
Gardens' Scheme Charitable Trust;
Scotland's Gardens, also yellow-covered;
the Guide to Gardens Opening Under Scotland Gardens' Scheme, also a
charitable organisation;
Historic Houses, Castles and Gardens in Great Britain and Ireland, produced
commercially by British Leisure Publications;
The Good Garden Guide, published by Vermilion.
The two yellow books are concerned solely with gardens opening for their
respective charities, and are by far the best at leading visitors to small
and medium-sized privately-owned gardens, many of which are only open on one
or two afternoons in the year.
The books also list some bigger gardens and many of those can also be found
in the commercially produced garden guides. Every year the lists get longer:
this year Gardens of England and Wales lists more than 2,800 gardens, the
largest number ever to support this highly successful charity. This year it
aims to raise Pounds 1.4m.
There have been some criticisms of these charitable schemes. Some feel that
not all the gardens listed are worthy to be opened to the paying public. But
there are two answers to that. The first is that worthiness is very much a
matter of personal opinion; the second is that it is instructive, and often
entertaining, to see what is made of gardens by less skilled, less wealthy
owners. The gardens are all inspected by officers of the charities. Proof of
the pudding is that the public, in general, is delighted with what is on
offer, as demonstrated by the ever greater number of visitors and the very
considerable sums of money collected for a diversity of charities.
The Good Gardens Guide is the youngest of the guide books, first published
in 1990. It has quickly become a favourite because of the amount of
information it contains. This year it lists more than 1,000 of the best
gardens open to the public in Great Britain and Ireland. Many of the gardens
are privately owned, and some will be found also in the charities' guides.
(This can be welcome duplication because of the independently written
descriptions, which are occasionally critical and always try to convey some
idea of merit.) Originally this guide book tried to give a graded standard
of excellence to each garden but this has been dropped - sensibly, because
gardens vary so much in style and character that it is impossible to compare
them all on the same basis.
Historic Houses, Castles and Gardens has a wider brief than any of the
others, as its title makes plain; it also carries quite extensive
advertising for some of its properties. Information about the properties
themselves is brief, but includes full particulars about dates and times of
opening, facilities available, and price of entry. It has good outline maps
of the British Isles, showing where the various properties are. This year,
for the first time, quite a lot of full-colour illustration makes the book
much more attractive.
Yet another annually updated guide book that I carry in the car is The
National Trust Handbook. Although its properties are covered by one or other
of the other guides, there is usually a lot of additional useful
information. Gardens of England and Wales can be obtained from booksellers
at Pounds 2. Scotland's Gardens costs Pounds 2.50, including postage, from
Scotland Gardens Scheme, 31 Castle Terrace, Edinburgh. The Good Gardens
Guide costs Pounds 11.99 and Historic Houses, Castles and Gardens costs
Pounds 6.95, both from booksellers. The National Trust Handbook is sent free
to NT members or can be bought in bookshops for Pounds 3.95.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920411

