FT923-15493

FT  02 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Environment hit by too free trade - The
Mexican city of Ciudad Juarez provides a stark warning


   By DAMIAN FRASER


ISSUES concerning the environment, formally not part of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), have now become part of the debate.
Ciudad Juarez, the Mexican city bordering west Texas, is a striking
testament to unrestrained free trade. In 20 years, more than 300 foreign
companies have opened plants there, to take advantage of low wages, and
duty-free exports to the US.
The city, home to more than 1.2m people, three times that in 1970, is now a
big producer of car wiring systems.
But the growth has had calamitous side-effects, both for Ciudad Juarez, and
its sister Texan city of El Paso. Some 400,000 Juarez people live in
neighbourhoods without sufficient housing, running water, sewerage
facilities, pavements or electricity.
An open canal carrying Juarez's daily 55m gallons of raw sewage runs
alongside the Rio Grande for 17 miles, contaminating shallow-water wells on
both sides of the border and occasionally the river itself.
El Paso has suffered from its neighbour's explosive and unregulated growth.
It is the fifth poorest city in the US, with rates of hepatitis, dysentery
and tuberculosis five, four and two times the US average respectively.
Cholera has been recently found in Juarez's water system, and could soon
find its way to El Paso, warns Dr Lawrance Nickey, of the El Paso
City-County Health District.
Environmentalists, and unions keen to oppose free trade on all grounds
possible, fear that Nafta will exacerbate problems along the border, and do
for the rest of Mexico what has been done for Ciudad Juarez.
They are demanding that the text of the agreement incorporates environmental
safeguards and that billions of dollars be spent on cleaning up the
frontier. 'Unless the government marries free trade and the environment, we
will be totally burnt. We cannot cope with more growth,' says Dr. Nickey,
Their concerns are shared by many US congressmen. Mr Bill Richardson,
Democratic congressman from New Mexico and a leading supporter of free
trade, says: 'What will decide the free trade agreement will not be the
commercial side - the array of trilateral trade agreements currently being
negotiated - but the environmental issue.'
The irony is that the free trade agreement could be decided by an issue that
it purports not to tackle. The agreement will incorporate some 'green
language' and may give US companies the right to seek redress against
Mexican businesses that obtain a competitive advantage by being able to
pollute freely. But the US and Mexican administrations have for the most
part insisted that Nafta stick to trade issues and that the environment be
addressed in parallel agreements.
The governments have partly done this through an integrated environmental
border plan, launched with some fanfare in February. The plan commits the US
and Mexico to spend about Dollars 1bn (Pounds 500m) in three years to
provide water treatment plants, better roads and solid waste sites along the
border, and promotes co-operation by enforcing existing regulations.
If successful, the plan would mark a considerable change. Mexico's Ecology
Ministry turned a blind eye to the 2,000, mainly US, bonded factories
(maquiladoras) along the border that dumped waste into rivers or nearby
desert. The National Toxics Campaign Fund found toxic discharges at
three-quarters of the maquiladoras it visited last year. These and other
wastes have helped turn the border into 'a virtual cesspool and breeding
ground for infectious diseases', according to the American Medical
Association.
The Mexican authorities have already started to crack closed hundreds of
maquiladoras for failing to comply with regulations. Mr Sergio Reyes Lujan,
under-secretary of ecology in Mexico, dismisses fears that Mexico will
become a haven for US polluting companies under Nafta and says 'there should
be no doubt that any factory rejected by the US will not be accepted in
Mexico. Low Mexican salaries are sufficient to attract US industries'.
Along with tighter enforcement of existing rules, US and Mexican officials
argue that Nafta will help the environment in at least two more ways: it
should make Mexico richer and thus more environmentally conscious, and
remove the incentive for foreign firms to operate along the already
saturated border - where in practice free trade pertains - and encourage
them to move to the less crowded interior.
Environmentalists, such as Mr Dick Kamp at the Border Ecology Project in
Arizona, counter that if Nafta as proposed by the administrations of Mexico,
the US and Canada is rejected due to environmental objections, the agreement
would soon be resubmitted but with much tighter environmental safeguards
written in.
A collection of environmental groups have drafted their own 'green language'
treaty, which would establish a commission on trade and the environment to
ensure trilateral harmonisation and enforcement of environmental laws, and
subject penalties on companies that failed to comply.
Many groups fear that without such provisions Mexico's promise to tighten
enforcement would soon be relaxed. Mexico does not have an independent
judiciary or congress and, as the pressure group Fair Trade Campaign argues,
there is no effective way to force environmental compliance through the
courts.
The Mexican government, fearful that the US would use environmental concerns
as another mechanism to protect US businesses from Mexican goods, has
opposed strong 'green language', but, by doing so, may undercut support for
the agreement in the US congress.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920702

