FT924-6273

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (7): Brutal game behind the painted
smile / A look at the cosmetics industry


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


COSMETICS has always been a brutal business. It was, after all, Elizabeth
Arden, one of the grandes dames of the beauty industry, who called it 'the
most vicious . . . in the world'.
But the cosmetics industry of the early 1990s is more brutal than ever
before. The dominant theme in its development during the 1980s was the wave
of mergers and acquisitions that swept across the US and Europe. This has
left the market in the hands of a small number of powerful players -
Unilever, with Elizabeth Arden and Calvin Klein Cosmetics; L'Oreal, which
owns Helena Rubenstein and Lancome; and Procter & Gamble, with Max Factor
and Cover Girl.
These multinationals have already raised the stakes in the industry by
putting pressure on the smaller companies which cannot afford to sign up
celebrities or super-models for extravagant advertising campaigns, as
Lancome have done with Isabella Rossellini, and Revlon by paying Dollars 6m
(Pounds 3.9m) to Claudia Schiffer for a four year contract and Dollars 3m to
Cindy Crawford for three years.
The level of competition is now intensifying thanks to the Japanese
cosmetics companies - Shiseido, Kao and Shu Uemera - that are accelerating
their expansion into the West. Shu Uemera is opening its glossy boutiques
all over Europe and Shiseido this summer launched a Dollars 2m Haute
Parfumerie in the 17th century arcades of the Palais Royal in Paris.
Meanwhile, the entire cosmetics industry is threatened by the depressed
state of some markets, notably the UK, and by the spectre of legislative
intervention in areas such as product testing.
Where does all this leave the consumer and how will the changes in the
cosmetics industry affect the kind of products which will come on to the
market in the 1990s? The short answer is that, while the new global
cosmetics groups are struggling for sales in an increasingly competitive
market, their customers ought to be able to look forward to a stream of new
and increasingly sophisticated products.
The leitmotif of cosmetics in the 1990s will be innovation. This is partly
because the customer base will be increasingly fragmented, with more older
consumers and greater emphasis on the ethnic market. It also reflects the
more sophisticated research and development activities of the multinational
manufacturers. L'Oreal, Unilever and Procter & Gamble operate across dozens
of different product sectors so can apply the technological advances
achieved in one area, to others.
The effects are already apparent. Definicils, the 'High Definition' mascara
launched last year by Lancome really does make eyelashes look longer and
sleeker thanks to the years of research that L'Oreal has invested in its
haircare companies. Other new products, such as Chanel's foundation, which
moistens at the touch of the fingers, are the legacy of complex research
programmes.
All you have to do is to glance at the names of the latest cosmetic launches
to see where the market is going. Helena Rubenstein's Skin Life TPA Eye
Contour Cream (anti-wrinkle cream) and Clinique's Turnaround Cream with
salicylic-filled liposomes (tonic cream) sound like complex chemical
formulae rather than skin creams.
The cosmetics companies are also harnessing their research resources to
areas of the market they had neglected. Coloured and black women have a far
wider range of skin tones than their Caucasian counterparts, 37 as opposed
to seven. This means that manufacturers need to devise more shades, making
product development more costly and complex.
As a result darker-skinned women have had to mix their own shades from
conventional cosmetics, or buy products from specialist companies.
Mainstream US makers are using their improved technology to move into this
market. Maybelline last year introduced a Shades of You line while Clinique
introduced Colour Deeps and Almay brought out Darker Tones.
The emphasis on technological innovation is accompanied by the parallel
trend towards more natural cosmetics such as those of Clarins and Body Shop.
One of the fastest growing cosmetics ranges in the US is Origins Natural
Resources, the botanically-based products from Estee Lauder.
This trend is likely to be accelerated by legislative pressure such as the
recent recommendation by the European Parliament to ban animal testing of
cosmetics. All the big cosmetics companies have long been preparing for such
an initiative by developing alternative forms of testing by computer
analysis and cell structures.
Almost all the recent innovations in make-up have been achieved without
recourse to animal testing. However, the ban could affect research into skin
products such as anti-ageing creams and sun screens, raising the cost of
innovation and making the beauty business even more complex and competitive
in the 1990s.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921121

