FT921-370

FT  30 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Cuts haunt Major's troops in marginals - The
issues: Defence


   By DAVID WHITE


PORTSMOUTH South was once rock-solid Conservative ground. Now it is one of
the Tories' most precarious constituencies, among at least 30 Conservative
marginals hit by defence job losses in the past two years.
At its eastern tip it ends in a cluster of empty navy homes, fenced off with
'MoD Warning - Keep Out' signs. The occupants and neighbouring council
tenants were evacuated last autumn in a contamination scare. Underfoot is
what was known as the 'glory hole' - used by the navy as a tip for asbestos
and other waste.
Just to the west, behind the shingle beach, are the Victorian Eastney
barracks, recently abandoned by the Royal Marines. Beyond that is the
sea-front Tory heartland, backed by a swathe of guest-houses and bedsits. By
contrast, north of the city centre, inland from the naval base, is a scarred
zone of bleak council estates. Tory campaigners tread here at risk of verbal
abuse.
The dominant employer is the navy - 12,000 service personnel in the
Portsmouth area, 5,000 civilian staff.
'As a naval base its future is secure,' Mr Norman Martin, a union official
at the base, admits. Navy cuts will actually mean more activities being
concentrated at Portsmouth. But a question hangs over the future role of its
repair yard, once a major dockyard.
Further afield is a string of defence factories which have been shedding
jobs several hundred at a time, including GEC-Marconi, which has about 5,000
employees in the region. Since 1989, unemployment has doubled to about 10
per cent.
The impact of such cuts on voting intentions is hard to assess. The Tories,
traditionally strong on defence, still believe it is a card they can play
against Labour's perceived 'weakness'.
But in Portsmouth South, as in other constituencies nearby, the direct
challengers are the Liberal Democrats. This is a top target seat for them.
Their candidate Mr Mike Hancock, who heads the city planning committee,
captured it in a by-election in 1984. In 1987 the Conservatives' Mr David
Martin dug him out by just 205 votes.
Mr Hancock, who wants the region to get special assisted status, is counting
on transferred votes from Labour's home-ground. Mr Martin admits that, if
there is large-scale tactical voting, 'it could be a problem'.
Both Labour and the Liberal Democrats are banking on strong interest in
these areas for their proposals to help defence industries move into civil
sectors.
Recent cuts have reduced Rolls-Royce's workforce at Bristol from 8,000 to
6,500. Mr Becker believes that without investment to bring in more civil
business 'there is really no future there'.
Bristol's other main defence producer, British Aerospace's missile division,
has shed more than three quarters of its employees, leaving 800 and hardly
any manufacturing activity.
One of the BAe survivors, Mr Lawrence Elton, says many potential Tory
supporters have become disaffected. 'When you think of the number of people
who've gone down the tubes under a pro-defence Tory government . . . '
According to Mr Paul Dowdall of Bristol Polytechnic's Research Unit in
Defence Economics, nearly half the 10,000 defence jobs lost in the
south-west in the last two years have been in and around Bristol. This
compares with a current total, he estimates, of 15,000-20,000
defence-related jobs, about to be boosted by the transfer of some 5,500
Ministry of Defence procurement staff to Bristol's business park, close to
the Rolls-Royce and BAe works.
Of five Bristol constituencies, three - Bristol North-West, Bristol East and
Kingswood - are Tory marginals, all in the catchment area for these plants.
The most marginal of these is Kingswood. A 3.8 per cent swing would win it
for Labour.
Mr Rob Hayward, who has held this untypical seat for the Conservatives since
1983, sees it being a close result either way. A 'residual consciousness'
about the importance of defence to the region is one factor still in the
Tories' favour, he believes.
Not so, says his Labour opponent, Mr Roger Berry, an economics lecturer.
'Whenever Conservatives talk about defence, people think about job losses,'
he says. Unemployment in the constituency, he says, has risen 160 per cent
in the past two years. He identifies defence employment as a key issue.
In other respects, defence is hardly a prominent issue at all. Differences
between the main parties have shrunk since the last two elections, and the
Liberal Democrats say defence would not be an obstacle to their co-operation
with either Labour or the Conservatives in a hung parliament.
The old clash over Britain's nuclear deterrent is reduced to whether there
should be three or four Trident submarines, and a Labour government might
well decide to build the fourth anyway. Trident is not even mentioned in the
Labour manifesto.
Nor is there mention of a defence review, although the party has said it
would carry out a 're-assessment' in its first six months in office.
Targets for cutting defence funds have become something of a taboo for both
Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Defence savings were a popular theme until
the Conservatives showed how unpopular the results of even their reductions
could be, when they hit regiments or civilian jobs.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920330

