FT923-15662

FT  01 JUL 92 / International Company News: Indocement raises a few eyebrows
 -William Keeling reports on reaction to the group's plans to diversify


   By WILLIAM KEELING


INDOCEMENT, the largest quoted company in Indonesia, has been preparing to
diversify away from cement for more than a year. But the recent announcement
that it will acquire food companies and property totalling Rp1,720bn
(Dollars 848m) has raised a few eyebrows in Jakarta.
With a market capitalisation of more than Rp7,000bn, Indocement is part of
the Salim Group, a loose collection of mostly non-quoted companies in which
Mr Soedono Salim - also known as Mr Liem Sioe Liong, and reputedly
Indonesia's richest person - is a leading shareholder.
Non-quoted companies in which Mr Salim has an interest hold more than 40 per
cent of Indocement, which has a capacity of 9.4m tonnes a year and 52 per
cent of the Indonesian market. It made a net profit of Rp308.6bn last year,
a rise of 23 per cent over 1990, on sales of Rp771.3bn.
The purchases, which are all non-quoted companies from within the Salim
Group, will give Indocement a debt-to-equity ratio of 132 per cent, and a
rights issue to reduce debt is not planned.
The principal acquisition is the assets of PT Bogasari Flour Mills, a flour
milling company with an estimated 85 per cent market share in wheat flour.
The purchase cost of Rp1,179bn includes the assumption of about Rp350bn of
debt.
Mr Judiono Tosin, a senior official of the Salim Group and an executive
director of Indocement, explains there are benefits in buying the assets of
Bogasari but not the company as a legal entity.
In this way, Indocement can double-depreciate many of the assets and reduce
its medium-term tax exposure. Bogasari will be taxed on the difference
between the selling price and the book value of the assets, but the company
is not revealing what the book value is.
Also being purchased is 51 per cent of the Indofood Group for Rp777bn. Its
main product is instant noodles, made of wheat flour, in which it holds a 90
per cent market share.
The final acquisition, for Dollars 56m, is Wisma Indocement, a 23-storey
Jakarta office building. Indocement and Bogasari already occupy 45 per cent
of the building, which is fully let.
Of Indocement's 13 commissioners and directors, Mr Salim and five others
have announced an interest in the companies being purchased. Mr Tosin says
there is no question of private shareholders benefiting at the expense of
the public company. 'If Indocement purchases a non-group business, we (the
Salim Group) regard it as a migration of funds,' he explains.
The private side of the Salim Group, he says, plans to invest in industrial
estates, including Batam island off Singapore where it has a stake in the
Dollars 400m Batamindo industrial estate.
The reaction of Jakarta's brokers has been mixed. The food sector has high
potential growth and Bogasari has a cash-flow of about Rp160bn a year.
However, Bogasari and Indofood dominate their sectors and expansion will
depend on total market growth. Mr Tosin estimates instant noodle sales have
grown 26 per cent a year since 1986, although Bogasari operated at only 71
per cent capacity in 1991.
Some brokers question whether, at Dollars 2,900 per sq m, Wisma Indocement
is over-valued. A stake in a similar building recently sold for Dollars
1,900 per sq m, but Mr Tosin says the price is fair.
The brokers' main concern, however, is that the acquisitions increase
Indocement's exposure to sectors regulated by the state.
Indocement maintains a close relationship with government. In 1985, the
state took a 35 per cent stake in Indocement for Dollars 320m after the
company suffered substantial losses. Mr Sudwikatmono, president director of
Indocement, is President Suharto's brother-in-law. The government sets a
guideline retail price for cement, currently Rp5,425 per 40kg bag, and
authorises all imports and exports. Indocement estimates its gross profit
margin at 45 per cent in 1991.
The next few years, however, may see trading margins diminish. Growth in
domestic demand is expected to fall and the company may become more reliant
on exports, where the price is lower.
The wheat and flour sector is similarly state-controlled. Bogasari is
Indonesia's sole licensed miller of wheat and the sector is closed for
capital investment except for new projects which export at least 65 per cent
of production. However, Indonesia does not produce wheat and the government
is the sole importer.
The World Bank is pushing for a review of the sector. A confidential report
on Indonesia last month stated that 'significant additional benefits would
result from further deregulation of agricultural products, especially sugar
and wheat'.
The government is preparing a deregulation package prior to a meeting of
donors next month, but Indocement does not expect wheat to be included. Mr
Tosin says the company would welcome a competitive environment but the pace
of deregulation is up to government. 'We don't have any say about that,' he
insists.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920701

