FT921-3669

FT  13 MAR 92 / Arts: Cabal and Love - Lyric Studio, Hammersmith


   By DAVID MURRAY


This is Friedrich Schiller's early, fiery prose-drama Kabale und Liebe. It
deserves revival because it is not only a 'seminal' play, but a masterly
one, granted its dated conventions. Which is to say: it uses its
melodramatic scaffolding to soar above it - but the challenges confronting
any modern revival are that the dusty scaffolding must hold firm, and that
the ardour of Schiller's rhetoric should come up fresh.
As directed by Patrick Wilde, the Theatre Manoeuvres company partly manages
those things: well enough, at least, to make its Cabal and Love a
fascinating discovery. The passion is sometimes muted. In the close quarters
of the Lyric Studio, the actors are inclined to play safe, and David
Paisey's new Englishing is no more than tamely faithful. Its diction slides
between 20th-century colloquial and 19th-century fustian. Yet the drama is
set out lucidly, without extraneous tricks.
Schiller's play was first a pillory for his native principality of
Wurtemberg, and then - much less precisely, but with a huge overflow of
feeling - a manifesto for radical Romantic ideals. There is a remote,
self-indulgent Prince, whom we never see, and around him a cabal of minor
aristocrats, who insulate him from the people while advancing their own
interests, and below them the docile burghers.
The mainspring of Cabal and Love is the unsuitable love of the executive
President's son for a burgher's daughter: the kind of story which holds the
stage now only in the likes of Giselle and early Donizetti, fairy-tales in
which everybody is fated to his or her station. In Schiller's genuinely
political drama, however, every twist of the plot-screw illustrates the
power-relations between divided classes. Against that cruel spiral young
Ferdinand's and Luise's protests rise to prophetic vehemence, and their
final trap has the hard shape of tragedy.
The translation and the playing alike fudge one aspect of the dialogues:
that the speakers - however angry or bitter - know their places to a nicety,
and speak accordingly. That enforces a formal mode, upon which Schiller
capitalised grandiloquently. Here, the players are too politely
modern-democratic. Gil Sutherland's clever President has to be feline and
insinuating, not the formidable power-figure of the German production seen
at the Aldwych several years back; and only toward the end does Christopher
Hollis's personable Ferdinand get nearer to passion than well-bred,
low-wattage petulance.
Sarah Burghard's Luise, winsomely sincere and self-deprecating, acquires
moral force only in her face-off with the Prince's mistress, the exotically
English 'Lady Milford'. In fact Adrienne Thomas is no believable English
Lady, but a rampant Dynasty character - which is all to the good: she
strikes vital sparks. Best of all is Steve Hodson as the President's devious
secretary Wurm, finding intelligent depths in a character Schiller wrote as
a pure, slimy villain.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920313

