FT924-11929

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (31): Post Script


   By BARRY RILEY


SEPTEMBER'S LATE boost from devaluation and a UK interest rate cut was
gratefully received by the collective funds sector, but only served to
improve the recent performance of most unit trusts and investment trusts
from dreadful to poor.
But are better times around the corner? A devaluing or floating currency has
been beneficial to equity-based funds at most times during the past 25
years. The few years before and during the entry to the fixed-interest
culture of the Continental members of the European exchange rate mechanism
proved highly difficult. But you can only be seriously optimistic if you
disregard the government's anti-inflationary claims - with an ultimate sub-2
per cent inflation target - and assume a more traditional rate of decline in
the value of money in Britain.
Certainly the five-year performance figures continue to favour fixed income.
Several gilt-edged and preference-share unit trusts are showing rolled-up
values of more than Pounds 1,500 over five years, a performance that only
one UK equity fund and half a dozen North American funds have been able to
match. The gilt and fixed-interest sector average of Pounds 1,358 after five
years, and the similar international fixed interest average of Pounds 1,365,
have beaten all the other sectors out of sight. The closest challenge is
from the Far East ex-Japan sector with Pounds 1,153.
However, the equity sectors are about to strike back. From the end of this
month, the five-year figures will exclude the damage from the October 1987
crash. That should add Pounds 250 or so to the average five-year performance
in the equity sectors when the sums are done for the end of December -
assuming, of course, that there isn't another crash.
But the leap in performance will be, of course, a purely statistical effect,
and will do nothing for the portfolio value of the many investors who piled
into unit trusts in the first nine months of 1987. Few were buyers
immediately after the 1987 crash.
Looking at the shorter-term returns, the UK sectors continue to reflect the
difficulties faced by income funds, which have been plagued both by dividend
cuts and consequential share price declines, so that on average the income
funds have underperformed UK general unit trusts by 5 per cent in the past
year.
Internationally, only the Far East ex-Japan funds have done at all well,
mostly thanks to Hong Kong. However, the American funds have kept their
heads above water and have scored particularly well over two years (starting
from a point of deepest pre-Gulf War gloom).
As for the investment trusts, in general they have lost their performance
edge over unit trusts, but the trusts in the UK income growth and
international general sectors appear to have fared quite well in mostly
unhelpful circumstances.

The Financial Times


London Page XXXI

921023

