FT921-11943

FT  29 JAN 92 / Clinton 'circus' turns spotlight on US media: Serious policy
issues are being ignored in the pursuit of a sex scandal


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


US newspapers and television stations have spent the last few months proudly
declaring that for this presidential election, at least, they wanted to
focus on issues.
This week they scuttled to redefine as an issue unsubstantiated allegations
of infidelity against Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the early
front-runner in the race for the Democratic nomination.
As a result, three weeks from the crucial New Hampshire primary, Mr
Clinton's alleged adultery with Ms Gennifer Flowers, a former Arkansas state
employee, has displaced unemployment, tax cuts and health care from the top
of the media's political agenda.
It has turned into what Mr AS Rosenthal of the New York Times newspaper
calls 'the print and TV sexual examination that is the monument to American
immaturity and prurience'.
High-minded journalists like Mr Ted Koppel, of ABC's Nightline news
programme, insisted they were not discussing the story, only the issue. But
the 'quality media' have for the most part contrived to have their cake and
eat it.
The Washington Post, for example, concluded in its editorial that Mr
Clinton, governor of one of the smallest and poorest states in the country,
had given answer enough and that it was time to get on with the campaign. It
backed this up with no fewer than seven other articles on the subject.
Cable News Network, meanwhile, declined to broadcast tape recordings
supposedly documenting Mr Clinton's love affair, on the grounds that they
had not been verified, but broadcast the equally unverified allegations in a
live press conference of Ms Flowers, who says she was the governor's lover
for 12 years.
The allegations will continue to be aired wherever Mr Clinton travels, for
at every campaign stop local newspaper and television reporters will ask him
the same question.
'Quality' news organisations in the US have not resolved many of the
problems in their relationship with tabloid journalism - which in the US
reaches heights of imagination undreamt of by the UK's Sun or Daily Mirror.
The Star, a US supermarket tabloid which paid for Ms Flowers' story, is
somewhat less bizarre than competitors such as the National Enquirer; it
retails more celebrity sex and miracle diets, and fewer rapes by Martians
and sightings of Elvis Presley.
Yet many upmarket journalists seem frightened of appearing less bold and
uncompromising than their tabloid competitors, worried that they might be
caught in a cozy conspiracy to hide the truth from their readers.
And they can repeat the Star's allegations with impunity, for the US's libel
laws make it almost impossible for a public figure to win a suit, even if
allegations against him or her are proved false.
Most of the top newspapers say that affairs long past are not germane to the
political campaign. Only if Mr Clinton lied or engaged in current and
flagrantly inappropriate conduct of the kind that drove Senator Gary Hart
from the election in 1987, would the allegations become relevant once again.
Yet almost all sent reporters to Arkansas months ago to check,
unsuccessfully, on rumours about these same affairs.
The effect on the political campaign may become clearer after the New
Hampshire primary next month, the first in this election season.
Many voters may agree with Mr David Broder, the Washington Post's political
columnist, that the Clinton circus represents 'the latest, but surely not
the last, step in the degradation of democracy by televised image-making'.
In this vast country, however, voters know so little about any of the
candidates that they may grasp at any straw to find out who they are voting
for.
Few candidates would trade places with Mr Clinton today, but he may console
himself with the thought that voters have now seen something of his
personality, even if they have not had a chance to examine his policies.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Photograph Gennifer Flowers weeps in front of photographers
during a press conference (Omitted).

920129

