FT921-14020

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Dossiers compiled on supposed opponents


   By JIMMY BURNS


MR ROBERT Maxwell ordered detailed investigations, including the build-up of
personal dossiers, to be carried out by his personal security staff on any
individual or organisation he claimed to be libelling him, even though some
of the alleged libel has subsequently proved to be true.
The security staff, which included a former Scotland Yard chief
superintendent, worked closely with lawyers and some Mirror Group Newspapers
journalists but reported directly and were answerable only to the late Mr
Maxwell.
A highly-placed source, who worked closely with Mr Maxwell, detailed the
scope and scale of Mr Maxwell's apparent paranoia as business associates and
others began to probe deeper into his activities.
'For the last 2 1/2 years we worked very closely with our legal department .
. . we carried out investigations on behalf of the legal department . . . we
would make up a file on an individual who had made the libellous claim in
the first place . . . very often they were journalists.'
According to the source, Mr Maxwell also 'on occasions taped his own
conversations' and ordered the investigations to be extended to business
associates, although these tapes are believed to have been destroyed.
It is understood that Mr Maxwell's suspicions about some of his associates
continued in spite of being advised by his security staff that there was no
evidence to substantiate his allegations.
'Mr Maxwell was concerned about certain people and their loyalties . . . he
believed that there were some people who were leaking information . . . very
often people were unaware of what was going on around them,' the source
said.
Following Mr Maxwell's death, the Daily Mirror published a series of reports
alleging that Mr Maxwell's security staff bugged Mr Lawrence Guest, Mirror
group finance director, and executives of two other Maxwell-owned companies.
The alleged basis for the reports is believed to be the subject of an
investigation by the City of London Police, which seized documents from the
offices of the security staff.
A senior editorial executive of the Daily Mirror said this week that part of
the anger behind the newspaper reports stemmed from the alleged fact that
colleagues had not been able to use the services of the security staff for
their own investigations.
However, according to the source close to Mr Maxwell, the security staff did
provide some investigative journalists employed by Mirror Group Newspapers
with equipment and training.
Mr John Pole, former director of group security for Maxwell Communication
Corporation, said last night that he was not prepared to comment about the
activities of his department pending a police inquiry.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920117

