FT923-6606

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: I will arise and go now. . .to Sligo - The Yeats
International Summer School


   By ALANNAH HOPKIN


AT half past nine on a sunny Thursday morning in mid-August there is
scarcely an empty seat in Sligo's Hawk's Well theatre as Professor Helen
Vendler of Harvard University addresses the assembled company on 'Yeats's
Ottava Rima'.
'Ottava rima,' she says, 'is not exactly a subject for the crack of dawn.'
It is less intimidating once you realise that it is the standard form of the
first eight lines of a sonnet, five beats to a line with alternate rhymes
building up to a final couplet ('I must lie down where all the ladders
start,/In the foul rag-and-bone shop of the heart').
The technical analysis of the style and diction of half a dozen of Yeats'
greatest poems that followed was so clear and jargon-free that even the most
novice Yeatsian could not fail to be enlightened.
Vendler's lecture was the highlight of the first week of the 33rd Yeats
International Summer School in Sligo, whose second week ends today. The
prospect of getting people to pay IPounds 250 (excluding accommodation and
meals) to spend two of the best weeks of summer attending lectures and
seminars in a run-down Victorian town on the rainswept north-west coast of
Ireland is so unlikely that it would be laughed at by the tourist industry.
Yet the Yeats School has been so successful that imitations have sprung up
all over the country to study and celebrate all manner of writers in all
kinds of places - Brian Merriman in Lisdoonvarna, Goldsmith in Longford,
Gerard Manley Hopkins in Monasterevin, James Joyce in Newman House, Dublin,
JM Synge in Wicklow, and Bram Stoker in Clontarf, to name but a few.
The YISS is in danger of becoming a victim of its own success, since it must
now compete for custom with its imitators. And yet people still come - more
than 80 this year, in spite of a postal strike in the booking season -
divided between university students with a professional interest in Yeats
and poetry lovers seeking a friendly special interest holiday.
The YISS has a name for being friendly and relatively informal. It is hard
work for both students and the 23 lecturers and tutors, with two lectures
and a two-hour seminar every weekday, in addition to a packed schedule of
optional events such as poetry readings, lunchtime theatre (Yeats, of
course), concerts (Donovan singing Yeats) and outings to Yeats Country -
'Students should bring packed lunches and wear strong shoes'. Then there is
the late-night drinking and talking essential to any such school.
One reason why these schools prosper is that today's academics find them
helpful for networking. Angela Bourke of University College Dublin is
assistant director this year, and over the past six years she has made
friends in Sligo with colleagues such as Terry Eagleton, Seamus Heaney,
George Bornstein and Helen Vendler. Such friendships lead to invitations to
lecture abroad which might not otherwise materialise. It is a way of
compensating for the lack of mobility and poor promotion prospects in
academia caused by cuts. The School's Director, Patrick Sheeran of
University College Galway receives numerous letters from overseas academics,
particularly American, asking for the privilege of an invitation to lecture
 -and this at a fee of IPounds 45 per lecture, IPounds 15 per two-hour
seminar plus IPounds 40 per diem expenses.
Helen Vendler has been coming to the school since 1971. She found that
seeing the places that Yeats wrote about gave her a more intimate relation
to the poetry, and recommends the experience to her graduate students at
Harvard.
She has seen various phases in Yeats scholarship, the emphasis changing in
line with intellectual fashion. Yeats has survived deconstruction, and is
currently the subject of a lively debate on political versus aesthetic
readings of the poems.
The director and assistant director are responsible for the programme and
are appointed by the board of Sligo's Yeats Society, a group of
predominantly elderly local worthies who formed the Society to foster the
connections between Yeats and Sligo. Yeats was born in Dublin and grew up in
London, spending only his boyhood summers in Sligo, but he loved the place
with a passion - not the dreary little town, but the undeniably spectacular
scenery around it.
As John Keohane, president of the Yeats Society points out, even if you are
not interested in Yeats, the best way to see the area is to follow Yeats
since he wrote about all the best places: Lough Gill, which has Sleuth Wood;
the Lake Isle of Innisfree; the Rock of Donney; and the village of
Dromohair; 'bare Benbulben', an inland cliff whose distant prospect towers
over the streets of the town; Lissadell House, where Gore-Booth still lives,
and the grave in Drumcliffe churchyard- 'Cast a cold eye/On life, on death./
Horseman, pass by]'
Yeats actually lived about two hours' drive south at Thoor Ballylee near
Gort in County Galway, but his 'ancient tower' and the nearby ruins of Lady
Gregory's Coole Park are no match for the grandeur of the Sligo landscape.
Another potential rival is the Yeats International Theatre Festival, now in
its second year, which takes place at the Abbey Theatre in Dublin from
August 25 to September 12, bizarrely sponsored by Coca-Cola, but so far it
lacks the kudos of the Sligo event.
The YISS would also welcome a major sponsor to enable it to pay its
lecturers a more realistic fee and establish more bursaries to help students
with the cost. But if the man from the Tourist Board has his way, a sponsor
will not be necessary. Damien Brennan is proposing a 25-minute
state-of-the-art audio visual presentation 'W B Yeats - Sligoman' in the
Yeats Society's headquarters, with 75,000 visitors a year paying to see it
and the profits ploughed back into the school. The question is whether the
staid and serious Yeats Society would permit it. They would be foolish not
to.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920822

