FT923-9780

FT  03 AUG 92 / Ministers meet for final Nafta drive


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


TRADE ministers of the US, Canada and Mexico were meeting in Washington
yesterday for a final push to complete a North American Free-Trade
Agreement, writes Nancy Dunne in Washington.
'We simply must capture the momentum', said Mrs Carla Hills, US trade
representative, appearing on television yesterday on a programme taped on
Friday. 'You can't drag your feet and say we can't do it this week.'
The ministers had been 'on standby' since the previous weekend when they met
in Mexico City and failed to achieve a final breakthrough on the most
difficult issues. They flew into Washington on Saturday night and began a
series of unannounced meetings yesterday.
That they came at all indicates their top negotiators, who have been holding
meetings in Washington since Wednesday, were close enough to agreement to
allow the ministers to make the final, most difficult, compromises in areas
such as energy, agriculture, cars and rules of origin.
Mrs Hills, on television to make the case for the controversial pact to an
American public worried about the loss of manufacturing jobs to Mexico, said
US exports to Mexico would hit Dollars 44bn (Pounds 23bn) this year, up from
Dollars 12bn in 1987.
The US and Mexico had 'a wonderful fit,' and exports would continue to grow
in computers, capital goods and food products, creating thousands of new
high-paying jobs in the US.
She said letters had been sent to 160 US business leaders asking for
suggestions about a worker adjustment programme. This will be included in
the Nafta-implementing legislation, which must be approved by Congress
before the pact becomes reality.
Mrs Hills has said it could take at least three to four weeks to prepare the
pact before submitting it to Congress. It must be accompanied by 40
private-sector adviser reports.
The negotiators were hoping for congressional passage this year but they
have run out of time. The pact must first be submitted for a 90-day
notification period. When the new Congress meets next year it will have 90
legislative days to debate the pact.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920803

