FT922-454

FT  27 JUN 92 / Sport: A working boat goes racing - Sailing


   By KEITH WHEATLEY


OCEAN LEOPARD has become the boat to beat in today's Round The Island Race.
Last year the 80 ft maxiyacht smashed the monohull record for the annual
53-mile gallop round the Isle of Wight, so every one of the 1,500
competitors on the start line will be watching her chances of a repeat
performance. But owner Mike Slade is cautious about her chances.
'Coming out of the dream on the Sunday morning after last year's race, we
realised that we'd been incredibly lucky,' says Slade, chief executive of
property company Helical Bar. 'If it's blowing a fresh northerly then maybe
we could do it again.
'Round the Island is a great race for Leopard. She's got long legs and needs
time and space to pick up her skirts and go.'
What gripped many sailors about her 1991 feat, taking 22 minutes off the old
time, was that the yacht was still equipped with 'fridges, washing machines
and sofas from her workaday role as a charter yacht. Slade packed her with
over 30 old chums, when a minimal racing crew would have been 18.
Ultra lightweight hi-tech racing machines make so much of the news in modern
sailing. Yet here was a yacht, albeit big and expensive, that any everyday
sailor could identify with enjoying the limelight. The Round the Island
jaunt was the perfect race for Leopard to win: an annual festival of sail -
now the biggest regular yacht race in the world - attracting every one from
one-race-a-year 'picnickers' to the professional hot-shots.
David Alan Williams is both the designer of Ocean Leopard and acts as her
racing manager. Slade's yacht was the eighth of his Ocean 80 hulls to be
constructed; most are now cruising yachts and he gains great joy from seeing
one raced hard.
'No two rigs or keels have been the same,' explained Williams, 'so you could
say I've had a decade of full-size testing.'
For all Slade's insouciance about the chances of another record, Ocean
Leopard has spent the past fortnight having a new keel fitted. She went into
Hamble Yacht Services almost as soon as she arrived back from her winter
charter season in the Caribbean. Re-launch was only two days ago.
'I started designing the new keel in January and I'm fairly sure it will
give us better performance in light air. It's a relatively conventional lead
bulb on a steel fin,' says Williams, one of the more successful, if less
fashionable, yacht designers of the past decade. 'The previous tandem keel
was 'sticky' if the breeze dropped.'
Several new sails, a heavy-air spinnaker and No 4 genoa, have been added to
the Leopard's inventory, although not just for the Round the Island. Later
in the summer she is entered for the Round Great Britain race, an event
where Slade reckons the record is also up for grabs. 'We want to do well but
these are all fun races, not the America's Cup, and everyone aboard
occasionally reminds themselves of that,' says Williams, who also sails as
race skipper during the Nioulargue festival in St Tropez and the hectic
Antigua Race Week each spring.
So far, so glamorous. Yet in 1991 Ocean Leopard was beaten around the Island
on handicap by a 25 ft Folkboat, a 50-year-old design. It is the event's
charm that such things happen and are enjoyed by all.
The magic even rubs off on those who wish to charter the yacht for a simple
holiday or day's corporate sailing, and wouldn't dream of racing in 100
years.
'Leopard has to earn her living, but it's incredible how the high-profile of
last year's record has given clients new interest in her,' said Slade, who
skippers the yacht from behind the wheel rather than the owner's cabin.
If she were a racehorse, this would be her Derby Day: a little bit of
fashion, a lot of fun, and a great deal of competition. 'If we can take line
honours we'll be happy,' says Williams. 'Records come under the heading of
luck.'

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920627

