FT921-3719

FT  13 MAR 92 / Chinese opt for economic reform in victory for Deng


   By YVONNE PRESTON


   BEIJING


CHINA'S Communist party has committed itself unequivocally to economic
reform in a victory for the reformist strategy of the country's 87-year-old
paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, over hardline Marxists.
The ruling 15-man politburo, after a meeting this week in Beijing, said the
policies of reform and opening to the outside world would remain unchanged
'for 100 years'.
The reform strategy masterminded by Deng Xiaoping has been the subject of a
fierce power struggle between Deng's supporters, who want to speed up
change, and the party's Marxist hardliners, who warned that reform would
lead to capitalism. Deng, who has officially retired, disappeared from
public life last year but re-emerged in a visit to southern China early this
year. His tour was seen to back the opening of the economy, particularly
evident in provinces close to Hong Kong.
In a rare departure from the secrecy usually surrounding of China's main
newspapers - including the People's Daily, the party's official mouthpiece -
yesterday gave the politburo session splash headlines on their front pages.
The People's Daily had taken a consistently hardline stance since the
crushing of the pro-democracy movement in Tiananmen Square in June 1989. For
months, it frequently warned of the threat of 'peaceful evolution' to
capitalism and the dangers of bourgeois liberalism.
But it announced yesterday that the politburo had decided to 'firmly hold to
the party's basic line and not waver for a century, grasp the opportunity to
quicken reform and opening to promote the economy.'
Using language rarely seen in the official media in the months since the
1989 military action against student demonstrators, the People's Daily
reported the politburo's warning that the greatest threat comes not from
western-style liberalism, called 'rightism', but from hardline leftism.
'While keeping vigilance against 'right' deviation, the main attention
should be paid to guarding against 'left' deviation,' the paper said.
It echoed almost word for word the pro-reform language used by Deng when he
paid his visit in January to Guangdong province and the Shenzhen special
economic zone, the southern provinces which are seeing rapid economic growth
spurred by private enterprise.
Deng's strategy is to invigorate the economy using capitalist techniques
while maintaining the party's absolute monopoly of political power. It has
led to rapid growth and an influx of foreign investment, although the
economy still faces huge problems in its stifling bureaucracy and grossly
inefficient public sector.
Deng scores economic reform coup, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920313

