FT921-1294

FT  25 MAR 92 / Prudential to stop selling general insurance by broker


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


PRUDENTIAL, the UK's largest life insurer, announced that from yesterday, it
would no longer sell general insurance in the UK through brokers, after
losses of Pounds 77m in that business in 1991.
Prudential becomes the first of the large UK life companies to retreat from
the highly competitive and increasingly unprofitable commercial insurance
market where overcapacity has limited suppliers' ability to raise premiums.
Others, such as Legal and General, have said they were considering such a
move.
'Given our view of the market's prospects, we see no case to make the
investment of either our shareholders' resources or our management time to
attempt to improve our longer-term position,' said Mr Mick Newmarch, group
chief executive. He said the company had explored all options, including the
sale of the broker division, before deciding to close it completely.
The company has taken an extraordinary charge of Pounds 53m after tax from
the withdrawal, but will free up Pounds 100m in shareholders' funds to
expand more profitable parts of Prudential's business. Some 400 jobs will be
lost in the closure, but Prudential said it would try to redeploy the
individuals involved.
Prudential yesterday reported a 9 per cent rise in 1991 pre-tax profits to
Pounds 267m, in spite of losses in its overall general insurance operations
of Pounds 149m.
Mr Newmarch said the decision to withdraw from the general insurance broker
market was part of a wide-ranging review which began last September. The
broker market is the outlet for Prudential's sales of commercial insurance
to small businesses. It accounts for about 20 per cent of all Prudential's
general insurance business. On top of 1991 losses, the sector lost Pounds
48m in 1990 in spite of increases in premiums.
'We found that the problem with intermediaries (brokers) is that they are
keeping some of the increase in premiums,' said Mr Michael Lawrence, finance
director. Thus, the company was paying higher commissions for diminishing
business.
Mr Newmarch said that Prudential would retain some presence in home-related
general insurance because 'there is a natural synergy between that and our
life, pensions and savings products'.
Lex, Page 20; Details, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920325

