FT922-4210

FT  06 JUN 92 / Sport: Cast down by pride - Fishing


   By TOM FORT


I HAVE learned over the years to be modest about my achievements as an
angler. In the main, I concede, this is because I have much to be modest
about. But there is, too, an element of the superstitious, the awareness
that as it is pithily expressed in proverbs 'pride goeth before
destruction'.
I tend, therefore, to be alert to the risk of provoking Providence. But
every now and then the guard will slip. A small flame of hubris will be lit,
and will burn obstinately awhile. Then, as surely as night follows day,
nemesis arrives and I am returned to a proper condition of humility.
Recent experiences in the West Country illustrated this moral with painful
vividness. A week which began with buoyant hopes and that damnable streak of
conceit ended in humiliation and catastrophe. How bitterly I grieve at that
pride.
To explain it, I have to go back the best part of two decades, to my infancy
as a fly fisherman. I was an utter bungler - my casting was inept, my
knowledge of basic entomology negligible, my ignorance of technnique
absolute. Over four or five years I tried to correct these failings on
annual expeditions to fish those gorgeous Exmoor streams, the Barle and the
Exe. It was an arduous education.
Two days linger in my memory. On the first I was fishing down the upper
Barle, near Simonsbath. The river here is tiny, and after covering a couple
of miles and catching a few midgets, I decided that there was nothing in it
of worthwhile size (worthwhile in the West Country is four ounces upwards).
I then met two boys, making their way upstream. In their bag they had ten or
so trout averaging six ounces, with a pair of indubitable half pounders. I
gazed dumbly at these beauties, and neglected to ask how they had done it.
The other occasion found me on the Exe, I was, as usual, flogging my way
unthinkingly downstream when a vast hatch of March Browns aroused the trout
to orgiastic feeding. As it happened, I had bought some dry March Browns
that very morning. Cometh the fly, cometh the man, catcheth the trout, I
thought as I tied on the first of an ample stock.
The sequel is painful to dwell on. The architects of my downfall were the
barbed wire fence on top of the bank behind me, and an indecently luxuriant
bush on the far bank in front of me. The flies which were not snapped off on
the wire perished in the bush. The trout feasted while the hatch lasted,
then retired for a good laugh.
I gave the West Country a wide berth, until this Easter. I had, in the
intervening years, acquired a family - so they came too - and, I was
confident, the skill to get even with those trout. This was the seed of my
ruin. In my imagination, I could not stop myself lingering - yes, gloating -
over the baskets of half pounders to come.
I went first to the Barle, to the stretch above Tarr Steps where the river
is half-hidden in steep, ancient woods of sessile oak and hazel. It is
lovely water, although - being a holiday week - its banks were swarming with
picnickers and strollers, accompanied by dogs with a detestable weakness for
flinging themselves into trout-bearing pools. But I cannot really blame them
for my failure; nor the weather, which was ideal; nor the fact that I was
required for family duty in mid-afternoon. I blame myself, for provocative
vanity. In the first promising pool I came to I rose and missed four fish.
For some obscure reason, I then replaced the fly which had aroused this
interest with one that aroused none. I then found I could not remember which
the first fly had been. I tried a dozen possibilities, and a dozen more, and
caught nothing. At last I identified the killing pattern, lost it in a tree
and gave up.
Two days later I fished the Teign, beneath the frowning Luytens
extravaganza, Castle Drogo. By now I had banished fantasies about half
pounders, and was content with the odd fish of two or three ounces which
came my way. The notion that the powers above might have forgotten me had
just crossed my mind when I got caught up in a branch above my head.
I would prefer not to explain how I got the tip of my much-loved Pezon et
Michel rod stuck in my breast pocket as I tried to retrieve the flies.
Suffice it to say that I did, and that I broke the tip of this rare and
beautiful creation, designed by Charles Ritz and bought in Paris years ago.
Numbed, I sat on a tussock and pondered the nature of suffering. I then
began to whip some nylon over the fracture, to effect a temporary repair. In
the middle of this incredibly fiddly Job, an elderly walker came by, looked
at me for a time, and said: 'Good job you have the patience for that'. I
longed to throttle him and throw his corpse in the river. But I had learned
my lesson. 'Yes, it is, isn't it?' I replied - very humbly indeed.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920606

