FT924-12054

FT  22 OCT 92 / Government Bonds: Short-dated yields suffer from interest
rate cuts


   By RICHARD WATERS and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


ACTUAL and anticipated interest rate cuts across Europe helped short-dated
yields take another lurch downwards yesterday, though a correction began to
be felt in some bond markets after the heady advances of recent days.
The Bundesbank accepted some bids at its latest repurchase agreement tender
at 8.75 per cent, with others at 8.80 per cent, confirming hopes created on
Tuesday that it was about to shift rates lower from the previous 8.90 per
cent fixed rate repo. Although this represented another significant step
down, it left the more optimistic market participants disappointed, helping
to explain the lack of further gains in the bund market yesterday.
Yesterday's news of M3 money supply growth of 9.1 per cent in September  - a
figure distorted by the large-scale intervention by the Bundesbank to
support several European currencies - left the bond market largely unmoved.
Though the figure was lower than some had expected, it was widely seen as
irrelevant.
The Euromark futures contract rose sharply as the market looked for further
reductions in German rates, though it fell back later. Having opened at
91.87, the December contract moved up to 91.93, anticipating interest rates
nearly as low as 8 per cent by the end of the year, before dropping back to
91.79.
The bund futures contract followed a similar pattern on heavy volume, rising
from 91.53 to 91.70 and then slipping back to 91.37
THE Bundesbank's actions helped to provoke a series of interest rate cuts
across the 'core' European markets which were not hit by recent ERM
turbulence.
In a co-ordinated move, Belgium and the Netherlands cut their key money
market rates. Belgium's intervention rate came down by 15 basis points to
8.75 per cent and its discount rate to 7.75 per cent, a fall of a quarter of
a point, while the Netherlands also engineered quarter-point cuts in its key
rates.
French overnight interest rates slipped below 10.5 per cent for the first
time since the currency crisis broke around the French franc. Austria cut
its key interest rates by a quarter of a point, while Sweden's Riksbank
reduced its marginal lending rate to 13.5 per cent from 14.5 per cent.
Encouraged by these moves, investors in most continental European markets
continued to move into shorter-dated paper in anticipation of further German
monetary easing. Against this background, longer-dated bonds weakened later
in the day, giving up some of their recent gains.
CONFIRMATION that the UK is embarking on a course intended to pull it
quickly out of recession gave a further boost to the gilt market yesterday,
leaving investors with the unusual sight of gilts continuing to advance
strongly in tandem with the stock market.
Gilt investors preferred to disregard the potentially inflationary
consequences of a rush for growth, looking instead for further interest rate
cuts. The short sterling futures contract opened up more than a quarter of a
point and rose another 17 basis points to 93.47 in the euphoria, before
slipping to 93.24 by the close.
Stronger-than-expected retail sales and profit taking also hit longer-dated
bonds. Medium-maturity paper jumped as much as a point and a half before
losing ground. This still left the spread between 10-year gilts and bunds
even narrower at around 120 basis points, a level widely considered
unsustainable.
AFTER three days of heavy selling, US Treasury prices were pushed higher by
short-covering, bargain-buying and the announcement of smaller-than-expected
note auctions.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government bond was up  13/32 at 95
21/32 , yielding 7.614 per cent. The two-year note was also firmer, up  9/32
at 99 9/16 , yielding 4.214 per cent.
Traders said early demand was primarily a technical reaction to recent steep
declines, with speculative players taking advantage of lower prices and
short-sellers buying Treasuries to cover their positions. Prices gained
further ground when the Treasury announced only a slight increase in the
amount of two-year and five-year notes it will auction next week.
The underlying mood of the market remained subdued, with investors nervous
about the fiscal implications of a Democratic presidency. However, analysts
said those concerns may now be priced into bonds.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921022

