FT924-11546

FT  24 OCT 92 / Arts: Suitable cases for conflict - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


MORGAN, the protagonist of David Mercer's A Suitable Case for Treatment
(Radio 3's Sunday play) is a communist. Stalin's and Lenin's faces appear in
his dreams, and the KGB, and the great staircase scene in The Battleship
Potemkin. Morgan's girl Jean and his mother are communists, too. But the
play is not to do with communism. Indeed it is hard to say what it is to do
with.
Mercer was one of the dramatic highlights of the 1960s. This play was given
on television in 1962 and as a film, called Morgan, in 1965. Don Taylor, who
directed the television, has made and directed this radio version, but he
has not clarified the argument. That hardly matters, for, whatever it
signifies, this rally of unlikely events is entertaining in its way, and
Stephen Moore as Morgan is as likeable as such a grotesque figure can be.
Grotesque? He breaks into his divorced wife's bedroom and hangs her toy dog
on a toy gallows. He continues to live in her Morris Minor. He is obsessed
with Guy the gorilla in the Zoo. He puts a modest time-bomb under his wife's
bed, expecting her lover there. He is under analysis all this while, and has
these long dreams. Mercer seems to have regarded him as lovable; but his
wife, his girl-friend and I all found him too unpredictable for that.
What is unpredictable in Radio 4's Monday play, Angus Graham Campbell's From
Morning Sun till Dine, is that his two almost predictable characters should
stay together. Chris (Samuel West) is a public schoolboy studying for the
Army. Sharing his rooms, in the basement of his family's house, is Paul (Ian
Shaw), a rough Ulster student, reserved about the English upper-classes.
Instead of just swopping political truisms, Chris does knitting and, despite
evident anorexia, cooking, while Paul is distressed at Chris's apparent
illness.
I suspect that they have what used to be called a 'romantic friendship', but
the author hasn't wanted to mention it. (Chris picked up Paul on the
football field.) There seems no other reason for their staying together when
they are so often anxious not to. Paul, telling of a UFF murder of a
13-year-old boy, says he had 'these kind of greeny-blue eyes with pale
streaks,' a highly romantic detail of what was a savage attack. They are
still together at the end, poor sods. Richard Wortley directed.
The fourth, and unhappily the last, of William T. Vollmann's Yugoslavian
Notes came on Monday. I compared him before with Ernest Hemingway, and the
resemblance impressed me again. Vollmann was in a ruined youth hostel with
some students and Blue Thunderbolt soldiers. The chetniks in the house
across the street could be watched by using a mirror.
Casual talk was of taking furniture from the neighbouring houses to provide
fire, of searching for cabbages in the dark garden, to make 'a nice salad'.
If the chetniks fired with their machine-gun, the reply was a few rounds
from a Kalashnikov, taken respectfully in turn. Vollmann's low-key
commentary was as moving as it was exciting.
A different kind of conflict is in Radio 4's Devil's Advocate, a six-part
series on Wednesdays. People are invited to defend a fictional villain of
their choice, in front of Clive Anderson. The first advocate was Fay Weldon,
and she chose Alec D'Urberville in Hardy's Tess of the D'Urbervilles. Of
course he didn't rape Tess] He 'took advantage of her' when she flirted with
him. Feminist Fay Weldon could not condemn Tess; she was a decent girl, who
did not take part in the excesses of the May dancing. But she had agreed to
live with Alec while her proper husband Clare was abroad; and she murdered
him on her own initiative when Clare came back. Next week Helen
Atkinson-Wood will defend Goneril.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

921024

