FT922-7214

FT  20 MAY 92 / Construction pay agreed in Germany


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES and QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THE LAST significant threat of further labour unrest in west Germany this
year evaporated yesterday with agreement on a 5.8 per cent pay rise for 1m
construction workers.
The settlement, which followed on the heels of a similar deal struck at
midnight on Sunday for almost 4m engineering workers and the recent 5.4 per
cent rise for around 3m public servants, effectively concluded this year's
pay round.
While strike action in other industries cannot be ruled out - traditionally
militant printers invaded arbitration talks yesterday to press their case
for 11 per cent - negotiations in the key sectors are now complete.
The results so far suggest a national average award marginally below the 6
per cent adopted as the most likely outcome by government and independent
forecasters in their 1992 economic predictions.
Yesterday's construction deal coincided with the release of an upbeat report
by HDB, the main industry association. The weakness in the overall economy
had slowed building development but could not stop it, Mr Hermann Becker,
association president, said last night.
He expected real growth in the west this year of 2-3 per cent, despite the
effects of a severe spending squeeze on the public sector. New orders in the
east in the first four months of the year were a real 55 per cent higher
than in 1991, Mr Becker added.
The nominal increase of 70 per cent had been eroded by the rapid rise in
labour costs, he said. Wages in east Germany would increase to 77 per cent
of western levels as a result of yesterday's pay deal.
Total construction output in the east, where the upswing was still
'unsteady', was expected to show a 17 per cent increase for the full year,
Mr Becker said. Longer term, new estimates showed that DM2,400bn (Pounds
816bn) would have to be spent on construction in the east over the next 15
years to bring housing, working and environmental facilities up to western
standards.
Editorial comment, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920520

