FT921-1210

FT  25 MAR 92 / Olympia & York shake-up ahead of Dollars 20bn talks: Jubilee
Line extension in doubt as banks assess Canary Wharf developer's funding


   By ROBERT PESTON and VANESSA HOULDER


OLYMPIA & YORK, the world's biggest property developer, last night announced
a management shake-up and the appointment of financial advisers to guide it
through the reorganisation of its borrowings. An executive close to the
group said these were 'in excess of Dollars 20bn'.
The disclosures came as it emerged that the future of the Pounds 1.3bn
Jubilee Line underground extension to London's Docklands has been thrown
into doubt by O&Y's financial difficulties.
Mr Paul Reichmann, chief executive officer of Olympia & York, said that Mr
Tom Johnson, the former president of Manufacturers Hanover, the US bank, had
been appointed as the new president of Olympia and York Developments, O&Y's
main property subsidiary.
Mr Johnson is replacing Mr Reichmann in that post, allowing Mr Reichmann
more time to 'focus on Canary Wharf', according to an O&Y adviser. Canary
Wharf in Docklands is Europe's biggest new development of office blocks and
is at the heart of O&Y problems because of its huge construction costs.
Mr Reichmann said that O&Y 'remains fully committed to the completion of its
Canary Wharf project'. O&Y also said that JP Morgan, the US bank, James D
Wolfensohn, the corporate finance advisory firm, and Burns Fry, the Canadian
investment bank, had been appointed to advise O&Y on its negotiations with
banks.
Two senior bankers who will be involved in the forthcoming debt talks said
yesterday they expected the banks would have to convert part of their loans
to O&Y into equity, as part of the reorganisation of the property
developer's borrowings. They said repayments on some of the debt would
probably be rescheduled and there was also likely to be a need for new cash
injections into O&Y from the banks.
The banks are forming a steering committee to handle negotiations with O&Y.
Bankers said that Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce would head the steering
committee.
O&Y has formed a planning committee to manage negotiations with the banks.
This will be chaired by Mr Johnson rather than by either of the Reichmann
brothers, who own O&Y.
'The problem for Mr Reichmann is that he is asset-rich and cash-poor. The
real estate crunch has caused him to suffer gargantuan losses on paper and
his assets are not as liquid as he thought they were,' said one banker.
Mr Reichmann said yesterday that when the debt restructuring was completed
'it will take us through the current period of global recession in the real
estate industry'. Mr Steven Miller of Wolfensohn will be vice-chairman of
O&Y's planning committee. Mr Miller was a vice-chairman of Chrysler and a
decade ago restructured the US automotive manufacturer.
However, bankers said the reconstruction of O&Y's balance sheet had less in
common with Chrysler reorganisation than with negotiations held in the 1980s
with Latin American countries on the rescheduling of their debt.
Other members of the planning committee include Mr John Zuccotti, president
of O&Y's US operations.
Separately it emerged yesterday that O&Y has not yet signed the agreement to
contribute
Pounds 400m to the project to extend the Jubilee Line to east London, which
was agreed in principle with Mr Cecil Parkinson, then secretary of state for
transport, in 1989. This contribution is be-ing looked at by banks as part
of O&Y's debt reorganisation.
'You won't find the banks building the Jubilee Line,' said a banker closely
related to O&Y. 'O&Y made a commitment to the government that it would fund
the construction. But that had nothing to do with the banks.'
However, he said there would be detailed discussions between the banks, O&Y
and the government about how to finance the underground railway line.
O&Y is due to make its first contribution to the Jubilee Line extension, of
Pounds 40m, at the end of this month with another Pounds 60m due at the end
of March next year. The balance of Pounds 300m is not due until construction
of the extension is complete in 1996.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920325

