FT922-13494

FT  11 APR 92 / UK Company News: 'Crown jewels' placed on the first flight
out - BAe's attempts to find a partner for its corporate jet business


   By PAUL BETTS


BRITISH Aerospace's profitable corporate jets business has long been
regarded as one of the 'crown jewels' of the company's commercial aircraft
activities.
But yesterday it became the first target of the group's sweeping efforts to
restructure its aerospace activities around the core military aircraft and
large commercial airliner operations.
BAe's announcement that it was looking for a majority partner for the
business. It is forming a new company, Corporate Jets, incorporating its
business jet activities at Hatfield and Chester, employing about 1,200
people, to enable the sale to go ahead.
The move has set in motion the recovery strategy outlined last autumn at the
time of the flopped Pounds 432m rights issue. The strategy involved the
disposal of all businesses considered to be outside the core aircraft,
defence, cars and property operations.
In commercial aircraft the company indicated it wanted to focus on its 20
per cent participation in the European Airbus airliner programme, while
finding partners for the loss-making regional aircraft activities and
possibly shedding its corporate jets operations.
Earlier this year it split the commercial aircraft side into three
divisions, Airbus, region-al aircraft and corporate jets.
BAe remains confident of the long-term prospects of Airbus despite the
announcement yesterday that Airbus was planning to cut production of its
150-seater A320 twin-engine airliner by a total of 27 aircraft in 1993 and
1994 because of the current sluggish market for narrowbody jetliners.
The decision marks an end of an era. BAe and two of its former constituent
parts, de Havilland and Hawker Siddeley, have been manufacturing corporate
jets for almost 30 years.
Though profitable, the business was always a relatively small part of the
group. And, more significantly, BAe is faces the prospect of having to
invest considerable funds to develop new products at a time when its
resources have been stretched by its restructuring programme, the recession
in most of its main markets, and the investment needs.
BAe's intention is that the majority holder should be prepared to put in the
necessary long-term investment while it maintains a minority interest to
reassure and preserve its large and loyal corporate aircraft customer base.
The success of the corporate jet division has been based on the 125
medium-sized twin-engine jet, first developed by de Havilland 27 years ago
and ley. BAe currently manufacturers two eight-to-ten seater variants, the
125-800 and the BAe 1000, its latest model with a trans-atlantic range
launched in 1989.
Over the years, there have been some 10 different versions. In all, BAe has
sold a total of 816 of which about 500 have gone to North America,
traditionally the biggest market for corporate jets.
With the present models the company commands a leading position in the
medium-sized corporate jet market with a share of between 45 per cent and 50
per cent.
The aircraft have continued to sell strongly, even in the last difficult 12
months of recession. But during the next few years, BAe would have had to
consider launching a new aircraft to remain competitive.
Other manufacturers are studying the development of a new business jet with
trans-pacific range aimed largely at the US-Japan market. It was difficult
to see how BAe could adapt yet again the old 125 airframe to develop the new
model for this important market. The only option was to build a completely
new aircraft.
'We recognised we would have to launch a new aircraft to remain successful,'
said a BAe executive yesterday. 'That would have involved significant new
investment.'
BAe said it had so far not held any serious talks. But it should find little
difficulty in negotiating a deal. The business aircraft market has recently
seen a spate of mergers and acquisitions with several groups seeking to
strengthen their position.
The most recent was the sale in January by the US General Dynamics defence
group of its Cessna corporate aircraft subsidiary to Textron for Dollars
600m after a heated auction. Cessna's Citation jets compete against the BAe
125.
Dassault of France, which produces the Falcon range of business jets, had
bid for Cessna and is likely to be a candidate for the BAe business.
BAe's search for a partner for its loss-making regional aircraft activities
is likely to prove more difficult. The company has already had preliminary
talks with Japanese manufacturers over a possible partnership in its BAe 146
regional jet operations.
There have also been talks with European manufacturers which are seeking to
rationalise an industry suffering from overcapacity and a soft market
because of the financial difficulties of smaller airlines.
Pressure has been increasing on BAe to find a partner for the regional
business because of the attempts by Deutsche Aerospace, the aerospace arm of
Germany's Daimler-Benz car group, to forge a strong equity partnership with
Fokker, the Dutch regional aircraft manufacturer.
Alenia of Italy has also acquired a 6 per cent stake in Fokker, which could
constitute the basis of a new European regional aircraft grouping.
While working to disengage itself from the corporate jet business and
eventually, the industry suspects, from regional aircraft, BAe now appears
increasingly interested in increasing its role and participation in the
Airbus programme.
It is an ironic turnaround. Barely two years ago, BAe's top management was
expressing grave doubts about Airbus and its potential liabilities. Today,
it sees Airbus as one of the high-spots in its portfolio of businesses.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920411

