FT923-15614

FT  01 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Democrats form queues to back US trade
bill - Mileage can be won from 'foreignfoes'


   By NANCY DUNNE


EVER since the US merchandise trade balance turned negative in the 1980s,
there has been an unwritten political rule: election years - particularly
presidential election years - require the Democrats to move a trade bill
through Congress.
This year's bill, which could come to the floor for debate as early as next
week, is not much different from past ventures. It allows the Democrats to
seem to stand up to foreign foes in a way that presidents - who must handle
the consequences - often cannot. Yet it gives the responsibility for tough
action to the president's appointee, the US trade representative.
The current trade bill is notable for the fact that the provision most
egregious to free traders has already been removed. It would have limited
domestic car production by Japanese subsidiaries, who were begged to set up
US plants a decade ago.
It would have frozen the Japanese share of the US market - imports and
domestic - at 1992 levels for seven years, raising the ceiling only to
offset the increase of American car exports to Japan.
This is not to say that all the controversial stipulations have been
removed. The bill remains, according to one US trade lawyer, 'a mishmash of
special interest legislation'.
It would, for example, expand the anti-dumping regime to attack
'circumvention' of dumping duties. Thus countries which set up final
assembly facilities to 'evade' dumping duties in third countries - or even
the US - could still find the duties imposed either on the final product or
on its imported parts.
One proposal takes aim at EC patent rules. Another requires the US trade
representative to retaliate (with a few exceptions) against countries if a
year of negotiations over intellectual property rights fails to convince
them to change their ways.
It also contains a five-year extension of 'Super 301' - a provision in the
1988 trade legislation which required the US trade representative to name
the countries with the most formidable trade barriers and negotiate them
away. Super 301 expired after two years, much to the trade representative's
relief.
The bill requires the trade representative to institute a trade complaint
against Japan for its closed rice market and substantially tightens the
rules for the Generalised System of Preferences, which gives duty-free entry
to products from developing countries.
Democratic Congressman Sander Levin of Michigan is expected to bring to the
House floor an amendment which directs US trade officials to
institutionalise the informal commitments made by Japanese motor companies
early this year.
It would require Japanese companies to boost their purchases of parts from
US suppliers and it suggests holding Japanese car exports at 1.65m.
The current trade bill also has something the administration wants - customs
modernisation - on the theory that President George Bush may be induced not
to veto it. But that is a decision still to be made.
In the House, the legislation has the blessings of trade hawks - such as Mr
Richard Gephardt, the Majority leader - and moderates, such as Mr Dan
Rostenkowski, chairman of the powerful ways and means committee.
It is likely to get toned down when it reaches the Senate and vetoed by the
president, but opponents worry that similar legislation may reappear next
year.
In the Senate, Mr Lloyd Bentsen, chairman of the Senate finance committee
which has authority over trade, would like a simple bill extending Super 301
and a 'trade enforcement act' which requires the US government to retaliate
if countries fail to live up to their trade agreements.
Most congressmen know passage of the proposed legislation would create an
outcry in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt). They also know
that the voters do not have a clue about either the Gatt or international
trade rules, so they hope the legislation can be sent to the president for
an unpopular veto just before the November elections.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920701

