FT924-6180

FT  23 NOV 92 / Lessons of Iraqgate


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


The clearest aspect of the Iraqgate affair is the abuse of executive power,
all too characteristic of the oversecretive and overcentralised UK
government machine. Corporate executives of Matrix Churchill risked a
criminal conviction and possible imprisonment because ministers tried to
prevent official documents being used in their defence. We shall need to
wait for Lord Justice Scott's report to know who bears the main
responsibility. Meanwhile there is an aspect of the affair which does not
depend on the law and which was pointed out by Mr David Sawers in a letter
to the Financial Times published on November 18 ('Arms to Iraq: complex
objectives and high costs'). This is that Mr Alan Clark, who blew the
whistle on the whole affair, stated that his job as a minister of trade was
'to maximise exports despite guidelines which I regarded as tiresome and
intrusive'.
The full fatuousness as well as immorality of the policy was brought out in
the letter underneath by Mr Colin Grant-Wilson, who observed that 'Britain
almost certainly did not sell the arms, but in effect gave them to the
Iraqis'. For there is virtually no prospect of the payment by the Iraqis, in
which case the Export Credit Guarantee Agency would have to foot the bill.
Some economic fallacies mainly involve a waste of national resources.
Others, such as the obstinate defence of agricultural subsidies in the Gatt
round, are a threat to international prosperity as well. But the ones
involved in the government support for the arms trade are of an altogether
different degree of evil. For they lead to the arming of rival dictators,
enhancing their power of aggression and threatening both international peace
and eventually bringing about the death and mutilation of young soldiers
from the arms-exporting countries themselves.
Yet it all arises because of the fundamental mistake of supposing that it is
the government's job to maintain not merely full order books and jobs in the
whole economy, but in specific industries as well - the belief that if the
government does not ensure orders for industry X by hook or by crook, the
men and women employed will be thrown on the scrap heap and the other
resources involved permanently wasted. It is a first cousin of the 'lump of
labour' fallacy which maintains that we are always on the verge of economic
saturation and that there will soon be nothing left for the available labour
force to do.
State support of the arms trade is a near perfect fusion of the right-wing
belief in 'my country right or wrong' and the left-wing belief in industrial
intervention and subsidy. Some would say that this is an exact description
of French foreign and economic policy; but the English-speaking countries do
not have much to shout about either.
Obviously unregulated markets will not produce international harmony where
weapons of destruction are concerned. If businessmen find it pays to sell
arms to unscrupulous rulers, they will do so. The role of government
intervention - which as in so many other areas needs to be internationally
organised by the principal industrial powers to be effective - should be to
reduce the scale of such arms sales. Yet in practice its role is often to
stimulate sales further than would be the case under pure laissez-faire.
The industrial support fallacies are less obviously fallacies during a
recession. But it still remains true that 80 to 90 per cent of the workforce
have jobs and that most of those who lose them eventually find alternative
occupation of one kind or another. Moreover arms support is not an emergency
anti-recession policy, but is all-too-often long term in nature and does not
ease off when the danger is overheating and inflation.
Indeed, it is even worse than that. No sensible market liberal would deny
that there are human, economic and social costs in running down particular
industries rapidly and relocating employees. But these costs are magnified
when the sectors in question are inflated by government support to much
higher levels than would otherwise obtain. So the more that arms-exporting
industries are artificially puffed up, the more painful the process of
reducing them to normal size.
Above all, politicians and officials who see international trade as itself a
form of warfare between Western countries do not appreciate that exports are
 -like investment - a cost and not a benefit. They only do good if they
bring returns. If the exporting countries have to provide the money to pay
themselves, then it is a ludicrous form of employment support. It would be
much better for governments to use the money to make direct cash payments to
people who would otherwise be working in the arms industry.
So far from being a symptom of untrammelled market forces, much of the
international arms trade is interventionism gone mad. Do I need to underline
the moral any further?

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921123

