FT923-6635

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: BES gets new lease of life


   By JOHN AUTHERS


THE business expansion scheme (BES) is back, with another 16 months to go
before the government bids it adieu. The continued proliferation of
'contracted exit' schemes involving universities and housing associations is
in line with expectations. But the revival of more entrepreneurial schemes
is more surprising.
BES companies which are not backed ultimately by property are very risky.
They cannot be justified as a home for mainstream savings - but they can be
a tax-efficient way to invest money you are prepared to lose. Most such
schemes make for rather more entertaining investments than you can manage
through National Savings.
Offerings at present include Musica Oscura, raising money for a new record
label backed by the Consort of Musicke which will specialise in early music;
Spittoon, a television production vehicle for the makers of the satirical
programme Spitting Image; Beethoven, a chain of classical record shops; and
Artroute, which aims to build a new two-seat British sports car, the Mirach.
None of these companies can be recommended as a secure investment in its own
right compared with the possibilities on offer from the assured tenancy
sector. But the financiers who piece together BES companies have spent the
past four years squeezing as much risk as they can out of the system.
This led to contracted exit schemes where companies buy accommodation for
universities or housing associations in return for a pledge to buy back the
property at a fixed price after five years when BES exemptions expire. Thus,
they could predict a fixed return.
Universities and housing associations are not naturally strong financial
institutions, though. With property prices in reverse, BES sponsors looked
for third-party guarantors and self-financing deals.
The most recent such offering is Bessa Blue Chip, which is sponsored by
Close Brothers. Barclays direct mortgage service, part of Barclays bank, is
contracted to pay Pounds 1.20 for every Pounds 1.00 share after five years.
Top-rate taxpayers will effectively have paid only 60p, so this is
equivalent to Barclays offering to double your money in five years.
A similar offer, The Residences At Manchester (TRAM), sponsored by Hodgson
Martin, will buy accommodation for Manchester university's institute of
science and technology. After five years, Pounds 1.28 will be paid for every
Pounds 1.00 share.
Finally, reversionary schemes, where BES companies buy houses cheaply from
the elderly and then allow them to live there until they die, also seem set
to gain in popularity with Johnson Fry, the leading BES sponsor, planning
new issues. These offer the opportunity to buy properties very cheaply but
there could be problems in exiting from the deals after five years.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920822

