FT924-958

FT  21 DEC 92 / Letter: Positive outcomes suggested by record of new Russian
premier


   From Mr JONATHAN P STERN


Sir, Your editorial of December 15 ('Departure of a reformer'), contains an
important omission about the new Russian prime minister. As minister for the
gas industry, Mr Chernomyrdin may be 'associated with the failures of the
last Soviet regime', but he was one of that regime's few industrial success
stories. That is arguably why Mr Chernomyrdin has been singled out for this
very difficult position.
It is somewhat unfair of Leyla Boulton ('New man at top sweeps into office
with an old broom', December 15) to say that Mr Chernomyrdin has failed to
turn around the fortunes of the oil industry since he was made deputy prime
minister responsible for fuels and energy last April. Macroeconomic and
political confusion would have made this a difficult task for anybody in his
position to achieve within one year.
You may be right that Mr. Chernomyrdin does not know 'how to transform
Russia into a working, let alone a successful, market economy', but then who
does? The immediate issue is whether the new prime minister will set his
face against market-oriented reforms or whether he will continue them at a
slower pace.
Meanwhile we should be aware of two politically positive outcomes of his
appointment. First, Russia has a prime minister who has a track record of
some economic and political success (albeit within the framework of a
centrally planned economy). Second, the new prime minister has a detailed
knowledge of the oil and gas sectors, which are likely to be extremely
important for both the domestic economy and for foreign trade. Indeed, these
sectors could be the key to Russia's economic recovery.
A prime minister who could turn oil production (and exports) around and
guarantee the continued flow of Russian gas to Europe would help boost
western business confidence, even if he proves to be a less politically and
intellectually attractive than Mr Yedor Gaidar, his predecessor.
Jonathan P Stern,
98 Erlanger Road,
London SE14

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921221

