FT924-6563

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: Abnormal items behind 6.3%
profits fall at NAB


   By KEVIN BROWN


NATIONAL Australia Bank (NAB), Australia's biggest and most profitable bank,
yesterday reported a fall of 6.3 per cent in net profits to ADollars 675m
(USDollars 454m) after abnormal items for the year to the end of September.
However, the bank said net profit before abnormals increased by 11 per cent
to ADollars 802m. The abnormal loss of ADollars 127m was caused entirely by
a write-down in the carrying value of the NAB's 4.9 per cent stake in the
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ).
Mr Don Argus, managing director, said the result was 'the story of a black
ink bank'. He said the result was 'satisfactory' in the light of 'difficult'
trading conditions in Australia and the UK.
The result was achieved in spite of a 33.5 per cent fall to ADollars 189m in
the contribution from NAB's UK and Irish division, which includes the
Clydesdale, Northern, Yorkshire and National Irish banks. The sharpest
reverse was incurred by Yorkshire Bank, which suffered a 33 per cent fall in
profits to ADollars 11m, caused mainly by an increased charge for bad and
doubtful debts.
The Australian operations increased their contribution to group profits by
9.7 per cent to ADollars 588m. New Zealand operations, excluding the
recently acquired Bank of New Zealand, contributed ADollars 9m, compared
with a loss of ADollars 9m in the previous year.
Mr Argus said the main factors behind the improvement were a 5 per cent fall
in provisions against bad and doubtful debts to ADollars 908m, and a 1 per
cent increase in net interest income to ADollars 3.6bn. Almost half the bad
debt charge related to the UK and Ireland.
He said there were signs of modest recovery in Australia, but the outlook
for growth remained moderate, and uncertainties still surrounded the
property market and the level of business confidence.
This would sustain strong pressure on margins in the housing and retail
deposit market, the backbone of NAB's profitable performance.
Mr Argus said UK economic activity was expected to be weak in 1993, but
lower operating costs and charges for bad debts would provide a base for
improved profits.
See UK Companies

The Financial Times


London Page 27

921120

