FT924-8258

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Capital Markets: Edgar to tackle the paper
mountain - Patrick Harverson reports on the installation of the SEC's
electronic filing system


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


Every year the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) is deluged with an
estimated 10m pages of documents filed by US and foreign corporations and
investment companies. The documents cover everything from share prospectuses
to detailed earnings reports and data on stock ownership.
And each year the time-consuming and inefficient system the SEC uses to
assemble the mountain of paper, examine its contents and distribute the
information to the public, becomes ever more costly to maintain, threatening
to undermine the agency's ability to effectively regulate the industry.
Now, after more than nine years and Dollars 70m in the making, a new
electronic filing system is ready to revolutionise the way corporate
information is disseminated in the US.
The new system, called Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis and Retrieval, or
Edgar for short, will allow companies to electronically file the 300 or so
different forms required by the SEC. Edgar will also enable the SEC, headed
by Mr Richard Breeden since 1989, to assemble and examine via computer the
information in those forms. It will also allow public access to all
SEC-filed corporate documents via computer databases.
The idea behind Edgar is that it will make it easier and quicker for
companies to file documents to the authorities (an IBM-compatible personal
computer is the only technology that companies will need). It will also cut
the cost and time the SEC spends handling the information, and widen public
access to it.
So far only a few hundred companies have volunteered to file electronically
via Edgar, but by the middle of next year mandatory filing will begin, and
if everything goes to schedule, the 14,000 or so companies that regularly
file with the SEC will all be using the system by mid-1996 .
Yet in spite of its obvious usefulness, Edgar has been dogged by controversy
throughout its nine-year life. Criticisms have concentrated on the cost and
time it has taken to build the system, and on the lack of public access to
the information it collects.
Edgar's life started in 1983 when an SEC staffer wrote a paper recommending
automating the filing process. A prototype version was built the following
year. The original plan was for the pilot system to last two years, but it
lasted until this summer, when it was replaced by the operational system.
The project fell badly behind schedule primarily because of a fight over
funding. The SEC originally wanted Edgar to pay for itself by charging firms
to subscribe to the system, but Congress, always reluctant to cede control
of the purse-strings on government projects, insisted otherwise.
After much debate, it was agreed the public dissemination sub-system - the
part that allows vendors to sell the information gathered on Edgar to the
public - would be the only element financed privately. The rest of the money
would come from the public purse.
Deciding who should build Edgar also slowed things down. The task of running
the pilot system was originally given to Arthur Andersen, but in late 1987
the SEC decided it needed a new contractor for the operational system.
Changing horses midstream, however, led to wrangles over the choice of the
new contractor, and further delays. After a detailed and lengthy review
process, the job of developing the operational project was awarded in early
1989 to a five-company consortium consisting of BDM International, Bowne &
Co, CompuServe, Disclosure Inc and Mead Data Central.
When the new contractors were chosen, the SEC hoped Edgar would be ready by
the end of 1990. But further problems set the date back. The biggest single
reason for the delay was the SEC's insistence on adding to an ever-expanding
list of rules and requirements for Edgar users.
In a report by the General Accounting Office (GAO) released in September,
the SEC was severely criticised for continually changing the list of user
requirements. The original list of 350 requirements in 1989 ballooned to
1,000 by the start of this year.
The GAO said the SEC failed to exercise 'top management oversight' to
control the rapidly expanding list of functional changes in the system.
Mr John Penhollow, director of planning and administration in the SEC's
office of information technology, says reaching a consensus on the
requirements was difficult: 'It took a long time to get agreement on
requirements, but it is unrealistic for any agency that is building a system
of this magnitude and complexity to believe that any one group of people can
write down all the requirements that should be included.'
Development of the Edgar project has also been interrupted by the complaints
of consumer groups, who have argued that the cost of gaining access to the
information on the system will be prohibitively expensive.
Critics argue that access to Edgar would be limited to a few terminals in
reading rooms in three cities - New York, Chicago and Washington DC  - and
that charges levied by vendors of Edgar information will put the information
out of reach to the general public.
The delays have inevitably pushed up Edgar's costs. In 1989 it was
originally estimated the system would cost Dollars 51.5m. This summer that
figure stood at Dollars 70.2m.
By the time the system is fully operational in 1996 (assuming there are no
more major delays), Edgar is expected to have cost Dollars 78.3m, a 52 per
cent increase over the initial estimate.
Furthermore, there is no guarantee that Edgar will be ready by the target
date of mid-1993. The SEC is still receiving and responding to comments from
the industry on the proposed rules for Edgar that it published in August.
Congress will also want another look at the system, to respond to questions
about funding and public access, and given the pace at which legislative
inquiry progresses, Edgar's troubles may not be over.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921112

