FT923-6323

FT  25 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Stock Exchange keeps close watch on
Alliance


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


THE STOCK Exchange is keeping a close watch on events at Alliance Resources,
the oil and gas company which faces a winding up order from its former
broker, Girozentrale Gilbert Eliott.
A letter signed by Mr John O'Brien just five days before he became chairman
of the London-listed company in May, sets out proposals for an eventual
all-paper bid by Alliance for the unlisted Manx Petroleum. The letter
describes an offer of 11 Alliance shares for every Manx share.
Mr O'Brien wrote the letter in his capacity as managing director of Manx,
the resource company which is chaired by entrepreneur Mr Algy Cluff.
The letter also sets out terms for a Dollars 200,000 (Pounds 105,000) loan
to Alliance, and arranges for monthly management fees of Pounds 10,000 to be
paid to Manx. These fees are to be paid in arrears beginning in April 1993,
according to the letter. The document also proposes a capital reorganisation
to enable Alliance to issue more shares.
The Stock Exchange is believed to be aware of the contents of the letter,
and the fact that the details were not made known to shareholders. However,
since Mr O'Brien was not a director of Alliance when the letter was written,
the company has not violated the Class Four rule. This requires that
transactions between connected parties be disclosed to shareholders and
possibly be subject to their prior approval.
The Stock Exchange is believed to have had extensive discussions with
Alliance and its current brokers, Shepards, over the conduct of future
transactions between the two companies.
Should any offer for Manx eventually be made, a Class Four circular and an
extraordinary meeting could be required.
Alliance, formerly a Canadian company called United North American
Resources, came to the London market in March 1991 with a capitalisation of
Pounds 8.8m. The shares were floated at 40p. It is in dispute with Gilbert
Eliott over fees arising from the flotation. The broker has lodged a
petition to wind Alliance up, failing payment of the fees.
Alliance operates oil and gas assets in Louisiana, but has been unable to
develop them fully after incurring debts in its flotation. Manx, which was
spawned by Cluff Resources and operates from Cluff's offices, claims a 5 per
cent interest in a gas licence in the Netherlands as its main asset.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920825

