FT921-15336

FT  10 JAN 92 / Management: When service with a smile is missing by a mile


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


Why is it that supposedly excellent service organisations seem to slip up
when my friends, family or I have dealings with them? If it were just
because we are a pernickety lot, then we would presumably harbour the same
complaint about the quality of products.
But we don't: in our experience, products with really good reputations
generally seem to live up to their promise these days.
The reasons usually given for the patchy quality of most services relate to
their supposed intangibility, and to their undoubtedly high reliance on that
most fallible of factors, the human being. But there is more to the problem
than that - as several supposed paragons need to recognise. Take Federal
Express. The air courier company has become the subject of countless
business school case studies on service excellence, and in 1990 it was the
first leading service company to win America's Malcolm Baldrige National
Quality Award.
Yet I have refused to use FedEx ever since the mid-1980s, when I was billed
for months in error for a package sent from New York to London. To add
insult to injury, the company sent its threatening letters from Paris, and
in French] Neither its Paris office nor its UK counterpart ever acknowledged
my desperate protestations to them.
Similar stories from a business acquaintance suggest that such problems
arise not merely from the human errors of a few operatives, but from system
design faults.
Then there are Marriott and Hyatt Hotels, few of whose staff around the
world I have ever found as helpful as they are supposed to be. The Marriott
name has earned a double black mark in my book for supplying food tasting
like disinfectant on successive airline flights from three different
airports a couple of years ago.
Again, individual human error could hardly have been the cause of precisely
the same recurrent lapse in quality - there must have been some sort of
system fault.
Hertz car rental I shall avoid for ever - in America anyway - because of the
chaos of its Boston airport operation one day in 1988, when a
thrice-promised shuttle bus failed to show up, and I then had to queue for
over an hour to collect a pre-booked car.
Which brings us to the most instructive case of all, British Airways. In
almost every respect, the quality and consistency of BA's service improved
immeasurably during the 1980s. One came to expect the sort of dependability
which is praised to the skies - as is that of FedEx and Marriott - in a
useful new handbook on the management of product and service quality by an
American consultant, Richard Whitley.* But then, as the recession tightened
its grip in 1991, things began to slip.
Take just three experiences. First, the number of ticket desks at Heathrow
was pared to the bone, creating long queues of angry passengers.
Second, during the Gulf crisis, my wife's written questions to BA about
apparent security lapses were answered by its customer service staff only
with considerable delay and meaningless platitudes.
Worst of all, BA's upgraded Economy class service on long distance flights -
much-hyped under the 'World Traveller' label since January 1991 - has been
marred by the meanness of its legroom.
Most of its 747s have less space not only than many BA competitors, but also
than the airline's own European flights. What on earth can be the sense of
providing less space on long distance than on short-haul flights?
Whereas BA's inadequate response to the security query was, one hopes, a
single individual's lapse from the normally prescribed level of service, the
ticket desks and seating problems are both system faults: dubious economies
in the design of products which form part of a service.
For my money - which I now prefer to pay to roomier rivals such as American
Airlines, or even shabby TWA - the legroom issue is so fundamental on a long
flight as to rupture entirely BA's much-promoted 'service promise' of
all-round high quality.
In 1990, BA claimed that it could not afford the Pounds 50m-Pounds 100m in
annual lost revenue and engineering costs that the provision of an extra two
inches of legroom would involve. Now, faced with roomier transatlantic
rivals offering much higher service quality than did Pan American and TWA,
it may find it cannot afford not to.
For FedEx, Marriott, BA and their many would-be emulators of 'excellence',
what are the lessons of these lapses?
First, that product and service quality are intertwined in intimate fashion.
Quality service is not merely a question of getting one's front-line staff
to behave impeccably in every one of their hundreds of daily customer
contacts - which Jan Carlzon, the saviour of Scandinavian Airlines (SAS)
almost a decade ago, rightly called 'moments of truth'.
Second, every aspect of the product and service must be designed, produced
and delivered correctly - every time, and ad infinitum. As BA and especially
SAS have found, the people-intensity of a service makes its quality far
harder to sustain than that of a product.
Third, as Whiteley's book argues, companies must adopt more of the
measurement and research techniques which are available to transform many
intangible aspects of a service into tangibles. By measuring constantly
every customer - and employee - attitude in sight, BA has done a more
professional job than most, even if it sometimes turns a blind eye to the
results.
Fourth, service companies must realise that as the pace of innovation
quickens, and as many markets - such as airlines - become liberalised or
simply more competitive - like retailing - last year's 'excellent' service
may be this year's also-ran.
Underlying everything is the fact that customers who now demand a
consistently high level of quality in products - even in low-priced ones -
are starting to do the same in services. Such high expectations are fostered
still further by the sort of hyperbolic advertising campaigns which service
organisations, especially airlines, tend to run.
In the past, customers took such overblown claims with a generous bag of
salt. In future they will be less forgiving. They will penalise
organisations which fail to sustain the promised level of quality. They
will, like yours truly, take their business elsewhere.
* The Customer-Driven Company. Business Books (Random Century) Pounds 16.99.

The Financial Times


London Page 9 Illustration (Omitted).

920110

