FT923-9615

FT  04 AUG 92 / Italian rate cut as lira strengthens


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


THE Bank of Italy announced last night that it was cutting interest rates as
pressure on the lira eased in response to abolition of the scala mobile wage
indexation system.
The central bank said from today it was reducing the official discount rate
by half a percentage point to 13.25 per cent and the rate for fixed-term
advances to commercial banks by the same amount to 14.75 per cent.
The lira recovered strongly yesterday, breaking through the psychologically
important barrier of L755 to the D-Mark, to be fixed at L754.95, its best
level for weeks.
Shares on the Milan stock exchange also rebounded, jumping 3.7 per cent. The
Comit index closed at 416.64, up almost 15 points from Friday's close.
The improved tone in the markets follows Friday's agreement between
ministers, business leaders and trade unions to scrap the scala mobile,
which gave workers inflation-linked wage rises. The deal has reinforced the
view that the recently formed government of prime minister Giuliano Amato is
coming to grips with Italy's economic ills.
The Bank of Italy said the government's deficit trimming measures and the
scala mobile accord had given it room for interest rate cuts.
The lira has been under pressure during the past two months as speculation
mounted that it might have to be devalued against the D-Mark. The Bank of
Italy twice raised interest rates to support the currency.
Equity dealers described the agreement to end the scala mobile as historic,
even if many details of future wage bargaining arrangements have still to be
fleshed out. The deal is seen as an important step in reducing inflation,
improving productivity and boosting international confidence in the Italian
economy.
However, some brokers warned that yesterday's surge in share prices came in
a thin market, which was also affected by a breakdown of the screen-based
dealing system and signs of selling by some foreign investors.
Art of persuasion, Page 14
Currencies, Page 25
World stocks, Page 31

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920804

