FT924-1057

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: A high risk Flute


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


ONLY those with long memories will be able to picture clearly the Sadler's
Wells production of Don Giovanni from the 1960s, which brought modern sets
and pop-art drop curtains featuring green triangular trees to classical
opera. Imposing an abstract style on Mozart is a high risk strategy.
For Scottish Opera to try such a trick after the abuse that greeted its last
new production was brave indeed. But the company has taken out an insurance
policy. The conductor was Nicholas McGegan, who commands wide respect as a
Mozartian of authority and lively ideas. He conducted this new Magic Flute
on Thursday without a baton, but one would never have known: the orchestra's
playing was crisp and the whole score swept along, bristling with energy.
It was the sort of musical performance which stamps its personality on the
opera from the opening bars - in this case a businesslike call to attention,
nothing pompous at all, which is just what Martin Duncan's production will
have wanted. For his aim was to put on an anarchic show, which tramples all
the hallowed conventions underfoot. This is a Magic Flute of no particular
time, of no place, just a riot of colourful ideas in a fashionably
alternative style. The audience has tuned in to Mozart and found him on
Channel 4.
In such a demotic view of the opera there is no point in bothering about
lofty philosophical truths. Instead we get an adventure pantomime, in which
Paul Nilon's eager and boyish Tamino, rather short on princely nobility of
voice, sets out to win his girl - Susannah Waters, an attractive Pamina,
though one who does not sound at ease with her music.
On the way he encounters various bizarre creatures. The Queen of Night, sung
by Jennifer Rhys-Davies, becomes a vamp and evil magician, who pins the
birds that Papageno brings her on the wall at home. Rupert Oliver Forbes's
Monostatos is dressed as a human dung beetle with grotesque dangling bits
(one does have to sympathise with singers these days). Gidon Saks makes a
refreshingly unstuffy Sarastro, broadly sung; David Mattinson is the
dignified Speaker. The Three Boys seemed unnaturally confident, until a
glimpse of their child-bearing hips gave the game away.
The star of the evening, however, was Simon Keenlyside as Papageno, a
brilliant comic creation conceived (one imagines) by singer and producer
together. Here the bird-catcher becomes part bird himself, half peacock,
half gobbling turkey, his gait a stalking bird-like strut, his nose a
pointed beak, while the human part was wrapped up in the guise of a
Liverpudlian alternative comedian - a unique double persona, dazzlingly
brought off.
When he is on stage, the production takes wing. For the rest Duncan amuses
himself debunking the opera's convoluted symbolism. Into Ken Lee's brash
designs is tossed any symbol that happened to be at hand, windows, doors,
triangles, circles, all meaningless and a wickedly merry jape. I liked the
three temples of Sarastro's kingdom, which come out as triangles of stone,
on each of which a classical column (Ionic, Doric and Corinthian) has been
chalked as graffiti.
Less than half of what makes The Magic Flute a great opera is to be found
here, but what there is flies high with a brazen sense of fun: a symbol,
maybe, of renewed confidence at Scottish Opera.
Performances continue at the Theatre Royal, Glasgow, until 10 February (Box
Office 041-332 9000); then on tour

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921219

