FT923-6638

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: Invest without risk


   By PHILIP COGGAN


MANY PEOPLE like the idea of investing in the stock market but are scared of
losing their capital. Hypo Foreign & Colonial Marketing is the latest
company to try to attack this problem, with a fund called Protected Capital
Plus. The idea is to give investors exposure to stock market growth while
ensuring that their capital never falls in value.
The Foreign & Colonial product is a new twist on an old concept. The bulk of
the investor's money is invested in interest-bearing deposits, which grow to
repay his capital. The remainder is invested in futures and options to give
fundholders the equity-kicker.
What makes the F&C fund different is that the process happens quarterly. Say
you have invested Pounds 10,000. If after three months the stock market has
fallen, you will still have Pounds 10,000. If, however, a strong stock
market means the fund grows by 10 per cent, you will have Pounds 11,000.
That will be your base capital for the next three months; gains, once made,
cannot be lost. You can withdraw your money, without charge, at the end of
any quarter. That gives the fund an advantage over similar products which
tie-up your capital for years.
Inevitably, these advantages have their costs. The fund does not pay an
income. But when you sell your holding, any gain is subject to income,
rather than capital gains, tax. Since most people do not use up their annual
CGT allowance (now Pounds 5,800), this puts the fund in a worse tax position
than a unit or investment trust.
Furthermore, the fund does not give the investor the full benefit of equity
investment. Much depends on the cost of the options which the fund buys. If
the market has been turbulent, the options will be expensive, limiting the
fund's ability to match the index.
Over three months, F&C reckons that, when the market rises, the fund will
achieve a return equal to about 60 per cent of the increase in the FT-SE 100
index. But the investor will 'catch up' in quarters when the market falls
and the fund's value remains stable.
On that basis, the fund would have earned an average 13.7 per cent gross a
year between 1980 and 1992, compared with a gross return of 11.1 per cent
from a building society over the same period.
There are two caveats about safety. F&C is not guaranteeing the return of
capital - it is possible that the deposit element of the fund might invest
in a bank which goes bust. The fund will strive to avoid this by investing
only in banks rated AA and above.
The second caveat is that this is an offshore fund, based in Jersey and
unrecognised by the Securities and Investments Board. As such, it can be
sold only by professional advisers.
The minimum investment is Pounds 5,000. There is an initial charge of 5 per
cent and an annual management charge of 0.9 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920822

