FT924-6245

FT  23 NOV 92 / Market doubts remain over ERM: Spain and Portugal devalue by
6%; Major wants priority for capital spending


   By Our Economics, Political and Foreign Staff


SPAIN and Portugal devalued their currencies in the European exchange rate
mechanism early yesterday but the agreement triggered concern in financial
markets over whether this third realignment in 10 weeks would prove durable.
After meeting for 10 hours in Brussels, the European Community's monetary
committee announced that the Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo had been
devalued against the other six currencies in the ERM by 6 per cent.
The monetary committee statement also said Spain would lift the special
capital controls imposed during the currency turmoil of September to protect
the peseta after its 5 per cent devaluation that month.
But while officials leaving the meeting in the early hours yesterday
expressed confidence that the latest currency changes would put an end to
turmoil in the European Monetary System, foreign exchange market analysts
and economists in London were virtually unanimous in predicting further
troubles ahead.
The ERM changes spurred early buying interest in the dollar, which opened
sharply higher in the Far East. It was trading at DM1.6140 against DM1.6055
in New York on Friday.
The realignment came amid signs that the British presidency of the EC is
ready to reverse its previously-indicated opposition to efforts at next
month's summit to agree a concerted strategy to pull Europe from recession.
British officials said last night that Mr John Major would float with his
continental partners the idea of a Europe-wide agreement to give priority to
capital spending programmes - along the lines of the package announced by
the UK government in this month's Autumn Statement.
The British move, which the prime minister is expected to discuss with Mr
Jean-Luc Dehaene, his Belgian counterpart, at a meeting in Brussels today,
is designed to deflect calls from Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission
president, for a European 'growth strategy'.
Mr Leon Brittan, the British vice-president of the Commission, last week
held up the Autumn Statement as a possible model for other European
governments.
The weekend negotiations on ERM realignment - which came after Madrid
requested a peseta devaluation late on Friday - were marked by tension
between the Spanish and Portuguese officials in the committee because
Portugal was reluctant to devalue its currency.
The final agreement left the Irish punt and Danish krone unchanged against
the D-Mark, in spite of speculation against both currencies last week.
Neither Italy nor Britain, which left the ERM in September, applied to
rejoin the system. There was also no sign that the German Bundesbank would
be willing to lower its interest rates in support of the latest realignment.
On Friday, Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, warned that
there was minimal room for a cut in German interest rates. Early yesterday,
Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the Bundesbank vice-president, gave no indication that
the German central bank would change its policy. On leaving the meeting, he
said only that Germany would do what it felt was 'appropriate'. When asked
whether an interest rate cut would be appropriate, he answered 'no comment'.
Finance ministries throughout Europe joined in hailing the latest
realignment as a success. The French finance ministry said the move
suggested that the autumn currency crisis was over and that 'our
difficulties are behind us'.
Mr Thor Pedersen, Danish economy minister, said it 'should prevent currency
speculation' and 'bring calm'. Mr Bertie Ahern, Irish finance minister, said
he was 'well pleased' that the punt was unchanged and that the outcome was
'a recognition of the strength of the economic fundamentals in Ireland'.
But the limited nature of the weekend realignment fuelled expectations that
the Irish punt and Danish krone could again become the target of speculative
attack. Ireland's problem of a loss of competitiveness since the floating of
sterling in September has been compounded by political uncertainty ahead of
its general election on Wednesday.
There was some discomfort in Spain, the initiator of the changes. Mr Carlos
Solchaga, finance minister, said Spain would have preferred to wait for the
Italian lira to re-enter the system, but had acted to devalue the peseta
when there was no sign that this would happen.
From Madrid, it was reported last night that the Spanish government was
nervously awaiting market reaction, fearful that any further attacks on the
currency might force it out of the ERM.
It was also clear that Portugal had only agreed to a 6 per cent fall in the
value of the escudo in the ERM with the greatest reluctance.
'We did not need any devaluation,' said Mr Anibal Cavaco Silva, the
Portuguese prime minister.
ERM REALIGNMENT
Realignment blurs view of money union, Page 2
Bundesbank under new rates pressure, Page 2
Portuguese devalue, Page 3
Pressure on punt, Page 3
Currency union illusion shattered, Page 15
Lex, Page 16
Int capital markets, Page 22
The week ahead, Page 23
Currencies, Page 29

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921123

