FT922-7325

FT  19 MAY 92 / Thais quick to defy army control: The military's thirst for
political power


   By PETER UNGPHAKORN


MANY WHO saw General Suchinda Kraprayoon's press conference on February 24
last year, the day after the military seized power, were impressed by the
performance of the Thai commander in chief.
His manner was friendly and relaxed, and he appeared willing to tolerate
frank questioning. He also modestly admitted that he was not well versed in
certain matters of state, such as the economy, and was therefore prepared to
leave broad areas of policy to the experts.
A week later he further enhanced his standing in the eyes of many by
appointing a respected and able civilian, Mr Anand Panyarachun, to be prime
minister,
This was a stark contrast to the military dictators who dominated Thai
politics for 40 years up to the 1970s, and still leave a legacy of thirst
for political power within the army.
Fourteen months later, as prime minister and himself faced with a mass
campaign against his rule, Gen Suchinda presents a different picture. But
many analysts believe that even if he does win the current battle, the
return of the military to full domination cannot be taken for granted.
It is significant that he is the first military prime minister to have been
the target of such massive public opposition as soon as he took office.
A similar uprising, in October 1973, took place when the public became tired
of years of dictatorship. This time, the public in Bangkok was determined
not to let the military take control right from the beginning.
Part of the reason lies in the growing strength of urban civil society that
has built up with the country's rapid economic growth and a lengthening if
intermittent history of parliamentary democracy. In Bangkok and many urban
centres, the public is much less willing to bow to the military.
Another part involves the image of Gen Suchinda and his colleagues that has
emerged since last year's coup. His apparent indifference to public opinion
has added to the alienation.
General Suchinda dominated the fifth class of cadets studying under the
post-Second World War curriculum of the country's military academy. The
group is now known as Class 5. The year of graduation from the academy has
come to be a key element in determining allegiances and enmities within the
forces
Class 5's politicisation came about in the late 1970s and early 1980s with
the rise of a group two years his junior, Class 7. The Class 7 officers, who
became disillusioned with years of fighting communism in Thailand's poorest
provinces, were responsible for the appointment of several prime ministers,
including Gen Prem Tinsulanonda.
Class 5's response to the Young Turks, who looked as though they might
overtake them, was to form a 'Democratic Soldiers' group, and much of the
internal military conflict in the 1980s was between the two.
Three figures have emerged as leaders of Class 5 since last year's coup: Gen
Suchinda, Air Chief Marshal Kaset Rojananil, the Air Force chief who
succeeded him as Armed Forces Supreme Commander, and Gen Issarapong
Noonpakdi, the premier's brother-in-law who replaced him as army chief.
Several other Class 5 figures are in positions of power, and two members of
the Noonpakdi family have risen to important command positions.
Because many of the officers also have business interests, the Bangkok
public, including much of the business community that would once have worked
hand in hand with the military, has become highly suspicious of the degree
of domination.
The opposition is therefore seen as a civilian response to the return of the
military, and in many ways it is. But it is also important that many of the
elected politicians leading the opposition in fact have military
backgrounds.
Maj Gen Chamlong Srimuang, the near ascetic former governor of Bangkok, who
was arrested yesterday, was a member of Class 7 before he left the army.
This may explain why the prime minister treated his actions with utmost
suspicion.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920519

