FT924-8035

FT  13 NOV 92 / Management: Building networks - Chip makers are placing
greater emphasis on winning customer approval


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


When Texas Instruments decided it needed to improve its services to
customers, it sent teams of managers, design engineers and even accountants,
to talk to personnel of all ranks within its customers' companies.
Service improvement, it was found, could be made at any level. For example,
at ICL, the UK-based computer manufacturer which is one of Texas
Instruments' important customers, discussions led to a new system of
managing supplies.
In the past, ICL staff receiving goods from Texas Instruments had to open
each package - which could contain up to 10,000 components - confirm the
contents listed on the packing note and computerise the data. Now, the data
provided in bar-code by Texas Instruments is read by ICL's bar-code system
and goes automatically into its computer system.
Texas Instruments' efforts in paying greater attention to its prospective
customers' needs paid off when it became one of eight semiconductor
suppliers to win 'accredited vendor status' from ICL last year, allowing the
closest relationship between supplier and customer. Texas has also won, for
the second year running, the chip users' top customer satisfaction award.
Texas is not alone in placing a high degree of emphasis on winning customer
approval for its work: customer satisfaction is becoming as crucial to
success as technological skills or manufacturing capabilities.
Some manufacturers have established 'cost of ownership' programmes.
Customers are asked to log the hidden costs - including, for example,
availability of hardware and software support, delivery times, excess
inventory and the need to inspect products - connected with buying and
owning products from rivals, compared with themselves.
If, for example, it takes a chip user a long time to procure a particular
product, or there are delivery problems and product defects upon arrival, it
will cost the user that much more to 'own' the product.
Contact between suppliers and customers has commonly become more frequent
and may embrace discussions of industry-wide issues, rather than just
focusing on sales. Says Ken Sanders, general manager of Texas Instruments in
the UK: 'In the past we would go to see the customer only when we were
trying to sell him a product or when something went wrong.'
The new-found enthusiasm for listening to customers reflects significant
changes in the industry:
Competition has become so intense that leading companies have been turning
to improving customer relationships as an important way of distinguishing
themselves from their competitors.
Greater global competition has made it difficult for any one company to
maintain a dominant position in a particular field for long. While
leading-edge technologies and a strategic product range are crucial to
success, increasingly they are no longer enough on their own.
According to George Fisher, chairman and chief executive of Motorola, the US
communications and electronics group: 'In the US for a long time we let
technology be the differentiator and forgot the fact that customer
satisfaction and quality were equally important.'
Chip users increasingly insist that their suppliers meet rigorous demands.
Many users, such as computer and consumer electronics manufacturers, are
locked in fierce competition and need to respond rapidly to changing
markets. For that, they must be sure that their suppliers can provide them
with what they need, when they need it.
Emphasis on delivery times and product quality has become greater than ever
before. While in the past a customer may have expected delivery in a
particular week, today the amount of leeway given is limited to one or two
days, if not hours.
As a result of the important role their suppliers play in their own success,
a growing number of chip users have taken to making stringent monthly
assessments of their suppliers on factors ranging from product quality to
cost and delivery time, and letting them know how they score on each point.
Semiconductor users also need to have up-to-date information on which
suppliers are the most reliable. This is because they want to restrict their
dealings to a small group of the best performers, since it is costly and
time-consuming to assess a large number of suppliers for each particular
project.
Because of the need to disclose sensitive product plans to chosen suppliers
from an early stage in the development cycle, users want to know which
suppliers are reliable. There is some evidence to suggest that working
closely with customers leads to greater success and speed in product
development.
Some years ago, Motorola, the US semiconductor and communications group,
commissioned a study by Jagdish Sheth, a management consultant, who reported
that the chances of a product succeeding can be much higher when a customer
is involved in the development process. According to Sheth, 65 per cent of
products developed with no input from customers fail.
Motorola was encouraged by the study to enter a number of collaborative
projects which it believes has enabled it to develop more innovative
products and to do so faster than would have been possible on its own.
It has a joint design team with Philips in Eindhoven that has been working
on CD-I, the Dutch consumer electronics group's new compact disc-based
entertainment system, since it was in the concept stage. Similarly, Motorola
has a design team working with British Telecommunications on video
conferencing and multi-media.
Says Mike McCourt, Motorola's director of sales and marketing in the UK and
Ireland: 'In the past we would not have had a dedicated team working for one
customer but would have worked to develop a generic product.'
The old way of doing things was more time consuming and would have meant
taking longer to get the product to market. As time to market may mean the
difference between winning and losing the product war, customer satisfaction
is becoming less an issue of rhetoric and more a matter of survival.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921113

