FT922-4144

FT  06 JUN 92 / A secret world keen to shake off a shady reputation: Robert
Maxwell's links with Liechtenstein have again cast a dubious limelight on
the tiny principality / A look at the pros and cons of the tax haven


   By IAN RODGER


ONE of the frustrating things about Liechtenstein is finding it on a map.
The principality is so small that its outlines tend to get obscured among
the motorways, rivers and town names in the border region between Austria
and Switzerland.
Such geographical elusoriness adds to the slightly shady and mysterious
image that Liechtenstein has acquired as a result of scandals involving
individuals whose ill gotten gains it helps to conceal.
It is an image that the principality's leaders want to destroy. They see
their country as a harmless little enclave trying to make its way in a
difficult world, and they are dismayed that Robert Maxwell apparently abused
their laws and regulations as egregiously as he did those in Britain.
Liechtenstein is one of the handful of small countries that thrive by
helping rich individuals and companies to conceal their assets from tax
inspectors. They attract that clientele with a number of strategies. The
most important is very low tax rates. Foundations of the kind set up by Mr
Maxwell pay no income tax in Liechtenstein and face an annual levy on
capital or net worth of 0.1 per cent.
Such countries also eschew double-taxation agreements with other countries
and they permit locally established companies, trusts and foundations to
operate in great secrecy.
According to Mr Bryan Jeeves, a British trust adviser based in the
principality, the number of companies, trusts and foundations set up by and
for foreigners in Liechtenstein - often called letterbox companies  - now
numbers about 100,000.
The spread of companies is global, according to Mr Jeeves, and the taxes
paid, although low, accounted for about a fifth of the principality's direct
revenues of SFr361m in 1990.
When the taxes of the banks, legal practices and their employees are added,
the economic importance of this activity is clear. The substantial revenues
from it also mean that corporate and individual income tax rates can be
relatively low.
Some tax havens, such as Monaco and Jersey, have gone further, inviting
foreign banks and the nervous rich to settle. But Liechtenstein has severely
restricted immigration, fearing that its population of 29,000 and its tiny
banking and legal fraternities would be overwhelmed.
Thus, even though people such as Mr Maxwell set up trusts and foundations in
Liechtenstein, the assets owned by those entities, including cash and
securities, are usually located elsewhere. Mr Werner Keicher, a
Liechtenstein-based director of the Maxwell Foundation, has stated that
there are no Maxwell assets in the principality.
Because one of the key features of the Liechtenstein package is secrecy, the
principality has inevitably attracted some shady characters.
In the 1970s, some of the affairs of Michele Sindona, the Italian financier,
were traced to Liechtenstein. In the Chiasso affair, a manager of Credit
Suisse embezzled SFr2.2bn of clients' money in the late 1970s and hid it in
Liechtenstein. Two years ago, Mr Christian Norgren, a prominent European
banker, was caught routing insider purchases of US shares through a
Liechtenstein establishment.
At the beginning of this year, evidence emerged that Mr Maxwell was using at
least one of his Liechtenstein-based foundations to conceal the source of
share purchases aimed at propping up the share price of Maxwell
Communications (MCC).
Under Liechtenstein law, a foundation's purposes, which are usually
charitable, must be specified precisely. Moreover, a foundation cannot
normally engage in business activities. Although terms of the Maxwell
foundations are secret, it is unlikely that they would permit the kind of
share-support operations apparently carried out last spring.
While Liechtenstein will not help foreign tax agencies, it will co-operate
with foreign authorities in criminal investigations. The banking and legal
fraternities accept new clients only on referral from reputable banks and
solicitors.
In the Maxwell case, no one in Liechtenstein had any suspicions about the
foundations. Indeed, until late last year, the trust firm that looked after
Maxwell was much envied for having such a prestigious client.
With the trend towards European political and economic integration, there is
anxiety in Liechtenstein that it will soon have to give up its tax-haven
status and/or open its doors to foreign bankers and solicitors.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920606

