FT923-6512

FT  24 AUG 92 / Georgia's statesman gets tough at home: The republic's
age-old conflicts are testing the patience of Eduard Shevardnadze


   By STEVE LEVINE


Eduard Shevardnadze, whom westerners have long regarded as a conciliatory
statesman, has once again proven that he also knows the nastier side of
politics. This is not surprising. The 64-year-old former Soviet foreign
minister, who proved throughout his career that he is a realist, learned the
political ropes as Communist party boss of the former Soviet republic of
Georgia.
That is the reason, his supporters say, Mr Shevardnadze, a key member of
Georgia's current ruling presidium, sent in the tanks last week to crush
separatist Abkhazians after they kidnapped 12 of his senior officials.
'There was no way out,' says Mrs Irina Sarishvili, a Georgia State Council
member who backs Mr Shevardnadze. 'The ministers were hostage. If we didn't
send them (the tanks) in, the people would think, 'what kind of people are
you'?'
The question now is whether Mr Shevardnadze, who contributed greatly to the
remoulding the old Soviet Union, can now make the birthplace of Mr Josef
Stalin look squarely at its own internal problems and change. Despite Mr
Shevardnadze's enormous international prestige, the challenges are great.
In this task, the picturesque nation of 5.4m people, mythologised by the
Greeks, has already chosen to go it alone. It is the only former Soviet
republic outside the Baltic region not to join the Commonwealth of
Independent States.
In addition to securing the dangerous streets of Tbilisi, the capital, and
bringing home troops from the separatist regions of South Ossetia and
Abkhazia, Mr Shevardnadze must rebuild an imploding economy. Georgia's
output fell by a quarter last year, after dropping 5 per cent in 1989 and 12
per cent in 1990, and the International Monetary Fund predicts that this
year will probably be worse.
The key to economic improvement, analysts say, will be the outcome of the
October 11 elections for the republic's new parliament, which will replace
the unelected State Council. Assuming that Mr Shevardnadze retains a
leadership role, say his admirers, the silver-haired politician will enjoy
an undisputable mandate. Whether the country is to led by a prime minister
or president has yet to decided, and so Mr Shevardnadze's role after the
elections remains unclear.
At it stands, Mr Shevardnadze is just one of four members of the State
Council Ruling Presidium, where his pragmatism collides directly with the
militarism of the defence minister, Mr Tengiz Kitovani. Mr Kitovani's
detractors say he has exacerbated that violence that has debilitated Georgia
since January, when President Zviad Gamsakhurdia was deposed in a revolt by
his former allies.
'The minister of defence has great influence. He has the army under his
control. This influences the situation all over Georgia, because the army is
the strength in the country,' says Mr Ivliani Haindrava, a State Council
member and leader of the Georgian Republican party. 'We hope that the
parliamentary elections will somehow change the situation, and I think they
will.'
There is a lot to overcome. The first is the region's history. The last
eight months have shown that Georgians, as with their bretheren throughout
the former Caucasus Mountains, are quick to resort to violence to settle
political disputes - a characteristic, historians say, that is almost
unbroken in time.
Indeed, throughout the region Caucasians are fighting obscure wars. The most
prominent pits Armenians against Azerbaijanis in the enclave of
Nagorno-Karabakh. But there also has been violence in the autonomous region
of Daghestan, Chechenia, Nakhichevan and north Ossetia, in addition to south
Ossetian and Abkhazian battles with Georgia.
East and west Georgians have fought since at least the ninth century and,
after Mr Gamsakhurdia fled, they enthusiastically resumed a war that had
been interrupted only by the 70-year Soviet rule.
The Abkhazian conflict is a good example of the age-old disputes that have
festered in the region. The Georgian claim to the mountainous, seaside
region goes back to the fourth century BC, when Georgia was populated by the
Kolkh tribe in the west and the Iberian in the east. Abkhazian tribes
arrived only 600 years later, Soviet historians say - showing that Georgians
are legitimate heirs to the disputed western territory, not the Abkhazians,
whom the Czars and Soviets granted autonomy. The Georgians note that west
Georgians now comprise 45 per cent of Abkhazia's population, and Abkhazians
just 18 per cent.
The Abkhazians, of course, have their own reading of history, arguing that
they comprise merely 100 per cent of the population a century ago, but that
Mr Stalin changed the demographics by moving in his native west Georgians.
Even his biggest supporters concede that Mr Shevardnadze had to expect
complications if he sent troops into Abkhazia, where, among other
complaints, he said that bandits were robbing cargo trains and lorries
headed south. It was the pragmatic Mr Shevardnadze, not the better-known
conciliatory one, who acted when Abkhazian leader Vladislav Ardzinba
declared independence, and Georgian interior minister Roman Zventsadze and
11 others were abducted.
Announcing that the army would secure Abkhazia's railroads and port against
banditry, Mr Shevardnadze said nothing when Mr Kitovani proceeded to seize
the local capital outright despite resistance by Mr Ardzinba's supporters.
It was the pragmatic side of Mr Shevardnadze which also surfaced in January,
when Georgians deposed Mr Gamsakhurdia at the point of an artillery barrel.
In explaining the coup, the former foreign minister said straight-faced: 'It
was not so much a violent takeover as a conflict between an authoritarian
regime and democratic forces which were supported by armed formations.'
Many Abkhazians don't consider Mr Shevardnadze a great conciliator, and
journalists who have seen Mr Ardzinba in his stronghold of Gadauta say he is
digging in for a long fight. 'This land has been ours since 1931, but the
Georgians still think it's theirs,' says Mrs Patrulya Karbiyev, an Abkhaz
woman who was hiding in her Sukhumi home last week as Georgian troops
patrolled the streets.
Mr Shevardnadze the realist has been heard to say he has never had a tougher
job. Indeed, supporters believe he may even be forced to retain Mr Kitovani
as defence minister to avoid even worse upheaval in the future. Few expect a
stable Georgia soon.
'Georgia has no tradition of democracy, and no control over its military
forces. You can't expect us to become a highly developed, democratic country
in just two or three years,' says Mr Haindrava, the Republican Party leader.
'We must change our mentality. We need time.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920824

