FT921-15212

FT  11 JAN 92 / Travel: How to save on hotel bills - Does London offer a
fair deal on accommodation? Nicholas Lander and Michael Skapinker study the
controversy over room rates and VAT


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


WHEN my colleague Nicholas Woodsworth was recently in Tblisi, Georgia, he
needed an hotel room, writes Nicholas Lander. Bereft of tourists, Tbilisi is
a buyers' market. In the morning he was quoted the official government price
of Dollars 120 (Pounds 66); by early afternoon it was down to Dollars 80; by
evening, Dollars 32.
If the Georgians have so quickly discovered the workings of the free market,
has the same lesson been learnt by their London counterparts? There is no
doubt that today, as a result of recession, over-building and delusions of
grandeur on the part of a number of London's hoteliers, it, too, is a
buyers' market.
To discover how hungry the hotels might be for business, I phoned 15 central
London hotels on behalf of a fictitious American couple who wanted a double
room for two weekday nights, January 23 and 24. I could have made a
reservation in any of them.
What surprised me was not the range of prices on offer but the difficulty in
obtaining terms and conditions. Of the 15 I phoned, only three were prepared
to tell me immediately what their price included. At the Savoy and Durrants
the price included the room and valued added tax; at the Sheraton Park Tower
it was the room but not the VAT.
At all the others it took some probing to discover whether the price offered
included elements which could add another 25-30 per cent to the cost of the
room.
Only the Beaufort and the Swiss Cottage Hotels included VAT, service and
breakfast; the Connaught, idiosyncratically and illegally, adds a 15 per
cent service charge to an amount that already includes a VAT element. And
only one hotel, the Hilton, on Park Lane, offered a deal. There, until the
end of January, a special room rate of Pounds 99 a night is on offer,
exclusive of breakfast, service and VAT.
In an industry which has just survived a difficult year and is entering the
traditionally quiet first quarter, this pricing disparity seems not only
off-putting but unfriendly.
The dividing line, and one that can add 17.5 per cent to the price quoted,
is how the hotels deal with VAT. According to the Sleeping Accommodation
(Price Display) Order of 1977, the range of prices an hotel charges has to
be displayed in the hotel lobby and must include the service charge.
However, although VAT has to be charged, hotels are allowed to quote either
inclusive or exclusive of this 17 1/2 per cent (although all published
prices, in brochures or advertisements, must include VAT).
But what would clients prefer? This issue splits London's hoteliers in two.
One faction, vociferously led by David Levin at the Capital and Peter Bates
at the Savoy, argues that hotels must behave like other retailers and
include VAT in all their tariffs. Nobody buys a watch or a car, they argue,
and then has to pay VAT as an extra.
Their point of view seems to be supported by the legislation governing food
and drink charges, all of which must include VAT. These hoteliers do not
want their guests to be presented with a bill made up of the room rate plus
a series of small but expensive extras such as local taxes or the national
sales tax.
However, this faction is now very much in a minority. Most of the
international hotel chains, led by the large North American corporations
such as Sheraton, Hyatt and the Four Seasons, have made a world-wide
practice of quoting room rates exclusive of local taxes. This policy
obviously makes life easier for the accountants in head office, if more
confusing for paying guests.
This faction's claims have been given considerable support by the work of
Derek Picot, general manager of London's Sheraton Park Tower. Three years
ago he realised that business travellers - they account for 80 per cent of
his clientele - are not the end users as far as the VAT on the hotel room is
concerned. The tax had to be levied and paid but could, quite legitimately,
be reclaimed and repaid to the guest's company.
Picot appreciated the extra marketing edge this knowledge would provide in
wooing new customers and quietly, before his competitors realised, offered a
service reclaiming the VAT incurred on the hotel room.
He also realised that there was no cut-off date for VAT already paid on
hotel rooms and, on behalf of his clients, began to reclaim the VAT they had
already paid. For one major client he reclaimed more than Pounds 45,000.
Picot's discovery is no longer a secret. For any company finance director
keen to reclaim local sales tax, or anyone travelling in Europe on business,
a most comprehensive survey of what is, and is not, recoverable has been
compiled by Ernst and Young, the management consultants. It has published
two small booklets entitled Refunds of VAT to EC Businesses, and Refunds of
EC Vat to Overseas Businesses. They may not be ideal bedside reading but
should be sufficient to persuade London's hoteliers to be consistent in
their attitude to pricing.
The booklets are available from Ernst and Young, Rolls House, 7 Rolls
Building, Fetter Lane, London EC4A 1NH. Tel: 071-928-2000.

The Financial Times


London Page XII Illustration (Omitted).

920111

