FT922-3987

FT  08 JUN 92 / International Capital Markets: Banks back to the future


   By JOHN PLENDER


All recent history suggests that acquisitive financial institutions with
grandiose global aspirations have a marked tendency to come unstuck. The US
commercial banks' plunge into the British securities market in the
mid-1980s; Barclays' and National Westminster's recent adventures in North
America; Fuji Bank's disastrous acquisition of Chicago-based Walter E.
Heller; and, dare one say it, Midland Bank's catastrophic acquisition of
Crocker in California and Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation's
unhappy experience with Marine Midland.
With Lloyds finally retreating from the battle for Midland without any
damage to its share price on Friday, shareholders in Hongkong and Shanghai
must resign themselves to a gigantic leap backwards into the future. One can
understand why the men from Hong Kong want to do it. But it is also clear,
to judge by the market's response, that the shareholders have as much
enthusiasm for their management's international plans as the Danes have for
Maastricht. The difference is that bankers are subject to much looser
accountability than politicians. But for how much longer?
One explanation for the extraordinary ability of bankers to lose billions
over the past decade is that while the liabilities side of their balance
sheet has been socialised through deposit insurance, the asset side has been
subjected to increased competition. The bankers are thus under pressure to
generate increased profits - which implies taking on increased risk -
without being subject to any discipline from depositors.
The result is that they find themselves down at Canary Wharf, London's
answer to Brasilia, lending billions of unsecured money with no better
guarantee than the support of a parent company balance sheet that the
Reichmann brothers thought indelicate to show them. The taxpayer ends up
footing a substantial bill.
The extreme example is the US after the savings and loan debacle. Yet the US
banking system is now pointing to some thought-provoking ways out of the
impasse.
If bank stocks have lifted themselves off the floor this year, it is partly
because Wall Street has detected that rewards in banking are now being
subsidised, as well as risks. That is, the proportion of the asset side of
the balance sheet that carries an explicit or implicit government guarantee
has been growing as the banks buy Treasury bills, guaranteed mortgage backed
securities and the rest.
This risk-averse behaviour is just about profitable thanks to a steepening
yield curve, as the Fed drives down short-term interest rates while bond
rates remain relatively high. Since short-term rates have not come down in
Europe, a flatter yield curve precludes a comparable response. Yet the idea
of socialising both sides of the balance sheet as a means of clipping the
bankers' wings has its appeal. Why not unbundle the banks to achieve a
better matching of risk in the different parts of their business?
The moral hazard implicit in deposit insurance could be minimised if the
regulators insisted that insurance was only available where deposits were
invested in designated low-risk assets. Insurance might also be continued
for the payments system, which is really a utility. Risky assets, meantime,
could be financed chiefly by uninsured wholesale deposits, which would
carefully sort out the banking sheep from the goats.
All that flies in the face of the mega-merger cult. Nor, incidentally, would
it have been impossible to socialise assets in a Lloyds-Midland merger in
order to square competition policy. The US Community Reinvestment Act can
make bank mergers conditional on the expansion of lending to minorities and
the poor. Nationsbank (the newly combined NCNB and C&S/Sovran), for example,
is required to expand such lending by Dollars 10bn over the next decade.
The commercial equivalent of an ethnic minority in Britain is the small
business sector. It would not be hard to stipulate a specific increase in
small business lending, as a condition of a merger, to pre-empt excessive
concentration. British banks, like their US counterparts, would hate it. But
would such a policy cost the banks more than Latin America or Canary Wharf?

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920608

