FT924-11921

FT  23 OCT 92 / Bingham Report - Investigation into the BCCI scandal:
Appointed men are no strangers to regulation


   By NORMA COHEN


NEITHER Mr Ian Watt, the man named to head the Bank of England's new special
investigations unit, nor Mr Peter Peddie, the head of the new specialised
legal unit, is a newcomer to the regulatory scene, Norma Cohen writes.
Mr Watt, 59, a partner at KPMG Peat Marwick, has made investigation work and
liquidations his specialty. In 1971 he was a joint liquidator of
Rolls-Royce, while in 1982 he became the Department of Trade and Industry's
investigator into insurance broker Alexander Howden. In 1986 he headed the
DTI's investiga-tion into the share-support operation surrounding Guinness.
Most recently he was one of the joint liquidators to parts of Drexel Burnham
Lambert, the US-based investment bank which collapsed along with the
so-called junk bond market.
Mr Peddie, 60, who recently retired as a partner at Freshfields, the City
law firm, has been involved in work for the Bank since 1975. He has been a
member of the Law Society's committee on company law for the past 20 years.
Mr Watt, who was one of the assessors to Lord Bingham's enquiry, said he
feels his primary role is 'to help banking supervisors develop some antennae
for smelling out fraud' rather than to mastermind a radical overhaul of the
supervisory process. 'There is an overriding need for the regulators to
identify the suspect banks and show their willingness to deal with them
firmly,' he said.
He said that among the early warning signs which ought to alert bank
supervisors are corporate re-organisations that place key parts of a bank in
geographic locations not easily reached by regulators. Also, the existence
of large loans to a handful of organisations or a sudden shift of auditors
ought to alert regulators.
Mr Watt said he would also increase the use of outside expertise such as
audit firms by the Bank and step up communication with other supervisory
bodies.
Mr Watt will report directly to Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the
Bank, and Mr Eddie George, deputy governor.
Mr Peddie will have direct access to both men but on a daily basis will
report to the director of banking supervision and the director of money
market supervision. 'I see my task as bringing a legal focus to supervisory
issues,' said Mr Peddie.
Critical to their effectiveness, both men say, are proposals outlined by the
chancellor to make it easier for regulatory bodies to share information with
each other and for punitive measures that the Bankcan take short of the
so-called 'nuclear option' of closing a bank down.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921023

