FT924-6294

FT  21 NOV 92 / Travel: Port of Spain


   By SEBASTIAN HOPE


ON my first night in Port of Spain, a week before Trinidad's carnival,
Wilfred took me to 'Calypso Spektakula' in the Queen's Park Savannah stadium
where the north stand was in fine voice and the competitive tradition of
calypso was stirring a little heat.
Talk centred around who would win this year's King and Queen of Calypso
titles, and what would become the Road March - the year's most-played
calypso.
Wilfred fancied Black Stalin for the title, with a sarky number called Love
My Country, and debated fiercely with his neighbour. I had met Wilfred on
the aircraft from New York, back in the smoking section with a bottle of
Cockspur.
By day, Port-of-Spain was one long musical assault course. It is hard to say
exactly when carnival starts. Some claim it never stops, but the Panorama
competition brings excitement to a head. The steel bands practise year round
for it, and in the run-up crowds come to listen at the pan-yards each night
where the bands put the finishing touches to their pieces.
Wilfred had once played 'cellopan for his local band, Casablanca, so our
tour ended up at their yard. The Casablanca Steel Orchestra was one of the
bands to emerge from the pan-yard wars of the late 1940s into respectability
in the 1950s.
Yet they had never won a Panorama title, and Wilfred took that personally.
There was no doubt whom I would be supporting. Besides, I had been given the
tribal colours: a Casablanca T-shirt.
In the north stand the chairs, which had been wired together, were suddenly
being stacked to one side. Mine was taken out from under me, and I was lost
in a mass of dancers.
We set off. Minutes later I was covered in mud. Casablanca was jumped by a
band of Moko Jumbies and Mud Massers armed with buckets of slop the
consistency of pancake mix.
A large lady, her face mottled with light brown mud, the colour of her scant
clothes no longer visible, singled me out. She battered my face and rubbed
herself against me. Who was I to stop her? I bore the marks with pride, and
she disappeared back into the night.
As we neared the circuit, the streets became stiff with people dancing,
drinking, covered in mud and not much else. Steel bands, drummers, floats
loaded with loud speakers jockeyed for position.
Something - the music, the rum - set me going. The abandon of the beat
seeped into my bones with the darkness. I could not see how anyone could
stand still.
The dawn light fixed images in my mind - an old man beating a hub cap, a man
writhing on the street while he was painted blue, couples grinding, legs
intertwined. I fell in with a Soca band, and then, from nowhere, there was a
girl behind me jamming up, and another in front jamming back, which seemed
the natural thing to do.
As the sun climbed, the next shift started to arrive, formal bands
thematically costumed, spotless and fresh. They had come to warm up for
their competition next day, Mardi Gras, when the Road March would also be
decided. I caught sight of myself in a shop window looking none too
wholesome. A shower and a tactical nap and everything would still be
happening when I returned.
Next year's Trinidad carnival is slated for February 22-23. About a dozen UK
tour operators feature Trinidad in their brochures. Details: Trinidad and
Tobago Tourist Office, 8a Hammersmith Broadway, London W6 7AL. Tel:
081-741-4466, fax: 081-741-1013.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921121

