FT924-6333

FT  21 NOV 92 / Markets: New rules bring companies to account - The Bottom
Line


   By ANDREW JACK


THE EFFECT of changing British accounting standards became starkly apparent
to investors last week with preliminary results from BOC, the UK industrial
gases and healthcare group. BOC reported pre-tax profits down 31 per cent to
Pounds 215m in the 12 months to September 30, well below market
expectations. Without accounting changes, this year's figure would instead
have been up by 10 per cent to Pounds 341.9m.
The company is one of the first among many likely to be altering their
figures substantially as a result of the new regime for financial reporting
being introduced by the Accounting Standards Board (ASB). BOC said the
culprit was FRS 3, the new financial reporting standard on the profit and
loss account launched by the ASB at the end of last month, which becomes
mandatory for year-ends after June 22 next year.
A number of other companies are beginning to change already. In the past few
days, Courtaulds and De La Rue both have published interim results in
compliance with FRS 3. It alters the shape of the accounts radically,
particularly for those companies with active acquisition and disposal
programmes. Among the principal changes are:
The virtual abolition of the extraordinary item. Only extremely rare and
unpredictable events outside the normal course of business activities will
be allowed. That might include expropriation of a company's assets following
a political revolution in the UK, but not in Iraq.
Calculation of earnings per share will include any remaining extraordinary
items. This will make earnings far more 'lumpy' year by year and will
discourage readers of accounts from relying so exclusively on this single
published figure - and the price/earnings ratio based on it - which has been
subject to considerable manipulation in the past.
Gains or losses on the disposal of revalued assets must be shown in the
profit and loss account at their carrying value given in the balance sheet,
not at historical cost.
The treatment of goodwill - the difference between the net assets and
purchase price of a business - is changed. Previously, goodwill could be
written off to reserves and companies could make a 'profit' on the sale of a
business without taking account of the goodwill. Now, any stated profit or
loss on resale must reflect the original purchase price. Any goodwill
written off must be written back.
For BOC, most of the impact on profits came from this final item. Its
disposal of subsidiaries during the year - principally Glasrock, its
domestic medical gases business - resulted in a loss of Pounds 117.1m which
it had written off previously as goodwill.
Readers of future accounts will also find other revelations required by FRS
3. Companies must continue to disclose separately three types of exceptional
item: profits or losses on the disposal of fixed assets or businesses, and
the costs of fundamental restructuring. In BOC's case, these items include
the Pounds 117.1m goodwill write-off and a Pounds 25.4m provision for
reorganising its health care division. As the table shows, FRS 3 would not
have had a significant impact for BOC in the past five years except in 1988,
when there was a loss on disposals of businesses of Pounds 17m and Pounds
24.5m written off as goodwill.
Companies must also show turnover and profit, divided for the first time
between continuing and discontinued operations and those acquired during the
year. That should help those trying to make estimates of underlying and
future maintainable performance.
The danger of creating these 'pigeon-holes' for profits and losses is that
numbers shown previously in a single extraordinary or exceptional item may
now be concealed in a variety of figures.
The ASB hopes to force investors to sift through more information and make
their own calculations and judgments rather than relying on published
earnings alone. Its rationale for FRS 3 has been to make accounts more
transparent, allowing in sunshine by providing additional financial
information.
But the effect might be more like a prism, scattering considerable
information over a wide area. That could prove confusing and intimidating
initially for many readers of accounts.
 ----------------------------------------------------
      BOC PRE-TAX PROFITS: BEFORE AND AFTER
 ----------------------------------------------------
               1988   1989    1990    1991   1992
Before        287.1  324.8   350.2  310.13   41.9
After           254  324.8   350.2  310.12     15
 ----------------------------------------------------
Source: BOC annual reports
 ----------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

921121

