FT922-4153

FT  06 JUN 92 / Perot spells out free-trade threat


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


MR Ross Perot, the prospective independent presidential candidate, would
drastically cut imports from Japan and believes the free trade agreement
with Mexico would undermine US manufacturing.
In the most specific interview he has yet given on economic and trade
policy, he told the Los Angeles Times that 'we cannot be a superpower if we
cannot manufacture here'.
Though describing himself as 'a fair and free trader', he asserted that 'the
agreements we've cut with countries around the world are not balanced at
all'. Describing US trade with Japan as 'a tilted deck', he said he would
tell the Japanese 'in a nice, diplomatic way, we'll take the same deal on
cars we've given you'.
However, he did say he thought the US could learn from Japan by 'targeting
industries of the future and making sure sacrifice in corporations starts at
the top'.
Free trade with Mexico inevitably meant the export of US jobs, he said.
'Labour is a 25-year-old with little or no health-care expenses working for
a dollar an hour. You cannot compete with that in the USA, period,' he
asserted. Although he added that his attitude towards trade policy was not
set in concrete.
So far this year, the sort of economic nationalism represented by Mr Pat
Buchanan on the Republican side and Mr Jerry Brown for the Democrats has
been indifferently received. Both President Bush and Governor Clinton have
generally opposed protectionism. But Mr Perot is a more potent populist and
his arguments could well force the issue back to the forefront of the
national debate.
So may some of his reflections on domestic economic policy. He believes the
country's future lies with small business, which he says are being starved
of credit. He dismissed US big business as part of the establishment. 'The
status quo works for them right now and I'm talking about major, major
changes,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

