FT923-6625

FT  22 AUG 92 / Wine: Twelve green bottles, and the cost can send you to the
wall - The case for mixed delights when buying wine


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


WHAT IS so special about the number 12? More particularly, why are we
expected to buy a full 12 bottles (or six magnums, or 24 halves) whenever we
buy young wine?
Part of the reason is that, traditionally, wine has been packed 12 bottles
to a case, presumably because this is the maximum number that all but the
puniest adults can be expected to carry at a time. Selling by the unbroken
case allows the merchant to pass on wine by the unit with minimal effort.
But now that merchants can generate more than Pounds 50 of profit from
selling a dozen bottles of wine en primeur, perhaps they ought to think
about doing some more work for their money and offering us mixed or smaller
cases.
For some time now, the Wine Society of Stevenage, Herts, has been offering
top-quality Burgundy by the six-pack. The society also puts together cases
(such as the one delivered to me the other day) of two bottles each of six
different and first-class 1989 clarets. If only more companies would put
themselves in their customers' place - after all, however delicious an
expensive wine might be, 12 bottles of it is quite a commitment.
Smaller lots would also help merchants to allocate the really sought-after
wines to a greater number of satisfied customers. And remember that Oddbins
sells young, smart wine by the bottle.
I approached the highly successful 1990 vintage in Burgundy with all this in
mind, loth to shell out more than Pounds 300 to acquire a single wine.
Almost every merchant used to an influx of en primeur cash has been touting
1990 burgundies, and I have been lucky enough to revel in several memorable
tastings of generally deep-coloured, evocatively scented, richly fruity,
well-structured reds, sometimes enlivened by some surprisingly good whites
(especially from Chablis).
Bibendum London NW1 offered a particularly popular range and, as is often
the case, Justerini & Brooks of London SWl and Edinburgh had one of the best
selections, if few bargains. I was delighted, therefore, that - by waiting
until the wines were in J&B's cellars - I could put together my own mixed
case, and was quite happy to pay a 10 per cent premium for the variety.
(Common advice is to buy wine with your friends, but they are usually
precisely the people whom you wish to delight with it).
All three wines from J&B's new Pommard domaine, Coste-Caumartin, are rich
and exciting, varying in price (duty paid and VAT-inclusive) from Pounds
15.60 for a straight Pommard to Pounds 21.10 for Pommard, Boucherottes. You
could still buy a bottle of Jayer's Echezeaux for Pounds 40.10 but a more
modest and much earlier-maturing choice (in my tasting note for this, I see
I wrote the word 'gorgeous' twice, would be Bruno Clair's Savigny, La
Dominode, from 80-year-old vines, at Pounds 14.60.
I could not resist Dauvissat's grand cru Chablis, Le Clos, at Pounds 22.10 -
another 'gorgeous' wine, I see (I really must take a few lessons in wine
description), with a stupendous conjunction of ripeness, acidity and length
of flavour.
But there are two 1990 red burgundies which made such an impact on me
recently that I am considering giving in not only to the necessity of buying
them by the case but even paying extra for the privilege.
You have to pay Pounds 25 for life membership of the Bin Club - although you
do get a welcoming magnum of Louis Roederer 1985 in return which is worth
far more. The club is a clever continuous wine-buying scheme based in an old
Victorian stone brewery in Wickwar, Gloucestershire (tel: 0454-294085). More
than a dozen of us assembled there to trawl through 74 possibilities for the
club's Burgundy offer, and two of the most exciting wines were not two of
the most expensive.
An almost cheekily rich Vosne-Romanee, Les Suchots, from Domaine Chantal
Lescure, seemed a snip at Pounds 200 a case and the headily dense Clos de
Vougeot, Le Grand Maupertuis, from Anne et Francois Gros, ditto at Pounds
284. But note that these are in-bond prices and do not include VAT, so there
is at least another Pounds 45 to pay per case.
Perhaps I should sign up for some of Armand Rousseau's superlative,
long-lived Chambertins which clever Lay & Wheeler, of Colchester, Essex, was
able to include in its recent 1990 Burgundy offer.
Prices vary from Pounds 131.88 for a village wine to Pounds 383.88 for the
Chambertin, but these are even lower approximations to final reality than
the Bin Club's prices as they even exclude delivery to Britain.
And the Chambertin, which is allocated at one case per customer, will have
sold out long ago, thereby infuriating far more people than it pleases.
I asked Hugo Rose, of Lay & Wheeler, if the company had considered making
more flexible offers, but was put firmly in my place. 'Most of our customers
are well-trained,' was how he put it. 'They say they wouldn't dream of
buying fewer than 12 bottles.'

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920822

