FT921-11940

FT  29 JAN 92 / Air France to halt flights from Stansted


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


AIR FRANCE yesterday dealt a blow to London's Stansted airport by suspending
all its flights from the new airport complex from March 30, while boosting
London City Airport by announcing expanded services from the much smaller
Dockland's airport.
Air France will introduce a new aircraft type to London City by operating
the ATR 42 turboprop regional aircraft on the Paris to Docklands service.
Crossair, the Swiss regional carrier, is also expected to announce soon the
start of regular services between Zurich and London City Airport using the
British Aerospace 146 regional jet.
The introduction of new aircraft to London City follows a recently completed
Pounds 7m extension of the airport's runway. The expansion is expected to
increase activity at the loss-making airport owned by the Mowlem
construction group.
Mr Bill Charnock, the airport's managing director, said the Air France
decision 'confirms our optimism in the future of the airport and is the
first of a number of announcements we expect from airlines offering new or
extended routes from our airport'.
Air France said it was rationalising its services to London's four airports
for its summer schedule starting March 30. Daily flights from Heathrow to
Paris and to Nice are being increased, Gatwick flights will serve only
regional destinations in France and not Paris, and all services from
Stansted will be suspended.
The suspension of the Stansted flights reflect the disappointing passenger
loads on these services, Air France said. The French airline was one of the
first big international carriers to operate from the new Pounds 400m
Stansted complex opened by BAA (formerly the British Airports Authority)
last year.
The decision is a setback for Stansted because the airport has been seeking
to attract big international carriers. Many carriers have been reluctant to
commit themselves until they see significant international traffic expansion
at Stansted.
The French national airline was also one of the first big carriers to
operate into London City Airport. But until now it was working in
partnership with Brymon Airways, the UK regional carrier, using de Havilland
Dash 7 turbo-props.
Air France will now operate its own services to London City. It said it
would schedule at least four daily return flights to Paris and possibly
seven.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920129

