FT924-11361

FT  27 OCT 92 / Invesco to pay Pounds 9.5m compensation


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


INVESCO MIM, the UK investment management company, said it will pay Pounds
9.5m as compensation in cash to shareholders in troubled Drayton
Consolidated Investment Trust for which it was fund manager.
The compensation, the first of its kind by a fund manager to an investment
trust, stems from Invesco MIM's decision to invest Pounds 43m in a troubled
company and failure to disclose the extent of that investment to Drayton's
shareholders and board of directors.
Drayton had taken a 14 per cent stake in Alma Holdings, Scotland's largest
confectioner valued at Pounds 3m. However, it guaranteed Pounds 40m in loans
to the company, taking its stake to 97.2 per cent when Alma collapsed
earlier this year and the loans were called in by the lenders.
Drayton's accounts never made clear the extent of the exposure, and tax laws
penalise investment trusts from taking a stake greater than 15 per cent in
any company. Shareholders had threatened to replace the board of Drayton,
and Invesco MIM as fund manager, earlier this year if compensation was not
made.
The compensation, announced yesterday, is part of a package which will also
create a new company, Second Consolidated, to hold the remaining investments
of Drayton.
That company will have a net asset value of 158p per share, giving a total
package to shareholders of 243p per share. At its peak, Drayton Consolidated
was valued at nearly Pounds 5 per share.
As a result of the reorganisation and compensation package, Invesco MIM will
have to spend Pounds 15.7m, of which roughly Pounds 5.2m is expected to be
returned following asset sales. The deal requires Invesco MIM to purchase
Pounds 7.5m of loans to another Drayton investment, City Merchants Bank and
to repurchase shares in an East European Development Fund investment trust.
Mr Ratan Engineer, Invesco's finance director, said that Invesco is unlikely
to incur further charges as a result of the Drayton reorganisation. Already,
the company has written off charges of Pounds 22.8 connected with Drayton.
The company will remain as junior fund manager while Foreign and Colonial
Ventures will be the senior manager.
Lex, Page 24; Details, Page 28

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921027

