FT923-9822

FT  03 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Nissan UK counts the mounting costs of
legal battle - NUK to concentrate on property after loss of car franchise


   By KEVIN DONE


NISSAN UK Holdings, the former British distributor of Nissan vehicles
controlled by Mr Octav Botnar, achieved a pre-tax profit of Pounds 65.4m in
the year to end-July 1991, a small decline from Pounds 68m in the previous
year.
Turnover dropped by 26.5 per cent to Pounds 599.4m but profits were
maintained by a substantial jump in income from parts and accessories
operations. Some 22 per cent of Nissan UK profit came from property and
investment income.
Nissan UK lost its exclusive, lucrative franchise to import and distribute
Nissan vehicles with effect from the start of 1992, following a long
conflict with Nissan Motor, the Japanese car maker.
The company, previously the most profitable independent vehicle
importer/distributor in the UK, will continue as 'a property investment
company' once it has disposed of its remaining vehicle stocks, says the NUKH
annual report.
It is facing rapidly mounting costs as a result of the array of legal
battles that are being fought by the Botnar-controlled companies both
against Nissan Motor and against the Inland Revenue, which staged its
largest ever corporate raid against NUK last year.
The NUKH accounts disclose net extraordinary charges of Pounds 8.67m. The
charge for legal fees arising from the Inland Revenue investigation totals
Pounds 3.63m, while legal fees and other costs arising from the loss of the
Nissan franchise total Pounds 5.04m.
Last month the High Court ruled that it must also pay damages of Pounds
804,000 for breach of contract and the wrongful dismissal of a former Nissan
UK assistant managing director.
NUK, itself, is seeking damages of several hundred million pounds from
Nissan Motor for the loss of the franchise in arbitration proceedings
currently under way in Tokyo.
In the NUKH annual report the company accepts, however, that 'the likely
amounts receivable are impossible to quantify'.
NUK is also pursuing a claim for Pounds 6m against Nissan Motor in the
British courts for what it alleges are 'unpaid advertising contributions'.
Mr Botnar, who has remained outside the UK since January following the
issuing of a warrant for his arrest by the Inland Revenue - he is presently
believed to be living in Switzerland - received a salary, excluding pension
contributions, of Pounds 353,000 last year from NUKH. In addition he
received Pounds 130,000 from Automotive Financial Group Holdings, the
related motor dealer group of which he is also chairman.
NUKH's 'ultimate parent undertaking' with a stake of 71.52 per cent is the
Panama-registered European Motor Vehicles Corporation. It is controlled by
the trustees of a settlement made by Mr Botnar in 1974, which also control
GF International Finance and Investments, the 'ultimate parent undertaking'
of AFGH, which is incorporated in the Bahamas.
Combined, the Botnar-controlled companies NUKH and AFGH achieved a total
pre-tax profit in 1991 of Pounds 130.1m (Pounds 142.6m) on a turnover of
Pounds 1.44bn (Pounds 1.76bn). Total dividend payments were tripled to
Pounds 60m (Pounds 20m) with Mr Michael Hunt, NUK deputy chairman and
assistant managing director, receiving a total of Pounds 6.38m as a result
of his 10.63 per cent beneficial holding in both companies.
The NUKH annual report indicates that the group's finances have been
radically restructured since the end of the last financial year following
the loss of the Nissan franchise.
In May this year the fixed and floating charges on the group's assets, which
had provided security for both its bank borrowings and the bank borrowings
of other related companies totalling Pounds 330.4m, were released.
Mr Botnar has reduced the companies' dependence on bank finance. Automotive
Financial Services, the finance arm of the group of companies controlled by
Mr Botnar and a subsidiary of AFGH, has replaced a 'significant' part of its
banking facilities.
It has gained medium term funding by securitising a large part of its hire
purchase receivables through a Pounds 220m issue of floating rate notes
through a newly-created subsidiary, Auto Funding.
NUKH remains a major contributor to charities with donations totalling
Pounds 2.77m in 1991. It is committed to paying Pounds 8m towards building a
new wing for the Great Ormond Street children's hospital in London.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920803

