FT921-15273

FT  11 JAN 92 / Last gasp for young fogeys: A species near political
extinction


   By IVO DAWNAY


These are dark days in the once sunlit world of the young fogeys. With the
passing of the Thatcher era and the emergence of the consensual politics of
Mr John Major, what is arguably Britain's most rarefied sociological
sub-species has been riven by schisms and backbiting.
On Europe, on the Citizen's Charter, on the goal of a classless society,
even on Mr Major himself, the once united front of militant fogeydom is as
bitterly divided as a meeting of Trotskyite International.
It was not always so.
Identified in the mid-1980s as an eccentric faction of middle-class
nostalgists, the young fogey phenomenon was at first dismissed as a purely
aesthetic reaction to the vulgar materialism of the yuppies.
With their tweed jackets and laced-up brogues cocking a deliberate snook at
Next suits, the fogeys took pride in being old before their time. Their
loathing for television, their obsession with the book of common prayer and
their disdain for icons of modernity such as the Sony Walkman, evoked a Toff
Liberation Front steeped in the traditions of the 1950s English public
school.
Ancestor worship was a key element in the mythology. As A N Wilson, the
novelist and critic often cited as the quintessential young fogey, put it
recently: 'The main quality of the fogeys was that they didn't rebel against
their parents' views - they imitated them.'
If fogeyus snobus maximus was a ludicrous figure, fogeyus politicus was
someone to be reckoned with. Mr Charles Moore, one-time editor of the
Spectator, and Mr Frank Johnson of the Sunday Telegraph - still a member of
the species in his mid-40s - were frequent informal visitors to Downing
Street, where other fogeyish figures such as Mr John Whittingdale, the
former PM's political adviser, and Mr Robin Harris, her speech writer, would
provide the tea and scones.
A little more than 12 months ago, the unknown Mr Patrick Robertson, at 21
the youngest of all fogeys, proved that his Bruges group could influence
thinking in a way that, with serious consequences, Sir Geoffrey Howe could
not. In the think tanks, pinstriped fogeys such as Mr Graham Mather,
politically independent director of the Institute of Economic Affairs, and
Mr David Willets, head of the Centre for Policy Studies, provided a well
stocked 'supermarket of ideas' for their mistress's delectation.
Arguably, what most appealed to Mrs Thatcher was the fact that her new
public school-educated cadres dismissed the old noblesse oblige traditions
of patrician Tory figures such as Lord Pym or Sir Ian Gilmour. Instead, they
believed, like her, that government should merely do its best to create the
opportunities for individuals to pull themselves up by their own boot
straps.
So what has changed? The answer is almost everything.
Out, as Mrs Thatcher would put it, has gone the firm stand against the
encroachment of the European Community. Out, too, have gone the doctrines of
rugged individualism and self-help meritocracy. And out have gone the
fogeys.
In their place have come the notion of 'society', deemed not to exist under
the ancien regime, the aspiration to classlessness and the all but
crypto-communist vision of Mr Chris Patten, Tory chairman, arch-liberal and
advocate of a 'country at peace with itself'.
Even before he took office, Mr Major was reported to have been splenetic
with Mr Moore over what he alleged to be a 'patronising' interview style.
Soon after, Mr Harris and Mr Whittingdale retreated to their fallen leader's
bunker.
In the wake of a public row over unsolicited advice on Europe, Mr Robertson
has now resigned as secretary of the Bruges group to take up a post with the
World Economic Forum in Geneva. A N Wilson has declared that he has now lost
his faith in God and will be voting Labour. And everywhere else the ragged
forces of fogeydom have been beating retreats or taking last stands.
For some, the ebbing of the Thatcherite tide has forced tough choices
between collaboration and resistance. In most of the think tanks,
internecine warfare over Europe has ended with a victory for the
pragmatists. Mr Mather, who always denied the fogey label, has gone even
further, and now advocates a full-blown debate on constitutional reform.
'The fogeys were always full of romantic contradictions,' he argues. 'The
energetic thinkers are not just going to slump in a bath chair and decry the
falling standards of literacy.'
Others, like Mr Simon Heffer, the Spectator's 30-going-on-60-year-old deputy
editor, believe that all is not yet lost with Mr Major. 'He cannot be
entirely antipathetic to fogeyism, as he likes cricket,' he observes.
For some, however, Mr Major's arrival has proved a political Dunkirk. Mr
Johnson - ranting recently about 'the worst display yet' of Mr Major's
concern for others - has chosen the course of outright confrontation. He
argues that the true faithful must hope that the Tories are cast into
opposition at the next election, and then use the time to regroup under a
younger generation of Thatcherites.
The tattered tweed banner of fogeydom will fly again, he promises, but, for
now, Britain is no longer a country fit for our parents and grandparents to
live in. Teatime at Number 10 is indefinitely postponed.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920111

