FT921-11813

FT  30 JAN 92 / Japan likely to support Russian oil, gas project


   By STEVEN BUTLER


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) is set to
further relax a long-standing policy against supporting Russian development
projects by providing financial backing for an oil and gas project on
Russia's Sakhalin island that could cost up to Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5.7bn).
A consortium, including Mitsui of Japan and Marathon Oil and McDermott
International of the US, was awarded a letter of intent to conduct a project
feasibility study on Monday.
Government backing is crucial because of the inherent high-risk nature of
oil and gas development coupled with political uncertainties and the
long-term credits that would be required. Purely commercial finance for the
Sakhalin project could be prohibitively costly, if available at all.
Japan has long refused to back Russian development projects because of its
territorial dispute involving the four Kurile islands off the northern coast
of Hokkaido.
Miti, however, has taken the view that the Sakhalin project is of national
importance to Japan, although it is seeking ways for the partially
government-owned Sakhalin Oil Development Corporation (Sodeco) to
participate in the development.
Mitsui said yesterday it was confident of receiving support from the
Japanese government, and was also hopeful of obtaining US government backing
for the project. A Mitsui executive said preliminary studies indicated the
project would be feasible if oil prices stayed above Dollars 15 a barrel.
The formal feasibility study is to be completed by the end of next year,
with first oil production hoped for around 1995. Projected oil production
would cover the cash-flow requirements of the project, but eventually gas
production would be required to assure a profit, Mitsui said. The fields,
Piltun Astoskoye and Lunskoye, off the east coast of Sakhalin, have reserves
estimated at 730m barrels of oil and 400bn cubic feet of gas.
The possibility of building a gas liquefaction plant at the site is under
consideration. Liquefaction plants, however, are difficult to finance and
would require advance sales.
The Sakhalin project could be the first of a wave of resource development
projects in Siberia with extensive Japanese participation. Japan has long
looked at Siberian resources as a possible avenue to diversify dependence on
other sources of raw materials, particularly Middle Eastern oil.
However, future Japanese support for such projects is likely to depend on
progress in resolving the territorial dispute with the newly independent
Russian government.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920130

