FT924-11984

FT  23 OCT 92 / UK Company News: ACT buys ailing NMW in Pounds 3.8m deal


   By ROLAND RUDD and ALAN CANE


A WORSENING in the finances of NMW Computers has forced the company to
accept a bid from ACT, the Birmingham- based computing services group, at
18p a share - 56 per cent less than yesterday's opening price.
The cash offer from ACT, formerly known as Apricot, values NMW, which
specialises in services and software for the UK securities business, at
Pounds 3.8m. NMW shares fell by 23p to 18p. ACT's shares rose 4p to 147p.
In June ACT spent Pounds 2.1m to take a 25.4 per cent stake in NMW at 40p a
share. It had to get special dispensation from the Takeover Panel to bid for
the company at less than the price at which it bought its stake.
A sudden deterioration in its finances led to NMW, which could no longer
count on its banks for support, to recommend ACT's discounted offer price.
However, speculation that ACT was planning a full bid for NMW had already
pushed up the company's share price.
There is a share alternative of one new ACT share for every eight NMW
shares.
Higher than anticipated costs incurred in developing NMW Charterhouse, the
software business specialising in debt recovery and the Lloyd's insurance
market, was mainly responsible for a pre-tax loss of Pounds 1.23m for the
half year to June 30.
This compared with a profit of Pounds 278,000. Losses per share of 5.7p
compared with earnings of 0.9p. Sales slipped to Pounds 4.9m (Pounds 4.98m).
While NMW would not talk about the deal yesterday it is understood that
trading performance has been so poor that, without considering the problems
at Charterhouse, restructuring would have been necessary.
The depth of the problems at Charterhouse did not come to light until
management changes during the summer and it was considered better to give
the shareholders all the bad news at once rather than allow it to dribble
out.
ACT said it would reorganise Charterhouse to stem the division's losses of
Pounds 1.2m.
Stockbroking operations at both companies will be integrated.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921023

