FT923-10684

FT  29 JUL 92 / Amato to seek confidence vote


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


ITALY'S month-old government is to put its emergency economic package and
outline structural reform programme to a vote of confidence.
Mr Giuliano Amato's four-party government, backed by the Christian
Democrats, Socialists, Social Democrats and Liberals, could fall if its 16
seat majority in the Chamber of Deputies is whittled away by desertions when
the vote is taken today. However, last night government ministers appeared
confident they would win approval. The Senate will vote next week.
The vote of confidence has always been on the cards, but Mr Amato decided to
resort to this device both to emphasise the urgency of the measures and to
avoid lengthy filibustering by opposition deputies. It was disclosed
yesterday that 651 amendments and changes had been tabled.
Mr Giovanni Goria, finance minister, yesterday told parliament: 'This is a
financial package which must be put behind us as soon as possible because
the problems we have ahead of us are even more serious.'
The package is seeking to raise an extra L30,000bn (Pounds 13.67bn) in
revenues and spending cuts in order to contain the budget deficit to
L150,000bn, equivalent to nearly 11 per cent of GDP.
Also as part of the package are outline proposals for privatisation. The
reform of pensions, public health and local government finance, as well as a
shake-up of the civil service, will be debated separately. Parliament is
being asked to approve these latter measures as a special decree which will
then permit the government to work out details on its own.
The government insists speed is essential because it has to prepare the 1993
budget in September. Uncertainties about the state of the current year's
budget would make this exercise impossible. Equally, if the government were
to fail to obtain a vote of confidence, the government would fall
precipitating early elections - a prospect no party relishes.
Also yesterday, Mr Piero Barucci, treasury minister, announced to parliament
that the government would revalue the assets of IRI, the main state holding
company which has just been converted into a joint stock company. IRI
currently has a temporary capital of L1,873bn which represented its previous
endowment fund, against debts of more than L60,000bn. Revaluation of its
assets would enable it to comply with legislation on the ratio of debts to
capital.
'We will revalue the subsidiaries of IRI,' he said, 'and we will reassure
creditors, national and foreign, on the nature of the joint stock company
which will be 100 per cent in the hands of the Treasury.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920729

