FT921-11720

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (12): Subsidised security -
Agriculture


   By MARK NICHOLSON


THE continued appearance of thousands of perfectly formed wheat circles in
the deserts of Saudi Arabia has economists baffled.
Unlike the corn circles which appear magically in southern English fields,
there is no mystery to these circles' proliferation. The swathe of wheat
circles in the Hail and Qassim regions of Saudi Arabia, the kingdom's wheat
belt north-west of Riyadh, derive directly from the government's policy of
heavily subsidising agriculture to assure a prudent level of food
self-sufficiency.
What raises the economists' eyebrows is the level of support the government
is willing to commit to this policy.
King Fahd, the Saudi ruler, this month authorised payment to the country's
wheat farmers of no less than Dollars 2.1bn for their record 1991 wheat crop
of four million tonnes. On average, agriculture experts reckon, this
amounted to payment of upwards Dollars 480 a tonne for Saudi wheat, compared
with world prices of just over Dollars 100 a tonne.
Since the government embarked on its subsidised path to food security in the
mid-1970s, farmers in their thousands have turned to a low technology
irrigation system using a central pivot and rotating watering pipe,
pioneered in California in the 1940s, and greened the desert with crop
circles - some covering more than 100 hectares each.
The highly subsidised scheme has led to successive bumper harvests and a
large grain surplus. Saudi Arabia's 152,000 farms were already producing
enough wheat by 1984 to meet domestic demand of about 1m tonnes. The
government's largesse since has led to a series of surplus harvests: enough
to fill available Saudi storage capacity of 1.4m tonnes and turn the kingdom
into the world's sixth largest exporter.
Saudi Arabia has exported a total of 9m tonnes of wheat since 1986 to 40
countries, while the subsidies have helped cut food imports by half from 87
per cent of total needs in 1980.
But economists are prone to raise eyebrows at the full and indirect costs of
Saudi wheat production. The direct subsidies are only a part of government
support packages for farming which also include such inducements as 80 per
cent interest-free loans for agricultural enterprises.
More crucial, however, is the cost to the nation's limited water supplies.
Agriculture accounts for at least 90 per cent of the kingdom's annual water
consumption - more than 14bncubic metres. This, since desalinated water is
both too limited in supply and too saline even after purification for
agricultural use, is running down reserves of fossil water which, according
to the best available estimates, have a lifespan of 15-25 years at present
rates of depletion.
'The present wheat policy is little short of a heavily subsidised way of
exporting water,' is one diplomat's gloss on the subsidised programme.
The government, which treats information about water security with the
secrecy it accords information on national security, disputes there is any
dangerous threat to water reserves, maintaining that more aquifers will be
discovered in time. Moreover, it stands solidly behind a policy which,
whatever its economic cost, is also seen to reap vital political profit.
The agriculture programme's impetus came from threats issued by some US
politicians during the 1973 Arab oil embargo that western countries should
retaliate with a food embargo of their own. The kingdom swiftly turned its
prodigious oil wealth to try to counter any such threat through the subsidy
programme. Domestically, moreover, the subsidies also provide affluence and
jobs in the north-western interior which had won few direct economic
spin-offs from the country's oil boom and which is a strongly conservative
Islamic heartland.
Such considerations make the kingdom unlikely to abandon agricultural
support. Since Saudi Arabia is not a member of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, there will also be no external obligation for it to cut
support.
Nevertheless, the government has sought to restore some kilter to
agricultural output by requiring wheat farmers to apply for certificates to
produce the crop - and by adjusting the subsidy to promote cultivation of
barley, of which the kingdom produces 400,000 tonnes a year to feed camel
and sheep, but of which it still imports 3m-5m tonnes a year.
As last year's record wheat harvest indicates, the policy has so far had
limited effect. Nevertheless, Saudi Arabia is witnessing elsewhere a growing
and increasingly diversified farming economy. Agriculture is expected by the
government to grow by 7 per cent a year to 1995 by when it is expected to
account for 9 per cent of GDP.
According to figures released last year by the agriculture ministry,
domestic agricultural production rose 40 per cent between 1984 and 1988,
with the value and volume of food imports falling 31 per cent and 41 per
cent respectively over the same period. In the five years to 1990,
agriculture increased its share of GDP from 3.4 per cent to eight per cent,
with employment in the sector rising to 569,000.
So far, the kingdom is truly self-sufficient only in wheat, eggs and dates
of which it is the world's biggest producer with output of 542,000 tonnes
last year.
Heavy - and again heavily-subsidised - investment in dairy farming has
brought the kingdom on the verge of self-sufficiency here too. And, here
too, the farming is on a gigantic Saudi scale. As an illustration, the Al
Safi dairy farm 70km south of Riyadh proclaims itself the world's largest,
with a herd of 20,000 Holstein cattle and a parlour which milks 1.25 million
litres a day.
But here again the cost of producing milk from a desert dairy can be
measured in an expensive use of water. Some agriculture experts in the
kingdom estimate that to produce one litre of milk - taking into account
water used to irrigate the feed, plus that sprayed on the animals to keep
them cool, that which is used to clean the dairy equipment and the gallons
used to water the cows themselves - requires no less than 1,500 litres of
water.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920130

