FT921-3832

FT  12 MAR 92 / Lautro board member quits over rules on disclosure


   By NORMA COHEN and DAVID OWEN


A LEADING financial services executive resigned yesterday from the board of
Lautro, the life assurance and unit trust industry's self-regulatory body,
over a new disclosure regime which he described as 'inherently
anti-competitive'.
Mr Tim Miller is director of marketing at M&G Group, Britain's biggest
specialist unit trust company, and head of Lautro's advertising and product
disclosure committee. He said the decision of regulators to allow life
companies to show average charges throughout the industry rather than
require them to show their own will not offer adequate protection.
Mr Miller's resignation followed yesterday's announcement by the Securities
and Investments Board, the City's chief watchdog, of the new regime, which
is designed to help consumers shop more wisely for life assurance.
The regime was prompted by urging from the Office of Fair Trading and the
Department of Trade and Industry which said in 1989 that the absence of cost
information in the sale of life products inhibited competition.
'What we are proposing will have a significant effect on competition,' said
Sir David Walker, SIB chairman. He said giving more cost information to
consumers would shift insurance business to low-cost providers and encourage
producers to design more short-term investment products which offer smaller
penalties for early cancellation.
Consumer groups generally hailed the new disclosure regime as vastly
improved on current rules which do not require sales agents to tell
consumers anything about charges until after they have agreed to buy the
product; even then, the information is not easy to understand. They
expressed disappointment that the SIB would not insist that companies
disclose their own charges in advertising material.
Defending the decision, Sir David said: 'We've reached the conclusion that
it's very hard to require them to use standard projections of investment
returns and not allow standard projections of expenses.'
He said consumers would be given a basis for comparison in other data which
will now be required to be shown along with the projections.
Under the proposed rules, customers must be told how much of their premiums
will be deducted as expenses if they cancel a policy within the first five
years. They must also be told how many years' premiums must be paid
regularly before the policyholder is entitled to a 100 per cent refund.
Companies will also have to tell prospective customers by how many pence
each pound of final maturity value will be reduced in order to cover costs.
David Owen writes: The effectiveness of Lautro and the regulator for
independent financial advisers, Fimbra, was questioned in the Commons last
night by Tory MP, Mr Michael Colvin. He highlighted the losses faced by some
investors in investment bond home income schemes and said self-regulation
was not working as intended.
Two cheers for plans, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920312

