FT923-9879

FT  03 AUG 92 / N-plant cottage attracts buyers


   By CHRIS TIGHE


   AT LEAST one house for sale in Britain looks likely to find a buyer


even though it has the Sellafield nuclear waste reprocessing plant as its
next-door neighbour.
Coombe Cottage, a detached three-bedroomed property with a pink bathroom
suite and imposing views of the Sellafield complex, stands just yards from
the north gate of the vast site and within its 2km emergency evacuation
zone.
Although in a cul de sac, it suffers from heavy traffic at shift changes, as
many hundreds of Sellafield workers drive past.
Yet while appealing properties in quiet avenues all over Britain languish
for lack of buyers, this most bizarrely situated of homes has already
attracted offers, including one just Pounds 2,500 short of its Pounds 47,500
asking price.
Mitchells Lakeland Properties, the estate agents, say the location of the
cottage, the nearest private property to the Sellafield site, has neither
deterred would-be buyers nor deflated the asking price, which at is on a par
with comparable freehold houses elsewhere in West Cumbria. It is understood
that the cottage is being sold by the family of an elderly woman who lived
there until recently.
'There's been quite a lot of interest in it,' the estate agents said. 'We
have a couple of offers on it and it's standing at Pounds 45,000 at the
moment. It's a nice little cottage; it's been very popular.'
British Nuclear Fuels, Sellafield's operator, owns some formerly private
farms around the site, previously coastal agricultural land. The agents said
BNFL was interested in Coombe Cottage, which has been on the market since
March, but declined to say whether it had made an offer. The company said it
would not automatically buy a property just because it was so near the site.
The keenest buyers would probably have been anti-nuclear groups, which would
have found it ideal as a 'shop window' for protests on Sellafield's
doorstep. The cottage's price has deterred them, though, especially as
recession has dented their income.
'The problem with anti-nuclear activists is they haven't got that sort of
money,' said Ms Janine Allis-Smith of Barrow-in-Furness based Cumbrians
Opposed to a Radioactive Environment (Core). 'It'd be great to buy it just
to have a foothold. But who in their right mind would want to live there?'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920803

