FT924-12190

FT  22 OCT 92 / China makes case for Gatt seat


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


THE US and the European Community said yesterday they wanted more
clarification of China's trade policy regime before pressing ahead with
negotiations on the terms of Chinese membership of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt).
Addressing the Gatt working party charged with drawing up China's protocol
of accession to the world trade body, Tong Zhiguang, vice-minister for
foreign trade in Beijing, said his government hoped for an early resumption
of Gatt membership.
China's firm decision to move to a market economy, endorsed by the 14th
Communist Party Congress which ended earlier this week, would bring the
economic system closer to Gatt principles, Tong said. The government was
also committed to reforming the trading system in accordance with Gatt
rules.
China had already acted to release state-owned enterprises from central
control and liberalise prices, he added. Price reform would be completed
within three years. China was also ready to reduce customs tariffs,
eliminate other import restrictions, and increase the 'transparency' of its
foreign trade regime.
In return for allowing Taiwan to apply separately for Gatt membership, China
has been promised expedited negotiations on its own 1986 application to
resume the Gatt seat it left in 1950 after the Communists took power.
These negotiations were suspended in 1989 after the brutal suppression of
the pro-democracy movement and a slowing of economic reform. The working
party met again last February but made little progress.
US and EC officials said yesterday they wanted to know more about how a
'socialist market economy' would work in practice.
They also wanted more information on the bilateral accord struck by China
and the US earlier this month, which in some respects could serve as a model
for the Gatt protocol.
China will have bilateral talks with trading partners on tariff reductions
and other issues, before the working party reconvenes tomorrow to consider
its next moves.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921022

