FT924-11523

FT  26 OCT 92 / French case on grain undermined


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRENCH grain exports will suffer almost as much under European Community
farm policy reform, which Paris has already agreed to, as they would under
US demands on grain exports, according to projections from an official
French institute.
A chief cause of the deadlock in the Gatt trade liberalisation talks is the
US demand that the Community should cut the volume of its subsidised cereal
exports by 24 per cent over six years. France has refused to agree to this.
However, EC grain exports will fall to 14.8m tonnes a year by 1996 because
of reductions agreed under the EC's Common Agricultural Policy, according to
estimates by Insee, the French government economic research arm, in a report
published today.
Its forecast is just under 1m tonnes more than the level of subsidised EC
grain exports envisaged by the US in the Uruguay Round of the Gatt.
The Insee projection appears to undermine the French government's case that
French cereal exporters, by far the largest in the Community, would be worse
off under a Gatt deal than under the CAP reform.
France objects particularly that the US wants the grain exports cut made
from the level in 1986-88 when, according to the Insee report, EC cereal
exports averaged only 18m tonnes. Since then such EC exports have climbed to
nearly 28m tonnes a year.
But even a 24 per cent cut from the 1986-88 level would bring EC grain
exports to not much below 14m tonnes a year.
EC officials in Brussels have been trying to put the same message as Insee
across to Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy's government, but without much
success so far.
The beleaguered Socialist government evidently hopes a tough stand on Gatt
will help it in next March's legislative elections.
The Insee report, however, suggests that EC and French farmers might have
difficulty selling even a reduced amount of grain exports in competition
with US farmers, if subsidies were reduced.
It claims US agriculture is more productive than any national farm sector
inside the EC, except that of the Netherlands; over the 1973-89 period, US
farmers were 30 per cent more productive than the average European farmer.
American farmers' competitive edge over their EC counterparts is reflected
in the fact, says Insee, that overall their farm prices were 20 per cent
lower than in Europe between 1973-89, with US oilseeds and animal feed
prices nearly half those in Europe.
US farmers benefit from lower costs of land, petrol, fertiliser, and
vegetable inputs into animal feed than in Europe, the French organisation
says.
But CAP reform, it adds, will make French farmers better off than they would
otherwise be in the absence of reform. As a result of direct aid in
compensation for lower EC prices, the average French farmer will see his
income rise by 10 per cent over five years, whereas without the CAP changes
agreed this summer he would gain only 5 per cent over that period.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921026

