FT922-4431

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (13): New leader for a new era -
Stock Exchange


   By PHILIP GAWITH


THE political reform process in South Africa has galvanised many
organisations into a fundamental reassessment of their role, often with the
view that new goals necessarily require new structures. But as one senior
banker put it: 'You do not need new horses in South Africa. You need new
jockeys.'
The Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) has experienced just such a change
recently with Mr Roy Andersen taking over in May as president of the JSE
from Mr Tony Norton. Much of Mr Norton's five-year tenure was occupied with
systems and structures - improving the general functioning of South Africa's
capital markets. Mr Andersen has already made clear that with the structures
in place, it is now a question of ensuring that these match the needs of the
emerging South Africa.
He is well aware that many of South Africa's leading black politicians see
the JSE as little more than a privileged, white man's casino whose functions
are wholly unrelated to the needs of the mass of South Africans. To a large
extent this is a function of ignorance, but Mr Andersen will not gamble on a
future government acting on its ignorance. He has, as befits a man of his
military background, launched a pre-emptive strike, in the form of
instituting a wide-ranging investigation into what the optimal structure of
the JSE is as it enters a new era.
Mr Andersen says of the investigation: 'It is an attempt to ensure the JSE
controls its own destiny. We don't want things to be imposed on us.'
Certainly, if the JSE does want to convince the mass of South Africans that
it has a wider usefulness, it has a long way to go. Although Mr Andersen is
too polite to say so, he will be aware that in terms of affirmative action
and black advancement, the broking community is at least 15 years, and much
heartache, behind the accountancy profession, where he came from. There is
not a single black broker, or trainee, on the JSE. The rewards, however, for
those who make the effort, will be rich. One observer commented cynically:
'He who gets the first black broker gets very rich.'
Political change is not the only stimulus here. In its efforts to bring
South Africa's capital markets more into line with international practice,
the government will, during the present parliamentary session, alter the
Stock Exchange Control Act, to permit, but not require, negotiated
commissions, dual capacity and corporate membership.
Aside from assessing the extent to which the JSE will go the 'Big Bang'
route - investment community opinion seems to favour negotiated commissions,
but not dual capacity and corporate membership - the investigation will also
assess how well the JSE is performing its role as a primary and secondary
market. On the former count, the JSE can point to a record R14.4bn raised
during its last financial year. Liquidity, however, remains a problem.
Market liquidity in the 1992 financial year was 4.3 per cent - considerably
lower than most stock exchanges. The main reason for this is that
institutions which dominate the market tend to hold on to lines of quality
stock which are not readily available, because their options are limited by
exchange control.
The silver lining to exchange control and poor liquidity is to be found in
share prices which are inflated by the heavy weight of institutional funds
with few alternative outlets. Gold and mining stocks have underperformed, in
line with weak commodity prices, but the industrial index has scaled record
heights. It rose above 4,600 points in late May, 12 per cent up since
January following a 40 per cent rise in 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920605

