FT924-8274

FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (4): Returnees on the move - The labour
market


   By JAMES WHITTINGTON


JORDAN'S labour market is in transition. According to Ministry of Labour
figures, unemployment has risen sharply from 8.9 per cent in 1988 to 16.8
per cent then 18.9 per cent in 1990 and 1991 respectively. But some
economists claim a more accurate figure is more than 30 per cent.
Jordan's traditional labour market in the Gulf has shrunk since the Gulf war
and the status of the 300,000 returnees from Kuwait, of whom an estimated
59,000 are said still to be without jobs, remains largely unknown.
Furthermore, with government statistics showing that 43 per cent of the
population is under the age of 15, the future demand for jobs seems certain
to outstrip supply for years to come.
Government officials talk of 'creating the right atmosphere' for jobs and
'allowing the market to find its own equilibrium'. But few tangible policies
are in evidence.
Apart from institutions such as the Vocational Trainng Corporation (VTC),
which offers retraining for the unemployed, and the Development and
Employment Fund (DEF, which offers low-interest loans for new businesses,
the goverment has largely adopted a laisser faire approach to Jordan's
labour market.
The most successful government initiative appears to be the DEF, which has
allocated JD3.6m towards the establishment of 694 small businesses since it
opened in March 1991. Dr Abdul-Ilah Abu-Ayyash, the its director, DEF has so
far created 2,300 jobs.
Borrowers are given nine years to repay their loans, with a two year grace
period. Some 67 per cent of the new entrepreneurs are graduates. Dr
Abu-Ayyash says he aims to create 6,000 new jobs a year with the help of
more government and overseas funds, including an EC grant.
But according to one official in the prime ministry, the root of Jordan's
unemployment problem is in peoples' attitudes: 'The social value of work
needs updating,' he says.
For one thing, Jordanians tend to reject low salaries and manual labour and
are undercut in these areas by foreign workers. This is pertinently
reflected in the astronomical rise - from 18,000 in 1991 to 92,000 in the
first nine months of this year - in work permits issued by the Ministry of
Labour to non-Jordanians (mainly Egyptians and Syrians) coinciding with the
country's construction boom.
For another, the country's higher education system turns out thousands of
graduates who tend to rely on finding work in government dempartments rather
than in the private sector. An independent study of unemployment in Jordan
by the Royal Scientific Society showed that by the end of 1991, 47.5 per
cent of the unemployed interviewed were university or college graduates.
Figures from the Civil Service Commission show that a total of 75,773
graduates applied for just 3,025 government posts by June 30 this year.
Meanwhile, a new draft labour law is to be presented to PArliament in
December which is described by a Ministry of Labour official as 'a
modernisation of the relationship between employer and employee'.
The legislation will include a minimum wage and a stipulated minimum working
week, provisions for maternity leave and support for the disabled.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

921112

