FT924-12153

FT  22 OCT 92 / Accountancy Column: A gloomy global forecast for the
profession


   By ANDREW JACK


ANYONE wanting to get a flavour of the global state of the accountancy
profession could have done no better than to attend the 14th World Congress
of Accountants in Washington DC last week. Sitting in the huge Convention
Centre auditorium, in the middle of the capital of the country with more
accountants than any other, was like being inside a barometer measuring the
prospects for the industry around the world. The forecast was not good.
The most significant indicator was the lack of activity. As Mr Dennis
Beresford, the chairman of the US Financial Accounting Standards Board, put
it later: 'Many of the delegates were disguised as empty chairs.'
Officials tidying up at the end of the four-day gathering estimated that
2,850 people attended the congress. Stripping away the 'accompanying
persons', journalists, staff and accountants from the surrounding region who
were hauled in on three-line whips by the organisers, the number of serious
delegates going to many sessions was considerably lower.
The total might still seem an impressive number, but it was substantially
down on the previous congress five years ago, and has left the organisers -
headed by the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) - with a loss
probably running into several hundreds of thousands of dollars. The
attendance says a lot about the depressing state of business in the
accountancy firms, most notably those in North America, the UK and much of
the rest of Europe. After a decade of heady growth, many are now expanding
at rates below the level of inflation, some are reporting absolute declines
and others have been forced to merge or close.
At the same time some of the more enthusiastic delegates at the congress
served as a reminder that business - and hence accountancy - in some parts
of the world, such as south-east Asia, is very different and even
flourishing. The IFAC is able to point to 110 member bodies from nearly 80
countries, representing 1.2m accountants.
In general, one of the most lively sessions was on the state of the
profession in the developing countries. Elsewhere, groups from eastern
Europe were listening attentively as they attempted to kindle future
development and expansion of their infant accountancy networks. But the
messages from the Anglo-Saxon world were far from bullish.
Aside from the sluggish state of the world economy, a number of the
specialist sessions during the congress were instructively gloomy. While
those on technical subjects were among the most heavily attended, two on
more wide-ranging subjects stood out.
The first was on the expansion of environmental reporting by companies,
including many multi-nationals. That could bode well, offering accountants
the chance to become involved in a new area of auditing and consultancy
work. But the speakers also stressed the risks, since auditors could
potentially be held liable in the future for unidentified and undisclosed
liabilities such as toxic waste clean-up obligations imposed on their
clients.
Even more significant was a session on legal liability. There was lengthy
discussion about the collapse of Tricontinental in Australia, which
generated, at Dollars 1.1bn, the largest known claim at the time against an
auditor. That level has since been overshadowed earlier this month by the
Pounds 8bn claim concerning the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Speakers renewed their claims for tort reform to reduce the incidence and
size of claims against auditing firms - which they argue are not responsible
for the collapse of companies. One glimmer of optimism came from a bill now
proposed in the state of New South Wales in Australia which could become law
early next year. That would cap the size of claims that auditors and other
professionals would be required to pay. It would also require all firms to
take out indemnity insurance or have assets sufficient to cover claims up to
the specified limits.
More generally, Mr Richard Murray, chairman of the global professional
services division of Minet, the insurer, warned that commercial cover might
no longer continue to be available to firms facing claims at the current
escalating rates. There may be a need for governments to step in and provide
cover for uninsurable business, he warned.
Mr Murray said that while accountants should continue to press externally
for reform of litigation, they should also look internally at how they
manage risk. That could mean turning away clients perceived to be
fraudulent, in danger of collapse or likely in some other way to give rise
to legal action which might trigger a legal claim. The issue raises
questions over how such companies would continue to find alternative audit
firms in the future.
While the World Congress did give delegates a depressing glimpse of some of
the issues now facing the profession, a number of those attending questioned
privately whether the idea of such an ambitious and wide-ranging gathering
was becoming a rather anachronistic way of exchanging ideas.
Mr Bertil Edlund, IFAC president, puts a brave face on such criticism and on
the lower levels of attendance this year. He points out that the congress
was able to go ahead, while those of many other industries and professions
have been so harshly affected by the recession that they have been unable to
take place at all. Mr Edlund also stresses the subtle achievements of
fostering greater international collaboration and consensus, particularly
through informal discussions and meetings which took place outside the
public sessions.
There is certainly some substance to his argument. Away from the convention
centre, for example, Mr Anatoly Sheremet, president of the Association of
Accountants and Auditors of the Commonwealth of Independent States, was busy
talking to officials at the World Bank. He is attempting to gather support
for foreign loans totalling up to Dollars 500m to help with the development
of the profession in the former Soviet Union.
An equally important session took place just after the congress at the
headquarters of the Financial Accounting Standards Boards in Norwalk,
Connecticut. World standard-setters met to exchange progress reports and
discuss how they could work more closely together in the future. As the
speakers around the table discussed their agendas, two issues stood out: how
little co-operation currently exists and how much common ground there was on
issues being tackled.
Several different countries mentioned draft accounting standards on topics
such as financial instruments, related-party transactions, leases and
intangible assets. Yet one clear difference remains: the purpose for which
accounts are prepared. For the the US and the UK, for instance, it is
clearly stock market investors. For Germany, by contrast, it is creditors,
especially the banks.
Inevitably the accounting standards that result are different and the
pressures and speed of reform vary considerably. Several speakers argued
that with growing demand from companies for access to international capital
markets, there will inevitably be growing requirements for the harmonisation
of standards of financial reporting with which they will have to comply.
Yet it seems that at the moment the importance of international
collaboration is still principally being driven from the outside and from
the top downwards, by a relatively small number of accountants. Their
concerns are seemingly still not considered important by either the vast
majority of partners in the delegates' own firms nor by the wider business
community.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921022

