FT924-12059

FT  22 OCT 92 / International Company News: Colossus shakes Austrian
financial markets - The mixture of vigour and timidity shown by one-year-old
Bank Austria


   By IAN RODGER


FOR a bank that is only a year old, Bank Austria has made its presence felt
in Austria's languid financial markets.
It has sacked three top executives following the discovery of massive loan
losses in the UK and the US; it has driven up domestic interest rates for
loans; and it has mounted a boardroom challenge to an aspiring competitor.
But Bank Austria is not just any bank. It became, through a merger last
October of two venerable Viennese financial institutions, the country's
largest bank at a stroke. And it is trying to assert leadership in a market
where banks, most of them state-owned, have been more interested in market
share than in making profits.
Yet Bank Austria, itself state-controlled, is being extremely timid about
implementing the rationalisation that must follow its merger.
So far, not a single branch has been closed, although bank executives
acknowledge that at least 50 of the 360 are blatantly redundant. Fewer than
300 of the bank's 9,700 employees have lost their jobs. And only a couple of
branches have been fitted out with the bank's new insignia and symbols.
This timidity stems in large part from the bank's roots. Its two predecessor
banks, the Zentralsparkasse group of Viennese savings banks and
Osterreichische Landerbank, were in the socialist camp.
An agency of the city of Vienna was the dominant shareholder in
Zentralsparkasse, and Mr Helmut Zilk, the city's socialist mayor, remains
chairman of Bank Austria. The national government had a majority stake in
Landerbank, with socialists holding the majority in the boardroom and senior
executive positions.
Mr Rene Alfons Haiden, the chief executive, disclosed last month that the
bank intended to close about 50 branches over the next two years. He has
also said up to 1,500 jobs would be lost by the end of 1995. 'The next two
years are the difficult ones,' according to Mr Haiden. 'It is going to be
hard, but we will do it.'
Bank executives claim they have done better on paring administrative costs,
notably combining back-office premises. And they say the delay in installing
the new identity at branches was due to dissatisfaction with the first
design.
On the business front, the new bank has been more impressive. Within weeks,
directors had to deal with severe problems in the UK and US branches
inherited from Landerbank. In February, they announced a Sch5bn (Dollars
472m) charge for extraordinary losses on bad loans and sacked three
executives.
As the losses and the executives came from the Landerbank side, bank
directors knew their tough action would contribute to the view that the
merger had really been a rescue of Landerbank, and that this would undermine
staff morale.
But the crisis passed without upheaval, and the bank has reassured former
Landerbank staff by making clear that Mr Gerhard Randa, their former chief
executive and now deputy chief executive of Bank Austria, would take over
from Mr Haiden within the next three years.
The bank then set out to use its new market leadership position to reassert
discipline in pricing of services.
Past attempts by a bank to raise interest rates or customer charges were
usually undermined by competitors. Lending spreads have been thin in the
Austrian market, now averaging 1.75 per cent, according to Mr Haiden, a full
1 percentage point less than needed.
In April, Bank Austria raised charges on private cheque accounts by 25 per
cent, the first significant increase in several years, and others followed.
In July, it boosted lending rates by 0.0025 to 0.005 per cent but froze
rates on deposits. Again, everyone followed.
'It looks as if Haiden has broken the pattern,' says Mr Heinz Handler,
banking analyst at the Austrian Institute of Economic Research (WIFO).
Others say that all banks are making such poor profits that they are
co-operating.
Bank Austria's first-half pre-tax profits tumbled 15.7 per cent to Sch867m,
while those of Creditanstalt, the second largest bank, were down 9.5 per
cent to Sch845m.
Bank Austria's latest offensive is aimed at blocking the attempt by
GiroCredit, the country's third largest bank, to expand its retail strength
in the Austrian provinces. Following a confrontation last week, both sides
backed down, but it looks as if Bank Austria will soon get rid of its 30 per
cent stake in Giro.
These manoeuvres will not be enough to rescue Bank Austria from a
disappointing first full year. Mr Haiden has forecast some improvement in
the second half, but net income could be 10 per cent below last year's
Sch2.1bn.
And if market conditions remain depressed, the bank will rationalise more,
even if it is run by socialists. 'If the bad situation persists, all the
large banks will have to make big changes to their cost structures,' Mr
Randa predicts.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

921022

