FT923-6344

FT  25 AUG 92 / Bankers toughen stance on Efim loans


   By SARA WEBB and HAIG SIMONIAN


   LONDON, MILAN


FOREIGN banks which lent to Efim, the Italian state holding company put into
voluntary liquidation last month, plan to demand full repayment of their
loans at their next meeting with the Italian Treasury.
Bankers representing the international banking syndicates in London stressed
their determination to press for full repayment of the loans on which Efim
defaulted when they meet representatives from the treasury and the Bank of
Italy next week.
However, it is clear each side is trying to play a strong hand ahead of the
talks. In Italy, reports have circulated that postponement of the meeting,
expected this week, stemmed partly from differences among foreign bank
creditors.
Japanese institutions are said to be particularly hawkish about full
repayment, but Italian officials say some US and UK banks are more flexible.
The Italian treasury announced earlier this month bonds would be issued to
cover Efim's borrowings. However, to the annoyance of the foreign banks,
interest rates on the bonds have been set below market levels.
Treasury officials have hinted they may be prepared to negotiate in the hope
of a compromise, but foreign banks said yesterday they wanted full
repayment.
'The banks want repayment in full as we don't want to suffer a loss in terms
of capital,' said one agent bank. 'We're not discussing a percentage loss,
we feel we should not take a loss at all.'
The five-year lira bonds would pay interest at 7.25 per cent annually, while
those in ecu would have a 4 per cent coupon.
One banker said: 'We're being offered an ecu bond paying 4 per cent whereas
under normal conditions a five-year ecu bond for Italy would be expected to
have a coupon of just over 8 per cent.'
The difference in interest rates between the bonds and market levels means
creditors will receive only about 80 per cent of the principal and interest
that would otherwise have been due.
Efim and its subsidiaries signed several syndicated borrowing facilities
with foreign banks. The wholly owned subsidiaries were able to borrow at
competitive rates on the strength of the Efim  - and hence Italian state  -
name, the bankers claim.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920825

