FT924-1006

FT  21 DEC 92 / War of advice may hit Russia: Foreign advisers may have to
fight for an ear


   By JOHN LLOYD


THE FOREIGN economic experts who have played a big role in advising the
Russian government on the reforms of the past year have no idea whether they
will still be advising next year, when the government and the policies of Mr
Viktor Chernomyrdin, the new Russian prime minister, will be clear.
For some, including the team of Professor Jeffrey Sachs and Mr David Lipton
from Harvard University, it is already clear that Mr Chernomyrdin is a
threat to the reforms on which they advised.
Mr Lipton says: 'It's clear from what Prime Minister Chernomyrdin has
already said on the need to support industry, and heavy industry in
particular, that he has no regard for the interests of the economic
transformation, no regard for consumers, and no respect for markets.'
However, the Sachs/Lipton team, with its score of assistants scattered
throughout the bureaucracy, will remain in place for now.
So will Mr Richard Layard, the London School of Economics professor who
works closely with Mr Sergei Vassiliev, head of the Economic Reform Centre.
Prof Layard said that he had no plans to cease work, and Mr Vassiliev, a
close associate of former Prime Minister Yegor Gaidar, said that 'we'll
carry on as long as we feel it useful to do so'.
Nevertheless, the privatisation programme, which is the biggest reform
programme and employs the bulk of the foreign expertise, is now on hold. Due
to be discussed by Parliament last week, it was taken off the agenda while
the new prime minister read next year's programme to see whether he would
support it.
The state privatisation committee, headed by Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy
prime minister, is now developing an ambitious programme of mass
privatisation to begin in January, leaning heavily on foreign assistence.
The International Finance Corporation, the World Bank division which worked
on privatisation throughout the year, is waiting to see whether the
programme will get under way. This is also true of the team from Credit
Suisse First Boston, which is charged with bringing the first companies to
market in December. 'It's business as usual for now,' said Mr Stephen
Jennings, a CSFB executive in Moscow.
However, it is clear that the privatisation committee is now working flat
out on next year's programme, much more aware than previously of the limited
window of opportunity open to them to make privatisation irreversible.
The US merchant bank, Goldman Sachs, hired in February by the government to
assist in finding inward investment, is now unsure if its services will
still be required. 'We were able to work essentially because of our link
with Yegor Gaidar,' says Mr Bill Crowley, head of the GS team in Moscow.
'Our main contact point is the Agency for International Co-operation and
Development under (deputy prime minister) Alexander Shokhin, and it's not
clear how that will now work.'
The Ford Foundation, one of the biggest funders of individuals in Moscow
through its Dollars 7m (Pounds 4.6m) annual fund for the former communist
states of eastern Europe, is one of the many private and government
institutions now debating whether to continue funding market-oriented
programmes which may no longer be welcomed.
Others include the British Know-How Fund and US Aid.
Mr Chernomyrdin said during his first press conference that he thought that
the foreign advisers should continue their work 'and Russian ones too'.
He has already put feelers out to Mr Nikolai Petrakov, the economist who
served as former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev's adviser in 1989.
At the same time, Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, has appointed as
his economic adviser none other than Mr Yegor Gaidar.
A war of advice clearly looms.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921221

