FT921-3976

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Analysis): Best news reserved for the elderly -
Personal Savings


   By PHILIP COGGAN


Savers were never likely to be the focus of a Budget in the middle of a
recession, a time when the government wants voters to spend, not save.
The Labour party's plans to re-introduce the investment income surcharge may
have already forced many savers into the Conservative camp. Labour's
proposed 9 per cent surcharge would apply to savings income of more than
Pounds 3,000 per year of those below state retirement age.
So it is unsurprising, economically and electorally, that yesterday's
changes were fairly small. Easily the best news was for those elderly people
who depend on a small amount of company pension and savings, on top of their
state retirement benefit. Such people will particularly gain from the 20 per
cent tax rate on the first Pounds 2,000 of taxable earnings.
The inflation-linked increases in income tax and capital gains tax
allowances and the slightly larger rise in the inheritance tax thresholds
will be welcome, but not unexpected news.
The cheeriest faces in the savings industry will belong to unit and
investment trust managers. They had long campaigned for the Personal Equity
Plan rules to be altered to allow them to compete on a level playing field;
now both types of investment schemes can qualify for the full Pounds 6,000
limit.
Previous Conservative chancellors had restricted the amount invested in unit
and investment trusts compared with direct investment in equities, on the
ground that the latter gave the saver a taste of 'real' capitalism.
The snag was that small investors were unlikely to achieve a good spread of
risk through direct investment in equities. Unit and investment trusts give
built-in diversification, and are likely to be the most sensible route for
most small investors to approach equity investment.
The change will also eliminate the loophole by which new issue investment
trusts had received the full Pounds 6,000 allowance. This had provoked a
flurry of investment trust launches towards the end of the 1991-1992 tax
year, and had biased the PEP industry towards investment, rather than unit,
trusts which did not qualify under the new issue rules.
Schroders ought to win a prize for quickest Budget reaction, announcing
plans for a full Pounds 6,000 unit trust PEP shortly after 6pm last night.
There will be few tears for the Business Expansion Scheme which went through
a number of rule changes before its most recent incarnation - a landlord's
tax shelter. The structures devised by the sponsors grew ever more ingenious
 -and the benefits to the British economy of this tax break ever more
dubious.
The tax incentives of the BES are so generous - relief at the highest
marginal rate - that there will inevitably be a stampede into schemes before
abolition at the end of 1993. An investor could invest Pounds 120,000 by
that date - and the great danger to savers could be that they rush into some
badly-managed schemes in their enthusiasm.
The new National Savings scheme which Mr Lamont announced is a hybrid, the
success of which will probably depend on the rates on offer when the first
bond is launched in July. Previously, National Savings products gave either
income and instant access, at a rate which was not guaranteed, or guaranteed
growth on products which required a five-year investment.
The new product, offering guaranteed income over a one-year period, might
capture a different market. But it will probably have to be highly
competitive with building society rates to persuade the cautious basic rate
taxpayer to switch.
The greatest danger to savers is inflation, and they will have to wait to
see whether the chancellor's hopes for a low-inflation 1990s are borne out.
Some economists believe that a PSBR of Pounds 28bn will be storing up
inflation for the future.
And it has yet to be seen whether the Budget will achieve another of the
chancellor's hopes - lower interest rates. Cuts in rates may be good news
for many but not for savers.
At least there were very few new gimmicks to entice savers to switch their
portfolios into untried products. And they now have to wait until the
election to see if any of Mr Lamont's modest reforms will be implemented.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920311

