FT922-533

FT  27 JUN 92 / Supreme Court shows liberal face


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


THE US Supreme Court ruled yesterday that airport authorities may ban
religious and other groups from soliciting for money at their facilities,
but may not stop them handing out literature.
In another important ruling, the court found that the state of Mississippi
still had not done enough to rectify its history of racial segregation in
higher education.
Both verdicts are being minutely examined for hints as to how the court will
rule on the highly controversial Pennsylvania abortion case, a judgment now
expected on Monday.
A common conclusion is that the court is not proving as reflexively
conservative as suggested by its political heritage, which has been
accentuated by the appointments to the bench of presidents Reagan and Bush.
However, there were reports yesterday that the abortion ruling had been
delayed until Monday to permit either Justice John Paul Stevens or Harry
Blackmun, who have supported freedom of choice, to write even more
blistering dissents over the weekend.
The airports ruling was on a case in which the Hare Krishna sect had
challenged a New York ban on their presence at airports.
Passengers at many US air terminals have to run a gauntlet of appeals from
religious, charitable and political groups, with a background public address
announcement saying that the airport authority was in no way approving of
such activities.
The judgments show how finely the court is now divided. It issued two
rulings, the first, banning solicitation, determined that an airport is not
'a public forum' under the constitution, the second found that to ban
leafletting would be to abridge the constitutional protection of free
speech.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the first woman on the court and an
increasingly influential swing vote, produced laughter in court yesterday
when she declared 'if anyone can figure that out, they're doing well'.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920627

