FT922-4166

FT  06 JUN 92 / Reichmann may bid to win back Canary Wharf


   By ROBERT PESTON and VANESSA HOULDER


MR PAUL REICHMANN, founder of the troubled property developer Olympia &
York, is planning a bid to regain control of Canary Wharf, the east London
property development which is in administration under UK insolvency
procedures.
Mr Reichmann, whose family owns Olympia & York, is in talks with a number of
powerful investors, whom he hopes can be persuaded to join him in a takeover
bid for the project, according to a financier with a close knowledge of O&Y.
Four separate options are being considered by him, all of which will include
a commitment to provide funding for extension of the Jubilee Line
underground link.
Mr Reichmann is due to meet administrators from the accounting firm Ernst &
Young in London next week to discuss his plans for Canary Wharf.
Some bank creditors, owed hundreds of millions of pounds as a result of
their involvement in Europe's biggest property development, may be angry at
the possibility that he may regain control of Canary Wharf.
On the other hand, tenants are likely to welcome the continued involvement
of O&Y, whose reputation as a landlord remains unsullied by its financial
difficulties.
Mr Reichmann is believed to be confident that opposition will come from only
a handful of creditors.
His bid would provide sufficient capital to complete the project's first two
stages without any new money from the present Canary Wharf lenders.
It would also allow banks to reduce their exposure to the project, but at
the price of taking some loss on any loans withdrawn.
On Wednesday, Mr Reichmann met the chairman and chief executives of eight
banks with heavy exposure to O&Y.
The meeting, held in Toronto, was described by one of the bankers as
friendly.
The appointment of administrators at Canary Wharf 10 days ago was a severe
personal blow to Mr Reichmann. The project was by far the most ambitious
undertaken by O&Y, and Mr Reichmann has overseen every detail of its
construction.
Before its liquidity crisis arose in February, O&Y was confident it was on
the verge of a breakthrough in its efforts to attract tenants to Canary
Wharf. Such a breakthrough could have secured the project's future.
Two UK financial institutions were due to sign leases by the end of April
for a total of 400,000 sq ft of office space.
One of them was Barclays, the UK bank which is also one of the leading
lenders to the project.
One of Mr Reichmann's concerns in his comeback effort is that he may be
outbid by another party, such as Hanson, the Anglo-US conglomerate which has
indicated it is considering a bid.
Ernst & Young said yesterday that no more than 'half a dozen serious players
worldwide' would be interested in rescuing the project.
The administrators said the project had so far cost Pounds 1.5bn. Unsecured
creditors, including building contractors, are owed Pounds 50m.
Prospects for project, Page 4
Civil servants protest over move to Docklands, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920606

