FT923-6479

FT  24 AUG 92 / International Company News: Ciba-Geigy gains 12% in opening
term


   By IAN RODGER


CIBA-GEIGY, the Swiss chemicals and pharmaceuticals group, said its
consolidated net profit in the first half rose 12 per cent to SFr1.4bn
(Dollars 1.06bn) on sales also up 12 per cent to SFr12.26bn, and forecast
'further profit growth during the second half of the year'. Cash flow
increased 11 per cent to SFr2.03bn.
The strong performance was attributable mainly to the rapid advance of the
group's pharmaceutical division where sales jumped 23 per cent to SFr3.2bn.
The group claimed this growth was twice as fast as that in the market as a
whole and enabled it to move up one rank to become the world's fourth
largest supplier of pharmaceuticals.
Ciba cited the successful US introduction of its transdermal patch,
Nicotinell TTS/Habitrol, in the division's growth. US sales of the patches
exceeded SFr400m in the first half. Although competition was increasing and
'proper patient usage' was needed, the group said the patches and a new
menopausal drug, Estracomb TTS, would continue to fuel growth through
introduction in other countries.
The group's agricultural sectors fared less well. Plant protection sales
were flat at SFr2.8bn, hurt by a spring drought in many parts of Europe and
changing buying patterns due to changes in EC agricultural policy.
Industrial product sales gained 10 per cent to SFr4.6bn and the group said
margins were improving. Growth for the remainder of the year was expected to
be driven by sales in the US and Asia, especially of textile dyes, chemicals
and additives and pigments.
Ciba pointed out that once again its sales figures were flattered by a
weakening Swiss franc. In local currencies, its overall sales growth was
only 8 per cent. Since the beginning of the year, the group has set a goal
of hedging against potential negative currency effects its total anticipated
consolidated profit. Previously, it hedged only the net cash flow exposure
flowing to the parent company.
As a result, it said the expected consolidated profit for 1992 was projected
at a rate of about SFr1.5 to the US dollar.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920824

