FT924-11991

FT  22 OCT 92 / Survey of Leman Region (4): Deep roots in Lausanne / Profile
of Bobst


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


BOBST, the world leader in cardboard packaging machinery, started life just
over 100 years ago as a humble print supplies shop in Lausanne. Although it
now employs 5,400 people worldwide, production continues to be centred in
Lausanne, almost all of it for export.
Like many Swiss companies, the original family remains intimately involved
in the company's affairs. Descendants of the founder, Joseph Bobst, and his
son, Henri, retain a majority shareholding with two other families. Mr Bruno
de Kalbermatten, company president, is Henri Bobst's son-in-law. Of the nine
executive directors, four are family members.
It was Henri Bobst who, in 1940, invented the first automated die-cutting
press for making cardboard boxes. The company now makes machinery for
manufacturing and printing cardboard and paper packaging of every shape and
size, from the famous triangular Toblerone boxes and cigarette packets to
corrugated casings for safe delivery of domestic appliances.
Last year, Bobst had a worldwide turnover of SFr1.13bn, while consolidated
net earnings were up 18 per cent to SFr71m despite the global recession.
Although growth has slowed this year, the company is still predicting
satisfactory results for 1992 - in sharp contrast to the difficulties now
being experienced by many other Swiss machinery manufacturers.
Two-thirds of Bobst's sales go to Europe, with North America accounting for
10-20 per cent. Bobst has dominated the market in these countries for
high-performance, extremely reliable machines, and some 8-9 per cent of
turnover is spent on research and development.
However, the group is also expanding its medium-price product range of
simpler machines. This is partly to tap growing markets in the developing
world - a quarter of worldwide sales last year - and partly to serve
increasing demand in the industrialised countries from recession-hit or
smaller companies seeking a cheaper alternative. Nearly half Bobst's total
sales last year were of medium-priced machines.
Bobst's global network is chiefly focused on sales and after-sales service.
Although the group has machining and assembly plants in the US, Brazil and
Japan, these are intended chiefly to maintain a notional manufacturing
presence in these markets. In Europe, Bobst has affiliates in France,
Germany, Denmark and Italy, bought as going manufacturing concerns with
their own distinct product ranges. Some 60 per cent of the group's total
production by value is still based in Lausanne.
Family links as well as tradition clearly give the company deep roots in
Lausanne and, more generally, in the Canton of Vaud. However, Mr Andreas
Koopmann, Bobst's production director - with no family connections - says
there are also economic advantages.
Chief among these is a highly skilled workforce. 'Even the simplest of our
packaging machines has 21,000 parts', says Mr Koopmann. 'Our production
requires a lot of technical know-how.' He says the Swiss apprenticeship and
technical schools system 'gives us the people we need'.
Mr Koopmann also cites Lausanne's central position in Europe, where most of
Bobst's production goes, good communications and Switzerland's tradition of
labour peace. Taxes are relatively low, the economy prosperous despite a
nasty recession, and the quality of life is high.
There are also disadvantages. Costs are high, not only for labour but for
land, buildings and energy. Bobst faces a constant battle to curb costs,
making full use of techniques such as 'just-in-time' stock control, and has
recently introduced 'work islands' or autonomous teams that have enabled it
to reduce support staff and boost productivity.
Another problem has been recruitment of qualified workers in tight labour
market conditions, although current high unemployment means this is not the
constraint it was.
Perhaps most importantly, the political and planning environment is not very
encouraging for industry wanting to establish or expand. Bobst's French
affiliate, S. A. Martin, recently built a new factory in the Lyon area. From
purchase of the land to completion of the building took 18 months, including
obtaining planning permission for re-zoning. A comparable exercise in Vaud
could take four to eight years, says Mr Koopmann.
Bobst has no intention of uprooting from Lausanne, or shifting more
production abroad. But like most successful Swiss exporters, the company is
a staunch supporter of closer European integration through the European
Economic Area (EEA) and eventual Swiss membership of the European Community.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

921022

