FT921-14207

FT  17 JAN 92 / Wily Shamir's coalition on last legs: Disappointment at
partners' resignation may belie Likud gains


   By HUGH CARNEGY


AFTER a brief but eventful life of almost 20 months, the coalition
government habitually labelled the most extreme in Israel's history looks to
be on its last legs.
As is often the case with Mr Yitzhak Shamir, the wily prime minister, it was
hard to tell yesterday whether he was happy or sad.
Officially, he was said to be disappointed that Tehiya and Moledet, two
extreme rightwing partners in the coalition led by his Likud party, had
decided to quit.
Their action was in protest against offering a limited form of
self-government to the Palestinians of the occupied territories in the
current Middle East peace process.
The coalition, of right-wing and religious parties, weathered the Gulf
crisis and presided over a huge influx of Jewish immigrants from the former
Soviet Union.
Above all, from the point of view of Likud ideology, it produced an
unprecedented expansion of Jewish settlement in the occupied territories
while simultaneously achieving Middle East peace talks largely on its own
terms.
It might seem that Mr Shamir would want to continue such an arrangement
until the due date for a general election in November.
However, there are clear reasons why he may be quite happy if it indeed
collapses early next week.
Mr Shamir has the option of running a minority government that might survive
until November. But his aides say he would prefer an early election, given
that Likud is well ahead of the opposition Labour party in the polls.
The faltering economy could well be in worse shape in November and an early
poll would pre-empt attempts by rivals within Likud to challenge Mr Shamir's
supremacy.
Freed of the far right, Mr Shamir may find it easier to reach agreement with
the US on Dollars 10bn in loan guarantees - due to be settled over the next
few weeks - which are of great importance to the immigration-burdened
economy.
Meanwhile, by continuing the peace talks, he could present himself to the
electorate as a leader who sacrificed his government for the sake of the
peace process, undermining opposition claims that the Likud is not serious
about the negotiations.
There are, however, flaws in this scheme of things. Under Israeli
parliamentary law, Mr Shamir cannot call an election without winning a
majority to do so in the Knesset. For this he is seeking Labour party
co-operation to engineer a date in the late spring or summer - but Labour
will want to exact a price for its help.
Mr Shamir also faces a dilemma over the loan guarantees. The Likud cannot
lightly give in to the main US condition that Israel curb settlements in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip - something which Mr Shamir has resolutely refused,
to date.
But with an election pending, the leverage President George Bush can exert
on Mr Shamir through the loan guarantee issue is undoubtedly enhanced. A
serious clash with the US, with which relations have already deteriorated
during the life of the present government, would not go down well with most
Israelis who fear both the political and economic consequences.
A significant shortfall in the amount requested would seriously jeopardise
Israel's ability to borrow large amounts elsewhere and would almost
certainly trigger unpopular compensatory measures at home, such as tax rises
and expenditure cuts, at a time of fast-rising unemployment and economic
hardship.
The precarious state of the economy is Labour's most promising election
weapon against Likud. But Labour has failed to mount an effective opposition
to Mr Shamir since its own grand coalition with Likud broke up two years
ago.
Before a general election takes place it is due to mount its own leadership
battle, pitting current leader Mr Shimon Peres against Mr Yitzhak Rabin, a
former prime minister, and at least two other candidates. The contest will
sharply expose to voters the deep internal splits within the party - hardly
an election -winning formula.
Mr Shamir's less than anguished reaction to the crumbling of his government
stems from his confidence that he holds most of the cards in the domestic
political poker game that will ensue in the coming weeks.
However, the joker in the pack for him may prove to be the issue of the loan
guarantees held firmly in the grasp of President Bush.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Photograph Political poker game, Shamir, in Jerusalem
yesterday, could face early elections (Omitted).

920117

