FT922-3952

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (8): The last of the Bay's
heroes - History


   By BERNARD SIMON


MERCHANT PRINCES by Peter C Newman Viking, Pounds 20, 448 pages
THE QUALITY of The Hudson Bay Company's latter-day management was brought
home to its fur-trading veterans when they gathered on the auction floor of
Beaver House in London one evening in January 1988 to mourn the sale of the
fur business which had sustained their venerable company for the previous
318 years. As one participant remembered the evening, 'the greetings from
head office in Canada were as they had been for some years previous - zero.'
Such incidents - there are many more - raise a question mark over the title
of this third, and final, volume of the history of North America's oldest
company. Most of the men who have run The Hudson's Bay Company for the past
100 years have displayed neither the talent nor the glamour worthy of
Merchant Princes. One lost opportunity after another has diminished The Bay
over the past century from the colourful Company of Adventurers, who roamed
over a twelfth of the earth's surface trading furs, into a rather dull (and
not very profitable) collection of Canadian department stores.
The fur-trading business has been sold. So have the remote trading outposts
 -now mostly supermarkets - where The Bay's Factors introduced Indians and
Eskimos to the joys and sorrows of western civilisation. An oil and gas
business with vast reserves was sadly neglected before it too was eventually
put on the block. Even the department stores which now make up the rump of
the company have been in turmoil for years.
Just as it took The Bay more than a decade to capitalise on the booming
market in Arctic fox at the beginning of this century, its retail executives
hesitated in the 1950s and '60s to join the rush into suburban shopping
malls. The rather unremarkable qualities of most of the men who oversaw the
shift from fur trading to department stores have clearly given Newman, a
veteran Canadian business journalist, less material to work with for this
volume than for the previous two, Company of Adventurers and Caesars of the
Wilderness.
There are two notable exceptions. The Bay was brought into the 20th century
under the stewardship of the wily Donald Smith, who was propelled in middle
age from his fur trading outpost in Labrador to become, as Lord Strathcona,
one of the company's longest-serving Governors.
While in Labrador, Smith had the HBC's supply ship bring him a year's supply
of The Times on its annual visit. He made a point of reading each paper over
breakfast precisely one year after publication. In later years, Strathcona
celebrated milestones in his career, such as his peerage, by remarrying his
wife - four times altogether.
The Bay's present controlling shareholder, the second Lord Thomson of Fleet,
is also no run-of-the-mill businessman. Although now in his late 60s,
Thomson (or simply Ken, as he prefers to be known in Canada) still lives in
the shadow of his lively, newspaper-proprietor father.
The younger Thomson has always shown more interest in his dog and his
collection of Cornelius Krieghoff paintings than in his business
investments. To save money, the world's eighth richest man has his hair cut
by his wife; he saves on electricity bills by eating in the kitchen of his
Toronto mansion.
One theory suggests that Thomson hit on the idea of buying The Bay one night
while walking his beloved dog, Gonzo, through a park near his home. The most
visible object from the park is The Bay's ochre neon sign on its head office
building a few blocks away.
The Bay will probably be led into the 21st century by Ken Thomson's eldest
son, David, whose attention has so far been focused as much on the painter
John Constable as on the family businesses. Judging by Newman's description
of David Thomson as 'an improbable mixture of introspective genius and
post-industrial babble', the chances seem slim that anyone will find enough
material for a fourth best-selling volume on the venerable Hudson's Bay
Company.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920609

