FT924-6235

FT  23 NOV 92 / The ERM Realignment: Portuguese dragged in by Spain's
devaluation


   By PETER BRUCE, PETER WISE and REUTER


   MADRID, LISBON


THE PORTUGUESE do not have much time for their big, brash, deficit-ridden
neighbour on the Iberian peninsula. But Lisbon has never been able to do
much about the fact that Spain is now their biggest export market, consuming
about 20 per cent of what Portugal has to sell abroad.
This weekend Portugal paid dearly for that, as a nervous Madrid asked the
European Community's monetary committee to devalue the peseta 6 per cent in
the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System. Portugal, its
exporters already squeezed by a 5 per cent devaluation of the peseta during
the EC currency crisis in September, had little choice but to let the escudo
fall 6 per cent as well to maintain the status quo.
It has left a bitter aftertaste with Portugal's Prime Minister, Mr Anibal
Cavaco Silva. 'We did not need any devaluation,' he said yesterday. 'The
escudo survived without any problems the foreign exchange crisis on Friday.'
But the peseta did not. The Bank of Spain spent Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.9bn)
supporting the currency last week after the Swedish government's attempt to
shadow the ERM failed - at a reported cost to the Swedish central bank of
around Dollars 25bn - last Thursday. Spain's finance minister, Mr Carlos
Solchaga, calculated that he had precious little time to act before
speculators turned again on the peseta.
The lessons of September still burn fiercely in Madrid. 'Solchaga didn't
want to be put in a situation where he was throwing foreign reserves away to
defend an overvalued currency,' said Mr Jaime de Pinies, head of research at
Banco Santander de Negocios yesterday. 'The Swedish failure must have scared
the daylights out of the Bank of Spain.'
Indeed, while Spain still has foreign reserves of around Dollars 53bn, Mr
Solchaga has contributed to further speculative pressure by suggesting for
two months that he would allow a further devaluation of the Spanish currency
as part of a wider realignment.
As it turned out, he could not wait. The government faces elections in the
next 11 months and a sharp fall in GDP growth (to under 1 per cent in the
third quarter), constant skirmishing with the unions and polls showing the
ruling Socialist party vote dropping sharply. A second peseta crisis could
have ruinously undermined domestic and foreign confidence.
Analysts in Madrid were at least applauding the government for agreeing to
follow the devaluation with an immediate withdrawal of a series of capital
controls imposed in September and designed to dissuade speculation. They
stopped the peseta falling through its ERM floor but also angered investors
attracted to Spain after it scrapped all exchange controls earlier this
year.
But with the artificial peseta floor provided by the controls removed,
Madrid is anxiously waiting to see what the markets do to the currency today
and tomorrow. Will a further 6 per cent prove to have been enough?
Government officials and Mr Solchaga said they believed it would.
The inflationary effects of the devaluation are hard to judge. Some analysts
yesterday predicted possible interest rate rises to dissuade employers from
using a cheaper peseta simply to boost exports while the domestic economy
cools and to stop concentrating on slowing wage growth.
The government has always said industry could no longer rely on competitive
devaluations to get it out of trouble at home, but the effect of the
devaluations in September and this weekend may be to do just that. Spain
stood firm for 10 years, following devaluations in 1959, 1967, 1976, 1977
and 1982. But including the two devaluations, the peseta has fallen about 15
per cent against the D-Mark since the summer.
Madrid's only guarantee of keeping inflation in check now - following a
welcome fall last month to 5.2 per cent - is to stick firmly to the tight
fiscal and deficit cutting targets in the 1993 budget, but many doubt it can
do so in an election year, when spending normally rises.
Portugal has been much more virtuous, fiscally, than Spain, which will only
add to irritation in the Lisbon government. Portugal has almost full
employment (Spain has 18 per cent unemployment) and the Portuguese finance
minister, Mr Jorge Braga de Macedo, was only last week boasting that
devaluations were 'proof of the inability of governments to conceive of and
execute a credible policy programme'. Portuguese officials had even been
suggesting that by not following the peseta down, the country might be able
to diversify its trade and end dependence on Spain.
Lisbon will be particularly irritated by the message the escudo devaluation
will send to exporting employers, as the government is setting a tough
4.5-5.5 per cent target in public-sector wage talks, which act as a
guideline to the private industry.
But Portuguese exporters welcomed the escudo's fall, saying they still hoped
for more. And Mr Victor Constancio, a Socialist opposition economist, said:
'After failing to accompany the September devaluation of the peseta,
Portugal could no longer refuse to follow the depreciation of the weaker
southern currencies without losing credibility.'
Perhaps, but it hurts in Lisbon nevertheless.
The new peseta parity in the ERM is set at 72.79 to the D-Mark, against
68.42 before, as a result of the devaluation, the Economy Ministry said,
Reuter reports from Madrid.
It said the new upper limit within its 6 per cent fluctuation band is 68.55
pesetas, against 64.43 previously, and its lower limit 77.28 against 72.62.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921123

