FT924-12210

FT  22 OCT 92 / Moslem and Croat clash halts airlift


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


THE United Nations yesterday suspended the international airlift to Sarajevo
as fighting broke out between Moslems and Croats north-west of the besieged
Bosnian capital.
UN officials said the clashes between troops who had been nominal allies in
the Bosnian conflict threatened the safety of flight paths used by relief
aircraft. They said it was uncertain when deliveries of food and medicine
would resume.
The suspension of flights came after the UN stopped road convoys from Split.
The only land access route now is from Belgrade.
Any prolonged suspension of relief flights will exacerbate the deteriorating
food situation in Sarajevo. The city's main flour mill was hit by four tank
rounds, destroying a key food source for the 380,000 people trapped for
seven months by a Serbian siege. An apparent dispute over the control of
Vitez, 60 miles north-west of Sarajevo, led to the collapse of the fragile
alliance between Moslems and Croats.
Croatian radio said five Croat soldiers and 17 civilians had been killed
when the two forces, formerly united against Serb fighters, clashed in the
mostly Moslem town in Croat-controlled territory. The UN sent an armed
convoy to Vitez to rescue relief workers.
Meanwhile western embassies in Belgrade yesterday accused Serbian President
Slobodan Milosevic of failing to condemn ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, and
warned that UN sanctions would not be lifted until violence in Bosnia stops.
A statement by the EC, the US, and the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), accused Mr Milosevic of not using his
influence to press Bosnian Serb forces into stopping ethnic cleansing or
atrocities in Bosnia. It warned that sanctions would not be lifted from
Yugoslavia until ethnic cleansing was reversed, and asked: 'What has Mr
Milosevic done to stop paramilitary fighters.'
It criticised Mr Milosevic for failing to dissociate himself publicly from
ethnic cleansing.
'The governments are appalled at the continuing evidence of human rights
abuses and ethnic cleansing in Bosnia-Hercegovina,' it added. The letter
named Bosnian Serb forces, who control 70 per cent of Bosnian territory, as
the 'principal offenders'.
It warned Mr Milosevic to heed the UN Security Council resolution on war
crimes of October 6, urging him to endorse publicly a commission of experts
who would 'ensure those responsible come to justice'.
Reuter adds from Vienna: Yugoslav Prime Minister Milan Panic said yesterday
he plans to hold a general election on December 13 to elect new federal and
regional parliaments and presidents. However, it is unclear whether Mr Panic
has the constitutional power to call elections.
Nato defence ministers meeting in Gleneagles, Scotland, yesterday said they
were ready to offer more help to the UN to bring peace to former Yugoslavia.
The ministers agreed to draw up military plans for a new peacekeeping role
by the end of the year. The alliance and the Western European Union have
sent warships to the Adriatic to monitor UN sanctions on Serbia.
Nato is also using Awacs surveillance aircraft planes to monitor airspace
over Bosnia.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921022

