FT921-11900

FT  29 JAN 92 / Hanson shuts door on bid for ICI


   By ROLAND RUDD


LORD HANSON yesterday relin-quished his right to bid for ICI for the
foreseeable future when he told his annual general meeting that Hanson had
no plans to acquire the chemicals giant.
It was the first time since Hanson took its 2.8 per cent stake in ICI last
May that its chairman, Lord Hanson, firmly shut the door on launching a bid
for the chemicals group.
He told Hanson shareholders: 'We have never said we would bid for ICI - that
was all media speculation and market rumour - and we have no plans to do so
now.'
The Takeover Panel on mergers and acquisitions said that Lord Hanson's
statement was 'unambiguous' and therefore prevented the conglomerate from
making a bid for a 'considerable period of time'.
Only a 'material change' in ICI's circumstances would give Hanson the right
to try to acquire the chemicals company. A spokesman for the panel added
that even if there was a significant fall in ICI's profits for the year to
December 31, 1991 - to be announced on February 27 - this would not
constitute a material change in circumstances.
According to Hanson's advisers, Lord Hanson decided to rule out a bid for
ICI after he received scores of written questions from shareholders
concerning the group's investment in the chemicals company.
Lord Hanson told shareholders that he believed ICI had 'lost a great
opportunity' in refusing to talk with him. He added: 'As ICI's second
biggest shareholder we will continue to watch its progress with great
interest and affection.' ICI's shares fell just 2p to Pounds 12.67 on the
news that Hanson would not bid.
In response to a question about who would succeed him as chairman, Lord
Hanson could not resist blaming the media for speculation on the possible
heir apparent. 'The media believe that some talented executive should be
brought in for a huge fee . . . We have the succession. We just don't plan
to name it at this time.'
He said that Lord White, head of Hanson Industries in the US, would not
become a member of the board because he was chairman of Hanson's American
arm. 'It would not be best served by being directed from Britain,' he added.
Charges against Lord White, 68, who was accused of assaulting his girlfriend
Miss Victoria Tucker, the 29-year-old former model, on a skiing trip last
year in Aspen, Colorado, were dropped yesterday after she withdrew her
allegation.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920129

