FT923-6605

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: Still reigning after all these years - Screen


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


FOR a moment Gene Kelly, possessed by recall, looks about 29. He reminisces:
'When we all worked together at MGM, we were an angry young group of people,
because musicals up to that time had been looked down on. Every good
director would say, 'Oh, one day I'll have some fun and make a musical.' And
some of them tried it and their films went right in the bucket. But making a
musical and not just having people yell at each other - not having them say
'I love you' and then burst into song  - that was hard work and it was new.'
So was Gene Kelly 50 years ago, and even newer 80 years ago. The man who
battles Fred Astaire for the title of American cinema's greatest
singer-dancer was born on August 23 1912. And back in 1942 a newcomer with
St Vitus feet and a head-cold singing voice came to MGM to make his first
musical.
Kelly became the most important thing that ever happened to that form.
Before him - before On The Town and An American in Paris and Singin' In The
Rain - song-and-dance movies, when not backstage stories, were about high
society folk kicking up their heels between Long Island parties. The
Astaire-Rogers films, shot in black and white like old New Yorker cartoons
come to life, set the style.
In came Kelly and MGM and almost overnight musicals were multi-coloured and
so were their social spectrums. 'The big difference between me and Fred -
and we always got angry when critics said we were like two peas in a pod -
is that in his musicals everyone was always rich. Even if they did a
divertissement with poor people, they all had tailored clothes] It was like
Lana Turner in The Postman Always Rings Twice: she had an apron designed by
Givenchy or someone. It was a whole different age.'
Some filmgoers, myself included, do not go back to the Astaire age, except
via TV re-showings in which the Incredible Stick Insect and Ginger dance
everywhere from bandstands to banana boats. I like Top Hat and Roberta, but
I grew up with Kelly's films and like them more. Postwar baby-boomers
preferred their musicals grounded in a real world with real colours and
characters.
Kelly today - we met at his modest but maximum-security hacienda off Sunset
Boulevard - is a gracious, fatherly gent with a cardigan and balding
no-toupee pate. The tenor-adenoidal voice is hoarser than when it sang in
the rain back in 1952, but it still transmits tremors of recognition:
especially when, to illustrate the genesis of the musical cinema's
best-known solo number, Kelly breaks into the vamp from Singin' In The Rain.
'Do-de-do-doo-do-de-doo-de-do-doo. . . That was Roger's idea' - Roger Edens,
MGM music arranger - 'and it gave me the 'in' to the number that I wanted. I
can't escape that song. It's become a classic, and I'm deeply grateful for
that.'
Singin' In The Rain - chalk up another birthday, it is 40 this year - has
topped poll after poll as everyone's favourite screen musical. But neither
the project's starting point, a bunch of old Arthur Freed songs in search of
a script, nor the title song itself seemed promising back in 1952.
'It was an old Freed number and it had been used three times before on
screen and never worked, so I thought it was jinxed. Arthur came up to me
one day and said, 'How you gonna do it?'. I said, 'I don't know, but I'll be
singing and dancing and it'll be raining.'
'Well, it took 10 days to rehearse and we shot it in one and a half. People
don't believe we could do it that fast, because we had to back-light the
rain, and have puddles dug, and cue each effect to the music. Plus, I had a
fever and a bad cold, and it was scorching hot outside. We were working on
the backlot under these big tarpaulins and the rain was coming out of hoses.
I didn't enjoy it, but I knew what I had to do.'
I suspect he did enjoy it. Kelly's powers of recall today are fond and
focused, and he jumps on any memory-error perpetrated by former colleagues.
When I tell him about Debbie Reynolds' claims that Kelly, first, did not
want her in Singin' In The Rain and, second, put her through hell in the
rehearsal room he answers: 'Wholecloth]' (A favourite Kelly term of scorn).
'Both Stanley (Donen, co-director) and I saw straight away that Debbie was a
pretty girl and bright as a whip. She wasn't a great tap dancer - she was
only 18 - but she worked hard and faked well. As for training, Debbie says
that one day her feet bled. Well, it may be so but I never saw it. She
romances that past quite a bit.'
So much for Debbie. Kelly himself de-romances the past. The man MGM helped
turn into a superstar is startlingly casual about the studio's heyday and
its myths. On the colourful LB Mayer, for instance, whom history paints as a
non-stop despotic interventionist: 'Mayer never stepped on to a soundstage
that I recall. We were pretty much given free rein. I hardly even met him:
we used to refer to him and his executives as the Pope and the college of
Cardinals.'
So genius flourished unencumbered?
'We weren't geniuses. We were contract players just like athletes in the old
days. If there was a style to a movie or group of movies, it might come with
the individual directors like Minnelli.
'But we had, I guess, a sense of mission. We wanted to make films in which
the music was part of the plot and there was some kind of characterisation
of the actor in his numbers. In the old musicals you could take any song or
dance and put it somewhere else in the film - they often did - and even give
it to a different character.
'But if you take a musical like On The Town, which is my favourite, what we
tried to do was treat it as real. The songs and dances were part of the
story. The film was very daring for its time: we shot on location in New
York City, we had blacks and Japanese-Americans as main characters - LB
Mayer didn't like that - and we threw out the chorus line because we said,
'Well, the five leads will be the chorus.''
But there's a point beyond which you cannot go, surely, pace On The Town,
West Side Story and other gritty song-and-dance shows. The musical is a
romantic form, isn't it, even an escapist one?
'The critics like to say that: they always say, Oh musicals make no social
comment. But a good musical makes more than the deepest, dreariest drama. In
Singin' In The Rain, for instance, we took the art form of the 20th century
 -the cinema - and we told the truth about the silent era and the way sound
movies came in. Every detail was true, all the way from the broken careers
of actors whose voices couldn't make it, to those scenes of early sound
recording with mikes hidden in flower vases.
'But if you ask me if there's romance in musicals, of course there is. I
think that's why it's died as a movie form: because dance follows music, and
since the revolution of the Beatles that music has got louder and a bit more
frightening for dancers. It's very hard to say 'I love you' to modern pop
music. To the music of our generation it was easy and the dances became an
extension of that.
'Fifty years from now, that romanticism might come back. Occasionally I hear
melodic lines creeping back into a song that's half-popular. And if it does
come back, so may a new generation of trained dancers who can sing and act.
They've always been the rara avis in show business.
'When I was at MGM we tried to bring on a lot of new male dancers, because
after a while I was a bit embarrassed: I'd be 40 years old and I'd be
partnering Debbie who was 18, Leslie (Caron) who was 17. So the studio and I
collected and trained a group of young dancers who I think were the best in
the world. But the public wouldn't accept them. They would't go to the
films. Right up into the Fifties - right up almost into our fifties - they
still wanted me and Fred.'

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920822

