FT921-15259

FT  11 JAN 92 / Economic Diary


TODAY: Mr Norman Lamont, Chancellor of the Exchequer, has pre-budget
discussions at Chevening, Kent. European Community trade and farm ministers
meet in Brussels to finalise the EC position on proposed world trade deal.
MONDAY: Credit business (November). Retail sales (November - final).
European Community finance ministers meet in Brussels. Uruguay Round
negotiators return to Geneva with reponses from their governments to Gatt
chief Arthur Dunkel's blueprint for a trade pact. Finnish parliament due to
debate government report on joining the European Community. Mr Ian Maxwell
and Mr Kevin Maxwell ordered to appear before House of Commons all-party
committee looking into the conduct of pension funds.
TUESDAY: Capital issues and redemptions (December). Producer price index
numbers (December - provisional). US retail sales (December). European
Community budget council meets in Brussels. The Institute of Economic
Affairs holds state of the economy conference in London. Bank of England
petition to wind up Bank of Credit and Commerce International resumes in the
High Court.
WEDNESDAY: Quarterly analysis of bank advances (September - November).
Details of employment, unemployment, earnings, prices and other indicators.
US wholesale trade (November); business inventories/sales (November).
Deadline for European Community to recognise Yugoslav republics of Croatia
and Slovenia.
THURSDAY: Institutional investment (third quarter). Labour market
statistics: unemployment and unfilled vacancies (December - provisional);
average earnings indices (November - provisional); employment, hours,
productivity and unit wage costs; industrial disputes. Provisional figures
of vehicle production (December). US industrial production (December),
capacity utilisation (December); real earnings (December) and consumer price
index (December).
FRIDAY: Public sector borrowing requirement (December). Retail prices index
and tax and price index (December).

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920111

