FT921-12054

FT  29 JAN 92 / Leading Article: CBI adds to the gloom


THE UK economy 'is probably 'bumping along the bottom'', the Bank of England
declared back in August. Yet even the Bank has been proved over-optimistic.
Mr Lamont must now concede that there was no recovery in the second half of
last year. Moreover, employment, investment and output are still falling,
bumpily and painfully. The room for cutting interest rates may be small; but
what little there is should be taken as soon as possible.
The Treasury's optimism has been sustained by a convenient myth: that media
gloom is deepest just when the recovery is under way. But yesterday's gloomy
Confederation of British Industry survey has put the ball firmly back into
the optimists' court.
It would be wise, the cautious may argue, to view this CBI survey with a
pinch of salt. No one knows what might be influencing those who completed
it: election nerves, a desire to influence the government or the previous
night's television news. But this is not an excuse that the Treasury can
employ. The CBI has long pushed the advantages of forward-looking confidence
surveys over backward-looking official figures. But no one has more
enthusiastically backed this view than Britain's beleaguered chancellor.
Economic sense
The Treasury's faith in CBI surveys does, in fact, make good economic sense.
In recent decades, there has been a very close relationship between changes
in its business confidence index and changes in output. While the CBI's
business confidence index was rising, from - 26 in July to +2 in October,
this economic relationship also had considerable political appeal. All of
which explains why the latest fall in its confidence index, back to - 24, is
so worrying, both for the government and the economy. Taken at face value,
it suggests that manufacturing output will fall throughout the first half of
this year. The government looks set to fight an election after the longest
post-war recession, and before the recovery has begun.
This forward-looking CBI survey is already behind the times. Over the past
few months, a pall of gloom has engulfed the UK economy, matched by the rush
of economists to revise down their forecasts for 1992. It is easy to see
why: non-oil output fell in the three months to November, compared with the
previous three; retail sales fell in December and are expected to fall again
in January; high debts and painfully high real interest rates have cut
consumer confidence; even the fall in last year's trade deficit, to its
lowest level since 1986, was largely caused by depressed demand for imports.
Wreaking damage
This combination of sluggish demand and depressed animal spirits is wreaking
damage that will persist long after the election. More companies now than in
the last CBI survey are expecting to cut investment and employment this
year, citing uncertainty about demand as the main reason. The only good news
is that increases in producer costs and prices are at their lowest recorded
level in the past 30 years.
On economic grounds the case for lower interest rates is compelling. Easier
monetary policy would reduce the damage to the real economy that will be
inherited by whoever wins the election. Moreover, there is room to cut:
sterling remains more than a pfennig above its effective floor against the
D-Mark, and almost 10 pfennigs above its official floor. The government
should cut rates and sell pesetas until it is just above its official floor.
That, after all, is what wide bands are for.
Whether the government will choose to cut rates now or later is a political
judgment; it is also one entailing obvious risks. With the short-term
interest rate differential against Germany at less than 1 percentage point,
cuts might have to be reversed if sterling comes under heavy pressure. This
consideration will no doubt tempt Mr Lamont to delay any move on interest
rates until the Budget clears the way for Mr Major to declare the official
election campaign open. He would do better to cut now and, who knows, he may
even sneak a second cut in March.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920129

