FT924-12136

FT  22 OCT 92 / Search for a balance of power: A review of Britain's energy
policy must overcome past mistakes and economic constraints


   By DAVID LASCELLES


Tumultuous events have forced the government to launch a review of UK energy
policy only days after it tried to shut down half of the coal industry. But
as Mr Michael Heseltine, the president of the Board of Trade, sets about his
task he must already know that it is deeply unenviable. Few, if any, of the
possible courses of action before him are free of pain, and none are without
a heavy financial cost.
Set against the background of the UK's deeply depressed economy and the
Treasury's tight constraints on public spending, whatever answers he does
come up with will be heavily tinged by the short-term view. This augurs
badly for an industry in which time scales are measured in decades. It is
bound to go against the thrust of the government's own free market policies.
Not that Mr Heseltine has a shortage of options. As the most fuel-rich
country in Europe, the UK has the flexibility to develop an energy balance
from a wide range of sources: coal, gas, oil, nuclear, even - given the
British Isles' long coastline - wind and tidal power.
But that is not the only balance to be struck. If reversing some of the pit
closures means keeping open uneconomic mines, Mr Heseltine will also have to
decide how the extra costs are to be paid for. Will they fall on the
taxpayer, or the consumer of electricity? If the answer requires
intervention from on high, how is that to be squared with the government's
commitment to a free market? And how far can it tinker with one element of
the tightly interlinked energy balance without upsetting all the others?
Mr Heseltine's difficulties have a long history. Some of them stem from past
mistakes, such as the decision in the 1960s to develop a nuclear power
industry using the wrong technology, or a tendency to build unnecessary
power stations in order to meet a short-term expedient. But many of them
also relate to the government's own attempts to create a competitive market,
a process which still has some way to go and has accumulated its own errors.
Today, the UK has an energy market where only one fuel - oil - is relatively
free. Gas is becoming freer since privatisation and is finding a new role as
a power generation fuel, though the monopoly of British Gas remains a fact
of life in much of the market.
Electricity, privatised two years ago, is a duopoly of generators plus a
string of regional monopolies where the barriers to full competition will
only be removed in stages up to 1998. Nuclear power receives more than
Pounds 1bn a year in subsidies, but the government plans to review its
future in 1994, and phase the subsidies out by 1998.
Coal also receives heavy subsidies, though in the form of artificially high
prices from the electricity industry rather than state hand-outs. The
government's original intention was to reduce coal to a commercially viable
size next year so that it could start supplying coal at competitive prices
and keep up the steady process of deregulation. If that process is now to be
slowed, it will have knock-on effects throughout the electricity industry,
in nuclear power, and also in gas.
Mr Heseltine's real challenge is to find a way of enlarging coal's share of
the market - or at least slowing its steady decline - in a way which causes
the least damage to other sectors, particularly the electricity industry.
But he will also want to keep alive the ultimate policy goal of a
competitive market.
The main reason for coal's steady decline is its high cost - and to some
extent its dirtiness. This means that coal's immediate future depends either
on subsidy, or on driving out fuels which are even more expensive, or on
inhibiting competition from cheaper sources of power. It also means
compromises on the environmental front - which may be the easiest aspect to
the problem given the low place which greenery holds on the political agenda
in a recession.
The power industry is already buzzing with possibilities. A relatively easy
step would be for Mr Heseltine to delay the next stage in the deregulation
of the electricity industry.
At the moment, the market has two tiers: the 'free' market for large
customers using over 1MW of power a year where any supplier can compete, and
the franchise market which is the monopoly of the regional distributors, and
where most coal-based power is sold. In 1994, the threshold of the free
market is due to be lowered to 100KW - effectively extending it from the
country's 5,000 largest customers to the next 50,000.
By preserving the present structure Mr Heseltine would create more long-term
certainty, and give the regional distributors a reason to commit themselves
to buy more coal-based electricity. By one power industry estimate, he could
raise coal demand by 8m tonnes a year, enough to keep eight pits open and
save 8,000 of the 30,000 jobs at risk.
The beauty from Mr Heseltine's point of view is that the cost of this would
be hidden in higher-than-necessary household electricity bills. But it would
require him to intervene with Prof Stephen Littlechild, the electricity
market regulator, and postpone the deregulatory process, something that
could harm the electricity industry as well as the consumer.
'Competition has entered the market, and is here to stay,' said Mr Ed
Wallis, the chief executive of PowerGen yesterday. 'We would rather have
competition than direct regulatory direction.'
A further possibility would be to accelerate the retirement of the UK's
older nuclear reactors. Nuclear has grown rapidly to 20 per cent of the
market and has the advantage of not producing emissions. But it is a
loss-making industry, and for consistency's sake should be subjected to the
same discipline as coal. Closing the old reactors would create space in the
market for about 9m tonnes of coal a year at the cost of relatively few
jobs. However the substantial decommissioning costs would have to be borne
by the Treasury and would be less easy to hide. Again, it would mean
interfering with the timetable and pre-empting the long-promised 1994
nuclear review.
Although many of the problems which are currently facing the coal industry
have been blamed on the 'dash for gas' by power generators, Mr Heseltine's
ability to call a halt to this trend is limited. For one thing, the true
competitive position of gas vis-a-vis coal is hard to ascertain because the
crucial figures are closely held commercial secrets, and the case for
halting it is far from proven. Short of revoking licences for new gas power
stations, his only course of action is to intervene once again with Prof
Littlechild to enforce the electricity companies' obligations to buy power
at the best possible price. Even then, Prof Littlechild could not order the
closure of the gas stations; he could only penalise companies for using
them.
The outcome of all of this is bound to be a compromise which will save some
miners' jobs at the cost of higher tax or electricity bills. But the
exercise will not have been entirely futile if it brings greater clarity to
some of the more fundamental issues which are involved in UK energy policy.
It is already clear, for example, that trying to create a free market in
energy - one area where the UK is a world leader - is much less simple than
the government thought when it embarked on the exercise in the late 1980s.
Mr Michael Grubb, an energy expert at the Royal Institute for International
Affairs, said yesterday: 'The whole debate shows that energy cannot be
treated as an area where government has no role. It is too regulated, too
strategic, too close to the national interest.'
The two most unwelcome results of deregulation have been a surge in power
station construction to the point where the UK could have 30 per cent more
capacity than it needs, and a sharp rise in fuel imports. These both have a
similar cause: the private sector managements were unhappy with the
structure of the state-owned businesses which they inherited. They are now
taking solutions into their own hands by importing cheaper fuels than the UK
can produce itself, and developing their own power sources.
Is this the price of change, or should government take a stronger leading
role? Mr Patrick Lane of Oxford Economic Research Associates believes that
it is the inevitable result of 'holding back the water' in the energy
business. But these trends look worrying to many people and will strengthen
the case for more central direction.
Among those pressing for a more active government role are two leading
academic energy specialists, Nigel Lucas and Ian Fells, who called in a
report yesterday for the creation of an Energy Commission to assign
responsibility for planning electricity capacity and choosing fuels. They
argue for an energy policy driven by wider considerations: for example,
greater use of coal by power stations where the environmental effects can be
localised, and saving gas for other uses.
On the other hand, recent events have rekindled memories among older power
industry hands of the damage done by earlier government interventions - the
very events which gave Britain an inefficient power industry and provided
the impetus to the privatisation drive. Indeed, Mr Heseltine's efforts to
save miners' jobs may have wide public support, but they could well
introduce fresh distortions into the energy market.
'The old employment-led energy policy is reasserting itself,' says Mr
Jonathan Stern, a specialist in the gas industry. 'Keeping people in work is
a worthy aim, but I thought that the whole ethos had changed.'
Perhaps Mr Heseltine's strongest justification for trying to influence the
energy balance would be if he could come up with a good long term case for
coal. The national interest argument is certainly strong, and environmental
objections can be eased with promises of major advances in clean coal
technology. But the economic currents running in coal's favour are not
strong, at least in Europe, because of cost and the emergence of more
attractive alternatives.
'Coal is a declining fuel throughout the western world, and will continue to
be so,' says Mr Grubb. To challenge this view Mr Heseltine would have to
abandon his own claim that the economic case against coal is 'unanswerable',
and that seems most unlikely.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    UK ENERGY POLICY: TOUGH CHOICES
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Power generation fuels
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
thousand tonnes
                    1985      1990       1995est    2000est    20005est
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Coal               42,149    47,876      45,501     43,034     41,658
Oil                11,652     7,684       7,058      4,238      2,544
Gas                 1,201     1,567       5,914     14,133     18,936
Renewable & Other       0       436         424        605        885
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total              55,003    57,564      58,896     62,009     64,022
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: EC Commission
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921022

