FT923-10752

FT  29 JUL 92 / UK Company News: British Coal ready to sell smokeless fuel
side


   By ROLAND RUDD


BRITISH COAL is preparing to sell Coal Products, its smokeless fuel
business, to a single trade buyer.
The planned sale of the wholly owned subsidiary is a commercial decision by
BC, independent of the government, before the run-up to privatisation of the
corporation.
Coal Products Limited made operating profit of Pounds 2m for the year ended
March 28. Last year it had debt of Pounds 50m; it has not yet filed its
separate accounts for this year.
Anglo United, owner of Coalite smokeless fuel, is likely to be the main
contender to buy CPL.
Although Mr David McErlain, Anglo's chairman, was unavailable for comment
yesterday, he recently expressed interest in buying the business.
Mr Malcolm Edwards, BC's former commercial director who now runs his own
energy business, said: 'The price for CPL should be related to its realistic
earnings capacity and not to its inherited debt.'
BC has decided first to shut CPL's loss-making Avenue Coke and Chemical
plant near Chesterfield, which produces Sunbright fuel for the domestic
closed fire market. BC said it would be meeting with the employees on
Monday.
Anglo is likely to become an immediate beneficiary of the decision. Last
year it introduced its Blasebright product, for the domestic closed fire
market, in the expectation that BC's Chesterfield plant would close.
Anglo currently produces 20,000 tonnes of Blasebright a year, compared to
Sunbright's 320,000 tonnes.
Anglo is interested in buying CPL for two reasons. First, because it would
like to take over Phurnacite, BC's other smokeless fuel for the domestic
closed fire market, which is produced at Immingham.
Second, CPL's Coventry plant, producing Homefire fuel for the open fire
market, would make an ideal fit with Coalite.
Anglo currently produces about 400,000 tonnes of smokeless fuel for the open
fire market, about 50 per cent of its total capacity, because it believes
there is already too much capacity in the market.
The mild winter and continuing recession dented Anglo's pre-tax profits
which fell to Pounds 8.3m (Pounds 15.7m) in the year to end-March.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920729

