FT922-4387

FT  05 JUN 92 / Brazil seeks to end impasse on diversity accord


   By CHRISTINA LAMB, DAVID LASCELLES and STEPHEN FIDLER, America Editor


   RIO DE JANEIRO, LONDON


BRAZIL'S President Fernando Collor is today expected to suggest in a speech
at the Earth Summit modifications on a crucial treaty on bio-diversity that
it hopes will allow the US to sign it and thus reduce north-south divisions.
The US has caused widespread consternation and anger at the summit by saying
outright that it would not sign the accord, which deals with survival of
species.
So far there is little evidence that Mr Collor's initiative will do more
than fall on stony ground. Early this morning Mr George Bush angrily
rejected criticism of the US refusal to sign.
'I will not sign a treaty which in my view throws too many Americans out of
work,' he said.
'I have some responsibility: responsibility for a cleaner environment and
responsibility for families who want to work. . . If they don't understand
it in Rio, too bad.'
The Brazilian initiative comes just after France announced it would sign the
treaty, putting further pressure on the other two waverers, Britain and
Japan. Mrs Segolene Royal, French environment minister, said last night
France 'wanted to be a leader' and would sign all the summit's conventions.
Last night Mr Jose Goldemberg, Brazilian environment minister told Mr
William Reilly, head of the US Environmental Protection Agency, that Mr
Collor's speech would incorporate some 'suggestions' to meet US concerns.
The new effort to get the US on board came after the leaking of a memo from
Mr Reilly to the White House in which he proposed that the US suggest
modifications in the text in order to avoid being cast as a villain at the
summit.
Mr Reilly said last night the White House had rejected his suggestions and
added 'we completely rule out signing the bio-diversity treaty in its
present form. Many other countries share our view but for their own reasons
do not wish to state this publicly.'
Mr Reilly said the White House held serious doubts about the intellectual
property issues raised by the bio-diversity treaty such as the possible
patenting of genetic material.
Mr Goldemberg appeared to share some of his doubts on the treaty, asking:
'What I don't understand is why people agreed to it in Nairobi (where the
last meeting was held)'.
Japan is expected to announce next week that it will sign the bio-diversity
convention, and in London yesterday the UK government said it hoped and
expected to sign.
Britain had initialled the convention, but then had second thoughts because
of concerns that it implied an open-ended financial commitment from the
developed world.
Japan, too, shares this worry that the treaty amounts to a 'blank cheque on
aid'. Britain is seeking to ensure adequate arrangements to monitor
protection of species.
France was keen for the global community to draw up lists of the world's
species. This, however, was rejected by countries, which feared it would
encourage excessive conservation.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920605

