FT922-4346

FT  05 JUN 92 / Arts: Falstaff - Opera


   By DAVID MURRAY and RICHARD FAIRMAN


At the Coliseum Mark Elder conducts Verdi's last opera with great fluency
and even passion, though when the music must wear a magical delicacy he
achieves that too. This is a revival (with support from Mrs Donatella Flick)
of David Pountney's 1989 production. Amongst the entire cast - none of them
bad - there is a general air of eagerness to please, and they attacked the
all-in final fugue with enough exuberance to make a satisfying end. So far,
so good; but not good enough. Readers who have already booked seats may
prefer to stop reading NOW.
Marie-Jeanne Lecca's designs are as unappetising as ever. Though there are
coy hints of Elizabethanry in both the peculiar costuming and her basic set
 -a central tower which contains Falstaff's snug at the Garter Inn in its
hollow and rotates boringly, and three sides of skeletal house-fronts
numbered 1 to 8 with mail-slots - the effect is wilfully scatty. It removes
any sense of period or of place (not Windsor, not even England: Miss Lecca
hails from Romania), from an opera where those things fix the terms of the
action. By the time we get to the nocturnal denouement in Windsor Forest, it
hardly matters that the rustic spookery is rendered in pinball-era lighting
effects.
In fact the Windsor locals are garbed as Suburbanites from Hell, or from
Outer Space. The respectable 'merry wives' are squeezed into bizarre little
dresses and large bonnets, Mistress Ford's dangerously jealous husband into
a ludicrous gangster-suit which denies him either bourgeois dignity or
paternal menace. As so often now, Mistress Quickly's lower social status is
erased, though Anne Collins sings her with the right fruitiness - and as
much broad, sitcom mugging-to-the-audience as everybody else. Pountney's
great gifts as a producer have never extended to eliciting humane detail
from his operatic actors.
When Falstaff is thus reduced to featherweight farce, the subtle insights of
Verdi's masterly score cannot register. His characterisations-in-a-phrase
pale away if Falstaff is only a loon, the merry wives are never flirting
with real danger, and the young lovers' plight amounts to no more than a
temporary embarrassment about how to tell Daddy. From Malcolm Donnelly's
blunt Ford, you would never have guessed that his anguished Act 2 soliloquy
can make a powerful concert-piece.
At first sighting Benjamin Luxon's Falstaff looks ideal, but thereafter he
takes the role no further than an amiable old buffer's bemused innocence.
His reactions are never gross, nor seriously choleric; neither does he
overween or bluster. Instead of the Falstaff we know and cherish, he is
somebody quite similar but much nicer - and infinitely duller. The Luxon
baritone no longer carries a Falstaffian weight; still, it would have made a
sharper impression if his singing pitch had been less often vague or
indeterminate. Donnelly's Ford suffered from that too, and Terry Jenkins' Dr
Caius.
Susan Bullock and Yvonne Howard make sturdy merry wives, without any
shadings to notice. Alison Hagley's Nannetta looks too modern and knowing
for her music, but sings it with grace; better still her tenor swain, though
Bonaventura Bottone's visible persona - flash and spivvy, a stand-up comic -
is weirdly wrong. All the other ENO principals have been here before,
neither better nor worse.
Though turning the Verdi-Boto Falstaff back into English might seem a bonus,
the language is an insuperable problem. For all the resourceful wiles of
Amanda Holden's translation, there are just too many pungent phrases that
Verdi composed irrevocably in Italian. Syllable for syllable, they refuse to
go into natural English with anything like the pithy eloquence that inspired
Verdi's setting - but hasn't touched the performers here.
While Falstaff brings ENO's season to a close, the Royal Opera is in the
middle of its busy summer schedule, writes Richard Fairman. The production
of I Puritani, which won general approval when it opened a few weeks ago, is
still in repertory, a stalwart try at Bellini's difficult English Civil War
opera, driven along with combative vigour and not a small degree of noise
from the pit.
Into the thick of the melee for the last two performances has stepped a new
and delicate heroine Elvira. Sumi Jo has been having a busy time at Covent
Garden, first with her faultless mechanical doll Olympia in Les Contes
d'Hoffmann, then as Adina in L'elisir d'amore. The role of Elvira takes her
a lot further and, at times, right to her limit. The voice is pure but
small, and trying to dominate the ensemble at the end of Act 1 left her with
not an ounce of tone to spare.
Nevertheless, she stayed the course and used her resources cleverly to best
effect. The coloratura was fluent if not dazzling; the lyrical solos were
shaped with real musicianship, even when there was not the range of colour
or force to drive an important line home. As a petite, girlish Elvira, she
knows how to hold the stage and was by no means overshadowed by the more
domineering among her colleagues.
I Puritani does not come round often and this adds up to a decent enough
performance of it to warrant a visit. There is one last chance to catch the
show tonight.
Falstaff remains in repertory at the English National Opera to June 20

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920605

