FT924-12005

FT  22 OCT 92 / Survey of Leman Region (6): Geneva pulls them in -
International Organisations


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


In the post-Cold War world, Geneva is being forced into battle to retain its
pre-eminence as Europe's 'international' city. Swiss neutrality is no longer
a special advantage.
The political centre of Europe is shifting eastwards, boosting the claims of
rivals such as Berlin, Vienna and Prague. These and other European cities,
notably Bonn, have been trying to lure the United Nations and other
international organisations with a range of financial incentives, including
free office space and accommodation.
Geneva and the Swiss government are fighting back, with mixed success. The
loss to The Hague earlier this year of the 1,000-strong secretariat to
administer the forthcoming UN treaty outlawing chemical weapons was a big
blow. Geneva is now in competition with UN headquarters in New York for the
much smaller Commission on Sustainable Development, the body that will
follow up the ambitious agenda set at the UN 'Earth Summit' in Rio de
Janeiro last June.
Among the 15 UN organisations already based in Geneva are the UN's European
headquarters, the World Health Organisation (WHO), the International Labour
Organisation (ILO), the High Commissioner for Refugees and the World
Meteorological Organisation. The city is also home to the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(Gatt) and the European particle physics laboratory, CERN. Along the lake in
Vaud are the World-Wide Fund for Nature (WWF International) at Gland and the
International Olympic Committee in Lausanne.
Capturing and keeping UN bodies in Geneva involves high economic stakes for
both canton and region. According to the Cantonal Statistics Service, 46 per
cent of the UN's 21,700 staff live in France and spend much of their
salaries there, compared with 44 per cent who live in Geneva. Another 10 per
cent commute from Vaud.
Most of the SFr3bn spent last year by the international organisations went
to the region in salaries or payments to local companies. In all, the
international sector accounts for about 10 per cent of cantonal income and
about the same proportion of employment. When non-government organisations
and diplomats from the 131 countries with UN missions in Geneva are
included, total international employment was about 25,600 last year.
The benefits are felt indirectly, too. 'International Geneva' has pulled in
a range of private companies, research bodies and lobby groups. For Du Pont
and Glaxo, for example, proximity to the WHO was one reason for siting
international operations in Geneva.
UN meetings and conferences also generate huge amounts of business for
Geneva airport and the city's hotels, restaurants, taxis and public
transport. The 90,300 delegates who attended 1,672 UN-sponsored meetings in
Geneva last year accounted for 40 per cent of hotel bed-nights.
Geneva's principal handicap is the high cost of living, which makes it one
of Europe's most expensive cities. There is also the curious anomaly that
Switzerland is still not a UN member although it belongs to most UN
agencies. But the city and its surrounds also boast considerable advantages
as a result of the existing congregation of international organisations.
Most UN members already have representative missions in Geneva - an
important consideration for poorer, smaller countries. International
transport links and telecommunications are excellent. The city is
multilingual. The necessary infrastructure - such as conference facilities
and hotel accommodation - is in place. The proximity of related
organisations makes, at least in theory, for better co-ordination and
efficiency.
In its unusually high-profile campaign to host the Sustainable Development
Commission, the Swiss government has emphasised the large number of
environmental and related bodies which have already made the region their
home.
Swiss interest in the Sustainable Development Commission stems less from its
size - no more than 50 people - than its possible 'multiplier' effects in
making Geneva a 'world environment capital'. The government is offering to
subsidise the Commission to the tune of SFr1.5m a year for its first five
years. Like other UN bodies in Geneva, it will also be given a free site and
a subsidised loan for building by FIPOI (the Buildings Foundation for
International Organisations), which is run jointly by the canton and the
confederation. Over the past 25 years, cheap credits extended by the
foundation have totalled more than SFr750m.
The government has in addition offered the UN SFr60m towards construction of
an international environment centre which would bring together in one
building all the various UN and many non-governmental bodies now scattered
around the city and neighbouring areas.
The Swiss even have the perfect building in mind - the lakeside Palais
Wilson, first seat of the pre-war League of Nations, which is due for
reconstruction after being partly destroyed by fire in 1987.
Heading the Swiss campaign is Mr Jurg Leutert, of the directorate for
international organisations in the Swiss Foreign Ministry. He and other
Swiss officials have visited some 50 capitals in recent weeks to drum up
support for Geneva, emphasising not only financial incentives but also
Geneva's independence from the political imbroglio of the UN in New York.
'If countries want a strong independent Commission, they should decide on
Geneva', Mr Leutert says.
Despite support from, among others, the US and the Arab League, Mr Leutert
puts Geneva's chances at no more than 50-50 when the decision comes before
the UN General Assembly in New York early in November. UN cost-paring, as
well as politics, may decide the outcome. On that decision may also hang the
future location of another, even smaller, offshoot of Rio, the secretariat
for the convention on biodiversity, where Geneva is in competition with
Seville.
Mr Leutert says that even if Geneva loses the fight for the Sustainable
Development Commission, the environment centre will still go ahead. And Mr
Michel Constantin, director of FIPOI, is confident that international
organisations already in Geneva will not leave whatever the temptations
elsewhere. It would simply cost too much to do so, he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

921022

