FT921-619

FT  28 MAR 92 / Brazilian accord cuts car prices by 22%


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


   BRASLIA


BRAZILIAN car prices were reduced 22 per cent yesterday as a result of
successful negotiations between the government, vehicle and parts
manufacturers and union representatives.
This is the government's first major step towards reaching a social pact
believed necessary for the success of its economic stabilisation plan and is
an astonishing breakthrough in the effort to reduce monthly inflation,
currently running at 21 per cent. The government hopes to repeat this
victory in other sectors, and will begin talks with the textile industry
next month.
Under the accord, reached late on Thursday night, the government has agreed
to lower state and federal taxes by 12 percentage points in return for a 7.5
per cent cut in profit margins by manufacturers and a 2.5 per cent cut by
dealers. Workers have agreed to delay a pay rise due next month until July
in return for guaranteed job stability.
The move is of particular significance because of the prominence of the
Brazilian motor industry, which is dominated by Autolatina (a joint venture
between Ford and Volkswagen), General Motors and Fiat. It accounts for more
than 10 percent of GDP and generates around 4m jobs. Protected from foreign
competition since the 1950s, manufacturers have been able to raise prices
way above inflation.
Although President Fernando Collor ended the ban on car imports when he took
office in March 1990, import duties remain a stiff 50 per cent and despite
the country's recession Brazilian car prices have risen an average 42 per
cent in dollar terms in the last 15 months according to the Federation of
Vehicle Distributors.
As a consequence sales have fallen drastically and Mr Collor's recent
announcement of a cut in import tariffs - to 40 per cent from October -
finally forced the manufacturers to the negotiating table to discuss how the
notoriously inefficient industry could survive in the face of foreign
competition.
In a series of sectoral meetings headed by Ms Dorothea Werneck, the national
economy secretary, the manufacturers complained that they had been
handicapped by the country's import ban on information technology and by
taxes of 43 per cent - a level they claim to be the world's highest.
The aim of the accord, which will run for a 90-day trial period, is to step
up sales and efficiency. The government also agreed to put forward a
programme of fiscal incentives and subsidised credit to stimulate exports,
while car producers pledged to invest Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.8bn) over four
years.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920328

