FT923-9771

FT  03 AUG 92 / Fiscal boost is sought to spur economy


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Correspondent


THE GOVERNMENT is urged today to consider fiscal stimulus for the economy,
including help for the housing market, amid forecasts that output may
contract by about 1 per cent this year.
In separate reports, Oxford Economic Forecasting, an independent economic
research company, and Midland Montagu, the investment bank, forecast that
British gross domestic product will fall by 1.1 per cent and 1 per cent
respectively this year.
In its latest Economic and Financial Outlook, National Westminster Bank
predicts a 0.3 per cent drop in UK GDP this year, compared with the
government's Budget forecast of 1 per cent growth.
Both OEF and NatWest advocate temporary fiscal expansion to cope with the
recession.
Mr David Kern, NatWest's chief economist, said the government should
'seriously consider higher public spending on infrastructure and specific
help for the housing market' as a way to regain the political initiative and
to counter the criticisms of UK membership of the European exchange rate
mechanism.
The Oxford forecasting team suggests that the government should re-examine
the nature and composition of its fiscal policy instead of simply defining
it in terms of the PSBR and the medium-term aim of balancing the budget. The
outlook for public infrastructure investment - which it described as a
proven pump primer for the construction sector - appeared especially bleak
at present, it commented.
The OEF report advocates a stimulus to the housing market through relaxing
controls on the supply of building land.
The report urges the government to look at ways of promoting private-sector
investment in market-oriented ways. One way would be through an
across-the-board subsidy to 'demonstrably new projects started in the next
six to 12 months' to compensate for the high level of interest rates.
The OEF warns that a realignment involving a devaluation of the pound would
not cure the UK economy's ills. It would not lead to lower interest rates
and would fail to give a sufficient boost to exports.
In his report, Mr Roger Bootle, Midland Montagu's chief economist, says
there may be a radical shift of government policy aimed at achieving lower
interest rates after the end of the UK's six-month EC presidency if the
government is unable to deliver sharply lower rates within the ERM
constraints. Mr Bootle said markets should expect the government to attempt
a 'radical breakout' in policy next year if UK inflation is low, there is no
UK recovery in sight and no meaningful cut in German interest rates is in
prospect.
Economics Notebook, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920803

