FT922-4426

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (16): Plans to redraw map - Regional
development


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


'IN THE 1970s, it was a fantastic offer to establish here,' says Mr Hermann
Dedekind, manager of Springbok Clothing, one of the tenants of the Babelegi
industrial estate in the nominally independent black homeland of
Bophuthatswana.
'But now you really wonder if it's worth it to come here. If it hadn't been
for the huge incentives of the 1970s, we wouldn't have come,' he concludes,
passing judgment on the policy of industrial decentralisation which was a
cornerstone of apartheid, and one of its most costly legacies.
For the aim of apartheid - euphemistically known as 'separate development' -
was to remove all blacks from South Africa to designated black 'homelands'
where they would pursue their own separate tribal nationhood. But
apartheid's planners knew that blacks would not remain segregated in the
homelands without jobs; so they spent billions of rands to persuade white
businesses to set up, either in the homelands or on their borders, to help
develop them into viable economic units. The idea was to give the homelands
an economic as well as political rationale for existence.
Now the sinister political motive which spurred industrial decentralisation
has been abandoned, but the problem of developing remote areas which are
home to half the black population remains as acute as ever - perhaps more
so, as the African National Congress (ANC) and the government are committed
to helping those most disadvantaged under apartheid.
'Forty per cent of our people reside in overcrowded and underdeveloped rural
slums,' says a recent ANC document on regional policy. 'They will, along
with all their compatriots, be important voices in the land . . . Their
demand for roads, electricity, water, rural extension services, schooling,
clinics, cinemas, swimming pools and running tracks will be strong.'
And as both parties favour a strong regional bias to the constitution -
Pretoria wants a federal constitution, while the ANC favours a unitary state
with significant regional autonomy - the issue of regional development will
remain a vexed one. The government has already proposed redrawing the map of
South Africa to include nine development regions, rather than the present
four provinces. The ANC largely agrees, though it proposes a tenth region.
Uncontrolled urbanisation could well frighten a new government into making
decentralised development a priority. For South African cities are already
struggling - and in most cases failing - to provide accommodation and jobs
for millions of immigrants from the rural areas. By 2010, the Urban
Foundation, a business-funded think tank, believes black urbanisation will
reach 68 per cent, adding 14m to the urban total. Any new government may
well be tempted to try to stem this flow, which would overwhelm urban
infrastructure, by investing in development away from the main urban
centres.
Indeed, in a recent document the ANC says its aim is to promote 'a more
balanced pattern of industrialisation capable of overcoming the current
acute over-concentration of economic activity in certain urban areas'.
But as the National party can tell them, this is dangerous ground. According
to a government study published by the Development Bank of Southern Africa
in 1990, the so-called Regional Industrial Development Programme was costly,
inefficient, and failed to stimulate 'self-sustaining growth and coherent
regional development'. The programme involved a range of extremely lucrative
incentives to attract industry to remote regions, or to areas on the edge of
existing metropolises - but always in or next to a homeland. The incentives
included transport rebates, subsidised power, housing loans, provision of
infrastructure, loans for capital requirements, interest rate subsidies, and
a cash incentive in some cases equal to 80 per cent of the wage bill.
The Development Bank study found that the number of jobs created was
'relatively insignificant', that 74 per cent of firms which benefited from
the incentives were unprofitable, and that the system was subject to
widespread abuse.
The Urban Foundation, in a separate report, concluded that it cost three to
four 3-4 times as much to create one job under the programme as in the
cities.
Last year, government reacted to these criticisms by scaling down the
programme, and introducing much more modest market-related incentives. But
the cost of the failed policy will remain a drain on the budget for years to
come: R764m is budgeted this year for continuing payments under the old
scheme (which will decline over time but remain high for years to come); and
the new scheme is budgeted to cost up to R500m a year.
The risk is that the ANC, if it controlled the government, might also be
tempted to adopt an interventionist industrial strategy which could prove
equally unsuccessful. For the Urban Foundation's conclusion is that the
industrial decentralisation scheme did not fail simply because of its
dubious political motivation, but because such a strategy is fundamentally
flawed.
'The international evidence suggests that the best policies for dealing with
such problems are to re-organise the way in which the cities are run rather
than attempt to stop their growth,' the Foundation suggests. It advocates a
regional policy based on exploiting the comparative advantages of regions in
all economic sectors - not just industry, but tourism, agriculture and
especially services - coupled with direct targeting of assistance to the
poor.
So while negotiations will eventually solve the political problem of the
homelands - most will be re-incorporated, though Bophuthatswana may seek
autonomy in a federal South Africa - the problem of regional disparities in
development will not go away. If regional boundaries were re-drawn according
to the ANC's plans, the new Border region, taking in the homelands of
Transkei and Ciskei, would still have 10.6 per cent of the population but
generate only 1.9 per cent of GDP; and the Northern Transvaal region, with
11.5 per cent of the population, would contribute only 3 per cent of GDP.
Any new government must somehow improve the appalling living standards in
these areas, or risk a mass population influx to the cities.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920605

