FT922-7102

FT  20 MAY 92 / Spain threatens to impede Community enlargement


   By DAVID MARSH and PETER BRUCE


   MADRID


SPAIN will withhold co-operation on enlarging the European Community unless
it wins speedy agreement on bringing into operation a new EC mechanism for
channelling resources to poorer countries.
Mr Carlos Westendorp, minister for European affairs, said yesterday that
Spain wants the Community's new 'cohesion fund' agreed at Maastricht five
months ago to come into effect at the start of next year.
He also served notice that Britain's Pounds 2bn a year EC rebate, agreed in
1984 to compensate it for undue financial burdens from the common
agricultural policy, will probably have to be renegotiated.
Germany has already cast a cloud over Britain's presidency of the Community
in the second half of this year by suggesting that the rebate will have to
be cut to help improve EC finances.
The cohesion fund will represent an important source of funding for Spain's
overall efforts to improve its economic structure in preparation for
economic and monetary union later in the decade. The fund, as proposed by Mr
Jacques Delors, the European Commission president, would channel Ecu2bn
(Pounds 1.4bn) a year to Spain, Portugal, Greece and Ireland by the end of
1997.
Spain is insisting that the EC settle the financial details of the
Maastricht process before negotiations on widening the Community can begin.
This means the 12 members will have to clinch an accord on the cohesion
fund, as part of general efforts to boost the EC's resources, at the
Edinburgh summit in early December. Germany and Britain have expressed
scepticism whether the fund needs to be operating before the end of 1993.
Mr Westendorp warned that unless agreement were reached, Spain would be
'less co-operative in other operations' - above all, concerning the plans
for Sweden, Austria and Finland to start EC entry talks next year.
Mr Delors' proposals, put forward in February, for increasing the EC budget
by Ecu21bn up to 1997 have drawn sharp criticism from Britain, Germany and
others. Roughly half the extra funds would go to the four poorer EC members,
both through the cohesion fund and through an enlargement of the existing
structural fund for economic development.
The Delors package, if accepted, would increase Spain's net receipts from
the Community from Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.6bn) in 1992 to roughly Dollars 6bn
in 1997. The extra funding was 'the minimum necessary', he said, to aid
Spain's attempts to bring its economy into line with its better-off
partners.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920520

