FT921-11970

FT  29 JAN 92 / Lonrho to lose control of VW/Audi UK distribution


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


LONRHO, the international trading group, is to lose control of its
Volkswagen/Audi import and distribution operations in the UK from the end of
1993. The business accounts for more than a fifth of Lonrho's worldwide
turnover.
It is understood that Volkswagen, the German carmaker, will take control of
the business operated by VAG (United Kingdom), a Lonrho subsidiary, when the
present six-year vehicle supply contract between VW and Lonrho expires.
Lonrho, which has suffered a steep fall in its share price after disclosing
a 24 per cent fall in pre-tax profits and a dividend cut last week, refused
to comment yesterday.
Mr Paul Spicer, Lonrho joint deputy chairman, said: 'I am saying absolutely
nothing. It is a contractual relationship. It is confidential and private.'
VW, the leading European carmaker, is keen to control distribution in all
five European large volume markets. In recent years it has added ownership
of the Spanish and Italian operations to its control in Germany and France.
'The contents of the contracts with Lonrho are confidential,' it said
yesterday. 'We are not authorised to disclose any information on this
matter.' VAG (UK) referred all questions to Lonrho.
Lonrho shareholders have not been informed explicitly about the future of
the company's contract with Volkswagen. The only reference was in the 1987
Lonrho annual report, which stated: 'Since the year-end, an agreement has
been concluded between VAG (UK) and Volkswagen AG to allow Volkswagen AG a
greater interest in the distribution of Volkswagen AG group products in the
United Kingdom.'
It is understood that the previous two year rolling contract was replaced at
that time by a six-year agreement running to the end of 1993. Mr Spicer
refused yesterday to reveal any financial details for the subsidiary.
Information filed by Lonrho at Companies House reveals that the financial
performance of VAG (UK) and its related companies has deteriorated in the
past two years. Turnover for the year to September 30 1991 was Pounds
1.02bn, representing 21.1 per cent of Lonrho's total turnover of Pounds
4.846bn and an 11 per cent fall from Pounds 1.15bn in 1989-90. In 1990 it
provided just over half of Lonrho's UK turnover.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920129

