FT921-3764

FT  12 MAR 92 / Arts: The mid-life crisis of an out of work drugs courier -
Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


LIGHT SLEEPER (15) Curzon West End
FRIED GREEN TOMATOES AT THE WHISTLE STOP CAFE (15) Odeon Haymarket
HEAR MY SONG (15) Odeon Marble Arch
If Paul Schrader's lithe moral thriller Light Sleeper were a pop single, it
would be issued as the flip side to The Last Temptation Of Christ. Here is
star Willem Dafoe as another vernacular-tongued martyr, this time a drugs
courier crucified on New York's narcotics-for-the-rich business. Here is
Susan Sarandon as his lady boss playing two neo-Biblical Marys in one, part
mother figure, part universal hooker. And here is the film's backing group -
let us call it 'Paul Schrader and the Calvinists' - thumping out chords of
guilt and redemption as our turning-forty hero tries to process a mid-life
crisis into a giant gesture of salvation.
Miss Sarandon is about to go straight, swapping cocaine for cosmetics. And
Mr Dafoe is about to be left on the street with sirens whistling around him,
a lady friend high-diving from a penthouse and a crimeworld Mr Big pointing
at him the business end of his Smith and Wesson.
Film-maker Schrader screenwrote The Last Temptation and also wrote and/or
directed Taxi Driver, American Gigolo, Mishima and The Comfort Of Strangers.
His world is one of violence, hedonism and late - tragically late - attempts
at spiritual self-improvement. He is Bresson cocktailed with Peckinpah and
one is amazed that he has taken so long to direct a film in New York. Here
America's doomed high-rollers gather in strength, stacked up from the
sidewalks to the stars. And the wail of human distress - police cars,
ambulances, fire engines - is the city's non-stop municipal anthem.
Wonderfully, Light Sleeper combines outer turmoil with an intricately mapped
inner life. Dafoe's hero leads a flyweight-Dostoevskian existence. His
off-duty hours are spent penning a diary and compiling existentially
gratuitous 'lists' (famous people whose eyes don't match, famous left-handed
people). His duty hours are spent eyeballing death and degeneration. As an
expensive door-to-door supplier, he feels conscience-bound to visit clients
when they are ill or to hear their confessions or to nod interestedly at
their stoned philosophising.
Meanwhile his ex-wife (Dana Delany), a former addict now turned squeaky
clean, resists his renewed overtures. And Miss Sarandon, a human bird of
prey with a flair for scarlet dresses and throat-ripping executive
efficiency, politely discourages his interest in her planned cosmetics
take-off.
In addition to larger matters the movie is all about what it feels like, on
a bad day, to be 40. The despair-bearing future presses down from above; the
guilt-bearing past presses up from below; and the present is a tiny
crawlspace where we try to do what we can in limited time with limited funds
in limited daylight.
Schrader may leave his characters naked and desperate, but he gives his film
a rich metaphorical set-dressing. He sites his tale of silted-up lives
seeking salvation in a garbage-strewn Manhattan (there is a collectors'
strike) where hotels and apartments are full of wry beckonings to a better
life. Their interiors even hint at spiritual grace through New Testament
visual echoes. A reproduction of a Vermeer portrait leans Madonna-like over
a love-making sequence; fishing tableaux gaze down on smart eaters in a
restaurant. And a montage of overhead shots catches the sleeping Dafoe in a
sculptured swirl of bedsheets like a low-life Pieta.
My only, not quite minor question: Should we even ironically be looking at a
drug runner's life as if he were a modern-day messiah? Unlike Robert De Niro
in Taxi Driver, Schrader's other Manhattanite agonistes, Dafoe is no
psychotic purging society of its ills. He is a nice guy - or made to seem so
 -even when helping people shovel poison up their noses or into their veins.
The drugs trade in Light Sleeper is made a milieu as morally neutral as
accounting or trout farming. Is this a comment on the world, on America, on
Schrader; or on what the cinema thinks fit for our jaded appetites as
filmgoers?
*****
Old actresses never die, they are put out to pasture in wrinklie farms like
Fried Green Tomatoes At The Whistle Stop Cafe. A wrinklie farm is a
narrative environment in which biddies with print dresses and Southern
accents yatter on dispensing wholegrain folk wisdom. Here Jessica Tandy,
1990 Best Actress Oscar-winner for Driving Miss Daisy, draws the short straw
 -indeed all but wears it in her mouth - as a silver-haired pastoral crone
given to long-haul reminiscence. The slightly longer straw is drawn by Kathy
Bates, 1991 Best Actress Oscar-winner, playing a downtrodden Alabama
housewife schooled to rebellion by Miss T's tales of her own tomboy
childhood.
They meet in a hospital waiting room and are soon fast friends. Did I say
fast? The film lasts 130 minutes and dawdles 'lovingly' over every
flashbacked Tandy anecdote - ah the times she had running the racially
defiant Whistle Stop Cafe (Negroes welcome) and helping best friend
Mary-Louise Parker escape her rotten hubby - and alike over every one of
Bates's asinine present-day adventures in spouse defiance. Miss B knocks
down walls, serves nouvelle cuisine meals and shocks her husband with frank
talk. The last time Bates treated a man like this, James Caan in Misery, it
was considered a horror story.
This extended feminist fable is directed by Jon Avnet from Fannie Flag's
Pulitzer-nominated novel. I have not read it, but I feel as if I have. I
also feel Miss F should be flagged down before providing further
quaint-old-dear fodder for actresses who deserve better. As it is, Tandy
does what she can with tiny flourishes of wit, mischief and expressive
rubato: shining like a naughty deed in a goody-goody world. And Bates, not
yet a wrinklie but apple-cheeked enough to be press-ganged 30 years hence if
not careful, has one gloriously destructive scene showing how to park in a
crowded shopping mall. Take your least favourite driving-test examiner.
*****
We have all had those experiences when what we thought was dead suddenly
sits up and proclaims itself alive. It may be a well-loved aunt or a
semi-recumbent aspidistra. Peter Chelsom's Hear My Song is a good British
comedy, a genre we thought long defunct, and thus enrolls itself instantly
in the same syndrome.
Indeed the genre not only sits up here, it dances across the hospital floor,
seizing carnations between its teeth and molesting the nursing staff. The
star and co-writer is Adrian Dunbar, a young actor who resembles a tousled
ant-eater. He blarneys his way beguilingly through the tale of an
Irish-Liverpudlian cabaret agent (himself) who seduces from retirement the
famed tenor and tax exile Joseph Locke (Ned Beatty).
Locke's warbling heyday, you recall, was the 1950s: hence the film's
fictionalised swarm of older fans who enthuse Dunbar with their oohs and
aahs at Locke's memory. They include the singer's one-time girlfriend,
Shirley Anne Field, now the mother of Dunbar's own girlfriend Tara
Fitzgerald.
But never mind all that. The film catches alight in the gaps between its
narrative planks, when improvisational flames shoot up between one 'What
next' and another. Two overweight bouncers do a delicate soft-shoe shuffle
on a pavement. A bewildered cow on a chain almost disappears down a well. A
chap in a battered trilby called Franc Cinatra outshines the real thing.
This is Broadway Danny Rose gone to its spiritual home, Ireland, via framing
scenes in Dunbar's adoptive Liverpool. In both habitats first-time director
Peter Chelsom displays blissful assurance. He stalks and outsmarts the
lurking comedy (from a chaos-prone cattle auction to a vainglorious Locke
impostor), he never mugs it. And look at the thoughtful richness of the
visuals. An eerie, tremulous tracking-shot captures the menace of a moonlit
field; a firelit cellar glows fiery orange in one corner, for a row between
comeback-shy Locke and our hero, leaving a cold blue space in another where
they complete the business end of their chat. The film could have been a
birdbrained Carry On Cabaret Agent.
Instead it is a sly, imaginative, off-the-wall delight, somewhere between
early Bill Forsyth and any-time Flann O'Brien.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920312

