FT924-6119

FT  23 NOV 92 / Why schools may become obsolete: America


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


I have often wondered what it must have been like to hear Bernard Shaw speak
in the 1880s, before he became famous. Many of his ideas, such as the
nationalisation of industry and the creation of a welfare state, must have
struck his small London audiences as completely mad. Yet much of what he
predicted came to pass within the space of one or two generations. Last
week, listening to a sparsely attended lecture at the Cato Institute, a
Washington think-tank, I felt a kinship with the Victorians that Shaw so
loved to harangue.
The speaker was Mr Lewis Perelman, author of a recently published book,
School's Out: Hyperlearning, the New Technology and the End of Education*.
The thesis he expounded with messianic fervour - which proved too outrageous
even for his libertarian Cato audience - was that conventional education is
obsolete. Putting resources into school reform makes about as much sense as
investing in the horse and buggy at the end of the 19th century. Just as the
automobile was destined to sweep aside horse-based transport, so
'hyperlearning' will sweep aside education as we now understand it.
I am not suggesting that Mr Perelman, a former high school science teacher
and planning director for Holiday Inns, is another Shaw. But I do believe
his fundamental argument - that technological change is undermining the
foundations of conventional education - is worth taking seriously.
Teaching today is immensely labour-intensive. Hundreds of thousands of
teachers stand in classrooms delivering almost identical lectures to their
students. Yet such techniques are inherently inefficient because the
abilities of students vary so enormously - and because the competitive
atmosphere of classrooms inhibits many less able students.
With the latest computer technology, a single talented teacher can prepare
and deliver a course to an unlimited number of students. Feedback loops and
programmed instruction can allow students to learn at their own pace,
repeating difficult sections as often as necessary. In principle, electronic
lessons can move effortlessly between different media; a history course, for
example, can move from a 'talking head' lecture format to archive text, to
film footage of battlefields and finish by playing music composed during the
period.
As the cost of electronic gadgetry falls, the savings from eliminating
classroom teachers and the physical infrastructure of schools are
potentially immense. To give an idea, The Civil War, an acclaimed US
television documentary, cost about Dollars 3m to make, or about 10 cents a
viewer/learner. To convey the same information to the same number of people
through traditional classroom techniques would have cost about Dollars 6bn
and required the services of all of America's college history professors for
more than a year.
A second plank of Mr Perelman's argument was that we can no longer afford to
think of education as something we complete in our youth as a preparation
for work and citizenship. With skill requirements changing constantly, we
all have to accept the need for lifelong learning. Fortunately electronic
tools give us the ability to learn what we want, when we want - and in the
comfort of our own homes.
The revolution in learning made possible by new technology is being impeded,
Mr Perelman argues, by the entrenched power of existing, redundant
institutions. He would abolish all public grants for schools and colleges
and give the money directly to families in the form of learning credits or
'micro-vouchers'. Just as US food stamps can be spent on any kind of food,
so educational micro-vouchers could be spent on anything that nurtures the
mind, be it distance-learning courses, video cassettes, books or
conventional schooling (which would no longer be compulsory.)
The second big change he advocates are laws forbidding employers to
discriminate on the basis of academic qualifications. Employers would be
able to test recruits to determine if they have the skills actually needed
for a job, but not to require them to have served time at schools or
colleges. Mr Perelman believes that US academic education is already a
costly fraud. People pay ludicrous sums for degrees that are of no practical
relevance and which no longer even guarantee high-paid employment. If
'credentialism' were banned and replaced by tests of actual competence, the
whole edifice might come crashing down.
But if conventional schools and colleges vanished, what would happen to
young people? Well some institutions for sports, the arts and social
interaction would be needed, but they would not have to involve the
regimentation of today's schools. That regimentation was, in any case,
largely needed to discipline people for the monotony of a mass production
industrial age that is already passing.
The essence of Mr Perelman's argument is that new technology provides the
means for a far more economical, flexible and personalised form of
education. At heart a utopian, he believes learning is as natural as eating
or sex; the trouble is that most people's appetite for it is destroyed by
crude and outdated delivery systems. His ideas probably seem outlandish; but
remember, few people predict the really big social and economic changes that
transform our lives.
* School's Out, William Morrow, New York, Dollars 23

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921123

