FT924-1020

FT  21 DEC 92 / Britain backs enforced no-fly zone: Bush and Major seek UN
resolution to step up military involvement in Bosnia


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


   WASHINGTON


THE US and Britain last night agreed to increase the international pressure
on Serbia with a jointly sponsored United Nations resolution to allow
military enforcement of the no-fly zone over Bosnia and a package of new
sanctions against Belgrade.
But in a compromise between the hardline position of the US and the much
more cautious British stance, Mr John Major, the prime minister, and
outgoing president George Bush acknowledged that there would be a warning
period before Serbian aircraft violating the zone would be shot down.
After weekend talks with Mr Major at Camp David, Mr Bush returned to
Washington emphasising that the US shared Mr Major's concern not to put at
risk UK and other ground forces serving with the UN humanitarian operation
in Bosnia.
'We must be careful that we do not needlessly put young men and women there
in harm's way,' Mr Bush said.
In a statement issued by the two leaders, they said the aim of the
resolution 'would be to prevent flights taking place other than those
specifically authorised by the United Nations.'
The statement acknowledged that 'many more lives will be lost this winter'
if the humanitarian effort were halted. They also agreed that the UN
presence in Macedonia and Kosovo should be stepped up to prevent the spread
of fighting in the regions. New sanctions against Serbia could include
initially the severing of postal and communications links and might also
lead to 'closing the borders and complete diplomatic isolation for some
years to come'.
Senior US and UK officials said that they expected the UN resolution
providing for military enforcement should be agreed within a few days,
probably before Christmas. Mr Bush, who spoke yesterday morning to Mr Boris
Yeltsin, the Russian president, said he was confident that Moscow would not
block it.
The two leaders said the length of the warning period before Serbian
aircraft would risk being shot down would be decided at the UN. Defence
secretary Dick Cheney said on television that a 15-day warning could be
given, while stressing it was not his decision to make. Reports that this
had been agreed were dismissed as without 'credibility' by Mr Major. One
British suggestion was that it might run until the inauguration of
President-elect Bill Clinton on January 20.
Mr Major's reluctance to see any escalation in the military conflict in
Bosnia was reflected in the refusal of his officials to discuss the terms
under which the no-fly zone would operate. Last week Mr Major said that
aircraft violating it might be forced to remain on the ground rather than be
shot down.
He said: 'We've got a lot of discussing to do before we determine how the
deadline is going to be enforced. We agreed that it is necessary to enforce
the no-fly zone. There is more than one way of doing that.'
But Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, the US secretary of state, suggested that the
US favoured still more decisive action. He indicated that the warning period
would allow western ground forces to prepare for possible Serbian
retaliation. The US has also drawn up contingency plans to bomb Serbian
airports.
Mr Major said that the 'paramount importance' of retaining the security of
ground forces and aid workers should underpin the UN resolution. He hopes
that the deterrent effect will keep Serbian aircraft grounded.
The joint statement warned of the danger of fighting spreading to other
former Yugoslav republics. The US and UK hoped the UN presence in Macedonia
would be stepped up. They agreed to 'press for a very early increase in the
number of observers in Kosovo'.
Election fraud alleged in Yugoslavia; End of an era as Major leaves
Washington Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921221

