FT924-8200

FT  12 NOV 92 / Plan to announce Jubilee Line deal frustrated


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


GOVERNMENT plans to announce the go-ahead for London Underground's Jubilee
Line extension as part of today's Autumn Statement have fallen through.
The future of the Pounds 1.8bn project remains uncertain because the private
sector has yet to agree terms for contributing Pounds 400m towards the cost.
Failure to win agreement is deeply embarrassing to the government which had
hoped to use the go-ahead as a centrepiece of its newly adopted growth
strategy.
This afternoon's Autumn Statement had been expected to set the scene for
increased spending on big capital projects such as the Jubilee Line as a
means of getting the economy moving.
It had also been expected to cite the project as an example of how the
private and public sectors could work together to start big infrastructure
projects.
The planned extension would run from central London through Docklands to
Stratford in east London. Some Pounds 400m of the cost was supposed to have
been paid by Olympia & York, developers of the Canary Wharf project in
Docklands.
When Olympia & York went into administrative receivership earlier this year,
the government stopped work on the line pending a new financing agreement
with Canary Wharf's bankers. A deal has still not been reached.
The government is expected to say today that it still hopes to proceed. The
setback is likely to be presented as a delay rather than a cancellation.
It is understood that ministers have agreed to fund the public sector's
share of construction costs as part of the current spending round, provided
the private sector contribution is forthcoming.
The delay will bitterly disappoint local authorities and businesses in east
London and Docklands. Many of them have said that a failure to proceed would
prove to be disastrous for the area.
It also jeopardises up to 12,000 jobs which London Transport says will be
created in the UK construction and supply industries if the project goes
ahead.
Police yesterday arrested two London Transport employees and a consultant
working for a company in Croydon, Surrey, in connection with an alleged
attempted Pounds 100,000 fraud involving the sale of land for the Jubilee
Line extension.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921112

