FT922-7187

FT  20 MAY 92 / Business and the Environment: The bugs bite back - Clive
Cookson reports on the search for pesticides that kill insects but are safer
than conventional chemicals


   By CLIVE COOKSON


Residues from agricultural chemicals in crops and water supplies are a
growing environmental concern. But they provide a business opportunity for
biotechnology, which is set to play a big part in the world's Dollars 20bn
(Pounds 11bn) a year pesticide industry over the next decade.
Insecticides are leading the way in the emerging market for residue-free
biopesticides. Sales of biological insecticides were in the region of
Dollars 130m worldwide last year - only 2 per cent of the figure for
chemical insecticides. Industry predictions put the bio-insecticide market
in 2000 anywhere between Dollars 500m and Dollars 2.5bn.
The market has been dominated so far by two international companies, Sandoz
of Switzerland and Abbott of the US. They make bio-pesticides from Bacillus
thuringiensis (Bt), a naturally occuring bacterium. Bt produces a protein
that kills some insects.
These natural Bt pesticides have been on the market for about 20 years.
Farmers have not taken them up enthusiastically, despite their environmental
appeal, because they do not kill most insects as effectively as conventional
chemicals.
Now a group of biotechnology companies, led by Ecogen and Mycogen in the US
and Agricultural Genetics Co (AGC) in the UK, is using genetic techniques to
develop a more powerful and more diverse range of second-generation
insecticides. Large chemical groups such as Monsanto, Du Pont and Ciba-Geigy
also have active bio-insecticide programmes.
Insects are the most tempting target for biological pest control, says John
Davis, Ecogen chief executive. One reason is that the chemical industry has
not developed a significant new class of insecticide since the synthetic
pyrethroids 20 years ago. Its recent innovation record is better against the
other main types of agricultural pest: fungi and weeds. As a result, some
insects are building up resistance to the long-standing chemical pesticides.
Another reason why biotechnology is attacking insects first is the wealth of
scientific and technical knowledge built up since the 1960s about Bacillus
thuringiensis.
Ecogen, based in Pennsylvania, has a bacterial library of 9,000 strains of
Bt collected from around the world. Each produces a slightly different toxin
and therefore has a different effect on insects.
The company's new products are based on Bt strains modified genetically
through a process known as transconjugation. This is different from the
standard genetic engineering technique of 'recombinant DNA' which alters the
chromosome, the bacterium's central store of genetic information.
Transconjugation involves moving plasmids - extra strands of DNA that some
bacteria carry outside the chromosome - from one strain to another. In Bt
the plasmids rather than the chromosome carry the insecticidal genes, so
scientists have been able to create super-strains with plasmids brought
together from different natural strains to have the maximum impact on
specific pests.
Ecogen is already selling three bio-insecticides made in this way and one
from AGC - to be marketed by Ciba-Geigy - will be launched later this year.
Their targets include various caterpillars, Colorado potato beetle and
European corn borer, gypsy moth and spruce budworm.
Mycogen, based in California, has most experience of recombinant DNA work on
Bt. Last year the US Environmental Protection Agency approved its first two
genetically engineered products, one for use on caterpillars and the other
aimed at the Colorado beetle.
Mycogen transfers Bt genes into another common bacterium, Pseudomonas, which
is then mass-produced and killed. The dead Pseudomonas cells act as a
'bacterial capsule' for the Bt toxins. They therefore persist longer than
the original Bt pesticides, which users have criticised because they break
down in the environment before they have killed their insect targets.
There has been little environmental opposition to Bt-based biopesticides in
the US, because the toxins biodegrade so quickly and leave no residues.
Compared with conventional chemicals they are very specific, poisoning the
target while doing little harm to other insects and none to birds and
mammals.
The Japanese, however, are wary, because current Bt formulations contain not
only the toxin crystals but also spores which could in theory give rise to
new bacteria. They fear that these could infect silkworms - which are
culturally if not industrially important insects in Japan.
'We see no harm at all in having the spores and we have made a Bt that is
not toxic to silkworms,' Davies says. But Ecogen is now talking to cautious
Japanese companies about developing spore-free versions of its products.
Although Bt leads the bio-insecticide field, some researchers are
investigating other micro-organisms as a source of toxins. For example Du
Pont, the US chemical group, is collaborating with Crop Genetics, an
agricultural biotechnology company, to develop insecticidal virus products.
All bio-insecticides are formulated so that growers can mix them with water
in a tank and spray on to the crops just like ordinary pesticides. Even so,
farmers need to be educated not to expect an immediate 'knock-down' as with
a chemical poison.
When a susceptible insect ingests Bt toxin, its stomach is paralysed
instantly and it stops feeding, but it may not die for three or four days.
This can mislead the user into thinking that the spray is working too
slowly.
'Once you get over that initial hurdle, growers get a kick out of using a
biological product,' says Roger Gilmore, chief executive of AGC. 'Many of
them feel instinctively that it's wrong to use a chemical spray.'
Eventually bio-insecticides may face competition from another feat of
biotechnology: transfering toxin genes directly into plants, so that the
crops then make the poisons in their own cells. Mycogen and Ecogen are both
collaborating with seed companies to do this with Bt genes, while AGC is
making use of insecticidal genes present in plants themselves.
It will be well into the next century, however, before many plant varieties
have been engineered to kill a wide spectrum of potential pests. By then
bio-pesticides are likely to have made many conventional insecticides
redundant.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920520

