FT924-6037

FT  24 NOV 92 / EC progress on Greek dispute with Macedonia


   By KERIN HOPE and FRANCES WILLIAMS


   ATHENS, GENEVA


GREECE and Macedonia are close to solving their dispute over finding a name
by which the European Community could recognise the former Yugoslav
republic, the EC special envoy on the Macedonian question said yesterday.
Mr Robin O'Neill, a retired ambassador who has been shuttling between Athens
and Skopje for two months, said: 'I believe we are as close to a solution as
you can be. It's for the government of Skopje to take the decision.'
The Macedonian government is due to make up its mind by tomorrow so that Mr
O'Neill, acting for the British EC presidency, can prepare for a decision on
recognition to be taken at next month's EC summit in Edinburgh.
Both Athens and Skopje have been urged to accept a compound name in which
the word Macedonia is used as an adjective not a noun.
While the EC leaders may be unwilling to reverse their joint support at the
Lisbon summit in June for the Greek view that Macedonia should not be
recognised under that name, Greece fears that if Macedonia decides at the
last minute not to compromise, individual member-states may go ahead with
recognition after the summit. Mr Constantine Karamanlis, the Greek
president, last week sent a letter to the other EC heads of state ahead of
the summit, which reportedly warned that Greece might close its border with
Macedonia if it was granted recognition by that name.
Macedonia, so far recognised by only a handful of countries, among them
Russia, Turkey and Bulgaria, has been lobbying actively for recognition and
has already applied for membership of the United Nations.
Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, the Greek prime minister, is staking his
political survival on the issue. Speaking in Geneva yesterday after meeting
Mr Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen, co-chairmen of the international peace
conference on ex-Yugoslavia, Mr Mitsotakis said Greece stuck by its position
that the term Macedonia could not appear in the internationally-recognised
name of what he called the 'Republic of Skopje'.
Feeling runs so high among Greeks that the national karate team pulled out
of a competition in Spain last week where the Macedonian team was competing
under the country's new flag, emblazoned with a sunburst design apparently
inspired by the ancient insignia of Alexander the Great.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921124

