FT924-12176

FT  22 OCT 92 / Industry hopes for political dialogue


   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent


BRITISH industry is hoping that the government's new economic strategy also
embraces a fresh determination to consult a business community left
increasingly frustrated at its inability to influence economic events.
For the time being, industry leaders are likely to remain sceptical about
promises made in the heat of political crisis. They will withhold for a
while their verdict on whether a new era of understanding and mutual
co-operation really is under way.
Last week, the prime minister pledged that Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor,
would begin an intensive round of discussions with business leaders on how a
cheaper pound can be fully exploited.
Yesterday Mr Tim Sainsbury, industry minister, endorsed the need for a
continuing, high-level dialogue between government and every sector of
industry.
Mr Sainsbury emphasised that the DTI, which has spent the past six months
trying to reorganise itself into a more sympathetic, responsive department,
has 'no pot of gold and no magic wand'. Industry says it is not in the
market for handouts; the chance to put across its case and maybe influence
policy will be good enough.
Signs exist that efforts by ministers to consult industry more closely were
already being made before the latest ministerial commitments to an improved
dialogue.
Sir Michael Angus, president of the Confederation of British Industry, was
surprised to be called in last week by Mr Lamont at short notice to give a
rundown on the CBI's recipe for economic recovery.
He asked for a more coherent statement on policies for economic growth, and
further interest rate cuts, a tight public-sector spending round and
protection for capital projects and training.
The CBI president said yesterday: 'One would rather assume that at this
particular moment, with one or two things falling around them, they would
listen more intently.'
The Institute of Directors also had a chance to put views directly to the
chancellor last week. Mr Peter Morgan, IoD director-general, has had a
session with Mr Heseltine in the past few days and meetings with senior
civil servants have recently been stepped up.
The IoD says that, this week, the government has disclosed an economic
strategy that reflects many of the initiatives it has been pressing on
ministers in recent weeks. An official added: 'There has been a distinct
change. Ministers are ringing up and asking us in for a chat.'
The Engineering Employers' Federation, which last week said it was drawing
up its own strategy for economic revival, to be published next month, said
it had not yet detected signs of the improved dialogue it has been calling
for since the general election.
Mr Neil Johnson, EEF director general, welcomed the prime minister's
strategy for growth as recognition of the serious concerns of the business
community.
He added: 'I urge the prime minister to involve industry in the development
of his plans and not to rely on the mandarins alone. He will find us an
enthusiastic and very realistic partner.'
Having made its commitment, the government will now be watched closely by
the business community to see if its promises of a new partnership
materialise.
It has bridges to rebuild with industry, not just with the broader
electorate.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921022

