FT923-6627

FT  22 AUG 92 / Special Report on Courses and Careers: Make the most of a
year off


   By MARILYN BENTLEY


AFTER THE strain of A-levels the idea of taking a year off before further
study is very appealing. But it is important to make good use of the time,
and to do so means deciding on specific objectives and making some realistic
plans.
Perhaps the first question to ask is: is it worth it? As a starting point,
Taking a Year Off (Trotman and Company) contains some useful tests and
checklists as a means of assessing the rewards and pitfalls of various
options, plus general information and case studies.
The possibilities fall broadly into three categories: travel, work and
short-term study. A gap year can provide the travel opportunity of a
lifetime and there are extensive concessionary travel schemes available to
young people. But it is worth investing in a return ticket. Local
emergencies often arise abruptly and extended periods of travel can be
lonely. For the intrepid but indigent, Vacation Work publishes guides to
opportunities and working conditions in various countries to supplement
income en route.
Rod Leith, at Returned Volunteer Action, has some exciting suggestions for
unskilled young people interested in voluntary work abroad. These include
joining work brigades, scientific expeditions, health, environmental and
agricultural schemes, in locations such as Nicaragua and Cuba. Leith
undertakes to field inquiries to the relevant organisations.
The National Youth Agency publishes an information sheet (50p) listing
opportunities for voluntary work within the UK. If the idea of conservation
appeals, the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers trains young people
as volunteer officers on projects such as dry stone walling or hedge laying.
As well as practical skills, volunteers have the opportunity to develop
their abilities for administration, environmental assessment and
negotiation.
'We don't ask anything except enthusiasm and commitment,' says BTCV's
Paulette Cohen. Volunteers are interviewed fully beforehand so that they
know what they are letting themselves in for.
Community Service Volunteers provides accommodation, food, travel expenses
and Pounds 21 per week pocket money to volunteers working in community care
settings. CSV's projects range from independent living schemes, helping
people with disabilities to live comfortably in their own homes, to day
centres and working with the homeless, or young offenders.
A short term study course can be used to acquire an additional skill between
A-levels and higher education. The Directory of Independent Training and
Tutorial Organisations (Trotman and Co) lists courses available in the UK's
private sector, and the Directory of Further Education, (CRAC Learning
Materials) those in local authority colleges. Courses include core skills
such as computing, teaching English as a foreign language, and more exotic
pursuits such as cordon bleu cookery or acupuncture.
For study abroad, The Student Handbook, (Macmillan) is a directory of
courses and institutions in the 12 EC countries, with information on
application procedures, fees, grants, social security and accommodation.
Studying a foreign language in situ can break down the prejudices of the
most confirmed monolinguist, and Cultural and Educational Services Abroad
offers information and advice on language tuition worldwide.
Often the most difficult part of taking a gap year is allaying parents'
fears. However, with sensible planning, it can be a rewarding experience.
Information:
Trotman and Company Limited, 12-14 Hill Rise, Richmond, Surrey TW10 6UA.
Returned Volunteer Action, 1 Amwell Street, London EC1R 1UL (071-278-0804).
Vacation Work, 9 Park End Street, Oxford OX1 1HJ (0865-241978).
National Youth Agency, 17-23 Albion Street, Leicester LE1 6GD (0533-554775).
The British Trust for Conservation Volunteers, Room CC, 36 St Mary's Street,
Wallingford, Oxfordshire OX20 0EU (0491-39646).
Community Service Volunteers, 237 Pentonville Road, London N1 9NJ
(071-278-6601).
CRAC Learning Materials, Hobsons Publishing plc, Bateman Street, Cambridge
CB2 1LZ (0223-354551).
Cultural and Educational Services Abroad, 44 Sydney Street, Brighton Sussex
BN1 4EP (0273-683304.)

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920822

