FT921-369

FT  30 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Views of a Labour supporter


What would be the greatest risk of a Tory government?
That the recession would continue and they would take no effective steps to
tackle it.
What would be the greatest risk of a Labour government?
Expectations on the part of the electorate might exceed the realistic
possibilities of what can be achieved by government action.
Has the campaign addressed the most important issues facing business?
Because of the concentration on the plight of the economy and the depth of
recession and the concerns regarding the health service, there has been
insufficient attention paid to date to education, training and homelessness.
What should be a government's priority for industry?
The sheer inertia induced in business by the depth and duration of the
recession, aggravated by the unwillingness on the part of the Conservative
government to recognise the problem, makes investment a major priority.
Will Britain be a better place to invest under Labour or the Conservatives?
Further investment depends upon restoration of confidence. Many people do
not believe the policies or indeed lack of policy of the previous government
warrants its re-election. Britain would be better for investment under
Labour because Labour would be more aware of the need to encourage
investment.
What would be the effects of Labour's plans to restrict takeovers?
Labour is broadly in line with that of the European Community. The
distinction is between short-termism and Labour's longer-term view.
Should Britain have a minimum wage?
I do not believe that a minimum wage would have an adverse impact. Our
objective must be to stimulate the economy and a factor in this must be
tackling low pay.
Are there any attractive features of the Conservatives' industrial policy?
It is the sheer absence of an industrial policy which has contributed to the
worst recession that business people in the UK have ever encountered.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920330

