FT922-7164

FT  20 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Yorkshire Water in engineering joint
venture with Babcock


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


YORKSHIRE WATER and Bab-cock International yesterday unveiled a joint
venture aimed at tackling engineering opportunities in the rapidly-changing
global water industry.
The move marks a further step in the diversification programme of the
recently-privatised water companies. Until now, many have largely
concentrated on diversifying into waste management.
Babcock International will pay Yorkshire Water Pounds 5m for 50 per cent of
the new company, to be called Babcock Water Engineering.
BWE will comprise Yorkshire's engineering subsidiary - employing 400
engineers and support staff - and about 20 Babcock employees. The chairman
will be Mr Eric Masell, who joined Babcock last year to advise on
opportunities in the water sector.
Initially, the company will rely on business supplied by Yorkshire Water,
which currently feeds about 70 per cent of its Pounds 300m per annum capital
spending through its engineering subsidiary, Yorkshire Enterprises. Sir
Gordon Jones, chairman of Yorkshire, said that the venture would retain the
orders only if competitive. 'They will have to fight for business,' he said.
Yorkshire's current capital spending programme is expected to benefit BWE
for three years. By 1995, the company is forecast to have about 20 per cent
of its business from customers other than Yorkshire.
Sir Gordon said his company's engineering subsidiary would benefit from
Babcock's international exposure and marketing expertise. There were several
other markets which were moving towards privatisation - such as North
America, Australia and eastern Europe - where Yorkshire's expertise in the
water sector could be put to good use.
The deal also pushes forward the company's programme to achieve 10 per cent
of group profits from non-regulatory businesses within five years of
privatisation. 'The non-regulated businesses will grow,' Sir Gordon said.
'The regulated side will only ever get more regulated.'
Analysts cautioned against too much optimism, however, saying the venture
was only a drop in the bucket of Yorkshire Water's total business. Based on
company estimates that the joint venture might achieve sales of Pounds 200m
in five years, profits would be about Pounds 10m compared with a forecast
Pounds 185m for the group as a whole by 1997.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920520

