FT922-7353

FT  19 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC ministers begin last push
towards farm reform


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


THE most radical overhaul of the EC's Common Agricultural Policy in its
30-year history hove into view yesterday, as farm ministers of the Twelve
convened here for marathon negotiations, and the European Commission began a
dogged defence of its reform proposals.
As the horse-trading began, it became clear that the Commission's challenge
was to prevent negotiation on detail from amounting to an assault on the
fundamentals of its plan.
The bargaining may last all week, and require an extra Council meeting
before the ministers are scheduled to reassemble on June 15-16 in Luxembourg
to finalise the reform. Agreement on CAP reform will also make conclusion of
the five and a half year-old Uruguay Round negotiations to liberalise world
trade less elusive, by demonstrating EC commitment to restrain subsidised
production of agriculture, the main obstacle in the international talks.
But doing a deal may well be at the cost of blunting the European
Commission's original reform proposals.
Such an outcome, while still amounting to the EC's biggest step towards
reining in overproduction, stabilising ballooning subsidies, and plugging
the widening holes in average farm incomes, will almost certainly require a
second round of negotiations later this decade.
After 18 months of hard negotiations, ministers have moved from unanimous
opposition to the Commission's plan to seeking an agreement based upon its
main precepts. Yesterday they started bilateral talks with the Commission
and the current Portuguese presidency of the EC to establish each country's
bottom line.
Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture commissioner, says he is determined to
resist attempts to soften his proposed 35 per cent cut in cereal prices. The
Commission wants to reduce the subsidised price of around Ecu155 per tonne
to Ecu100 over three years. Last month, Mr MacSharry registered an
unprecedented, formal objection to the Portuguese presidency's suggestion of
an Ecu112 target, or 27 per cent cut - its fourth attempt to engineer a
compromise and slide the cuts downwards.
The commissioner argued that Ecu105 was the limit at which the EC could make
its cereals competitive, cease dumping its surpluses on world markets, and
bring internal markets into balance. 'The Commission is not prepared to
accept 112,' a senior Brussels official restated last week.
The cereals proposal is the linchpin of the reform. It foresees direct
payment to farmers in compensation for the price cuts, contingent on larger
farmers taking 15 per cent of their land out of production. Mr MacSharry has
warned that a looser target price of Ecu112 would require them to set aside
22 per cent of their land.
Expert opinion oscillates between those who foresee the final compromise
settling at around Ecu108 per tonne - an optimum outcome for the Commission
 -and those who see a further loosening to around Ecu115 or beyond, which
would be a victory for Germany.
The Germans, whose inefficient agricultural structure has dictated the high
subsidies of the CAP since its inception, want to settle as near as possible
to the 20 per cent domestic cuts required within the Uruguay Round. France,
however, the EC's largest and most competitive producer, fears that softer
price cuts will saddle its farms with quotas to restrain production, such as
the increased set-aside threatened by Mr MacSharry. The UK, Netherlands and
Denmark also favour deeper price cuts.
Brussels has some leverage in that farmers this year already face a further
6 per cent cut in cereals prices, on top of an extraordinary 5 per cent cut
last year which would be retained for 1992-93, making 11 per cent. This
results from the old 'stabiliser' system, a tax on overproduction, without
compensation, which has nevertheless failed to restrain output, depressing
incomes still more.
The Commission may agree to conflate some of next year's sharp, unrefunded
cuts into the package of reform cuts. If it fails to win sufficient cuts on
cereals, the higher than planned prices will rebound into the crisis-ridden
livestock sector, where the lower cost of cereal feed is supposed partially
to compensate also severe price reductions.
The Commission's tactical imperative is to prevent German and French
interests from converging too far away from its plan. The Portuguese
presidency's 'compromise number four doesn't get us very far', judged Mr
David Curry, the UK's deputy Agriculture Minister. 'He (MacSharry) is going
to have to do a lot of political juggling to get us there.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920519

