FT922-4174

FT  06 JUN 92 / Private View: Artemis at the Olympic hunt - Christian Tyler
meets Alison Williamson, an archer aiming for the ultimate sporting glory


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


FOR THE farrier's daughter on Wenlock Edge the road to the Olympic Games was
no longer than her father's driveway: 30 yards, to be exact.
Here, on the steep path to a modern bungalow high in the Shropshire hills,
Alison Williamson has for 14 years practised shooting arrows.
She took up archery quite simply because it was happening all around her. 'I
was in the pram watching mum and dad shoot,' she said this week after her
selection for the British women's team for Barcelona.
Her father Tom (once good enough for the national squad) and mother Sue had
started shooting before her birth. When she reached the age of six 'it was
either fight with little sister in the car or get out and do it yourself. So
I stopped beating up my little sister and decided to shoot.'
Today's weapons bear little resemblance to the longbows of Sherwood Forest
or Agincourt. They are made of fibreglass rather than yew and are adorned
with stabilisers, sights, 'clickers' and pressure buttons. Modern archery is
an exercise in rhythmic repetition under mental discipline, less akin to
rifle-shooting than to golf or dry-fly fishing.
Some devotees rhapsodise about the whisper of the arrow as the bowstring is
drawn, the moment before loosing when the earth stands still, the awful
silence as the arrow hurtles away and the cathartic thump as it buries its
nose in the target.
Britain's blonde Artemis doesn't talk like that. To her, archery is second
nature. Nor, as she points out, do champions have to be sensitive and
intelligent. Some of them are as thick as two short planks.
Age and physique make little difference. Alison is a tall, leggy creature,
lively and restless. As she talked she gesticulated with her long fingers
and squirmed in her chair. But behind the squeals and giggles there is,
according to both her father and her team manager, a very determined and
competitive person.
I asked her whether she developed personal rivalries.
'I don't. I compete against myself. I don't even go for scoring more, I just
go for technique. Of course I have a little score in my mind that I would
like to get, but it's not the be-all and end-all.'
She gave as an example how she had learned to stop being an 'amber gambler'.
Competition archers are given 2 1/2 minutes, monitored by traffic lights, to
shoot each set of three arrows. 'Amber gamblers', lacking confidence, impose
an extra deadline by waiting for the yellow light before making their shots.
I asked Alison what she thought about on the line.
'If I have to wait I count the clouds, count the planes, look at the trees.
I'm marshmallow-head. But when it's three arrows in 2 1/2 minutes I'm
normally off the line in 40 seconds.'
Men shoot differently from women, she said.
'Men tend to be always fiddling with their equipment. They cannot leave the
technical side alone. Whereas women tend to say 'Let's get on the line and
shoot . . . leave hubby to do that or whatever.' I mean my dad, he's just a
typical man, just always playing with his equipment. 'Or there's the people
who are very keen and want to know too much. I think it's probably best to
be ignorant. They always ask 'why, why?''
Is it that women are more pragmatic, or phlegmatic?
'It doesn't really interest them. I don't care how the inside of my plunger
button (a device to correct the arrow's curved ejection path) works, whereas
I know men will take it apart just to look how it works. I just pick up the
bow and I shoot it.'
Archery is presently dominated by the Koreans, for whom it is a national
sport. (Americans also rank high; the British men managed a team bronze in
1988). In a 144-arrow competition worth ten points an arrow, the Koreans
regularly score around 1350. Alison's best score was 1301 and these days she
averages 1280-90.
Why are the Koreans so good?
'They live, sleep, eat archery. I mean they spend two hours in a field just
doing visualisation. And that's all they do. They have this approach, and it
works. We're sure they're hypnotised.'
She recalled being followed round the practice ground at last year's world
championships in Poland by the women's Olympic champion Kim Soo-Nyung.
'She was shooting absolutely awfully. I kept going back to the rest of my
team and saying 'She's putting in blues (outers) at 60 metres] This is
weird. I'm shooting tight and she's shooting everywhere]'
'They said 'Just wait till tomorrow.' And then the next day they all sort of
march onto the shooting field and they're all . . . blanked (she waved her
hand over her face) . . . sort of little robots. I'm sure they're
programmed.'
How do you think it's done?
'I went to this lecture in Italy by the former Korean coach. They watch
videos of candles, the flames. They have to concentrate on one point of the
flame. Or they have, like, kaleidoscopes and they have to pick one point and
focus on that. And that's what it is. They're taught how to concentrate.
It's drilled into them. They do it every night.'
So is it better for an archer to be a zombie? 'That's what's said: it helps
to be stupid. I don't know.
'To shoot those type of scores I think you have to be a robot. But you
slightly go into robot anyway. My friend in Arizona noticed when I go on the
line I look like I was on a different planet, sort of thing. Whereas they're
switched off all the time]'
The story is told to squeals of laughter.
Alison is one year into a five-year archery scholarship at Arizona State
University, at Tempe near Phoenix, where American toxophilites are nurtured.
She is studying social work. I asked her if she was good academically.
She laughed. 'I keep on the honours roll so I can't be that bad.'
Are you thinking about the Olympics a lot?
'Not particularly.'
Is that because you've been trained not to think about them?
'No. I mean, it's been my goal since I started. So if I hadn't made the team
I would have been just . .' She gestured wildly.
Devastated?
'Devastated'.
Are you nervous?
'Before the trials I was slightly. I had trained a lot and I knew I could do
it. But the night before I had this awful dream: you know, everything that
can go wrong did go wrong. I woke up . . . ahhhhh] It's not true]'
What went wrong?
'I turn up to the to the ground and no-one is there that should be. Then I
get on the line and the nocks are too big for the string and every time I
put an arrow on it falls off, and every arrow you look at, someone's gouged
it out.' She shrieked. 'I can't even get round to shooting]'
What does it mean to get to the Olympics?
Alison laughed at my foolish question. 'It's the Olympics] The whole
sporting world is there]'
Sometimes she imagines herself shooting against the Olympic champion in the
head-to-head final elimination round that is being introduced this year (it
is thought to be more televisual and it may lead to upsets.)
Otherwise she resists the hyper-optimism of her team manager David Clark.
'We play it down a lot. But you know inside that you're going to be in the
top ten or something. I don't go around saying I'm going to get a medal.
It's stupid to say that.'
Do you want to win a medal?
'It would be nice.'
I mean, I said, are you desperate to win a medal?
'Well, just as long as I do well. If I get a medal it's like a bonus -
because I know the competition.'
Do others think you might?
Artemis shrieked with laughter. 'I don't know. There might be a slim
chance.'

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

920606

