FT921-3867

FT  12 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Current resistance trips switch out of Amps
 -A source of corporate finance that is neither debt nor equity


   By MAGGIE URRY


THE RECENT decisions by ECC Group and Tarmac to redeem some of their auction
market preferred shares begs the question of whether Amps are a suitable
source of finance for UK companies. A handful of other UK companies still
have Amps, and intend to keep them.
ECC is raising Pounds 209.2m net through a rights issue to redeem Dollars
350m (Pounds 198.8m) of its Dollars 400m outstanding Amps, while Tarmac is
redeeming Dollars 150m of its Dollars 300m issue. Both companies were
satisfied with the job the Amps had done for them so far. But ECC said they
were 'no longer a satisfactory long-term source of shareholders' funds', and
Tarmac said: 'The competitive advantage of Amps as a financial instrument
has been eroded.'
The Amps market, which is based in the US and totalled more than Dollars
20bn at the end of 1991, allows companies to issue securities which pay an
interest rate set regularly through auctions, often every 28 days. The paper
thus carries interest rates comparable to other short-term US interest
rates.
But the securities can only be redeemed at the issuer's option which means
the companies which have issued Amps have a potentially permanent source of
capital. Although they have some of the characteristics of debt, the UK
Accounting Standards Board recently said Amps should be regarded as part of
shareholders' funds, although classified as 'non-equity'.
Amps, therefore, are a kind of hybrid between debt and equity, more
expensive than the former but cheaper than the latter. Holders of preference
shares do not share in the company's future earnings growth as ordinary
share investors do through rising dividends.
Observers of the Amps market point out that the recession in the US has also
meant that corporate treasurers, frequent buyers of the paper, have less
cash than they had. Also the US yield curve is steep at present, and
investors are switching from short-dated low-yielding securities to find
higher yields from longer-term paper.
Mr Bob Carlton-Porter, finance director of ECC, says the company decided to
redeem its Amps for a combination of reasons. The issue was originally made
to help finance the acquisition of Georgia Kaolin, at a time when the UK
equity market might not have been receptive to an issue of new shares.
ECC felt it was now a good moment to switch to the more traditional form of
finance through a rights. He concedes that equity is a more expensive source
of long-term capital than Amps, but he sees it as the most stable form of
finance.
Another reason behind ECC's decision was that, although the level of
short-term interest rates in the US is currently low, the rate ECC was
paying on its Amps had risen in comparison to US commercial paper (CP).
Whereas it had been paying dividends at about 90 per cent of CP rates, this
had risen to 105 per cent.
Mr Carlton-Porter feels that there is some uneasiness in the US at the
moment about UK issuers, because of recession and political uncertainty.
Investors in Amps, mainly US corporate treasurers, can easily switch to
other instruments.
He carefully does not mention Ratners, although many say the jewellery
retailer's experience has deterred investors. In January the US credit
rating agencies cut Ratners' rating from BBB to B. The next auction of a
Dollars 50m tranche of its Dollars 200m Amps failed - there were
insufficient buyers - and the dividend rate shot up to the fall-back maximum
of 250 per cent of US CP rates.
Soon afterwards Ratners suspended payments on all its preference shares,
including the Amps. Now the Amps dividends are rolling up at the 250 per
cent of CP level, currently around 11.25 per cent.
While the case of Ratners may have put off investors, it does at least
demonstrate what many promoters of the product have always said. When a
company is in trouble, Amps behave like equity not debt.
Had Ratners' Amps been real debt, the group might now have been in the
throes of a financial reconstruction or, even worse, at the mercy of its
bankers. But because Ratners is not obliged to redeem the Amps, the finance
has stayed in place and given Ratners a chance to trade its way out of its
problems.
Mr Gerald Corbett, finance director of Redland, the building materials
company, which has Dollars 250m of Amps, says that the Ratners experience
has helped him explain to ordinary shareholders that Amps do have equity
characteristics.
He does not believe that Ratners has soured the market for other issuers. He
says the market is entirely credit-rating driven and that good credits will
continue to achieve fine rates of interest.
One US securities analyst says: 'There is no phobia in the market against UK
names, these people are sophisticated investors.' He, too, stresses the
importance of a good credit rating and says that the Ratners episode has
pushed investors towards higher quality names.
Last year Rank Organisation decided to redeem its Dollars 200m of Amps when
its credit rating was cut by the US rating agencies. That would have pushed
up the cost of its Amps, while Rank had borrowing facilities available at a
lower cost.
Tarmac's decision to redeem half its Amps appears to have been prompted when
it was put on 'credit watch' by the rating agencies, and analysts expected
the rating to be cut. At an auction since being put on credit watch, Tarmac
had to pay 120 per cent of CP rates in order to sell the full amount.
Amps typically have a maximum interest rate, set in the event of an auction
failure, according to the credit rating. For Tarmac the rate is 125 per cent
of CP rates with a single A rating and 175 per cent for a BBB rating.
But other UK groups, such as Cadbury Schweppes, the confectionery and soft
drinks group, and Elf UK, the UK subsidiary of Elf Aquitaine, the oil
company, are paying dividends well below CP rates because of their good
credit ratings.
Mr John Grout, director of treasury at Cadbury, says: 'The people who buy
Amps are not equity investors but buyers of debt instruments and they are
very credit-rating sensitive'. He says the Amps - more expensive than
straight debt - have improved Cadbury's senior debt credit rating without
the costs of equity.
He warns, however, that Amps are not an instrument which a cyclical company,
likely to suffer fluctuations in its credit rating, should rely on heavily
for finance. The view is echoed by Mr Corbett of Redland who says Amps form
only 10 per cent of his company's capital structure.
There have been a number of new issues by US companies recently, but it
seems likely to be a while before another UK group taps the market.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920312

