FT921-11741

FT  30 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: FAO plans to preserve farm
animal genes


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


A FIVE-YEAR, Dollars 15m plan to preserve the ancestral gene pool of
domestic animals in the developing world is being launched by the Food and
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations.
Mr Edouard Saouma, FAO director-general, believes the situation is urgent.
'Most of the animal resources that exist in the developing world have been
in stable production systems for hundreds of years,' he says. 'Now they are
coming under competitive pressure from imported stocks. A breed can be
completely changed genetically in 10 years without a full understanding of
what will be lost.'
The FAO is kick-starting the plan with Dollars 3m, but is seeking donor
funding for the rest.
The programme has five goals - to take a world inventory of livestock breeds
and strains; to establish banks of semen and embryos from endangered
animals; to start conservation programmes to save livestock in native
habitats; to use DNA technology to determine genetic characteristics and
improve breeds; and to develop an international legal framework for global
animal trade.
Mr Patrick Cunningham, director of the FAO's animal production and health
division, believes livestock is under pressure from both the move from
subsistence to commercial farming, and from the speed with which Western
technology can be adopted. 'You can fly in one container of semen and change
totally the next generation,' he says, adding that some animal breeds had
been protected by isolation and poverty for centuries.
The programme will be looking at all livestock, including fowl and pigs.
'No-one really knows how many types of goat and cattle there are, nor how
they differ from each other genetically, in evolutionary terms,' says Mr
Cunningham. One example of the sort of animal that needs study is the
sahiwal cattle of Pakistan and parts of India, which is a promising dairy
breed at about the same stage of development as Europe's holstein was 200
years ago, giving less than half the milk of a modern holstein. The sahiwal
thrives in the heat, unlike the holstein, but is in danger of extinction as
local producers try to adapt the Holstein to tropical countries.
He wants to see the same transformation of productivity for the sahiwal that
has been achieved in the West, through selective breeding using artificial
insemination and embryo transfer techniques.
While the sahiwal is the most promising in dairy terms of the cattle breeds
on the Indian subcontinent, there are dozens more with different
characteristics. 'We want to preserve, but we also want to develop,' he
says. 'We can't leave them as they are - if they remain static they will
disappear.'

The Financial Times


London Page 28 Photograph Pakistani sahiwal cattle, a promising dairy breed,
are under threat from attempts to adapt European holsteins (Omitted).

920130

