FT924-12051

FT  22 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee touches 8-month highs


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


LONDON ROBUSTA coffee prices touched 8-month highs yesterday and the New
York arabica market was further ahead in late trading in what one trader
described as 'a total turnround in market sentiment'.
'A couple of months ago you would have sold the rallies - now you are
looking to buy the dips,' said the London trader, who added that there was
little selling from countries of origin.
The London market has moved ahead on the back of New York. On Tuesday, the
New York December contract broke through 62.90 cents a lb - regarded as an
important level by technical traders - to close 2.70 cents ahead at 64.85
cents. In late trading yesterday it was almost another cent up. London's
December robusta contract closed up Dollars 20 at Dollars 885 a tonne,
having touched an eight-month high of Dollars 894.
Ms Judy Ganes, softs analyst with Merrill Lynch, said yesterday that the
market's strength had surprised a lot of people, including roasters and
technical traders. Only a few weeks ago coffee prices were at 20-year lows,
with the nearby New York contract below 50 cents a lb.
Most of the movement in New York has been sparked by the smaller crop in
Brazil, the world's biggest producer. Last week Brazil said it had exported
only 1m bags (60 kg each) in September, down from 1.6m bags in September
1991. Domestic prices in Brazil have risen sharply, with the average cost of
a bag of export quality at Dollars 60. This partly reflects the recent
government decision to roll over producer loans.
Ms Ganes sees New York hitting 70 cents in the run up to the next
International Coffee Organisation talks on a new agreement, scheduled for
the end of next month.
These talks are likely to be the key to further price gains. Delegates will
have to make some sort of progress in order to avoid a market reaction, said
a London trader. 'They won't want to let go the ground we have gained under
such difficult circumstances.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921022

