FT924-962

FT  21 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Signs of maturity


FIVE YEARS ago, South Korea's first presidential elections for 16 years were
scarred by violence. The opposition vote was split, allowing a former
general to win in an atmosphere of recrimination. The electorate was fed up
with politicians even as democracy was born. Contrast the vote for the next
president, held last Friday. Riot police were not called into action during
the campaign. Allegations of misbehaviour were relatively tame and have not
included ballot-rigging. The losers conceded gracefully.
If the elections are a victory for democracy, they are also a remarkable
achievement for Mr Kim Young-sam. The veteran opposition campaigner's 41 per
cent share of the vote was far larger than he might have hoped. He will need
this mandate to confront the challenges left by Mr Roh Tae-woo, widely seen
as an ineffective president who has allowed the economy to slip.
It is not clear that Mr Kim has the skills for the job - though the same
could be said of his opponents. He is a wheeler-dealer party boss, an
effective politician, but in the transition from anti-military campaigner to
candidate of the ruling party, he has built up political debts which might
limit his freedom of action. He inherits an establishment machine which has
proved sluggish in introducing vital reforms and often has a vested interest
in slowing them.
There is little dispute about needed economic reforms, though Mr Kim's
advisers advocated a slower pace than those of other candidates. Democracy
brought a rise in wages which reduced Korea's competitiveness. Economic
growth has slowed. High-technology industry must be developed and
bureaucratic control loosened. The economy needs further opening to
international competition.
Most delicate will be the attitude Mr Kim adopts towards the chaebol, the
family-owned conglomerates. Many in the ruling party may feel unforgiving
after the candidacy of Mr Chung Ju-yung, founder of Hyundai, the largest
chaebol, and political flirtations of other industrialists. Any attempts to
curb the chaebol, though necessary, should be tempered by recognition of
their role in Korea's future development.
The political challenges are no less great. With a new president in the US,
South Korea's main ally, Mr Kim's handling of foreign policy will be
particularly sensitive. There is the ever-present possibility that collapse
of the dictatorship in Pyongyang could suddenly present him with the
greatest challenge of all - re-unification with North Korea. Domestically,
decisive leadership is needed to restore the confidence of voters, 16 per
cent of whom opted for Mr Chung, a man without a political background. As
former campaigners for democracy, the victor and the runner-up, Mr Kim
Dae-jung, are both remnants of a former age. To fight tomorrow's battles, a
new generation of politicians - and probably, political parties - must be
fostered. Only then will democracy have matured in Korea.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921221

