FT924-8023

FT  13 NOV 92 / Arts: Ivo Pogorelich - Music


   By DAVID MURRAY


On Tuesday the Croatian pianist Ivo Pogorelich donated his services for a
benefit recital 'in aid of Historic Sites of Dubrovnik, under the auspices
of the International Monuments Trust, Croatia Appeal, and supported by the
International Council on Monuments and Sites UK'. Gratifyingly, the Royal
Festival Hall was packed out.
A brilliant but wilful artist, Pogorelich was on his best behaviour -
granted that the first half of his announced programme was replaced by
completely different music: one had been looking forward to his Skryabin op.
32. Best behaviour, however, is not the same thing as best form. Though I
last heard him banging away unmercifully at Schumann in the Barbican, he has
since then recorded Chopin's Preludes with astonishing imagination and
extreme technical finesse. Here, his Chopin (replacing Skryabin, Mozart and
Brahms) was immaculate in its way, but distinctly tame.
The opening of the big C minor Nocturne was superb and unexpected: a
suspended hush, with beautifully liquid basses under a poignant singing
line. For the 'poco piu lento' middle, Pogorelich chose to move much faster,
and the grand reprise was decorative rather than cathartic. The late
Nocturne in E was similarly gracious, content to display a fastidious
surface, and much the same could be said of his B minor Sonata - plenty of
genteel feeling, little dramatic stress or electricity, even in the harried
Finale.
After the interval he addressed himself to Ravel's Valses nobles et
sentimentales, with intriguing results. There was a plethora of swooning
rubati, of spikey staccato when the music predicates the opposite, of shy
counter-melodies so spotlit as to hide the main tunes. It was for just such
idiosyncrasies that Ravel denied his old friend and champion Ricardo Vines
the premieres of everything he wrote for the piano after Gaspard de la nuit,
from the Valses onward. Yet Pogorelich administered so much character of his
own, consistent and vivid, that it would have been pedantic to repine.
He played Rakhmaninov's rhapsodic B-flat minor Sonata in the familiar,
pointlessly truncated version. (Not by a long way the best of Rakhmaninov,
the piece nonetheless deserves to keep its original proportions.) As sheer
piano-playing it was constantly fascinating, but no larger vision imposed
itself. So too with his encore, Balakirev's Islamey: it was sensationally
swift, accurate and quite without physical thrills. At the inspired
modulation at the start of the reprise, which is arguably the master-stroke
of the piece, Pogorelich clattered heedlessly straight through.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921113

