FT921-3896

FT  12 MAR 92 / Gillette given six months to divest Eemland interests


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent and PEGGY HOLLINGER


GILLETTE, the razor group, was yesterday given just over six months by the
government to dispose of its shareholding in and loan to Eemland, parent
company of Wilkinson Sword, its main rival in the UK wet shaving products
market.
Mr Peter Lilley, trade and industry secretary, said he had decided to make
an order under the Fair Trading Act forcing Gillette to divest, following
advice from Sir Gordon Borrie, director-general of fair trading, that he had
failed to negotiate an undertaking from the company to divest its interests
in Eemland (formerly known as Swedish Match).
Sir Gordon had been negotiating with Gillette at the request of the trade
and industry secretary after the Monopolies and Mergers Commission ruled
last year that a financial link between the two companies could work against
the public interest.
Gillette lent Dollars 69m (Pounds 40.35m) to a buy-out of the consumer
products division of Stora, the Swedish paper and forestry group, which
formed Swedish Match and took a 22 per cent stake through non-voting shares.
Gillette has always disputed the MMC's findings maintaining that its
interest in Eemland did not give it any influence over Wilkinson Sword.
However, Gillette has the right to prevent shareholders selling stakes to
other companies, and to turn its stake into ordinary voting shares which
could give it management control.
An Eemland spokesman said the group would not be affected by the MMC's
decision. The Dollars 69m mezzanine finance arranged with Gillette did not
allow for the loan to be called in before it falls due. 'Our obligations
under that finance will be the same whoever holds it,' he said.
The disposal of Gillette's 22 per cent non-voting stake would also have
little effect on Wilkinson. 'Gillette has been a passive, sleeping . . .
shareholder,' he said.
Gillette has spent the past two years trying to convince competition
authorities that its involvement in the deal did not damage competition.
The transaction has been investigated by authorities in the US, Canada,
France and Germany as well as by the European Commission in Brussels.
If Gillette refuses to divest at the end of the six-month period the trade
and industry secretary would have to seek a High Court injunction enforcing
the order.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920312

