FT922-556

FT  26 JUN 92 / Cheap oil price fuels finance problems


   By PETER MONTAGNON


THE SAD TRUTH about BP's problems is also the simple one. It would be in
much less trouble - and Mr Horton would probably still be chairman - if the
oil price were closer to Dollars 30 than the Dollars 21.50 at which it
closed last night.
At current levels the oil price is not high enough to generate the cash or
the profits needed to cover the heavy expenditure incurred by BP in recent
years as it searched for replacements to its maturing fields in Alaska and
the North Sea.
BP is also still trying to digest an expensive series of acquisitions in the
late 1980s, when it spent Pounds 4.7bn on buying out the minority interest
in Standard Oil of Ohio, Pounds 3.2bn on Britoil and Pounds 2.4bn buying
back its own shares from the Kuwait Investment Office.
Capital expenditure last year was Pounds 4.5bn, equivalent to nearly 14 per
cent of turnover. Outlays have been running at high levels for several
years, and though last year's total was below the Pounds 5.8bn spent in
1988, it still marked a near 20 per cent rise on 1990.
Mr Horton argued that the company's development programmes were 'robust'
even when the oil price was still between Dollars 17 and Dollars 18 last
winter. In practice, however, the persistent weakness of the price had
already condemned BP to steady increases in its debt burden, which now
totals Pounds 8.56bn.
By the end of this year's first quarter, net gearing had risen to 85 per
cent from 78 per cent at the end of the year. This is in marked contrast to
Shell which operates with a much lower level of indebtedness and a more
downstream-oriented business, and is therefore less dependent on the
vagaries of the oil price.
But BP remained defiant when first-quarter profits were insufficient to
cover the regular quarterly dividend of 4.2p a share.
'We have made a judgment that we are at the turning point in the
recessionary cycle and any change to our dividend policy would be
premature,' said Mr David Simon, the deputy chairman who is now to become
chief executive. This policy, on which Mr Horton had staked his reputation,
has become increasingly controversial.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920626

