FT922-4494

FT  05 JUN 92 / Wellcome unveils outline of share sale


   By MAGGIE URRY


INVESTORS bidding for shares in Wellcome, the drug company, in the Pounds
4bn global share sale set for next month, will receive more favourable
treatment if they put their bids in early and do not indulge in 'market
activity' which might depress the share price, Robert Fleming, the UK
merchant bank co-ordinating the sale, said yesterday.
The outline of the tender offer, under which the Wellcome Trust, the medical
charity, will reduce its stake in the group by between 202m and 417m shares,
was announced yesterday. Wellcome shares slipped 5p to 958p.
The filing of the 'pink herring' prospectus, so-called because it omits more
of the final details of the sale than is usual, allows the group to begin
the process of familiarising international investors with the group's
business.
Wellcome, which went public in 1986, is not well known internationally as a
company, although its drugs are famous, notably Retrovir, its controversial
Aids treatment.
As the trust still owns 73.6 per cent of the equity, the shares have been
difficult to deal in. Only 2 per cent of the shares are held in the US, the
company's most important market.
Mr Lawrence Banks, head of corporate finance at Fleming, said the structure
of the sale was designed to maximise the proceeds to the trust and to
produce an orderly after-market for the shares. The final size and price of
the offer will be determined by bids made by investors to the issue's
managers in eight regional syndicates.
The offer follows the US style of a book building sale, which is expected to
give the trust a higher price for its shares than a UK type of offering
would. The issue will not be underwritten, meaning that fees will be higher
than a UK issue but the discount to the market price should be significantly
lower.
The marketing campaign will begin on June 25 with an offering circular,
which will give the provisional size of the sale.
The tender period starts on July 6, but bids will only become firm at the
closing date two or three weeks later. Pricing is expected to take place
overnight or over a weekend so that investors do not carry any significant
market risk. All the shares will be sold at the same price.
Details, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920605

