FT921-11909

FT  29 JAN 92 / Business and the Environment: Moment of truth - Why Europe's
green investment market is set to take off


   By HILARY DE BOERR


Europe's green investment market looks set to grow by leaps and bounds in
the coming decade, superseding the US market as the place for
environmentally conscious investors to put their cash.
Impending EC legislation, Europe's dense population and the opening up of
eastern Europe will bring substantial business opportunities in the
environmental sector. That makes the beneficiaries attractive long-term
investments, say industry specialists.
Research and information systems, which remain limited in Europe's green
investment market, should also improve in coming years. Better investment
advice and, presumably, better returns should be available to investors
interested in the environment.
Europe's green investment market is still in its infancy. Britain - where
most of the activity takes place - saw its first green fund launched only
four years ago. While several more have appeared since then, the UK green
unit trust market is still only worth about Pounds 240m - a fraction of the
Pounds 55bn UK market.
Most European financial capitals offer at least a couple of green funds, and
there are signs of increasing activity - albeit at a slow pace.
In the US, where environmental legislation has been in place for longer,
green investment is a more mature market. The potential for investment
profits is being affected by concern about the economy, and environmental
regulations are even being blamed for slowing economic growth.
Investment analysts are therefore turning their attention to European
environmental legislation. The European Commission currently has under its
aegis about 250 directives, rulings or recommendations concerning the
environment. The directives will have to be implemented into law by EC
member states.
Rovid Technology Partners, the UK investment adviser, believes western
Europe's environmental goods and services market - worth Dollars 65bn
(Pounds 36bn) in 1988 - will more than double in value to stabilise at
Dollars 140bn 'some years into the next century'. The US market, already
worth Dollars 100bn in 1988, will stabilise at Dollars 120bn, it says.
The business boom will mean investment opportunities in such sectors as
waste management, air and water treatment and recycling, and investment
companies are showing signs of renewed activity after a couple of years'
hiatus.
While some companies will benefit from the growth of the green movement,
others will no doubt suffer. Environmental liabilities are going to cost
many companies a great deal of money, which will be reflected in share
prices.
The question now exercising financial analysts' minds is what exactly is a
green share; a company that has adopted environmentally-sound policies -
such as the Body Shop - or a company that operates in the environmental
services sector - such as Shanks & McEwan, the waste management group? David
Owen, an analyst at Ecofin, the London-based financial consultants, says one
analyst's green share is another's bete noire. 'I don't see how a company
selling free-range pigs is going to help clean up Russia,' he says.
In the UK, Commercial Union and Legal & General are expected to launch green
funds which invest in European shares, while venture capital companies are
increasingly active in the private sector.
Charterhouse in the UK, and Alex Brown and First Analysis Corporation in the
US, are currently raising funds from institutional investors in Europe and
the US for environmental venture capital funds worth up to Dollars 100m.
Companies in the UK, France, Germany, Italy and Spain are expected to
attract most of the money.
Stuart Janney, managing director of Alex Brown, the Baltimore venture
capital firm specialising in environmental companies, says: 'We think that
the next seven to 10 years are going to afford an unprecedented opportunity
to invest in companies that are small now but which will be very big at the
end of this decade. And these companies are going to be European companies.'
The main question in the debut years of green investment was whether money
could be made from being green. That has been been proved - some such funds
have outperformed their stock markets - but the bandwagon effect is wearing
off.
As Roger Hardman, at James Capel, publisher of the much-referred-to Green
Book on environmental shares, warns: 'The day has passed when the average
green share could rely upon a better-than-average market rating purely by
dint of its environmental awareness. The premium ratings can still be
obtained - but they have to be earned whereas in the past they didn't'
Sorting the potentially profitable share from the rest remains problematic.
There is a dearth of information on European companies' environmental
records - especially when compared with the US, where information systems
have developed over the past decade or so.
Few European investment companies operate their own environmental research
teams, leaving a handful of research outlets supplying information to a
specialist market.
There is simply not enough investigative groundwork, argue industry
specialists. 'Too much information is extracted from press cuttings,
celebrity panels and somewhat poor questionnaires sent to company chairmen
to complete. You won't get a company chairman who doesn't feel that his
company is not green and positive in every way,' says one observer.
There are signs of movement on both fronts, but it will not happen tomorrow.
As Peter Webster, executive director of EIRIS, the ethical investment
research service, says: 'Investment is a slow business - they take decisions
at a slow pace.'

The Financial Times


London Page 16 Chart (Omitted). Chart (Omitted). Chart (Omitted).

920129

