FT924-8013

FT  13 NOV 92 / Personal View: An American parallel


   By RAY CALAMARO


'It's remarkably brief and simple,' a senior European Community official
told me. He was talking about the 10th amendment to the US constitution, one
of the reference sources consulted by the European Commission as it tries to
frame a workable doctrine of subsidiarity. 'Perhaps,' mused the official,
'life was simpler then too.' Perhaps, but no one should think that the US
had an easier time agreeing its constitution than Europe seems to be having
with the Maastricht treaty.
The similarities between 1992 and 1789 are striking: individual states are
loosely bound together but recognise they must forge a stronger union,
especially for commerce and security; representatives of the 12 states
(Rhode Island did not send a delegate to Philadelphia in 1787) meet and sign
a historic document which, if ratified, will create a new union; under that
union each state remains sovereign except for those specific powers given to
the union, and in those instances the union's authority is supreme; the new
document requires ratification by the states; a raging debate ensues where a
central issue, sometimes clearly stated but as often not, is local control
versus central authority.
The American experience seems to be relevant in many ways. We too found the
process of creating a union difficult and painful. The Constitutional
Convention worked from February to May 1787 to produce a document that was
argued over and modified during that hot summer. In September the
constitution was sent to the 13 states, only nine of which were required to
ratify. Eight months and three weeks passed before the ninth state, New
Hampshire, ratified, and eventually the other four came along as well. The
smallest, Rhode Island, displaying the spirit of today's Denmark, was last
to approve.
During those tense months, the outcome was far from certain. And even then,
10 new amendments to the constitution - known collectively as the Bill of
Rights and intended to clarify and establish the right of individuals
vis-a-vis the state - were adopted two years later. A charter with 10 new
amendments may seem soft concrete for a foundation, but there have only been
16 more amendments during the two centuries that followed.
Like the EC in 1992, the US in 1789 was divided into large, powerful states
and smaller ones which feared being dominated. In 1789 it was four large and
nine small; in 1992 it is five large and seven small. The US constitution is
filled with devices sought by the smaller states to provide protection from
the power of larger ones. Likewise, the question of big-versus-small states
has arisen at important moments during the debate on Maastricht. The young
US faced immediate growth, as the EC does now. Vermont was the first of the
37 new states to join after the original 13. The EC has applications for
membership from Finland, Sweden, Austria and others, and it may quickly grow
from 12 to 16, with more later.
The most important parallel with today's Europe is that Americans who
favoured union had some very powerful opponents within the 13 states.
Alexander Hamilton knew that if he lost one of the big four, the
constitution could fail to serve its purpose of unifying the young nation.
New York (with the then capital of the US, New York City) was uncertain at
best. The governor of New York, whose name happened to be Clinton, was a
powerful and wily opponent.
As an American who imported his US-made car to Brussels, eats his salad
first and prefers dry martinis to dry Sancerre, I have been accused of
excessive patriotism. But though I am as proud as a Little League father of
my country's birth in 1776 under the Articles of Confederation and 'rebirth'
in 1789 under our constitution, I must admit that what Europe is now doing
is perhaps, given the centuries of history with which Europe must contend,
even more impressive.
There are many other comparisons that might be drawn, and history can be
retold to prove almost anything. The point, however, is that the hardest
work is not in drafting a constitution but in getting it approved. No
American knew if the constitution would be ratified, and many doubted it.
Indeed, one retrospective measure of greatness among our founding fathers is
the skill they showed in arguing for ratification and winning over those who
threatened to oppose.
This is why the great American historian Clinton Rossiter called the
Federalist Papers - a series of essays published in 1787 and 1788 by
Alexander Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay, which forcefully advocated
the case for ratification and drove much of the debate - 'the most important
work in political science that has ever been written, or is likely ever to
be written, in the US'.
History suggests the game in Europe, far from being over, may just have
begun. Those who ask where are the heroes who will unify Europe should wait
a while; their question may soon be answered.
The author was US deputy assistant attorney-general for legislative affairs,
1977-79

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921113

