FT923-9624

FT  04 AUG 92 / Arts: Face facts, new visions of the visage - Exhibitions


   By MARINA VAIZEY


TWO EYES, a nose and a mouth, five dashes placed in a circle: a face is what
most of us first see - and first try to depict. We gaze into the faces of
others, look at our own in the mirror, cover ours with all kinds of things,
from make-up to sunglasses to beards, depending on sex and culture. And we
assume that we know each other's attitudes and feelings by interpreting the
almost infinite range of expressions which the face, with its elaborate
muscular structure, is capable.
The face, stripped bare - the skull  - is the ultimate momenti mori. So it
is inevitable that the face should be currently undergoing, on the outskirts
of Paris, deconstruction and reconstruction in an enthralling anthology, A
Visage de Couvert (The Naked Face) at the Cartier Foundation at
Jouy-en-Josas until October 4.
Here, among other things, are tattooed Maori faces, the life mask of William
Blake as the subject of painting by Francis Bacon, Andy Warhol's smiling
Jackie in diptych and organic masks all put together beyond any framework of
historic, chronological, geographic or cultural categories. The collection
is billed simply as '200 masterpieces from every civilisation' and described
as 'witnesses to the philosophical and aesthetic interrogation that man has
always had with his own image'. The French are hardly given to
understatement.
There is a fascinating paradox at the core of the exhibition. The faces are
not presented as portraits and the subjects are rarely named. If identified,
most mean little: for example, Robert Mapplethorpe's powerful photograph of
a black face with its eyes closed - a living mask - is named as Ken Moody.
And yet from the extraordinary Sang mask from the Gabon to 19th century
bronze caricatures by Franz Xaver Messercshmidt to Picasso's cubist head of
a man, the parade faces, however stylised, satired and stereotyped, is a
procession of remarkable individuality.
Even the Malevich suprematist face - two squares, a rectangle and a curve in
black (the ultimate smile) floating in a white rectangular space - seems
cheeky and smart and proves that revolutionaries can relax.
The exhibition is dramatically shown in three separate sections apportioned
among three free-standing galleries in the spacious gardens of the Cartier
Foundation, opened by the company in 1984 to show thematic art exhibitions
to the public. Occasionally the sense of chic occasion has overwhelmed the
art: last summer's meditation on Vitesse (Speed) was long on presentation
and short on substance. Not so with The Face: divided into sections called
The Grammar of the Face, Uproar, and Silence, there is plenty of room for
the spectator to respond to a rich display in various media, including
holograms and video.
The heads are almost exclusively frontal views. Appearances range from the
startling smears of paint used like muddy cream by Frank Auerbach for his
obscure emotionally telling portraits of his friends to the colourful and
sinister watercolour heads by Francesco Clemente; a gouache and glued paper
portrait by Paul Klee vividly evokes a face with orange blobs for eyes and
nostrils set in to a grey oval, a contrast to the radiant liveliness and
immediacy of the second century Egyptian Fayum portraits of a young man
which have adorned his coffin.
This is a primitive and sophisticated mix, and what becomes clearest of all
is the surprising perversity of modern times. There are surprisingly few
female faces on view.
Many of the modern and contemporary artists as seen here defy history by
cultivating the childish, affecting a knowing, sly innocence. They focus on
anxiety and alienation, their images are fragmented and broken down,
distorted and deliberately obscure.
The stark simplicity, coupled very often with elaborate decoration, of the
masks and faces of North American Indians, African tribes and the classic
perfection of antiquity, still have a persuasive power. After this
extraordinary immersion into faces across human history, destroyed and
reassembled, our own will never look quite the same again.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920804

