FT923-9605

FT  04 AUG 92 / International Company News: Canada keeps close eye on
troubled carriers' talks


   By ROBERT GIBBENS


   MONTREAL


THE FEDERAL government is distancing itself from any quick solution to the
troubles of Air Canada and Canadian International Airlines, despite market
rumours that a merger proposal could come later this week.
While officials of Canada's two major airlines continued talks in Calgary,
Transport Minister Jean Corbeil said the government will not provide any
direct financial backing for a merger, beyond completing acquisition of
three Airbus 310s for the defence department from Canadian for about
CDollars 150m (USDollars 127.1m).
The Mulroney government, facing the countdown on its constitutional talks,
is watching the airlines' negotiations closely.
It must assure a future for Canadian's principal assets in western Canada,
including a large maintenance base, and also the position of Air Canada in
the east, including headquarters and a larger maintenance base in Montreal.
In the past two weeks Air Canada has been frozen out of negotiations with
USAir after British Airways bought part of the US carrier.
Then Canadian's parent, PWA, broke off talks with American Airlines because
Ottawa disagreed with the terms.
Immediately, Air Canada resumed merger talks with PWA, with the two airlines
picking up where they left off earlier this year.
Despite its heavy losses, Air Canada remains the stronger of the two
airlines financially, but it badly needs Canadian's Far East routes.
The two airlines have about 25 per cent over-capacity. Putting them together
would create an airline with 200 aircraft, 34,000 employees, two maintenance
bases, CDollars 4.5bn of debt, equity of CDollars 1bn and continuing heavy
operating losses because of the poor domestic market.
It would, however, still need greater access to US routes.
Analysts estimate between 5,000 and 10,000 employees would have to be axed
to bring costs in line with US carriers and severance and other factors
could run to CDollars 100m.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920804

