FT921-1486

FT  24 MAR 92 / International Capital Markets: Leaders feel the need for a
dose of fiscal discipline - Caribbean governments are putting state
enterprises up for sale to reduce deficits


   By CANUTE JAMES


   KINGSTON


GOVERNMENTS in the Caribbean are putting a range of state enterprises up for
sale as they become penned in by reduced foreign investment and the need for
improved fiscal discipline.
The driving force behind divestment has in some cases been the need to
reduce fiscal deficits by selling off enterprises which have been a drain on
the budget and to ease balance of payments problems by selling to foreign
investors.
The deregulation of economies has provided another spur to divestment
programmes, as well as the growing belief in market forces.
However, the effort can prove a headache. The Jamaican government, for
example, announced last year it would have sell its 39 per cent stake in the
island's largest commercial bank to the public. But this month, in a
reversal of policy, its sold the shares by private treaty to a local
insurance company and a building society for the equivalent of Dollars 23m.
Mr Hugh Small, the finance minister, said the state of the market would have
brought the government much less than it received from the two purchasers.
Government sources said later that the government could not risk going
public because it needed the money to satisfy conditions of an agreement
with the International Monetary Fund.
The government is likely to hope that this does not affect its privatisation
programme which has seen the sale of assets worth about Dollars 60m. These
include holdings in hotels, telecommunications companies and a cement plant.
The government has identified another 65 enterprises and agencies which it
intends to divest, among which are the international and domestic airlines,
water and electricity companies, the railways, some port facilities and the
postal service.
The Puerto Rican government tried last year to sell its telephone company
for Dollars 3bn. Although several companies showed interest, they all balked
at the price. The administration withdrew the offer, but saved some face
last month with the sale of its long distance carrier to Telefonica de
Espana, the Spanish telecommunications group, for Dollars 141m.
Guyana has been more fortunate in attracting buyers for state enterprises.
The government has divested 13 state enterprises since the start of last
year and is negotiating for another 10 to be partly or totally privatised.
Another 16 are likely to be put on the block.
Among the enterprises the government wants to privatise are a sugar company,
which Booker Tate of the UK is managing under contract while a US company
has been negotiating for a stake in the local power company.
Just over 4m acres of the country's forests have been leased to South Korean
and Malaysian investors who are putting Dollars 50m into a joint logging and
saw-milling venture.
Prospective participants in the divestment programme may be wary of the
attitude of the parliamentary opposition.
Elections are expected later this year, and Dr Cheddi Jagan, the opposition
leader, has said there was no guarantee that, if elected to the presidency,
he would honour any divestment agreements reached just before the election.
In neighbouring Trinidad and Tobago, the government which took office in
December is reviewing the divestment programme.
According to officials, the government is committed to implementing the
programme started by the previous administration, 'but is studying it to see
what aspects can be improved'.
In the Dominican Republic, the administration maintains it is committed to
selling off state companies. But Mr Juan Arteaga, economic adviser to
President Joaquin Balaguer, says there is reluctance to pursue the
programme. 'We are taking steps in this matter, but very slowly,' he said.
'There are vital companies that we should have a hand on, such as the flour
mills. On the other hand, electricity and the airline can be privatised.'
The local representative of one multilateral financial institution concluded
that privatisation was a sensitive political issue. 'There are many public
employees in the state enterprises, and they represent many votes which the
government does not want to lose.'
However, there are those, who counsel against undue haste in privatisation.
'I do not think that profitable government operations should be privatised,'
said Mr Michael Howard, an economist at the Barbados campus of the
University of the West Indies.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920324

