FT924-6050

FT  24 NOV 92 / GE disposal creates US defence group with sales of Dollars
11bn


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


MARTIN MARIETTA, the US defence electronics group, is to pay Dollars 3.05bn
(Pounds 2bn) for the aerospace businesses of General Electric, the US
conglomerate, creating one of the country's largest defence contractors with
combined annual sales of Dollars 11bn.
The takeover is one of the largest of a wave of deals aimed at restructuring
the defence industry in the expectation that the US military procurement
budget will continue to decline.
'The one thing I think I can absolutely promise is that these two companies
will be much better off together than they would be alone,' said Mr Norman
Augustine, Martin Marietta's chairman and chief executive.
Mr John Welch, GE's chairman and chief executive, said his company had
initiated the deal after a strategic review to find the best way of
developing its aerospace division, whose operating profits have stagnated in
a range of Dollars 640m-Dollars 655m over the past four years.
'We decided that clearly Martin Marietta was the best complementary fit . .
. we talked to no one else in the industry,' Mr Welch said.
Mr Augustine said that there was virtually no overlap between their
businesses; GE Aerospace is centred on satellites, radar, sonar and
communications systems while Martin Marietta is stronger in launch systems
and missiles. The two groups had concluded negotiations in only four weeks.
While the deal offers few opportunities for reducing overheads by
eliminating overlapping capacity, Mr Welch and Mr Augustine both said the
newly combined group would be able to compete more effectively in the
tighter defence market.
The new company will start with an order backlog of Dollars 19bn and about
Dollars 3.5bn of civil and commercial business.
Mr Augustine said about Dollars 100bn a year in defence contracts was still
'a non-trivial amount of money in our minds', and strong companies would win
a disproportionate share.
GE will receive about Dollars 800m in cash, Dollars 750m in new debt and
Dollars 1bn in perpetual convertible preferred stock and will retain the
right to Dollars 500m owed to the division by trade creditors. It will also
take two seats on Martin Marietta's board.
GE said the aerospace division will have made a net profit of about Dollars
330m this year, and its sale at slightly over nine timesearnings would
dilute the group's earnings per share by under 2 per cent. The deal would,
however, increase GE's growth rate by 1 to 2 percentage points, and the
dilution should be overcome in less than two years.
Mr Augustine declined to predict the deal's impact on Martin Marietta's
earnings, but said it would increase operating earnings, earnings per share,
free cash flow and free cash flow per share.
Martin Marietta's debt to capitalisation ratio will rise to about 46 per
cent because of the acquisition, but Mr Augustine said this ratio would
return to its current level of about 20 per cent within three years.
Ending of cold war hots up a merger Page 23
General Electric group buys Kodak credit arm Page 28
US stocks Page 39

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921124

