FT924-6442

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: Misled institutions - Off the Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


PERHAPS it is predictable that academic institutions should live in cloud
cuckoo land. That is certainly the case at Edinburgh University and at Royal
Holloway College whose administrators think they can solve their financial
problems by selling off works of art entrusted to their keeping.
Not only are they betraying their benefactors and stirring up ill will, but
the rewards will be disappointing. Their views on art market prices are at
least two years out of date. On the advice of a not disinterested auction
house, Royal Holloway had visions of raising Pounds 20m from selling works
by Turner, Constable and Gainsborough from the collection of its founder,
the Victorian pill king.
The prices paid this week at auction for British pictures (the few that
sold, that is) suggest it should revise its expectations to nearer Pounds
5m, or even less. Constable's 'Harnham Bridge' failed to reach its Pounds 1m
target and was unsold, as was an important Turner Venetian watercolour when
the bidding ran out at Pounds 400,000.
Edinburgh University slipped a copy of Audubon's Birds of America to
Christie's New York earlier this year and ended up over Dollars 2m richer.
It is trying to repeat the trick by selling either an Adrian de Vries
sculpture or a river scene by Jacob van Ruisdael. Once again the sum
anticipated, Pounds 5m, is ridiculously high, the more so if the University
thinks that the National Gallery of Scotland, which has had the van Ruisdael
on its walls since 1846, can somehow conjure up that sort of money to ensure
it stays in its natural home.
In addition both institutions are alienating their natural friends. As a
Grade One listed building, Royal Holloway could seek a grant from English
Heritage. Edinburgh is actually asking the National Heritage Fund for money,
money that is unlikely to be forthcoming given its current anti-art stance.
The National Heritage Fund has other things to worry about at the moment. It
was the chief sufferer from the inadequate arts budget achieved by Heritage
Secretary Peter Brooke last week. Totally out of the blue, its grant for
1994-95 has been reduced from the current Pounds 12m to Pounds 8.2m, with
Pounds 7.8m earmarked for the year after.
Why this successful institution, given the task of safeguarding the national
heritage, both artistic and natural, should be singled out for the axe is
unclear. Reports are that the entire arts and heritage budget was still
being finalised on the morning of the Chancellor's statement and the Fund
was regarded as the softest fall guy.
The budget was delayed because the Government got belated cold feet on its
original idea to mothball the British Library, and instead decided to lavish
money on the project in an attempt to finally finish it off. So Brian Lang,
current director of the Library, gained at the expense of the Heritage Fund,
which he headed in years gone by.
The Fund hopes that quiet lobbying will get its grant raised again by next
year's statement. Its importance as the ultimate guardian of national
treasures could become obvious in forthcoming months. There are many country
houses, hit badly by falling property and land values, who are tottering
financially and will look to the Fund to shore them up.
It may well do so, but only at the expense of saving works of art from
export. The Fund feels that many British antiques appearing at auction are
currently over valued. For example it is advising the V&A, which is keen to
acquire James II's wedding suit, not to pander to the owners, the de
Sausmarez family, who suddenly raised the reserve from Pounds 200,000 to
Pounds 300,000 at Christie's this week. This made the V&A's bid of Pounds
200,000 inadequate. The museum is still negotiating, but why offer more when
there is no obvious alternative buyer?
The same goes for the 43 intimate letters the Earl of Essex wrote to Queen
Elizabeth I in the 1590s. Sotheby's is offering them on December 14 at over
Pounds 400,000. The Fund thinks this is excessive, and will advise the
obvious purchaser, the British Library, to keep its saleroom powder dry.
Prints by Royal Academician Norman Ackroyd sell for at least Pounds 250 and
the work of Eileen Cooper, Albert Irvin, William Crozier and Julian Grater
for not much less. You can acquire a print by these artists for Pounds 38 if
you move quickly.
And there is more. For your money you get an annual subscription to Art
Line, the well informed if idiosyncratic magazine of contemporary art. You
also help a good cause.
Art Line exposed an art world confidence trickster. He filed a malicious
complaint of libel before fleeing the country. In amassing an overwhelming
defence against the charge Art Line acquired legal costs that could bankrupt
it. The artists have rallied round by producing the prints for free and
1,000 new annual subscriptions should clear Art Line's debt. Details from
Art Line, 11, Phoenix House, Phoenix St. London WC2H 8BS.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921121

