FT922-4382

FT  05 JUN 92 / Indian police raid broker's properties


   By RICHARD WATERS and R C MURTHY


   BOMBAY


POLICE in Bombay raided yesterday more than 34 homes and offices belonging
to the broker at the centre of the securities scandal and to his family.
Mr Harshad Mehta was also named in the first criminal indictment filed over
the affair, along with 12 others. These included his wife Jyoti and brothers
Ashwin and Sudhi, with senior officials of the State Bank of India, the
country's largest commercial bank.
Mr Mehta was taken away for interrogation, and was later formally arrested,
according to Reuters news agency.
The indictment had been filed by the Central Bureau of Investigation at a
special court hearing in New Delhi last Friday, but not previously
publicised. It alleges criminal conspiracy and breach of trust, cheating,
forgery, falsification of accounts and bribery.
Among those named was Mr C L Khemani, the State Bank deputy managing
director in charge of treasury operations. The bank's chairman was told to
go on leave on Wednesday, pending his retirement at the end of next month.
Assets belonging to Mr Harshad Mehta, his family and companies had been
frozen by the CBI, which is investigating how Rs30.8bn (Pounds 600m) was
illicitly taken out of the banking system.
The CBI's action so far relates to only one part of the affair - dealings
between Mr Mehta and the State Bank, which channelled Rs170bn of
transactions through him in the inter-bank markets since last July.
Some Rs4bn belonging to the National Housing Bank was later used to pay off
part of Mr Mehta's debts to the State Bank, after the money had been routed
through the broker's current account at ANZ Grindlays.
NHB cheques were paid by Grindlays into Mr Mehta's account, even though they
were made out to the bank itself and carried no instructions to pay Mr
Mehta.
Grindlays has claimed this was normal market practice between banks and
brokers. A broker may have a cheque credited to his account the day it is
received only when the cheque is made out in a bank's name and drawn on the
Reserve Bank of India, the country's central bank.
The affair has pitched Grindlays into head-on confrontation with the Reserve
Bank. It owns NHB, and is trying to press Grindlays into setting up a
provision to reflect its liability to refund the money.
The CBI's attention is expected to spread to other aspects of the affair.
These include the way in which Standard Chartered and two subsidiaries of
the state-owned Canara Bank came to be owed Rs12.8bn between them by Bank of
Karad and Metropolitan Co-Operative Bank, both of which lack sufficient
assets to repay the money.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920605

