FT921-1161

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Campaign diplomacy


   By JOE ROGALY


If foreign policy determined the outcome of elections, the Conservatives
would be assured of victory. You have merely to shut your eyes and think of
Mr John Major and Mr Douglas Hurd working in tandem to protect our interests
against the predatory and insane collection of foreigners that populates the
globe. Comforting, is it not? No? Even if you cannot quite believe in Mr
Major as, shall we say, Palmerston or Disraeli, Mr Hurd must appear on any
list of first-rate foreign secretaries. It is at the very least reassuring.
It should be a strong election sell. The Labour party cannot match it. This
is not a comment on the diplomatic or personal qualities of Mr Neil Kinnock
or Mr Gerald Kaufman. For all we know of their behaviour, should they reach
office the former may be the Attlee and the latter the Bevin of the 1990s,
although I suspect that he himself would doubt that. Unfortunately for
Labour, neither looks the part. Neither has the necessary experience. On
this issue, their images are subsumed by those of the prime minister and Mr
Hurd. For the duration of the campaign, the government's control of foreign
affairs must be counted a Conservative asset.
The Tories have not always deserved such public confidence. Take just two
post-1945 examples. Africa and Europe have frequently divided the party, to
the detriment of the national interest. It is 30 years since Lord Salisbury
called the then colonial secretary, Mr Iain Macleod, 'too clever by half'
for his cunning constitutional ploys during the process of withdrawal from
Britain's African colonies. The phrase nearly destroyed the career of a man
who is often cited as a role model by Mr Major. In the 1960s the
Conservative right, which took first the Kenya settlers' side and later that
of the white South Africans, was bitterly critical of the Tory left's
de-colonisers. It derided the then Mr Harold Macmillan, whose 'wind of
change' speech filled the sails of the anti-apartheid movement.
Between 1983 and 1991 the Tories were nearly destroyed by squabbles over
Europe. Arguments about Britain's stance within the Community led to the
resignations of Mr Nigel Lawson and Sir Geoffrey Howe. The long-running
schism - 'real Corn Law stuff', as one senior minister put it at the time -
eventually brought Mrs Margaret Thatcher down. This followed a challenge
from Mr Michael Heseltine, whose celebrated departure from Mrs Thatcher's
cabinet was precipitated by a European issue.
Mrs Thatcher aimed to keep Britain in what she hoped would be a special
relationship with the US. No harm in that. All her post-1945 predecessors,
Labour and Conservative alike, had done the same. But her perception of the
EC was distorted by suspicion of the motives of the Brussels administration.
She did not trust the Germans, and had little time for the French. She was
at heart an English nationalist. No doubt she still is.
Initially, she was also wrong about South Africa. She opposed sanctions at a
time when they were a necessary weapon against apartheid. She was lucky: her
support won the trust of the Afrikaners. That enabled her to be useful in
facilitating the end-game. But you could not honestly conclude that in the
period 1979-90 the principal strands of foreign policy were safe in the Tory
government's hands.
Nor is it possible to be sure that the Tories will get Europe right if they
stay in office. They still aspire to win the election, but on present form
they can only hope to do so as either the largest party in a hung parliament
or by a very slim overall majority. In that circumstance, the legislation
following the Maastricht treaty - a new 'Europe Act' - might be difficult to
get through the Commons. A small handful of Thatcherite Europhobes could
easily destabilise the proceedings. The never-ending post-war argument,
which first kept us out of the EC and then on the periphery of its affairs,
would be resumed.
Yesterday the Conservatives edged a little towards Mrs Thatcher's side of
this argument, partly to disadvantage Labour and partly in anticipation of a
renewed debate after April 9. 'Conservatives favour a free enterprise and
outward-looking Europe,' said Mr Hurd. 'Labour . . . embraces the Community
as a new source of regulation . . .' The Social Charter, which the
Conservatives refused to accept, would 'destroy British jobs'. He questioned
Labour's judgment on this and other issues, such as nuclear deterrence, EC
membership, South Africa and the single market.
It is fair political discourse, and it might do well in an election campaign
in another age. The greatness or otherwise of Britain is ever a saloon-bar
topic, although I suspect less so now than, say, in the aftermath of the
Falklands or Gulf wars. The contest due to be settled on April 9 is,
however, about domestic concerns, such as the recession, education, and
health. Turn away from that map of Europe: it is through the sickbeds of
England that Labour proposes to march to victory.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920325

