FT921-3768

FT  12 MAR 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Honda in damage
limitation drive


   By STEVEN BUTLER


For Mitsuru Sato, manager of Honda Motor's newly-established vehicle import
division, President George Bush's visit to Japan in January had one positive
result.
Thanks to the flood of publicity about trade friction in the motor industry,
nearly everyone in Japan now knows that Honda dealers are selling
Chrysler-made Jeeps.
The downside is that nearly all of these people also think that the Chrysler
Jeep Cherokees and Wranglers are poor in quality and overpriced.
Sato's unenviable job is to undo the damage and to avoid the embarrassment
to Honda should the company fail to reach its target of 1,200 Jeep sales a
year by 1994.
Sato confesses that the criticisms of Chrysler vehicles are, at least
partly, justified. 'People say the selling price is too high, which we
admit,' he says. The Jeep Cherokee sells for Y5.2m (Pounds 22,900) compared
with competing products by Japanese makers which cost between Y3.5m and Y4m.
As for quality, Honda was at first surprised when its customers complained
about fit and finish problems in the Jeeps because the vehicles had already
established a certain following among customers who bought directly from
Chrysler Japan Sales, the importer. Honda customers had higher standards and
they were holding Honda accountable for any problems.
It did little good to tell customers that Honda was not the importer and did
not set the price or have any control over quality. It was becoming the sort
of problem that could erode the loyalty of Honda's customer base.
Sato is attacking the problem in several ways. First, he says Chrysler has
been responsive to requests that the company beef up pre-delivery
inspections, which are now all done in Japan. He is also encouraging
Chrysler to pare down the delivery cost to reduce prices.
Sato is also trying to persuade Honda dealers to adopt a more positive
attitude toward the Jeeps. There is clearly a potential market in Japan
where 200,000 four-wheel-drive vehicles were sold last year. Chrysler Jeep
sales totalled only 1,700, of which 437 were sold by Honda.
Sato is trying to convince Honda dealers that problems with quality are not
as severe as many believe. After all, Sato reasons, Chrysler is selling
180,000 Jeeps a year in the US. And while the Jeeps have been recalled in
Japan for defects, it is not uncommon for Japanese cars to be recalled too.
Perhaps more important, Honda has set up a service support system for the
Jeeps. 'We are saying (to our dealers) - don't worry, we'll take all
responsibility,' says Sato.
Slowly, Honda dealers are coming around to support the idea and about 100 of
Honda's up-market and sports car dealers have expressed interest in selling
the vehicles.
Sato figures that selling cars is like multiplication, in which quality
multiplied by image, price, service, and promotion equal sales.
Unfortunately, a zero in any column reduces the final result to nil and that
is not very far from where matters stand today.
Sato says the image of the Jeep name itself is potentially a great asset,
since the Japanese think of it as a vehicle that storms through deserts and
jungles and wins wars. And the snob appeal of owning a foreign vehicle -
even in Japan - means that Jeeps may still sell well, even if priced
Y500,000 higher than the competition.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920312

