FT924-820

FT  22 DEC 92 / Business and the Law: Guinness finale tops the list


   By JOHN MASON


The important cases due to start next year include:
The final Guinness trial starting on January 11. Mr Thomas Ward, a US
attorney and former non-executive director of Guinness, faces theft and
false accounting charges relating to the 1986 takeover of Distillers.
Mr Anthony Dobson, Mr Michael Robinson and Mr Keith Woodward, directors of
Homes Assured, will stand trial in January accused of defrauding company
creditors.
Mr Asil Nadir, former chairman of Polly Peck International, goes on trial at
the Old Bailey on March 8, charged with 16 counts of theft and false
accounting. Mr John Turner, the company's group accountant, also faces
charges of false accounting. The trial is expected to last six months.
Mr Frank Shannon, former finance director of Nissan UK, and Mr Michael Hunt,
the company's assistant managing director, will stand trial in March on
corporation tax fraud charges.
Mr Roger Levitt, head of the Levitt group, whose trial on fraud charges is
expected to start on September 14. Three other former Levitt executives also
stand trial.
Cases before the courts for which no trial dates have yet been fixed
include:
The Maxwell trial. Mr Kevin Maxwell and Mr Larry Trachtenberg, are accused
of conspiracy to defraud and theft in connection with the collapse of Mr
Robert Maxwell's business empire. Mr Ian Maxwell and Mr Robert Bunn are
accused of conspiracy to defraud. The case is still before magistrates and
is not expected to start before early 1994.
Mr Nazmudin Virani, head of Control Securities, charged with conspiracy in
connection with the investigation into the collapsed Bank of Credit and
Commerce International. Two former officials of the bank also face charges.
Mr Terry Ramsden, former chairman of Glen International, collapsed in 1987
with losses of Pounds 142m, is awaiting trial on 22 charges, including
fraudulent trading.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921222

