FT924-8177

FT  12 NOV 92 / Technology: Moving pictures on the office PC


   By LOUISE KEHOE


Microsoft and Intel, the software and semiconductor champions of the
personal computer industry, aim to bring moving pictures into the mainstream
of personal computing with technology that enables most PCs to display video
images.
'Video for Windows', a Microsoft program launched this week, will allow any
PC with a 386 or 486 microprocessor 'brain' running the popular Microsoft
Windows operating system to display digitised video images along with text,
graphics and still pictures. Apple Computer already offers such 'multimedia'
capabilities on its Macintosh computers.
Until now, however, putting moving images on the screen of an IBM-compatible
PC has been expensive and complicated, requiring add-on circuit boards and
specialised software that have severely limited its use.
'For years, the necessary ingredients for digital video computing have been
coming together like elements in a chemical reaction,' says Andrew Grove,
Intel president and chief executive. 'Now we have added technology to ignite
a reaction that will turn a standard PC into a digital video computer. The
best news about it is that it's available to anyone who already owns a 386-
or 486-based PC.'
Intel's 'Indeo' video compression technology, which is incorporated in Video
for Windows, squeezes the huge amount of data required to record or display
a video sequence down to a manageable size, allowing users to integrate
video information in existing applications such as wordprocessors or
electronic mail.
Thanks also to Intel technology, Video for Windows will automatically adjust
the size and quality of video images according to the power of the PC it is
running on.
A standard 386 PC, for example, will provide a small image one-tenth the
size of the PC screen, at a slightly jerky 15 frames per second, whereas a
486 PC can display a quarter screen-sized image at 24 frames per second.
With the addition of a video enhancement circuit board, either machine will
provide full-screen, full-motion video images. 'Multimedia technology will
become important across a wide range of PC applications,' predicts Bill
Gates, Microsoft chairman and chief executive.
Business applications of digital video might include the enhancement of a
sales presentations or training materials with video clips; incorporating
video in electronic messages or using the PC as a display for desktop video
conferencing.
A sales report, for example, might have built-in video product
demonstrations or a training manual could incorporate 'how to' video
sequences. The boss might want to emphasise the importance of his message by
delivering it in a digitised video, while product development groups may
need to share pictures of the latest updates of their design work to
colleagues at a distant manufacturing site.
The portions of Video for Windows that enable PC users to 'play' video clips
will be free to current Windows users. The complete program, which includes
functions needed to create digital video, will sell in the US for Dollars
199.
Although the new Microsoft program provides video display capabilities on
most PCs, it is expected to whet the appetites of many PC users for add-on
products that improve PC video performance.
These may include video processing circuit boards and audio enhancement
devices, as well as memory upgrades and high capacity compact disk
read-only-memory (CD-Rom) data storage devices.
Eventually, multimedia display capabilities are expected to create increased
consumer interest in PCs by spawning new entertainment and educational
applications.
For these first-time PC purchasers, video display capabilities may provide
the first meaningful demonstration of the value of increased processing
power, tempting some to buy higher-performance PCs rather than the cheapest
models.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921112

