FT923-6572

FT  24 AUG 92 / EC traders face VAT offences


   By ALAN CANE


UK COMPANIES which trade with other EC member countries could face a battery
of civil and criminal charges next year unless they take urgent steps to
comply with new value added tax regulations which come into force on January
1.
The revenue authorities are worried that only a handful of companies have
begun to modify their business systems to take account of the biggest change
in VAT legislation since the tax was introduced 19 years ago.
The new regulations are an interim stage between purely national VAT systems
and a Community-wide system set for introduction in 1997.
Designed to simplify and lower the cost of cross-border trade, the
legislation nevertheless demands that companies will have to provide a broad
range of new statistics and reports.
The top 24 per cent of traders, which account for 97 per cent of the value
of all imports and exports, will have to make detailed monthly statistical
returns. So far, only 10 per cent of these companies have started to prepare
for 1993. Penalties for failing to comply with the requirements include
fines, while companies reporting inaccurate trade statistics could face
criminal charges.
UK Customs and Excise has been publicising the legislation but is concerned
that many companies are turning a blind eye to the implications. To meet the
new demands effectively, companies will have to make detailed changes to
their computer systems. Many companies will find it difficult to meet the
deadline. A scramble for scarce, specialised computer staff is expected
towards the end of the year. when companies realise the extent of their
predicament. Companies which cannot modify their systems in time will have
to muddle through using expensive manual methods or agents to make their
returns.
The customs authorities made clear last week that they would be lenient in
the early days of the new regime, but said: 'VAT is not a particularly
forgiving tax.' The rest of the Community is in worse shape than the UK -
legislation has not even been passed in Italy or Greece.
'Heads buried in the sand' over VAT rules, Page 5

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920824

