FT922-13325

FT  13 APR 92 / The European Market: Quiet relief at Tory victory's likely
effect on labour costs - Some EC governments may be glad of an excuse to
slow the growth of costly employment laws


   By DAVID GOODHART


THE Conservative victory in last week's UK election may have been greeted
with quiet relief in the more cautious European labour ministries.
A Labour victory should have been more to their liking. Labour was committed
to scrapping the Conservative government's opt-out from the Maastricht
social chapter, which extends the scope of EC employment legislation, and
pushing UK industrial relations closer to Europe's more legalistic
mainstream.
It is likely that even in a more liberal Conservative administration the
British opt-out will prevail (possibly amended to allow UK participation in
some aspects of the social chapter).
On the one hand, Britain's 11 EC partners, which have signed the social
chapter, have had fears that the opt-out would give UK employers an unfair
advantage by not having to implement EC-wide minimum rights at work.
But with the EC moving into a period of slower growth, some EC governments
might be glad of an excuse to reduce the growth of potentially costly EC
employment legislation.
The Maastricht social chapter gives the 11 the freedom to move ahead in the
employment field without the UK, but several are likely to argue that until
the UK can be persuaded to join in, changes should be limited. In other
words, a Conservative victory continues to allow other EC governments to pay
little more than lip-service to 'social Europe', if they choose to do so.
Nonetheless, the UK is likely to remain one of the cheaper countries in the
EC, provided it maintains relatively low non-wage labour costs, according to
a recent study for the London Economics group by Professor Doug McWilliams,
an adviser to the Confederation of British Industry. A Conservative
government maintaining the social chapter opt-out makes such a prediction
more than likely.
The study predicts wage and salary levels in Europe will converge less
rapidly over the next 20 years than they have over the past 20.
Spanish wages in 1970 were 29 per cent of those in Germany: in 1990 they had
risen to 66 per cent, to the study said.
What will happen over the next 20 years as the European economies grow
closer together but labour mobility remains restricted by cultural and
linguistic barriers?
Wage volatility will relent, according to Professor McWilliams, thanks to
harmonisation of inflation levels and there will be strong pressure for unit
labour costs to increase no faster than the rate in the leading EC economy,
Germany.
There will also be some further wage convergence, but without significant
movement among the three broad categories that Professor McWilliams defines:
the high-wage zone of Germany, Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands; the
middle-wage zone of France, Britain and Ireland; and the low-wage zone of
Italy, Greece, Portugal and Spain.
In the high-wage zone, the only significant change predicted is that German
wages will fall from 125 per cent of the EC average in 1991 to 115 per cent
in 2010, as a result of integrating eastern Germany. In the middle-wage zone
Ireland's position will move from 92 per cent of the average to 100 per
cent. In the low-wage zone, Spanish wages will rise slightly and Greek and
Portuguese wages will rise from 45 and 36 per cent of the average to 62 and
57 per cent.
Widely varying non-wage labour costs - such as unemployment or health
insurance paid by employers - complicate the picture. Only three EC
countries - the UK (41 per cent), Ireland (44 per cent) and Denmark (22 per
cent) - keep non-wage labour costs below 60 per cent of wage costs.
Some of the measures proposed in the EC's social action programme, such as
improving minimum maternity leave, could directly increase non-wage labour
costs in those countries where the EC proposal is more costly than the
existing national minimum.
Other measures, such as European works councils for multinationals or
controls on weekly working time, do not necessarily add significantly to
non-wage labour costs. But for a country such as the UK, the short-term
organisational cost of adapting to more regulated European norms, as
embodied in the EC's social action programme, would be quite high.
In 1990 UK wages were 8 per cent above the EC average but non-wage labour
costs were very low, and overall labour costs were 12 per cent below the EC
average.
The UK will still be under pressure to conform to some EC norms. Despite the
opt-out, bigger UK companies which operate in other EC countries will be
affected by some social chapter legislation such as provision for works
councils.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920413

