FT922-447

FT  27 JUN 92 / Travel: Schumann in the mansions - The Newport music
festival and the ugly houses where its staged


   By NICKY SMITH


THIS year's music festival in Newport, Rhode Island, promises even more
'programmes so extraordinary, so rich and rare that they draw music lovers
from thousands of miles away.'
The 24th festival (July 5-19) takes as its main theme a special series of 14
afternoon Schumanniads offering a retrospective of Schumann's chamber works.
Other performances take place morning, afternoon and evening, and there will
be more than a sprinkling of receptions and gala dinners.
The music festival is a highlight of Newport's packed summer calendar. In a
city that boasts sailing, polo, tennis and jazz among its annual activities,
the music festival has a devoted following.
The festival takes place in and around some of Newport's famous summer
mansions. Several of these remarkable monuments have been grouped under the
protection of the Preservation Society of Newport since 1945. They are
shrines to the aspirations and beliefs of families like the Vanderbilts and
Astors, flamboyantly interpreted by architects Richard Morris Hunt and
Stanford White.
Marble House and The Breakers, both designed by Hunt, are opulent beyond
belief. They are also remarkably ugly, having solidly pompous exteriors and
an air of greedy imitation.
Marble House, commissioned in 1888, was the answer to William Kissem
Vanderbilt's request for 'the very best living accommodation that money
could buy.' The Dollars 11m 'cottage' was modelled on the Petit Trianon at
Versailles and completed in 1892.
Five of the festival's concerts will be held at Marble House, while others
will be performed in its Vanderbilt twin, The Breakers. Here, with the ocean
as backdrop, it would be hard to resist an evening performance offering
Porter and Gershwin on the terrace near the recently restored lower loggia.
The ticket price of Dollars 40 (Pounds 22) includes a champagne reception
afterwards.
Belcourt Castle, built for Oliver Belmont and his wife, the former Mrs
William Vanderbilt, is probably the grandest of the mansions which are not
under the care of the preservation society.
Belcourt hosts a particularly interesting programme on July 18 - works by
Schumann, including nine early songs, five pieces in folk style and six
intermezzi. For music lovers who like alfresco dining, there will be a box
lunch concert with the Leontovych String Quartet at Hammersmith Farm. The
28-room cottage was built by John W Auchincloss in 1887 and was the
childhood home of Jacqueline Bouvier, who married John F Kennedy in Newport.
Tickets for the music festival can be ordered by telephoning 401-849-0700.
Food, especially sea-food, is a feature of any visit to Newport. Between
concerts you could visit Christie's, on the waterfront, at 351 Thames
Street, tel: 401-847-5400, for baked scrod (cod), giant clams and cream puff
sundae. Or try Pronto's, a new Italian restaurant also on Thames Street.
(Avoid Saturdays unless prepared for a long wait).
Accommodation in Newport is best found at inns. Whether small, like Clovell
House, originally built in 1805, or large, like the Castle Inn, a Victorian
summer mansion on a hill overlooking Narragansett Bay, they all have
atmosphere. The Newport County Chamber of Commerce at 10 America's Cup
Avenue Newport RI 02840 (PO Box 237, tel: 401-847-1600) will provide a list
of guest houses and small inns, as will Newport Historic Inns, PO Box 981,
tel: 401-846-7666.
Travel to and from Newport is convenient from Boston or New York. British
Airway's new daily flight, at present the only one from Gatwick to New York,
flies DC-10s and departs at 10am. You arrive at JFK at 12.40pm, leaving
plenty of time to catch one of many connecting flights to Providence from
where the Cosy Cab shuttle serves Newport. BA also has daily flights from
Boston to Heathrow. Bonanza Bus Lines commutes between Boston and Newport
(single ticket: Dollars 12).

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920627

