FT924-11919

FT  23 OCT 92 / Bingham Report - Investigation into the BCCI scandal:
Luxembourg agrees Dollars 1.7bn payout plan


   By ANDREW HILL


   LUXEMBOURG


A LUXEMBOURG court yest-erday approved the Dollars 1.7bn compensation plan
worked out by BCCI's liquidators and the Abu Dhabi majority shareholders.
Assuming creditors do not appeal against the decision, the judgment clears
the way for compensation payments to begin next year.
Mrs Maryse Welter, the principal judge in a three-person tribunal, said
yesterday that creditors who objected to the plan had not come up with a
credible alternative. Separate legal action against Abu Dhabi would be 'long
and costly', and the result uncertain.
She authorised the liquidators to sign the Dollars 1.7bn 'contribution
agreement' with Abu Dhabi, and the 'pooling agreement', which would pool the
proceeds from liquidation of BCCI's various operations.
Courts in the UK and in the Cayman Islands sanctioned the deal earlier this
year. But the court in Luxembourg, where BCCI had its brass-plate
headquarters, demanded more information from liquidators and the majority
shareholders before taking a decision. The first court hearing was in June.
Mr Julien Roden, one of the Luxembourg liquidators, said after yesterday's
formal judgment that he believed the plan was in the best interests of all
creditors and an appeal would be counter-productive. 'If an appeal is made,
then the whole story of payments to the creditors will be postponed for
months and months,' he said.
In a ballot on the package, conducted at the Luxembourg court's request over
the summer, the scheme received the backing of about 90 per cent of
creditors who voted. The Luxembourg judge said that had been a deciding
factor in the court's decision to approve the package.
Certain creditors had maintained their opposition to the plan, arguing that
the court should consider the damning US report on the bank's collapse by
Senator John Kerry and the UK report published yesterday by Lord Justice
Bingham. But the court decided not to take the reports into account.
Once the agreement between Abu Dhabi and the liquidators is signed,
creditors will be asked to prove their debt and to waive all further legal
claims against Abu Dhabi.
Mr Roden said yesterday that the liquidators hoped to recover 'a dividend'
of 30 per cent-40 per cent for creditors. He warned that liquidation would
be slow, taking at least three or four years.
He said that the first tranche of payments, based on the compensation
scheme, should be paid by the middle of next year. Further payments would be
made each time a further 5 per cent dividend was realised from the
liquidation.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921023

