FT922-629

FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (10): Good reason to celebrate - Profile:
Norgeskreditt


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


NORGESKREDITT AS, the Norwegian private sector mortgage company, is at least
one financial institution in the country that has not become a burden on the
taxpayer. Indeed, it appears to have survived the prolonged crisis that has
troubled the financial system ever since 1986.
In the first quarter of the year it made an operating profit of NKr26.9m and
in 1991 it achieved a NKr100m operating profit, which represented a 15.7 per
cent improvement on the previous year. 'We are running a surplus and we
always have done', says Mr Trond Wennberg, the company's managing director
who has been in charge for the past five years.
Norgeskreditt has not been spared credit losses from bad loans but by
comparison with Norway's commercial banks it has emerged relatively
unscathed and has not required any outside assistance either from the state
or other financial institutions. Identified and estimated losses on loans
totalled NKr9.3m for the first quarter of 1992 while last year losses
amounted to NKr51.3m, of which just under half represented net realised
losses.
Losses on loans last year amounted to 0.23 per cent of assets and to 0.17
per cent for the first three months of this year. Total defaulted loans
after loss provisions amounted to a book principal amount of NKr96m at the
end of last year. The aggregated principal on loans of more than 90 days in
arrears totalled NKr160.8m at the end of March.
At the end of last year Norgeskreditt had assets totalling NKr21.256bn with
a loan portfolio distributed among 3,650 customers across Norway. With a
capital base of NKr1.732.8bn at the end of March and an equity ratio of 9.7
per cent it looks to be in a strong financial position.
Mr Wennberg is in doubt why the company has not run into the troubles
familiar to so many financial institutions in Norway at the moment. 'We
stuck to the conservative way of running a bank,' he explains.
'Norgeskreditt is old fashioned'.
At a time when others were rushing into real estate the company held back.
This meant a loss of market share but the competitive pressures did not push
Norgeskreditt into a policy it did not want to follow.
Its lending business is aimed primarily at medium and long-term loans to
industry and commerce against adequate security. Norgeskreditt insists that
loans have to be secured by first priority mortgages within 60 per cent and
40 per cent of the assessed value or basis of valuation established by its
board for the property for both real estate and operating assets. Loans for
offices, commercial premises, the public sector and housing may be secured
up to 70 per cent of the same. It is the company's policy that loans should
never exceed the liquidation value. Last year 95.1 per cent (NKr18.514bn) of
all gross lending was to the business and public sectors and only 4.9 per
cent (NKr950m) to private housing.
In January this year Norgeskreditt decided to become a limited company, an
application that was accepted by the Ministry of Finance two months later.
This move represents a response to the greater competitiveness resulting
from the liberalisation of the Norwegian financial system. As the company
explains in its prospectus to its NKr750m share offer at NKr100 per share:
'A situation has been created characterised by increased competition where
the ability of individual financial institutions to raise equity capital on
favourable terms will be one of the decisive factors.'
By becoming a limited company Norgeskreditt is in a much better position to
raise equity capital more efficiently. Moreover, with the arrival at the end
of this year of the more stringent capital adequacy requirements under the
rules of the Basle-based Bank for International Settlements (BIS), it will
be possible to fulfil them with a good margin by becoming a limited company.
'Now we are getting more aggressive,' says Mr Wennberg. Norgeskreditt
accounts for 22.1 per cent of the gross lendings of the country's mortgage
institutions. By pursuing prudent policies when others were seduced by the
frenetic atmosphere of the mid-1980s the company has the strength for
expansion.
At a time of so much uncertainty and pessimism it appears to have good
reason for quiet celebration.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920626

