FT921-15557

FT  09 JAN 92 / Shattered towns that prove there can be a life after steel:
Anthony Moreton and Stewart Dalby find hope for Lanarkshire in recent
history


   By ANTHONY MORETON and STEWART DALBY


PEOPLE in Lanarkshire may be numbed by yesterday's announcement of the
closure of Ravenscraig, but they can take heart from the fact that towns in
England and Wales have proved that there is life after steel.
The most recent large closure, announced in May 1990, was of the United
Engineering Steels works at Brymbo, near Wrexham, Clwyd, throwing 1,125
people out of work.
On the day of the announcement, Dr Gwyn Jones, chairman of the Welsh
Development Agency (WDA), received a priority call at the agency's Cardiff
headquarters from Mr David Hunt, the Welsh secretary. He asked Dr Jones to
lead a search to find a buyer for the plant.
In the next eight weeks a small team sifted through companies with steel
interests worldwide that had inquired about investing in Wales, wrote to
almost 200 and called on the agency's offices in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan
and the US to make an input.
The result was that six companies visited either Cardiff or Brymbo and at
least two came near to talking turkey.
Eventual failure had more to do with United Engineering's unwillingness to
sell the plant and its equipment to a competitor at a time of surplus
capacity around the world.
Two decades ago, steel employed 72,240 people in Wales - today there are
16,400 involved. In addition to Brymbo, steelmaking at Cardiff, Llanelli and
Ebbw Vale in south Wales and Shotton in north Wales has ended, while
employment has been severely cut at both Port Talbot and Llanwern in south
Wales.
The response of the government and the WDA differed according to the
circumstances. After British Steel's closure of the East Moors works in
Cardiff in the early 1980s, the government immediately put some Pounds 42m
into an advance-factory building programme.
Around Pounds 4m was made available to the then new town of Cwmbran to
develop an industrial estate after Llanwern was hit by job losses.
At Shotton 8,000 people lost their jobs overnight in 1979 in the largest
single plant closure in Europe in 35 years. Now the Deeside industrial park
is home to tenants including Toyota's Pounds 150m engine works, Iceland
Foods, Kimberly-Clark, United Paper Mills, Deeside Titanium and Optical
Fibres. Almost as many jobs have been created.
Mr Phil Head, chief executive of the WDA, says many government resources
were put into alleviating the situation after the run-downs. 'Our budgets at
the time were significantly increased. Most of the new money went towards
the development of industrial sites and new factories.'
One of the most spectacular turnarounds was in Corby, Northamptonshire,
which in 1979 had one of the largest integrated steelworks in Europe,
employing more than 10,000 directly and indirectly in a town of 52,000.
The steel mill was closed in 1980. The tube mill lived on employing 7,000 at
first but gradually running down to its current level of 2,000.
Mr Duncan Hall, chief executive of the Teesside Development Corporation, who
was chief executive of Corby District Council at the time of the closures,
says unemployment in the town hit the 30 per cent mark by 1983, the highest
in the UK outside Ulster. 'By 1988 we had got it down to 3.9 per cent,' he
says.
Unemployment is back up to 7.9 per cent, but more than 400 companies have
been drawn in and most of them have stayed and survived.
Consett, in County Durham, close to Newcastle upon Tyne, is similar. With a
population of 24,000, it was a one-industry town based on steel. When the
integrated works began to close over 1979-80, some 3,500 people were
employed, down from 7,000 in the early 1970s. Unemployment peaked at 28 per
cent in 1988.
As with Corby - which was declared an enterprise zone - electronics,
biotechnology, food processing and other companies were attracted to Consett
using a battery of assistance and incentives. Unemployment is now back to 14
per cent having dipped into single figures in the 1980s.
But the 190 British and foreign companies that have relocated or established
in Derwentside, which includes Stanley the coal town as well as Consett,
have stayed. Some 5,000 jobs more than were employed in steel have been
created.
Mr Eddie Hutchinson of the Derwentside Industrial Development Agency says:
'I do not know of one single company which has moved out.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920109

