FT924-5986

FT  24 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Timetable slows for BR sell-off


   By RICHARD TOMKINS and ALISON SMITH


THE government appeared to be paving the way yesterday for a possible
slowdown in the timetable for its controversial plans to privatise British
Rail.
Transport ministers suggested that the first passenger service franchises,
originally intended to come into operation in April 1994, might now be
delayed for months.
One reason for the government's caution is the legislative timetable which
has prevented the government from introducing the rail privatisation bill
this month. It will now have to wait until early in the new year.
Ministers recognise that immense complexities with privatisation must be
resolved before the private sector can be convinced that passenger service
franchising offers an attractive opportunity.
Under pressure in the Commons yesterday on the timing of rail privatisation,
as Labour claimed the timetable was 'in tatters', Mr Roger Freeman, the
transport minister, admitted that the main privatisation bill was 'dependent
on early passage of the paving bill'.
The bill paving the way for privatisation will be considered in the House of
Lords next week, but is unlikely to be approved finally by parliament until
January.
Until recently, Mr John MacGregor, the transport secretary, had been
indicating that he hoped the main bill would have completed its
parliamentary passage by next summer.
In order to give an impression of momentum and press ahead where possible,
however, the government is planning to designate five railway lines as pilot
franchises in the new year in an attempt to give the private sector an idea
of how they might work under independent operation.
Services on the lines will continue to be run by BR, but as self-contained
'ghost' franchises with separate profit-and-loss accounts. Likely candidates
include the London Tilbury & Southend Line and Chiltern Line services from
London Marylebone.
Mr MacGregor insisted yesterday that BR's announcement of the loss of 5,000
jobs over the next four months was a 'commercial decision' and not connected
either to the government's plans to privatise the railway or to the
public-spending settlement in the Autumn Statement.
BR warned last week of further job cuts, putting part of the blame on the
'tight' financial settlement imposed on it by the government.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921124

