FT922-7390

FT  19 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Thornton Inv seeks Pounds 100m for new
trust


   By JOHN AUTHERS


THORNTON Investment Management is seeking to raise Pounds 100m via an
international placing for a new investment trust which will invest in
European smaller companies.
Other investment trust launches are also expected, despite the widespread
opinion that such new issues might be halted following a series of ambitious
flotations at the end of the 1991-92 tax year, which were aimed at taking
advantage of tax loopholes.
Thornton's trust will be called European Smaller Companies and will be
distributed by Thornton in the UK, by Banque Nationale De Paris in France,
and Dresdner Bank in Germany. These companies will also share the fund
management, which will be devolved to the three countries.
It will qualify as a UK investment trust, and will be incorporated in
England. The trust will also be listed on the Paris and Frankfurt stock
exchanges.
UBS Phillips & Drew will sponsor the issue. Stock will be distributed in
Pounds 5 units consisting of five ordinary shares and one warrant, and
investors will also be allowed to subscribe in German or French currency at
a 'comparable' price.
Mr Peter Walker, the former cabinet minister who is chairman of Thornton and
the new trust, said the issue in the UK and Germany will be aimed equally at
the wholesale and retail markets, while the French marketing will be set
primarily at institutions.
He said the fund would aim to take advantage of the establishment of the EC
single market and the reconstruction of Eastern Europe. It will be jointly
managed by Thornton, Dresdner and BNP. Each company will be remunerated
equally, regardless of the share of the fund they manage - according to Mr
Walker this will remove any incentives to distort the fund's asset
allocation.
The company had opted for a closed-end structure because this would allow
the fund managers more freedom. An open-ended structure might have obliged
the managers to sell stock in the event of heavy redemptions, Mr Walker
stated.
According to the provisional timetable the offer for subscription will open
on June 15 and close on July 7, with dealings commencing on July 14.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920519

