FT922-4097

FT  08 JUN 92 / Protection of bio-diversity sparks Rio controversy: Earth
Summit suggestions about the sharing of technology have upset the US


   By DAVID LASCELLES and CHRISTINA LAMB


THE US's refusal to sign the Earth Summit treaty on biological diversity,
and the doubts expressed by other countries such as the UK and Japan, have
made this much the most controversial document at Rio. It is also one of the
more complex because it covers new areas such as patent rights on
bio-technology.
The purpose of the treaty is to create measures to protect the diversity of
plant and animal life on the planet and prevent potentially valuable species
being wiped out before they have even been discovered. Scientists estimate
that there are at least 10m species in existence, of which only 1.4m have
yet been identified, and say we are losing as many as 75 each day.
About half of the treaty consists of worthy measures which cause little
difficulty: establishing protected areas, conserving eco-systems, aiming for
sustainable development. One important principle is that all countries have
the right to exploit their bio-diversity, but must not damage the
environments of other states.
The US objection centres mainly on the section dealing with bio-technology.
In some ways it is misleading to call it simply the bio-diversity treaty.
The treaty makes clear that one of its objectives is to give all parties
access to genetic resources, and also to the technology to exploit them.
This is a tricky area because it is mainly the Third World countries which
have the bio-diversity, but the industrial countries which have the know-how
to transform it into something of commercial value.
Developing countries have been demanding access to bio-technology on
preferential terms, backed by aid from the wealthier nations. But the US, in
particular, has been resisting any suggestion that the treaty imposes a duty
on industrial countries to share their technology, or give it away.
Washington insists that the private sector, and not governments, has control
of this.
Moreover the treaty leaves open the door for countries to patent genetic
material and charge royalties for its use, thus reducing the profitability
of the multinational pharmaceutical companies which develop them into
saleable products. Mr Marcos Azambuja, Brazil's chief negotiator, says the
treaty will keep intellectual property lawyers in work for years. 'If the
bark of a tree in Piaui (a state in northern Brazil) is found to have
certain valuable properties, is that a Brazilian asset? Do we allow others
to share it and can we charge royalties if someone synthesises it?'
US worries on these issues were graphically highlighted in the leaked
memorandum which Mr William Reilly, head of the US Environmental Protection
Agency, sent to the White House last week proposing changes which might make
the treaty more acceptable.
One of the treaty clauses, for example, says countries should co-operate on
patents and intellectual property rights in both the letter of the law and
the spirit of the treaty. The US wanted the section on the spirit of the
treaty removed.
'We would have hoped that the negotiations would have confined themselves to
the issue of protecting flora and fauna,' said Mr Reilly. In fact it was the
US which was initially pushing for this treaty until it realised that it
would incorporate bio-technology as a trade-off for developing countries to
conserve their eco-systems.
Since catering to US objections would have involved re-opening the treaty -
something which is now too late - Washington has been unable to sign it even
though Brazilian President Fernando Collor implied in a speech last week
that the treaty could be later modified.
The US is the only country which has expressed these worries quite so
strongly. But Mr Reilly claims 'many countries share our fears but for their
own political reasons don't have the nerve to come out publicly and say so'.
Other countries have admitted their concern privately that the treaty
includes a 'blank cheque' which would commit the rich countries to pour
limitless technology and financial resources into the Third World.
This arises because the treaty says the amount of money needed to make it
work will be decided by a 'conference of the parties' - the signatories.
Since there are likely to be far more recipient country signatories than
donor countries, the latter could easily be outvoted.
The UK and Japan are among those worried on this score. But both are likely
to sign the treaty if it is made clear that the troublesome clause refers to
money which is needed as opposed to money which must be provided.
A further controversy arose from a French proposal that countries draw up
lists of species. Although the idea of a global catalogue is appealing, many
countries objected because they feared that once a species was put on a list
it would become protected and unexploitable. The idea was dropped, but
France has said it will continue to explore it in other ways.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920608

