FT921-14055

FT  17 JAN 92 / Single engineering sector body backed


   By ANDREW BAXTER


CREATION of a single body to act as a focus for the UK's fragmented
engineering profession has come a step closer after most engineering
institutions had backed the formation of a steering group.
The decision was taken at a meeting in London on Wednesday of 41 presidents
or deputy presidents from the 46 engineering institutions. The steering
group will investigate the planned body's role and responsibilities, and
report back next year.
The move is the latest stage in an initiative launched in November by Sir
John Fairclough, chairman of the Engineering Council, the institutions'
umbrella body.
The plan, endorsed by the council, aims to increase the profession's status
and influence through a new body which would set standards of performance
and conduct, represent the profession on important issues, and provide an
operating framework for engineering institutions.
The initiative represents an attempt to accelerate the trend towards
unification in the profession. Many engineers believe the creation of a
federal structure is more feasible than mergers between individual
institutions, which have traditionally proved difficult to achieve.
Sir John said the profession needed more influence on big issues such as
relations with the government, education and training.
He said the new body could bring the institutions together in a more unified
structure, with the Engineering Council being subsumed within it to complete
the unification. It would cover only those activities that were best
undertaken at the centre.
The specialist knowledge of engineering disciplines in the institutions
should be developed and maintained within the individual institutions, he
said. These should retain their identities within the new body if they
chose.
One of the steering group's first tasks will be to appoint a 'roving
diplomat' to examine the attitudes of institutions and members, look at
alternatives and make proposals.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920117

