FT921-1305

FT  25 MAR 92 / Leading Article: It's tough at the Tecs


TO JUDGE by the FT's survey, published today, the men and women who run
Britain's Training and Enterprise Councils are diligent, loyal and persuaded
that on the whole this extremely ambitious project is going well.
That is the good news. For the government, and its successor, the bad news
is that they want more money and greater flexibility to develop their
programmes.
These are important messages that the politicians would be ill-advised to
ignore. It was obvious to everyone but the government that its decision to
cut for two years in succession and at a time of rapidly rising unemployment
the funding of the two biggest programmes the Tecs run - the youth training
and employment training schemes - was an approach best suited to the Monster
Raving Loony Party.
One inevitable side-effect has been to pile pressure on the agencies which
deal with some of training industry's most demanding customers, such as
ex-offenders and the disabled. If Labour wins, the cuts will be more than
restored.
The issue of flexibility is more complicated, because it goes to the very
heart of the Tecs' main dilemma: what are they for?
Those who joined their boards from business, the public sector and trade
unions, did so in the belief that their job was to improve training inside
companies and to help nurture small business - hence the middle word in the
Tecs' titles. Some Tecs would rather not be in the business of training the
unemployed at all; others merely think the balance of their tasks is askew.
Remedial work
In this case, the government is right and its critics wrong. If the Tecs are
to deploy to maximum effect their mix of entrepreneurial and cross-agency
skills, it must be part of their role to deal with those who are most in
need of training, even where this involves heavy remedial work on reading,
writing and numeracy.
The main problem seems to be that in its desire to account for the very
large sums of money involved - approaching Pounds 2bn a year - the
Department of Employment has felt obliged to adopt accounting procedures
based on crude monitoring of place numbers, which the Tecs find excessively
bureaucratic.
Financial supervision is an increasingly familiar problem as government
contracts out services, but it is not one which outweighs the benefits of
managerial initiative, motivation and flexibility. So far the Tecs have not
been given auditing procedures suited to their style and mission.
Measures of quality
Tecs should instead be funded at least partly by results, in terms of the
qualifications their clients gain, or by other measures of quality achieved.
Also if Tecs were subject to the kind of oversight the Audit Commission
brings to public sector bodies, there would be other benefits. The data
gathered could form the basis of an annual report, subject to scrutiny by a
parliamentary select committee. At present Tecs operate far too secretively
for their own good. Audits would also provide useful comparative data for
Tecs to consider their own performance.
For Labour, the FT survey contains three specific messages: that Labour is
considered by most Tec directors to be either a neutral or a benign force in
training; that they do not want Labour's proposed tripartite supervisory
body; and that the directors are divided on the merits of Labour's plan to
charge a levy on companies which fall short of certain standards of training
provision.
Neither of these Labour ideas is wrong in principle. Although an
ill-designed levy scheme would be open to avoidance by the declaration of
bogus or valueless training activities, it is an idea worth pursuing,
especially at a time of constrained public expenditure.
As for a supervisory body, there is no doubt that Tecs need a clearer
overall strategy and a more transparent link with government. Labour,
however, must resist any temptation to play old-style tripartite politics
with the Tecs; that was the mentality which destroyed the Manpower Services
Commission, an earlier attempt at just such a body.
The Tecs remain fragile creatures attempting to blaze a trail in an area of
British public policy where few honours have been won. They will need
looking after by whoever wins the election.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920325

