FT924-11269

FT  27 OCT 92 / Parliament and Politics: Hurd gives warning on Maastricht
Bill timing


   By DAVID OWEN


MR DOUGLAS HURD yesterday underlined the government's determination to press
ahead quickly with detailed parliamentary consideration of the Maastricht
Bill, warning that any delay would increase the impression that the UK was
trying to 'wreck' the treaty.
Addressing MPs on the all-party European legislation select committee, the
foreign secretary said there were 'very strong arguments' for beginning the
committee stage of the bill before the Edinburgh summit of the European
Community in December.
That was because there were 'very strong arguments against this country
wrecking or giving the impression of wrecking a treaty which we entered into
in good faith'. That impression would 'grow', he suggested, the longer that
parliamentary consideration was delayed.
Mr Hurd refused to be drawn on Mr John Major's apparent weekend ultimatum
that he would call an early general election if he lost the debate next week
to pave the way for the return of the Maastricht bill.
'I am not going to add to speculation on what might happen if the government
were defeated on this issue,' Mr Hurd said. He left no room for doubt,
though, over the importance the government attached to the bill, saying it
was 'a central part of the government's programme and will be presented as
such'.
He described the Maastricht treaty as 'the only possible agreed framework'
under which the UK and its EC partners could pursue their objectives over
the next few years.
On the hurdle of Danish ratification, Mr Hurd said Britain would do what it
could up to and during the Edinburgh summit to provide a 'rough framework'
of additions and clarifications that - while not amending the text of the
treaty - would enable Denmark to move ahead.
Pointing out that Denmark was next to hold the EC presidency, he said it
would be 'absurd' for the country to be invalidated from taking office, as
some had suggested.
In response to a series of questions on subsidiarity, Mr Hurd claimed that
the views of those - like Britain - who were arguing against inexorable
centralisation were beginning to hold sway.
'The weather has changed,' he said. 'The type of Europe we have been arguing
for is now seen by people way beyond these shores as the right one; we must
take advantage of that.'
His comments appeared not to convince committee members such as Mr Tony
Marlow, Tory MP for Northampton North, who has emerged as a prominent critic
of the treaty. 'Dr Goebbels would have been proud of the government's
assertion that this is a de-centralising treaty,' Mr Marlow said.
In a separate speech last night, Mr Hurd reiterated his belief that the
decentralists were winning. Under Maastricht, joint European action would be
'the result of co-operation between governments, with the Commission present
but not dominant'.
The council of ministers was 'close to agreeing new procedures to check
legislation against the subsidiarity template', he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921027

