FT923-6425

FT  25 AUG 92 / Seoul hails diplomatic links with Beijing


   By Our Foreign Staff and LUISETTA MUDIE


   TAIPEI


PRESIDENT Roh Tae-woo of South Korea yesterday hailed the normalisation of
relations between his country and China, saying it had removed the last
external constraint on peaceful reunification of the Korean peninsula.
'The normalisation of ties between our two countries marks a significant
turning point in world history in that it heralds the beginning of the end
of the cold war in East Asia,' Roh said.
Establishment of diplomatic relations, long expected but formalised in a
signing ceremony in Beijing yesterday, is a considerable coup for both
countries and a setback for their respective rivals, Taiwan and North Korea.
It will further enhance China's influence in Asia at a time of changing
political relationships in the region and should boost already growing trade
and investment links. Although Beijing insisted yesterday that its relations
with North Korea would remain unchanged, the move will inevitably raise
pressure on Pyongyang to be more accommodating in dealings with Seoul.
North Korea has not commented on the news that its chief backer has
consummated a relationship with the south. But an early test of its reaction
could come later this week in scheduled talks between the two countries at
the border village of Panmunjom.
Luisetta Mudie writes from Taipei: Taiwan yesterday broke off diplomatic
relations with South Korea and is to take retaliatory measures following the
normalisation of relations with China.
Mr Frederick Chien, foreign minister, called the move 'extremely
unfriendly', and said Seoul had forgotten the tens of thousands of South
Koreans killed by Chinese troops in the Korean war.
Meanwhile, a handful of protesters gathered outside the South Korean embassy
in Taipei at the weekend, burning a Korean flag and hurling eggs and stones
at the buildings.
South Korea was the last Asian nation formally to recognise the Taipei
Nationalist Kuomintang government as legitimate rulers of China. All but a
handful of countries have now switched recognition to Beijing.
Preferential import tariffs and quotas on South Korean goods will be
abolished, and direct flights between the two suspended from September 15.
However, a delegation from Seoul due in Taiwan in early September is
expected to discuss a framework for unofficial ties to be set up.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920825

