FT924-6307

FT  21 NOV 92 / Christmas Food and Drink: St Julien roadshow - Jancis
Robinson tests her palate and her stamina on 100 clarets


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


HOW many times have you heard it said that there is a world glut of fine
wine? Forth Worth's Marvin C Overton III MD, and his ilk, have a solution.
The problem is, you see, that we are all just too slow on the draw; our
corkscrews spend too long in the holster. If only we would loosen up, get
popping and match Overton's opening rate of nearly 20 bottles an hour, the
planet's fine wine backlog could be cleared within months.
I could not believe the program he faxed me of a tasting I co-hosted at the
Four Seasons restaurant in New York last May. We were to begin at 9.30 am,
apparently with 'Lillet over ice with a slice of orange', a glass of
vermouth being just what you feel like after breakfast, especially with a
total of 87 clarets in prospect.
Between 10 am and an early lunch we were to taste 24 vintages of Ch Gloria
plus 19 of Ch St Pierre. After lunch corks were pulled on no fewer than 40
vintages of Ch Ducru-Beaucaillou, three of them from the last century.
In the months before the event I had protested vigorously, twice, at this
unseemly massacre. Do we really have to taste every vintage of the 1970s and
1980s, I bleated from my fax machine. Overton insisted: 'The poor vintages
are now not likely to show that well and are simply there for completeness
to accentuate the true beauty of the better years. Don't be concerned. I've
done this on any number of occasions and have it down pat.'
And he did. By 12.15 pm we had raced through 43 red bordeaux - most of us
having given the Lillet a miss, however much it may assist the fortunes of
the Borie family of Ducru-Beaucaillou. At lunch a mere four wines were on
offer with the consomme and wild mushroom risotto. The visiting Bordeaux
chateau owners were somewhat mystified by this flesh-free midday snack, one
of them dismissing the risotto as 'porridge'.)
This gaggle of proprietors had one more thing in common: their properties
are all in the same Bordeaux parish of which Dr Overton iis a devotee. As he
put to the assembled wine collectors and writers: 'We're not here to
critique the wines, we're here to celebrate God's glorious place, St
Julien'.
Overton is unmistakeably Texan, not just for his bowlegged drawl but for his
height, his apple cheeks, his resolute beam and his extraordinary taste in
suits. I have to say that I found his jacket, sculpted by a famous Italian
tailor from finest pinstripe to Dr Overton's own design incorporating a
pointed cowboy yoke, almost as riveting as the Ducru 1867.
But perhaps what most distinguishes him as a Lone Star statesman is the
sheer scale of his ambition. All those bottles emptied, followed by a
15-wine dinner that night illuminated, naturally, by his 20-minute home
movie about St Julien - 'and don't none of you laugh at ma French accent' -
and this was just the start of his five-city, 10-chateau tour of the US
putting God's glorious place on the American wine collectors' map.
He is quite right to bring to their often blinkered view the fact that there
is life beyond the first growths (St Julien has no first growth but is
stuffed with exceptionally good seconds and others), but who else could have
imagined that they would be happy to board a 9 am plane to Chicago the next
day with 102 wines still sloshing around the bloodstream?
Overton, a neurological surgeon, clearly has heartening faith in the human
body's ability to withstand the ravages of alcohol. 'I find I have to let it
all wash down mah throat. But it's just a liddle pour, it doesn't affect
me,' he confided, just before trying to wind up the event 13 vintages too
early.
I spent the afternoon, doggedly trying to spit and write notes, flanked by
the non-spitting Overton and the non-note-taking Jean-Eugene Borie whose
grin became increasingly bemused.
'I never had such a tasting. Marvin is always so active,' beamed the
proprietor of Ch Ducru-Beaucaillou. 'At the chateau we have four bottles or
so of the very old vintages, but none of this marvellous 1924. I'm going to
try and buy some.' As we tasted his surprisingly delightful 1969 he looked
at it dolefully. 'I never taste the 1969. I thought it wasn't very
interesting to keep it.'
The wines had come from a variety of sources - Overton's own cellar and
those of fellow American collectors in particular - although importers
helped with newer vintages and the Ducru 1929 had been air freighted in from
a London trader only that morning.
Overton, who loves organising these tasting marathons, is not only long on
wine, but long on wine homilies, as in, 'Ah always say that for the first 10
years of its life you have to work at a wine. For the second 10 years you
marvel at it, and for the third 10 years you just let it float over you like
yer ol' flannel jammies.'
All over New York that week I kept bumping into wine folk asking 'Why is he
doing it?' I suppose it might have been to hear someone like Jean-Eugene
Borie stand up after dinner at the Four Seasons and say: 'Marvin, you are
very, very fantastic.' But I think it was probably just ol' Marv doing his
bit to deplete stocks, fast.
Best buy: St Pierre 1986 at Pounds 120 a dozen, plus VAT, from Bibendum,
071-722-5577.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921121

