FT923-15715

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: UK squares up for fight over
finance


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
THOSE who recall Mrs Margaret Thatcher's table thumping tactics over the EC
budget in the early 1980s will be in no doubt that, when the Community falls
out about money, nothing much else gets done.
That is the prospect facing the UK presidency. After the 12 failed at last
week's Lisbon summit to agree a compromise budget to succeed the 1988-92
finance package, the British presidency will be dominated by the need to
bring in a deal at the Edinburgh summit in December.
On top of this, of course, will be the presidency's duty to create a climate
conducive to the ratification of the Maastricht treaty. But conflicts over
money could sour public attitudes in countries from Germany to Spain.
A veteran German negotiator of EC finance packages said even before the
Danish referendum he had never seen such an uproar in the press on the
financing. 'For the first time politicians are going to have to take public
opinion into account; this is new in European affairs.'
The 'Delors II' package presented by the European Commission to the Twelve
is not just a budget, but the financial framework within which Brussels
thinks the political and economic integration agreed at Maastricht will
work.
The 1988 'Delors I' package, agreed in more prosperous times, sets the
precedent. It started a momentum which enabled the EC to advance further in
four years than in nearly four decades - towards the Single Market, and to
the Maastricht treaty.
To consolidate this, the Commission wants an increase of nearly a third in
EC revenues, from Ecu66.6bn (Pounds 47bn) this year to Ecu87.5bn in 1997 at
today's prices. Half the increase would go towards 'cohesion' or fiscal
transfers to help poorer states catch up, at a time when the stringent
financial targets for monetary union are forcing them to tighten public
spending.
The rest of the rise would underpin the common foreign and security policy
agreed at Maastricht; finance the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy
(CAP) agreed in May; and boost spending on research and training to sharpen
European industrial competitiveness.
All members want CAP reform, and firmer prices in commodity markets mean it
can probably now be financed without increasing the farm budget ceilings
fixed by Delors I. Joint spending on foreign aid and policy, equally, is
uniformly regarded as good value for money which would have to be spent
anyway. These two items were informally ticked off at Lisbon.
But amounts for 'cohesion' are nowhere near being agreed. The Commission
wants to double the funding available to Spain, Portugal, Ireland and
Greece. Only a promise at Maastricht to boost funding significantly
persuaded Spain to sign the treaty.
Redeeming this pledge is part of the bill for Maastricht, in the view of the
cohesion states, supported by the Commission and with some sympathy from
France. But the two main net contributors to the budget, Germany and the UK,
do not accept this means a doubling of aid.
They argue that there is no short-term need to raise the EC revenue ceiling,
from 1.2 per cent of combined gross national product now, to 1.37 per cent
in 1997, as Brussels proposes. This is because the current budget is well
under the ceiling, and economic growth over the next five years will
increase revenue automatically.
The UK says the Commission can get three-fifths or more of what it wants
with no change, and through savings on farm spending. British ministers also
point to the significant net contributions from early entry into the EC of
rich Nordic and Alpine countries.
German officials say the Delors package means an increase to Ecu105.5bn in
1997, based on Commission assumptions of 2.5 per cent economic growth and
4.5 per cent inflation a year. With these same assumptions, but no increase
in the revenue ceiling, 'you get to Ecu92.4bn anyway, a gap of only
Ecu13.1bn,' an official in Bonn says.
The British presidency will be handicapped in handling the budget as a
presidency cannot openly steer negotiations in favour of its own interests.
Germany, for instance, has said it wants the British budget rebate won by
Mrs Thatcher in 1984 - cumulatively worth Pounds 12.5bn - to be reduced. The
UK, otherwise allied with Bonn against the size of cohesion funding, says
the rebate is not to be touched.
In the end Chancellor Helmut Kohl is likely to compromise with Prime
Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain, probably resulting in a significant
increase in aid. But these increases will put great fiscal strain on
countries like Italy and Belgium, which will have to contribute much more
than they do now.
Nevertheless British officials are confident they can square the money
circle by 'five minutes to midnight on the last day of the Edinburgh
summit'.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920701

