FT921-1472

FT  24 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: US likely to pull out of sugar
organisation


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


THE US is expected to pull out of the International Sugar Organisation as a
result of last week's decision at negotiations in Geneva to retain the
possibility of ISO action to stabilise prices in the market.
The US had insisted that wording in the present International Sugar
Agreement allowing for negotiation of a new accord with 'economic
provisions' be dropped when the agreement expired at the end of this year.
Washington wanted the London-based ISO downgraded to a 'study group', which
would be simpler and cheaper to run.
The agreement, which came into force in 1987, has no market-intervention
measures, unlike its predecessor. The ISO currently acts primarily as an
information clearing-house and discussion forum.
Though backed by Australia, the US found itself facing strong opposition
from the European Community and Japan as well as producing countries. For
legal reasons some countries cannot join study groups but, more
fundamentally, most ISO members wanted to maintain the flexibility to
negotiate a price stabilisation accord if and when circumstances changed.
The new sugar agreement, which will come into force next year, will be
automatically renewable every two years unless members agree to negotiate
price-stabilisation arrangements.
Although, in a concession to US sensibilities, negotiation of a pact with
economic provisions will no longer be an 'objective' of the new sugar
agreement, Mr Dan Cruz-de-Paula, Washington's chief delegate, said the US
could not join the final consensus on the agreement. The administration will
make a decision on whether to withdraw from the ISO later this year.
A pull-out by the US would be 'very serious but not a disaster', according
to one European delegate at the talks.
Washington now contributes nearly 10 per cent of the ISO's Pounds 1m annual
budget. However, added to the forthcoming reduction in the contribution by
Russia, the organisation will be under heavy pressure to trim costs further.
Russia is paying the share of the former Soviet Union but, as from 1993, it
will pay a reduced amount, based on its own share of world trade. There are
hopes that part of the difference can be made up if the Ukraine and
Belorussia, both big producers, can be persuaded to join.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920324

