FT924-6501

FT  20 NOV 92 / BA strike averted at Gatwick: Angry ground staff say company
plans to impose 25% pay cut


   By CATHERINE MILTON, Labour Staff


BRITISH AIRWAYS last night averted strike action planned for today at
Gatwick airport by agreeing to hold further talks with unions over pay and
conditions for ground staff.
More than 1,200 staff, including booking and ticket sales staff, had voted
overwhelmingly for strike action after the unions claimed that the airline
planned to impose pay cuts averaging 25 per cent and failed to operate
negotiated consultation procedures at a local level.
BA said it had consulted unions and offered staff 'generous' compensation
worth one year's salary if they chose to take jobs in a new Gatwick-based
subsidiary, or redeployment elsewhere within the airline.
The row follows the airline's acquisition - for Pounds 1 - of Dan-Air,
formerly the UK's oldest independent airline, and the proposed introduction
of pay scales for staff in the new subsidiary known as British Airways
Gatwick Services.
Last night BA agreed to further talks after members of the TGWU general
union voted 909 to 111 in favour of a strike. Members of Apex, the
white-collar section of the GMB general union, also voted to strike by 202
to 15.
Management and unions will meet today 'to discuss and agree a solution for
cost effective short-haul operations at Gatwick', according to an agreed
statement. Talks are set to end by December 9.
The pay cuts would mean, for example, a drop of more than Pounds 3,000 for
check-in staff earning an average Pounds 13,000 a year, with compensation
payments averaging Pounds 14,000.
Virgin Atlantic and Airlines of Britain Holdings, which owns British
Midland, are expected to apply today for permission to seek a judicial
review of the government's failure to refer the takeover of Dan-Air by
British Airways to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission.
They are also accusing the director-general of fair trading of failing in
his duty to recommend the referral to Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary.
The airlines say the director-general and Mr Heseltine were required to act
under EC treaty rules aimed at preventing distortion of competition or abuse
of a company's dominant position in the common market.
They complain that the BA purchase will put smaller airlines at a
disadvantage and harm their competitive position.
Northwest Airlines must escape the winter, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921120

