FT924-8278

FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (6): The genie leaves the bottle -
Fundamentalists dominate parliament


   By HUGH CARNEGY


MORE than most Arab states, Jordan has let the much-feared genie of Islamic
fundamentalism out of the political bottle.
Since 1989, when the first legislative elections were held for more than two
decades, parliament has been dominated by members identified with the
Islamic movement. Their successes have brought ministerial appointments,
albeit in relatively lowly posts.
But while gradual democratisation is the avowed aim of King Hussein, he has
been careful to keep a tight rein on the process to ensure that the country
does not fall into the hands of the Islamicists or, as it almost did in
1970, Palestinian radicals.
The clearest sign of this came in recent months with the trial in the
military state security court of two Islamic fundamentalist members of
parliament. Mr Leith Shbeilat and Sheikh Ya'akub Qarrash were accused on
capital charges with two other men of plotting with Iranian help to
overthrow the regime. Both men received 20-year jail sentences earlier this
week.
Mr Shbeilat, perhaps the most popular and articulate MP, shot to national
prominence as a result of the liberalisation that led to the 1989 elections.
He was one of the Islamicists, most of them associated with the Moslem
Brotherhood, who won 22 of the 80 seats in the House of Representatives, the
lower house of parliament.
Unlike in 1989, when no organised groups were allowed to contest the
election, political parties will be permitted to take part in new elections
next year under a law which took effect only last month.
But of the half-dozen secular parties which have so far applied to register,
none reflects a cohesive ideology or group that looks capable of attracting
mass support. Because of this, and because the Islamicists attract heavy
support from the under-represented Palestinian community, the so-called
Islamic Action Front is widely expected to win at least 30 seats.
This would appear to put the fundamentalist camp on course for even greater
influence. But talk of an Islamic revolution is not much heard in Amman.
'They have no way to convert Jordan into an Islamic state,' says Dr Jamal
Sha'er, a prominent physician-politician. 'I don't believe they are a threat
to the parliamentary system. They can be contained within it.'
One reason lies in the popularity of the King himself, who is now seen as a
bulwark against instability and is, after all, a direct descendant of the
Prophet.
A second reason lies in the structure of the system. In the Jordanian
parliament, 18 lower house seats are reserved for Christians, Circassians
and Bedouin. The 40-seat upper house, the Senate, is appointed by the King.
Any change in the constitution requires a two-thirds majority of both houses
together.
A national charter published by King Hussein in 1991 enshrined the principle
of political freedom. But it also underscored the ultimate power of the
monarchy. A senior foreign diplomat said the coming years will test whether
'parliament will evolve from a body that lets off steam, or will
increasingly take power from the palace.'
Many among Jordan's emerging breed of politicians - Islamicists and
secularists alike - saw the trial of Mr Shbeilat and his colleagues as an
ominous shot across the bows of parliament, whatever the outcome. 'There is
a struggle going on. The implications for democracy are very serious,' said
one senior MP.
King Hussein insists on his commitment to 'democracy, pluralism and respect
for human rights'.
But he also stresses his determination that Jordan should not become a
'battleground' for outside forces; a reference to Palestinian and other Arab
nationalist forces as well as Iranian-inspired fundamentalism. The King
wants a dose of democracy rare in the Middle East - but he does not want a
European-style constitutional monarchy as yet.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

921112

