FT921-11984

FT  29 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Soviet oil production forecast
to fall by 13%


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


OIL PRODUCTION from the former Soviet Union could fall to 400m tonnes this
year from 460m tonnes last year, Mr Viktor Lopukhin, Russia's minister for
energy and fuels, told a London conference yesterday.
But the minister was hopeful of restoring output to its level of two to
three years' ago by the middle of the decade. The Commonwealth of
Independent States produced 568m tonnes of oil in 1988 before output started
to decline rapidly.
Mr Lopukhin was speaking at a conference on 'Opening up the Russian Oil
Industry,' jointly organised by the Royal Institute for International
Affairs and the Centre for Foreign Investment and Privatisation.
The economic reforms initiated by the government of Mr Boris Yeltsin,
Russian president, have barely touched the oil industry yet. The government
has partly freed oil prices so that, in stages, they can rise to free market
levels, Mr Lopukhin said. But it will be at least another two years before
the sector becomes self-financing.
The state price for oil has risen from R70 to R350 a tonne. But western
critics say that price caps in place for oil mean that, as the general rate
of inflation increases, real oil prices will remain low and will not be high
enough to discourage wastage.
Mr Lopukhin said his ministry was commited to minimising the risks for
foreign investors in the Russian oil industry. On February 6, the state
legislature will debate a Bill that will put in place a legal framework for
foreign investment. He said the passage of the Bill would not be easy, but
expected legislation to be in place in a matter of weeks rather than months.
Russia needs foreign help to kick-start its ailing oil industry. If all the
oil wells that are currently out of operation could be started up again,
output would rise by an estimated 24m tonnes a year.
The republic also intends to initiate a programme of privatisation based on
the creation of several vertically-integrated oil companies around which
smaller companies could be set up to create competition, Mr Lopukhin
explained.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920129

