FT924-11465

FT  26 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Favourite airline


AS IF THE furore over the coal industry were not enough, British Airways'
proposed acquisition of Dan-Air throws up yet more questions about how far
the UK privatisation programme has resulted in genuinely free markets. When
BA was privatised, it was part of government policy that local competition
should be fostered. In the event, smaller UK competitors have mostly gone
bust like Laker, formed protective alliances with big foreign carriers like
British Midland or been taken over by BA like British Caledonian.
Some of this may be due to the quality and cheapness of BA's service. If so,
it is worth asking how far BA has been kept up to the mark by the gadfly
activities of its smaller competitors. But it is also due to BA's market
dominance; and that is partly due to the antiquated system by which BA holds
airport slots as inherited assets.
In normal circumstances, there would be a clear case for the Dan-Air deal
being referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. The proposed merger
entails an evident loss to the consumer, in that BA will cease to compete
with Dan-Air on a number of routes. However, a reference would doubtless
result in BA crying off, in which case Dan-Air's holding company might well
go under. This would lead to job losses in the first instance, even if in
the longer run economically viable routes and slots were picked up by other
competitors.
But it is not sensible to ignore the context. In the depths of recession, it
seems perverse to add some 400 to the ranks of the unemployed and to
increase the burden on the banking system through a receivership which could
be avoided. But the underlying logic remains. It is not in the public
interest that BA should continue to be assisted in overcoming its smaller
rivals by a faulty system of regulation. If this deal must grudgingly be
allowed through, it is all the more important that the government should
tackle the strategic issue of how to throw routes and airport slots open to
the forces of the free market.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921026

