FT921-14394

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Fears for future of long bond
trade - The CBOT's unease about possible Treasury moves


   By BARBARA DURR


The idea floated by Washington to curtail issuance of 30-year Treasury bonds
has drawn heavy fire from the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), the world's
largest futures exchange.
Futures and options based on the US long bond accounted for about two-thirds
of the exchange's 1991 trading volume. The CBOT believes a halt of 30-year
bonds by the US Treasury would 'cripple' it.
Exchange officials and some bond market experts say that with fewer Treasury
bonds, or without them altogether, investors could move into other
derivative instruments to hedge interest rate exposure. Treasury bonds are
currently the world's most actively traded security, and they are considered
the benchmark against which all other dollar-denominated long-term
instruments are measured.
While some believe that the CBOT's trading, generated by investors
speculating on interest rates or using the futures market to hedge, will
switch - in the event of a halt in long bond issuance - into its futures and
options in the lower maturities of two-year, five-year and 10-year Treasury
notes. Mr Thomas Donovan, the exchange president, said: 'I don't think a lot
of it will shift.' He feels investors with long-term exposure will seek a
long-term hedge.
An announcement about the possible curbing of sales of the long bond is
expected before the quarterly refunding of US government debt on February 5.
The idea of cutting back on long bonds surfaced last month when Mr Nicholas
Brady, the Treasury secretary, told a congressional hearing that his
department was 'taking a look at the question of whether the Treasury should
stop issuing long-term bonds.'
Some academic and business economists, including Mr Martin Feldstein and Mr
Henry Kaufman, say that switching government funding to shorter maturities
could save the US government as much as Dollars 1bn or more a year in
interest payments and help stimulate the stagnant US economy.
By decreasing the supply of long bonds, supporters say, their price would
rise and their yield fall. Currently, the yield curve from short to long
maturities is very steep, with a top-to-bottom difference of more than 3
percentage points: with the yield on the long bond currently at about 7.5
per cent. If long bond yields declined, proponents argue, mortgage rates,
which are calculated by long-term yields, could also fall, freeing up more
consumer spending.
Those opposed, such as Mr Robert Giordano, chief of economic research at
Goldman Sachs, say that eliminating long bonds would be a mistake. He says
the effect on long-term yields is likely to be minimal and, consequently,
the savings for the US government would be trivial in the larger scheme of
high federal deficits and government debt worth Dollars 3,000bn.
Moreover, Mr Giordano and other opponents argue that the government would
subject itself to the vicissitudes of short-term interest rates and possibly
end up squeezing businesses out of the shorter-term market, where they
typically finance themselves.
Eliminating long bonds altogether looks a less likely option than curbing
their issuance. Some Dollars 50bn had been expected to be issued during the
next 12 months.
Mr William Griggs of Griggs & Santow, a New York investment advisory firm,
said: 'The feeling in the street is that they will cut back by Dollars 2bn
to Dollars 3bn (on long bonds in February refunding).'
Given that most of the CBOT's futures and options trading is built on new or
current issues, even a curtailment worries the exchange. Hedging and
arbitrage activity is heaviest in the futures market at the time of, and
immediately following, issuance, though portfolio turnover provides some
trading volume after that time.
The exchange, which has significant political clout, has been lobbying
against the move. Not only did it fire off a letter of protest to Mr Brady,
but it complained to Mr Dan Rostenkowski, the powerful chairman of the House
ways and means committee.
Such concern is uncalled for, however, according to Mr Richard Sandor,
managing director of Kidder, Peabody. As the former chief economist for the
CBOT, he designed its Treasury bond futures contract. He said: 'A diminution
of supply will not necessarily dampen activity in the futures market.'
He noted that as trading activity is driven into the two-, five- and 10-year
Treasury notes - and more of them will have to be issued to make up for a
decrease in 30-year bonds - volume at the exchange could actually pick up.
The CBOT already has experienced significant growth in its trading of
futures and options based on lower maturity Treasury securities over the
last year. For example, trading in five-year Treasury note futures and
options contracts grew 34 per cent and 48 per cent respectively over 1990.
Nonetheless, exchange officials are concerned.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920116

