FT921-529

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Precautions against Labour - Diary of
a Private Investor


   By KEVIN GOLDSTEIN-JACKSON


AS ACTIVE private investors, my family has been preparing over the past few
weeks for the general election. On March 13, my wife and two young daughters
sold their shares in Southern Electric for 249p each. We took the view that
City fears of tighter regulation by a Labour government of prices and
profits of utility companies would cause Southern Electric and other utility
companies' shares to fall.
Indeed, the recently-published Labour party manifesto promises families and
businesses 'power at prices they can afford.' Control of the National Grid
would be restored to 'public control.' Southern Electric shares are now less
than 240p.
My wife and I still retain a tiny shareholding in Scottish Hydro-Electric,
partly because it is uneconomic to sell the shares and partly because that
company ought to benefit from all the parties' support for a clean
environment. I have also held on to a small number of shares in Southern
Electric just in case its services decline. In that case, as one of its
customers, I might need to jump up at its annual general meeting to
complain.
Apart from that, my family has no other utility company shares - although,
if something dramatic happened between now and the election date to make it
overwhelmingly obvious that there would be a Conservative victory, we might
buy some in anticipation of a share price 'bounce.'
However, the outcome of the election looks very uncertain. Many people have
speculated that the worst outcome would be a hung parliament with no one
party with an overall majority. In my view, much worse would be a party
elected with a tiny majority. With a hung parliament, at least deals might
be struck between the parties and some uncertainty removed as to future
policies.
But suppose a party wins with a majority of one. Everything might be fine
for six months or so, with the majority party forming a government and
putting its policies into action. Then, one of its MPs dies. There would
then have to be a by-election. Suppose the government lost. A new government
with new policies would probably be formed.
To gain some protection against this risk, I managed a few weeks ago to
place bets with a bookmaker on the new government having a majority of
between one and six seats. The bet on the Conservatives being in that
position was at odds of 10/1; on Labour, 12/1. Recently, for bets like
these, the odds have been reduced considerably.
All these election uncertainties have made me examine my family's finances
closely. We have each sold as many of our shares as possible to take
advantage of the Pounds 5,500 capital gains tax thresholds, and to raise
some cash - in case there is a Labour government.
Should there be, the CGT allowances may be reduced and we could need extra
cash to increase tax-free investments, like National Savings Certificates,
or even to buy foreign currencies should it appear that currency speculators
and/or a declining economic situation cause the pound to be devalued or
'realigned within the ERM.' (A strong case could be made for devaluing the
pound, anyway, as it would make imports more expensive and encourage
exports, so (hopefully) helping to reduce the overseas trade deficit).
It would also be easy for a Labour government to go back on some of its
manifesto promises if it claimed that the Conservatives had 'doctored the
books' and that the country's real economic state was far worse than it had
realised.
If there is a Labour government, then house prices are unlikely to rise.
Indeed, they could continue to fall. Why? Because Labour plans to 'increase
the number of homes for rent' and encourage council house-building.' More
housing would, thus, be available.
Increases in taxation will hit particularly those on reasonable incomes who
traditionally have tended to 'trade up' to bigger houses and larger
mortgages. Increases in tax mean they would be more likely to stay put; so,
at best, the housing market would stagnate. This would have serious
repercussions for building societies and their thousands of branches. If
fewer people take on larger mortgages, and if more people rent instead of
buying, societies would be competing for even less business than exists even
in these difficult times.
This would force more societies to merge. My wife and I have benefited
already from one such merger - in 1990, when the Portman merged with the
Regency and West of England society and a bonus of 4 per cent for all
investors (up to Pounds 100 for each account) was paid to Portman
account-holders.
My family has spread cash around a number of building societies - including
the Chelsea and the Lambeth societies - in the hope of future mergers and
bonuses. Another advantage of spreading money between a number of societies
is that the Investor Protection Scheme covers only the first 90 per cent of
the amount deposited, up to a maximum of Pounds 20,000.
While uncertainties remain about the election outcome, I am holding back
from stock market investment. If Labour wins, advertising and PR companies
could suffer as there would be no lucrative privatisations and fewer large
contested company takeover bids.
But Labour's proposed increases in family allowances could give some appeal
to shares in companies like United Biscuits and Cadbury Schweppes, once the
market has settled down and the takeover speculation removed. People will
still buy sweets and chocolates, and those companies also have some overseas
earnings which could benefit if the pound is devalued.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920328

