FT922-4395

FT  05 JUN 92 / Sarajevo survives bombs only to starve


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BELGRADE


SARAJEVO, the capital of Bosnia-Hercegovina has suffered constant bombing
since the international recognition, last April, of the former Yugoslav
republic's independence - with results such as those pictured above.
However, the siege of the capital by Serb militia groups, which today enters
its third month, sees many in the city close to dying of starvation, writes
Judy Dempsey from Belgrade.
Dr Farhuk Konjhovzic, a 55-year-old neurosurgeon at the city's general
hospital, says his surgical unit is short of everything.
'We are running out of antibiotics, penicillin, and basic medical equipment.
We are just about coping. I look after 40 patients. All of them have very
serious head injuries caused by explosives. We just have to keep working,
day and night.'
Outside, no one dares linger in the streets. Public transport is at a
standstill. The constant bombing of the city has made sure of that.
'It's eerie out there,' said Mr Misrad Becerovic, a journalist at Sarajevo
radio. 'I now sleep here at the radio station. When you go out and you see
that it is quiet, you think you are safe. Then, from nowhere, the snipers
shoot. No one is safe.'
Everyone is hungry. Mr Konjhovzic says he cannot remember the taste of fruit
or fresh vegetables. 'We are living off rice and bread. No one is receiving
any protein whatsoever. There is no milk for the children, no nourishment
for the elderly.'
In the neighbouring suburb of Dobrinja, the people yesterday started to eat
pigeons. The district has been completely surrounded by the Serb militia.
Not a crumb trickles through the blockade. Mr Konjhovzic says the people,
who have been without food or water for 25 days, are close to dying from
starvation.
Yesterday, the UN again tried to continue negotiations with Croat, Moslem
and Serb forces, with the aim to reopen Sarajevo airport. Like the city, it
is entering the third month of a Serbian-enforced blockade.
Elsewhere, Serb forces yesterday tried to gain control of the city of
Prijedor, with a population of 112,000 in the north-west of
Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Moslems, who make up 44 per cent of the population, were ordered to
surrender. If they do not, they are likely to suffer the same fate as the
people of Sarajevo.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920605

