FT923-6392

FT  25 AUG 92 / Plea to protect dolphins: British Association for the
Advancement of Science


   By JENNIE LYNCH


A PANEL of zoologists yes-terday highlighted the need for urgent action to
save whales and dolphins from their main enemy  - the drift net  - at the
association's annual meeting.
Professor Guiseppe Notobartolo di Sciara, of the Tethys Research Institute
in Milan, said drift-net fishing was the main cause of dolphin deaths in the
Mediterranean.
According to European Community laws, drift nets should be no longer than
2.5km. Prof di Sciara said: 'In Italy these laws are not being enforced.'
Nets 12km and 15km long were being used by hundreds of fishermen.
He suggested that a dolphin sanctuary, monitored by an international
authority, be set up in the area bounded by Toulon, Genoa and southern
Corsica, where all drift-net fishing would be banned.
There are no dolphin sanctuaries in the Mediterranean at present.
Dr Margaret Klinowska, of Cambridge University's unit of mammalian ecology,
said sonic reflectors attached to drift nets at three-metre intervals could
make nets appear to dolphins sufficiently like walls that they would avoid
becoming trapped.
The reflectors have been developed in collaboration with scientists at
Loughborough University, their design being determined by engineering
knowledge and dolphin habits.
Dolphins navigate using a form of sonar, measuring the time taken for sound
to bounce off objects.
Dr Klinowska said that dolphins emit ultrasonic signals, above the range of
the human ear, which would bounce off the reflectors, alerting them to
something in their path.
She said fishermen were keen to use the reflectors, 'even though it puts 10
per cent on the price of their nets'. She added: 'The main problem with
their use is storage.'
Further testing, to achieve the best arrangement of reflectors and to reduce
the bulk and weight of modified nets, was needed. The research would cost
Pounds 300,000 over three years.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920825

