FT921-14382

FT  16 JAN 92 / Appointments: Barclays pursues Europe


BARCLAYS Bank is promoting two of its key continental European executives in
a bid to underline the UK clearer's commitment to further development across
the channel.
Carlos Martinez de Campos (right), who has made his mark by introducing
innovations to Spanish retail banking, becomes director of European retail
banking, a new function which he will fulfil from Madrid where is currently
based. de Campos is 47 and has been with Barclays since 1973. More recently
he has shaken up the Spanish financial establishment, for instance, by
pioneering interest-bearing current accounts; he has also pushed ahead to
open 33 new branches of the bank in Portugal during the past 15 months.
Meanwhile, Jacques Rambosson (above right), who heads the French operation,
is promoted to director of European corporate banking, also a newly created
position. Rambosson spent 8 years in London in charge of Banque Nationale de
Paris' UK operation, before moving in 1988 to Paris with Barclays.
Barclays is one of the few European banks still to harbour ambitions of a
pan-European strategy - pitting it alongside Deutsche Bank of Germany and
Credit Lyonnais in France. De Campos and Rambosson will report to Richard
Carden in London who is managing director of commercial banking in the UK
and Europe.
Rambosson, who is 54, will among other things assume overall responsibility
for corporate banking in Germany, a key country for Barclays particularly
since it bought the exclusive blue-blooded Munich bank Merck Finck in
September 1990. Giles Davison, who is based in Munich since the acquisition,
remains Germany's area manager.
The new posts are two levels down from main board directorships. Will
Barclays, which last year appointed two non-executive directors from
overseas, be cementing its international credentials with a foreign
executive director in the not too distant future?
*****
RODIME, the Scottish-based disk drive company, has restructured its board to
reflect the fact that its manufacturing subsidiaries are in receivership; it
is concentrating on pursuing patent infringement actions against other
manufacturers.
Thomas Kamp, a senior figure in the US electronics industry, has resigned as
chairman and is replaced by Malcolm McIver, senior partner of Bird Semple
Fyfe Ireland, the Glasgow solic-itors. McIver was already a non-executive
director and acted as company secretary.
Jay Swent is resigning as finance director but will remain a non-executive
director and consultant. Rodime has decided it no longer needs a full-time
finance director.
William Batchelor, a Scot who was a founding shareholder of Rodime, leaves
the board, as does Robert Ashley, a US electronics consultant.
David Mathewson, a director of Noble Grossart, Rodime's Edinburgh-based
merchant bankers, becomes a non-executive director. Peter Bailey stays as
managing director.
*****
Keith Swinley has been appointed group company secretary of LILLEY.
*****
David Newcombe, formerly finance director, has been appointed chief
executive of PHILIP HARRIS Holdings; Stephen Wood, who has recently been
responsible for the group's scientific business, has decided to leave.
*****
Graham Melmoth, a non-executive director of the Cop-operative Bank, remains
company secretary of the Co-operative Wholesale Society, and is not the
former secretary as earlier reported.

The Financial Times


London Page 42 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted).

920116

