FT922-7395

FT  19 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Standard Fireworks to be sold in Pounds 27m
management buy-out


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


SCOTTISH Heritable Trust (SHT), which is under pressure from its bankers
over its debts and commercial property portfolio, has sold its Standard
Fireworks subsidiary in a management buy-out costing Pounds 27m.
The deal, if approved, will reduce SHT's gearing to below 200 per cent from
270 per cent last December.
Huddersfield-based Standard is Britain's last fireworks manufacturer and
Europe's biggest, competing mainly against Chinese imports. It made profits
of Pounds 2.7m on Pounds 18.7m sales last year, but SHT said yesterday it
was 'a seasonal business in spades'.
It has negative cash flow of Pounds 1.25m a month for much of the year, but
an explosion of profit every November 5, when Britain celebrates the failure
of Guy Fawkes' gunpowder plot to blow up the Houses of Parliament in 1605.
In between, there are sales to events like fetes and carnivals, but these
make little impact on the whole.
Even the structure of the buy-out reflected the 'once-a-year' nature of the
business. SHT is getting about Pounds 15.2m of value ' Pounds 12m for the
business and Pounds 3.2m repayment of intercompany debts ' but the
purchasers have had to find another Pounds 12m for working capital to
survive until the main November pay day.
SHT bought Standard from Yorkshire's Greenhalgh family in 1986, and then
absorbed Brock, a principal competitor, soon afterwards. Mr Stuart
Macdonald, SHT's finance director, said the sale to the management
represented a profit of at least Pounds 10m on the costs of the original
purchases, and Pounds 3.5m in terms of net asset values.
SHT brought in the management team, headed by Mr Mel Barker, in 1988. As
pressures on SHT built, Mr Barker seized his chance, armed with Pounds 7.3m
of equity and mezzanine loan capital from 3i and Prudential Venture
Managers, and Pounds 19m of senior debt and banking facilities from the Bank
of Scotland.
Armed with independence, Mr Barker plans an export drive, as well as
consolidation of a growing UK market that seems to have been
recession-proof. Standard has also established itself as a pacesetter for
official standards in a highly regulated industry. This is helping to keep
sub-standard imports out.
Mr Macdonald said SHT's borrowings would now fall by nearly Pounds 12m to
Pounds 29m, based on last December's year-end figures, when Standard's net
assets were worth Pounds 8.4m. SHT's turnover would fall by 25 per cent but
it would not have to cope with summer debts of the fireworks business. SHT
shareholders' funds should rise to Pounds 18.8m.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920519

