FT923-10964

FT  28 JUL 92 / The Week in Luxembourg: Court ruling vindicates role of the
European Parliament


   By BRICK COURT CHAMBERS


   BRUSSELS


In a case of fundamental importance for the institutional balance of power
in the European Community, the European Court of Justice has overturned a
1989 regulation of the European Council of Ministers on road transport
cabotage.
The European Court annulled the regulation because the Council had infringed
essential procedural requirements laid down by the Rome Treaty's transport
rules. The Court ruled that the Council had failed to consult the European
Parliament a second time, as required by the legislative procedure, when the
initial proposal was substantially modified by the European Commission.
The modified proposal adopted by the Council provides for even less
liberalisation of road haulage operations within member countries than the
text criticised by the Parliament when it was originally consulted.
However, the Court said that the 1989 regulation, which expires at the end
of 1992, should remain in force until a new regulation is adopted after
proper consultation.
This is a landmark decision in the growth of business influence over EC
legislation through the European Parliament.
First, the decision is a test case giving guidance as to when the Parliament
may insist on second consultation.
Second, the Parliament, as in the present case, may insist that the Council
consults it again when the proposal initially considered has been
substantially modified.
Third, any further consultation will enable the Parliament to insist on its
opinion influencing the legislative process, as it retains its existing
powers to postpone giving an opinion.
However, a potential limitation of the judgment's impact on future
legislation lies in the Court's application of its powers to declare that a
void regulation remains in force.
Case C-65, European Parliament v Council, ECJ FC, July 16.
Use of evidence in competition proceedings restricted
In a reassuring judgment for business and professional advisers, the
European Court held that national competition authorities may not use as
evidence in their own investigations information given to the EC Commission
in the course of EC competition procedures.
The Court said the use of such evidence would infringe EC rules guaranteeing
confidentiality of business secrets, the restricted use of information
obtained for specific investigative purposes and the rights of defence.
The case concerned the investigation by Spanish competition authorities of
certain business practices of Spanish banks. The banks had also notified
their arrangements to the EC Commission for clearance or exemption under the
EC competition rules. Notification provides immunity from fines for any
prior infringements.
The banks had also provided information to the Commission in response to
formal requests. Member countries are given copies by the Commission of all
important documents provided in the course of notification, information
requests or inspection visits to the business premises concerned.
The Court's decision, which is also likely to be relevant in the context of
mergers, may complicate competition law enforcement by member countries.
However, it does not prevent the national authorities commencing their own
investigation, as a result of the knowledge gained from evidence given to
the Commission, and obtaining their own evidence of possible infringements.
A similar approach has been taken by the Court to the Commission's use of
information obtained in one proceeding as evidence in another proceeding
involving the same parties.
Case C-67/91, Direccion General de Defensa de la Competenza v Asociacion
Espanola de Banca Privada (AEB) and others, ECJ FC, July 16 1992.
European Court lays down the law to national judges
In two cases decided on the same day, the judges of the European Court
rejected EC law questions referred for their interpretation by national
courts.
The first, from Germany, concerned eight questions on the second company law
directive on the structure and capital of companies. The Court declared the
questions outside its competence since they were hypothetical with no real
connection to any dispute.
Neither party to the national proceedings disputed that the relevant German
company law provisions were in conflict with the second directive. The only
issue was whether the plaintiff's argument that those German provisions
applied was correct.
Case C-83/91, Wienand Meilicke v ADV/ORGA F A Meyer AC, ECJ FC, 16 July
1992.
The second case, from Portugal, concerned eight questions intended to
clarify whether Portuguese taxes imposed on imported and locally-made cars
amounted to discriminatory internal taxation prohibited by the Rome Treaty.
The fifth chamber of the Court declared all but two questions outside its
competence for lack of any relationship between the questions and the
national proceedings.
However, the Court did rule that when one national provision is caught by
the Rome Treaty's prohibition of discriminatory tax, other provisions in the
same law are not necessarily prohibited, if they are unrelated.
Case C-343/90, Dias v Director da Alfandeqa do Porto, ECJ 5CH, July 16 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920728

