FT921-12025

FT  29 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Pensioners seek government support


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MEMBERS OF the private Maxwell pension fund schemes yesterday appealed to
the government to intervene and make good pension losses suffered because of
the collapse of the Maxwell empire.
The pensioners and employees of AGB Research, the market research group,
were speaking on the day after it was decided to wind up four pension funds
covering about 4,000 employees.
Mr Mike Kirkham, managing director of AGB International, who could lose much
if not all of his 22 years of pension contributions, said yesterday that the
current status of the funds was horrendous. It was not known precisely how
many members there are or how much money is left.
'We believe in this situation we have the right to look to Parliament to
protect our interests as citizens from criminality and injustice. We look to
Parliament for restitution,' Mr Kirkham said.
Mr Alan Fishman of Clay & Partners, the independent trustee of the funds,
has made it clear that while he hoped to continue paying benefits to
existing pensioners there might to little money left to pay current
employees and deferred pensioners, who have left the company but still had
some pension rights.
The reality of what that might mean was all too apparent at yesterday's
press conference.
Mrs Lola Baker, personal assistant to a managing director of one of the AGB
companies bought by Robert Maxwell in 1988 was told in November she was
being made redundant after 31 1/2 years with the company. The redundancy
never happened.
On December 5 she said she was called by Arthur Andersen, the administrator,
and told to leave the building and not come back. 'To date I have heard
nothing. I don't have much hope of getting a pension,' said Mrs Baker, who
is nearing retirement and has an adult son dependent on her. 'I have got
another small job and I shall just have to keep working as long as I can.'
Mrs Sheila Baker, a former AGB validation clerk with more than 10 years
service, was also unlucky in her timing. She was due to retire in October
but instead chose to work another two months to round out the year. Those
extra two months may result in her losing her AGB pension.
The pension member's association also called for an inquiry into the role of
the Investment Management Regulatory Organisation and in particular the fact
that Imro had approved Bishopsgate Investment Management, the main Maxwell
pension vehicle as recently as last autumn.
Mr John Breadmore, a former regular army officer who ran AGB's computer
systems for 13 years before becoming a private financial planning consultant
yesterday described Imro as 'just a cardboard tank.' He accused the
organisation of spending the last five years honing its rules.
'They have not got the outlook of a forest ranger up a tower, sniffing the
wind and looking for furry animals on the move,' said Mr Breadmore, who is
still receiving his AGB pension but is worried that this might not continue.
The pensioners are associating themselves with an early day motion supported
by 53 MPs. The motion calls on the administrators of Maxwell Communication
Corporation to put the interests of all the pension fund members before the
interests of the general creditors on the grounds that 'the members and
pensioners and deferred pensioners of the corporation's pension funds are
the innocent victims of the unauthorised transfer of pension fund assets'.
In contrast, the motion says, the general creditors 'knowingly and
willingly' did business with MCC and took on the risks involved.
'We will seek to press the claims of the pension fund members ahead of the
banks and other creditors,' Mr Kirkham said.

The Financial Times


London Page 22 Photograph Mike Kirkham, current status of funds was
horrendous (Omitted).

920129

