FT921-11897

FT  29 JAN 92 / Carlton bids for Pickwick Group


   By JANE FULLER


CARLTON Communications, the television services and production company which
last autumn won the London weekday ITV franchise, is making a Pounds 69m bid
for Pickwick Group, the distributor of videos and recorded music.
The recommended offer of 100 Carlton shares for 232 Pickwick values the
target's shares at 245p each, 42 per cent ahead of yesterday's opening price
of 173p. The cash alternative is 220p.
Carlton already does some video distribution in the US and UK and duplicates
videos through its Technicolor subsidiary. Pickwick will provide a European
distribution network, particularly in the sell-through market in which the
videos are sold rather than rented out.
BBC Enterprises and The Walt Disney Company are among the organisations with
which it has distribution arrangements.
Mr Michael Green, Carlton's chairman, said he admired Pickwick's cautious
approach to the video sector. 'I like the children's and the sports market,'
he said, pointing to the success of Glasgow Rangers' greatest goals. 'It's
not all about Hollywood blockbusters.'
Indeed 65 per cent of the videos sold were not in that category. Another of
Pickwick's hits is The Lovers' Guide, an educational sex video.
The price Carlton is paying looks quite high in terms of Pickwick's
estimated 1991 earnings. Hoare Govett, its broker, has forecast a fall in
pre-tax profit from Pounds 6.9m to Pounds 4.3m, after a mere Pounds 82,000
made in the first half and problems in France. This would make Carlton's
cash bid 23 times earnings. With a recovery forecast to Pounds 7m this year,
the multiple returns to about 14 times.
Carlton, which has a market value of more than Pounds 1bn, is also
interested in the distribution network for the library of programmes that it
intends to build up once it takes over the former Thames Television service
next year. The acquisition takes it into a new area: audio tapes, which
account for about 60 per cent of Pickwick's turnover.
Pickwick came to the market in May 1987 when the offer for sale was more
than 50 times subscribed. After a heady share-price rise to about 260p in
1988, little progress was made, although profits continued to rise until
last year.
Carlton's offer has been accepted by Pearson, publisher of the Financial
Times, which owns 20 per cent, and by the holders of a further 5 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920129

