FT924-6177

FT  23 NOV 92 / Letter (1): East Europe: A 'remarkable lack of vision' shown
by the west


   From Dr HELENE SEPPAIN


Sir, It is all very well for Edward Mortimer (Foreign Affairs, November 18)
and his American colleagues to denigrate west Europeans for failing to
respond to the challenge of events in the east. US condemnation of the lack
of west European leadership may be fully justified in the case of the
Yugoslav crisis. But after being the dominant western partner in east-west
affairs for decades, the US, too, has shown a remarkable lack of vision in
the face of the collapse of communism.
True, President Bush cleverly 'steered' through the disintegration of the
Soviet Union. This meant doing absolutely nothing in the face of the
collapse of Soviet power.
The general passivity paid off in 1989-90. In those 'glorious' days,
Chancellor Kohl's warnings of Soviet economic collapse and the widespread
repercussions this would have in the world economy fell on deaf American and
Japanese ears. Let us not forget that, between 1989 and 1991, Germany
provided an estimated 56 per cent of all financial aid to the Soviet Union
and 32 per cent of all aid to the rest of eastern Europe. German calls for
G-7 'burden-sharing' in the reconstruction of the east were continuously
blocked by the Americans and the British who argued that Gorbachev had holes
in his pockets.
The resulting inaction has created even larger holes in President Yeltsin's
pockets. As Russia appears to slide into chaos, the pursuit of the US
'non-policy' toward the former Soviet Union (and I include here the work of
the International Monetary Fund which set the Russian government impossible
targets) is not only callous but extremely short-sighted. It is now left to
Jeffrey Sachs, Harvard professor and foremost western economic adviser to Mr
Yeltsin's government, to accuse President Bush of conducting a 'vacuous'
foreign policy.
Short-sightedness in politics appears to be a general western malaise.
Helene Seppain,
174 Huntingdon Road,
Cambridge CB3 0LB

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921123

