FT922-4253

FT  06 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Blue chips continue to give ground


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


FURTHER pressures on government bonds and stock index futures drove the UK
equity market below an important support level yesterday, leaving traders
somewhat apprehensive regarding the near term outlook. The market was
dominated by the withdrawal of Lloyds Bank from the contest for Midland, a
development which saw Midland shares fall sharply to an increased discount
against the terms of the Pounds 3.9bn bid proposed by Hongkong & Shanghai
Banking and recommended by the Midland directors.
London was unsettled at the end of the session as Wall Street slipped to an
early fall of 16 Dow points after poor US unemployment data failed to bring
any immediate response from the Federal Reserve.
The stock market opened steadily as the EC countries appeared to reinforce
their commitment to the Maastricht treaty and the currency markets held
firm. But, after trying to edge into firmer territory, the stock market
began to react to renewed losses in gilt-edged stocks and to a discount on
the June futures contract on the FT-SE Index. By early afternoon, the
Footsie Index was 17 points down. Gilt-edged issues extended losses in late
trading to close nearly half a point off.
There was little heart in a late rally which left the FT-SE Index at
2,668.5, a net loss of 13.4 on the day as the first leg of the equity
trading account came to its close. The Footsie has fallen by around 1.4 per
cent over the week as the Danish referendum rejection of Maastricht has
raised uncomfortable doubts on convergence on European interest rates.
The loss of the FT-SE 2,675 mark was received badly by some chart analysts
who pointed to 2,650 and even 2,600 as the next defence lines.
At Strauss Turnbull, UK securities arm of Societe Generale, Mr Ian Harnett
warned of disappointment in the US at the absence so far of a further move
by the Federal Reserve and suggested that Wall Street was vulnerable if
investors lost faith in the likelihood of further help from the authorities
for the US economy.
He reiterated his 'cautious to down' view on UK equities, an opinion shared
at Nomura Research Institute, where Mr Nicholas Knight said the stock market
was 'beginning to falter.' SG Warburg Securities drew attention to
indications this week that Blue Circle's Pounds 242m rights call might imply
a resumption of equity funding demands.
Retail, or customer, business in equities has fallen as worries over
prospects for the Maastricht treaty have kept investors on the sidelines.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920606

