FT923-9622

FT  04 AUG 92 / Personal View: A high-price market


   By DAVID SAWERS


Some of the evidence that prices of many products are higher in the UK than
in the US and other European countries has recently been discussed in the
Financial Times.
The OECD's purchasing-power parity exchange rates confirm that only some
goods - notably cars and electrical equipment  - are relatively expensive in
the UK. This raises the suspicion that special rather than general features
of the British market may explain the high prices. One of these factors
might be agreements among suppliers to restrict competition. But, as was
shown by a recent investigation by the British Office of Fair Trading (OFT)
into the price of compact discs, the OFT lacks the legal powers to find out
whether such agreements exist.
Legislation to give the OFT such powers was proposed in a white paper in
1989, but the Conservative government has not considered this reform
important enough to be included in its legislative programme - even though
it was promised in its election manifesto. The weaknesses of UK competition
policy extend beyond the powers of the OFT. The Monopolies and Mergers
Commission (MMC), the main investigatory body under the existing law, has
proved to be ineffective when faced with well-defended monopolies.
The most necessary reform is to give the OFT power to investigate whether
restrictive practices exist - for example, by raiding the offices of
companies to remove files which might contain incriminating evidence. The
OFT presently has to rely on information that is publicly available or is
volunteered by companies it investigates. Not surprisingly, these sources do
not reveal whether companies operate a cartel or just price leadership.
The second reform needed, but one not proposed in the white paper or the
election manifesto, would be to create a more effective body than the MMC.
The MMC can at best be described as unprofessional and at worst incompetent.
It suffers from the fundamental defect that decisions are made by part-time
commissioners, while its research is done by the full-time staff. This
separation between investigators and decision-takers reduces the
effectiveness of the investigations. The MMC findings also suffer from the
rigid legalistic approach with which they are conducted, and by their
division between studies by the staff and hearings conducted by the
commissioners. The commissioners may be more influenced by what they hear
from the witnesses representing the companies being investigated, than by
the evidence collected by their staff. The subjects of the investigation are
often surprised by the ease with which the MMC accepts their arguments.
A depressing aura of mediocrity hangs over the MMC and its staff. Neither
businessmen nor civil servants regard it as a desirable posting, so the
quality of both commissioners and staff suffers.
The first weakness would be rectified by the the proposals in the white
paper which would bring the treatment of restrictive practices within the UK
into line with that in the European Community. But the changes should be
supplemented by the creation of an agency to take over the work of the MMC.
The reform might be best achieved by enlarging the OFT to form a UK
equivalent of the German Cartel Office. Like the Cartel Office, the UK
counterpart should be staffed by lawyers, economists and others with
experience of industry who can devote all their time to their job, and who
are therefore better placed to take informed judgments than the part-time
members of the MMC.
As in Germany, there should be the right of appeal from this new body to the
courts; but unlike Germany there should be no provision for ministers to
override its decisions. Competition policy should be based on economic
principles and decisions taken by a quasi-judicial process. Political
intervention will reduce confidence in the impartiality and consistency of
the decisions.
Mr Michael Heseltine, the UK minister responsible for competition policy,
appears not to rank an effective competition highly among his priorities.
But he may change his mind when he learns more about British industry.
Excessive competition has not been cited an an explanation of poor
performance in British industry. Indeed the improvement in British
performance in the 1980s seems closely related to the more intense
competition of those Thatcher years.
Comparison with far eastern countries such as Japan and Hong Kong show that
domestic competition is much more intense than in the UK, and is one of the
more plausible explanations for these countries' rapid growth. Many
manufactured consumer goods are cheaper in the Far East, and the US, than
they are in the UK. Mr Heseltine should consider whether he is happy that
the UK should be a high-price economy, or whether he would prefer to attack
this culture by launching a more effective competition policy.
The author is an economic consultant

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920804

