FT924-8186

FT  12 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Italy's fight for credibility


ITALY STILL has a long way to travel before it can claim its fiscal problems
are solved. But as summer has turned to autumn, it has become apparent that
Prime Minister Giuliano Amato represents Italy's best hope of salvation.
September's exchange market crisis, which saw the lira limp from the
exchange rate mechanism, might have represented a mortal blow to his
government's credibility. But Mr Amato appears to have the gods on his side.
By concentrating the minds of Italy's conservative parliamentarians, it has
turned out to be a blessing in disguise.
Credibility is the key to success for any reforming Italian administration.
But that credibility must be earned by fiscal action, not by brave but
fruitless attempts to stick to unsustainable exchange rates. What Italy has
needed for some time is fiscal retrenchment combined with the promise of
more to come. That is what was missing before September 14. That is what the
Amato government has since delivered.
Exit from the ERM was, in fact, the catalyst for change. The national mood
of impending crisis, exemplified by high short-term interest rates, has
persuaded parliament that the Amato government's budget package must be
enacted. The most important third of the L93,000bn package - tackling
structural spending on health, pensions, public administration and local
government - has already been passed, while the entire combination of tax
increases and spending cuts should be through by December.
Short-term rates
If the Italian fiscal package can be made to stick, then the medium-term
outlook is moderately encouraging. Economic recovery should produce a
virtuous cycle of lower cyclical spending, higher tax revenues and a smaller
budget deficit, leading to lower interest rates on government bonds as faith
in the new-found fiscal prudence grows. In addition, the lira's 10 per cent
devaluation since early September on a trade-weighted basis means a sizeable
boost to the competitiveness of Italy's dynamic industrial base.
The problem is getting from here to the medium term. Italian short term
interest rates may have fallen by over 5 percentage points since their
September peak, but, at 14 3/4 per cent, they are still painfully high. The
impact of these high rates is already feeding through into depressed output
and rising unemployment. Nor can the Italian economy expect much help from
elsewhere. The outlook for the European economy is anything but rosy for the
year ahead.
The government must persevere. Tough fiscal consolidation is the only way to
reduce the large risk premium in Italian interest rates, while wage
restraint is essential if the competitiveness gains are not to be
squandered. But, in the short-term, these will compound the economic pain
and make the government's political task harder. Mr Amato's administration
must pale at the thought of persuading Italy's recalcitrant civil service to
implement his budget measures, including job cuts and a freeze on public
sector pay, against the background of a deteriorating economy.
ERM re-entry
Yet Europe may offer a useful crutch to keep the reform process on the road.
No one can claim that the ERM, in its current battered state, offers an easy
route to credibility, especially to indebted countries like the UK or Italy.
The risk of early re-entry is that it might become an open invitation to
currency speculators and prevent Italian short-term interest rates from
falling as far as the Bank of Italy might like. But German short-term
interest rates, now 5 percentage points lower than Italy's, are not likely
to constitute a constraint on Italian monetary policy anytime soon, while
the risk of speculation is lower today than in the early weeks of the Amato
administration when the lira was overvalued.
ERM re-entry at the current rate, combined with a credible fiscal package,
might even make it easier for Italian interest rates to fall without pushing
the lira down. Most important, ERM membership is the most available signal
of Italy's European commitment. Without the EC, Italy's reform process might
not have come this far. For the Italian state, it remains the best insurance
against political collapse and hyperinflationary suicide.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921112

