FT922-4190

FT  06 JUN 92 / Motoring: Smile please, you are speeding - The cameras which
catch naughty motorists


   By STUART MARSHALL


IN A few weeks the first automatic cameras will click into action on
Britain's motorways, snapping drivers who are breaking the speed limit.
Fixed penalty notices for the registered owners, identified through the DVLC
computer, will follow.
Britons have become hardened to being caught speeding by hand-held radar
guns. But radar-linked automatic cameras recording speed, time and date on a
picture showing the car's number plate are something else. Their use in
Britain became possible only when the Road Traffic Act was amended last year
to allow computer technology to be used as evidence.
Continental European motorists have, however, learned to live with them.
Especially in the Netherlands. For a long time, computer technology has been
making life difficult and expensive for Dutch motorists who break speed
limits, shoot traffic lights or park where they should not.
The Dutch replaced old-fashioned police tickets, and even older-fashioned
court summonses, for minor motoring offences 10 years ago. Since then, the
numbers detected and penalties paid has soared to 4m a year - and the
population of Holland is only 15m.
The 4m includes illegal parking as well as minor driving offences. As they
are growing at an annual rate of 20-25 per cent, the penalties are clearly a
nice little earner for the Dutch government.
Britain's motorists and lorry drivers are unlikely to be more law-abiding
and the UK population is nearly four times as great. When the motorway radar
cameras go into action this summer, speeding will be financially riskier
than it is today.
Will the methods now used to enforce payment of fixed penalty notices
(tickets) cope? Or will drivers, caught on camera, ignore penalty demands,
hoping sheer numbers will swamp the system and let them get away with it?
Many did in London when they ignored parking tickets wholesale in
pre-clamping days.
When the Dutch first deployed unmanned electronics against erring drivers,
the enforcement problem was tackled simultaneously. Traffic offences like
speeding, passing red lights and parking where it was forbidden were
decriminalised. The penalties they attracted were treated as automatic civil
taxes. As there were no contestable court summonses, the police were not
involved and the workload on the courts was slashed.
A separate central justice cashing office (CJIB) was set up. Although
independent of the police, its sophisticated computer software incorporates
the police data communication system. This notifies the police if an
electronically detected traffic offence leads to an accident. The average
time between the electronic detection of a motoring offence and the payment
demand dropping on the doormat of the car's registered owner is two weeks.
About 90 per cent of offenders pay straight away although, at the beginning
of the scheme, only 15 per cent did. One reason for the prompter payment
might be that, after one reminder, non-payers are visited by a process
server. If the money is not produced then and there, the process server can
seize the motorist's goods, like a bailiff. Laggards have found it better to
hand over the cash than lose their TV or video.
What happens to motorists who say: 'But it wasn't me the camera caught?'
They can appeal, but only after the penalty has been paid. Unlike Britain,
the Dutch have no totting-up system with points awarded for each offence
leading to automatic loss of licence when the total is 12. But the computer
detects persistent offenders and tells the CJIB, which can take them to
court.
Penalties for more serious motoring offences are severe. Drivers who break
the speed limit by more than 50 kph (31 mph) are liable to have their cars
and their driving licences impounded on the spot. When they appear before a
court it can order the car to be seized and sold, with the government
keeping the proceeds. This melancholy fate befell the driver of a Ferrari
unwise enough to do 150 mph (241 kph) - more than twice the legal limit - on
a Dutch motorway.
But the courts can be lenient. If the speeding was on a dry and deserted
road and no danger was involved, the driver may keep his car. The fine,
though, will still be heavy.
Could Dutch-style computerised enforcement happen in Britain? It could, but
not yet. A company called CMG (Computer Management Group), with an eye to
lucrative sales of its know-how and software, has kept the Home Office and
police authorities abreast of what has been happening in the Netherlands.
So far, only polite interest has been shown. The official view is that
British individual regional police forces will be able to cope, as they do
with fixed penalty notices. Will they? Only time will tell.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

920606

