FT923-15632

FT  01 JUL 92 / UK presidency to set stage for enlarged EC


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and ROBERT MAUTHNER


THE BRITISH government marked the start of its European Community presidency
today with a confident prediction that the next six months will set the
stage for the EC's rapid enlargement from 12 to at least 15 members.
In an interview with the Financial Times, Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign
secretary, underlined the government's determination to push through
ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
Delivering a broad hint to Conservative Euro-sceptics that the government is
willing to make ratification a fundamental issue of confidence, Mr Hurd
said: 'What the prime minister has done has been to make it clear that this
is not a peripheral matter. It is an essential part of government policy.'
His comments came as loyal Conservative MPs renewed their attacks on the
newly ennobled Baroness Thatcher of Kesteven. During another orchestrated
performance in the House of Commons, Mr John Major, the prime minister,
joined backbench MPs in reminding his predecessor that the Single European
Act which she had signed in 1985 was responsible for much of the
'centralisation' in the EC.
Cabinet ministers said the government was determined to discredit the stand
taken by Lady Thatcher, who intends to renew her onslaught on Maastricht in
her maiden speech to the House of Lords.
Mr Major, who said the Maastricht accord looked forward to
'decentralisation', will be joined today by cabinet colleagues for joint
talks on the presidency with Mr Jacques Delors and the European Commission.
Mr Hurd acknowledged the Commission president would have liked a federal
structure for the Maastricht Treaty. 'He would like to feel that the
Commission was a strong executive with a strong central power, but that is
not what happened. But he is a realistic man. He is beginning to realise -
though not all his colleagues have - what harm has been done.'
The foreign secretary, who will chair the EC council of ministers in the
run-up to the Edinburgh summit in December, said critics of Maastricht had
not appreciated the extent to which the 'flow of ideas' in the Community was
running in Britain's direction. That included the new interests in
enlargement and 'minimum interference by Brussels' as well as a more
realistic approach to EC spending.
Mr Hurd singled out the change of mood over enlargement as central to the
trend. Despite wrangling at Lisbon, he said that from three to five of the
European Free Trade Association countries should be members by 1995.
Austria, Switzerland, Sweden, Finland and, possibly, Norway are all
candidates.
Britain intends to put the preparation of a negotiating mandate at the
centre of its presidency and Mr Hurd said that it was 'realistic' to expect
their entry within three years.
He reinforced his message on the importance of sticking with Maastricht in a
speech circulated by Conservative Central Office.
If Britain sought to renege, he said, it would amount to behaving like
'political spivs'. With the arguments running in its direction, it would be
foolish to back off into 'noisy and destructive isolation'.
Brussels lets UK off the hook on court cases, Page 2
Europe: the state of the union, Pages 11-14
How Britain can resolve the Danish dilemma, by Sir Leon Brittan, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920701

