FT923-15622

FT  01 JUL 92 / Clinton benefits from infighting of rivals: Political
squabbling reduces support for Bush and Perot in the US presidential race


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


GOVERNOR Bill Clinton has been the instant beneficiary of a sharp political
confrontation between President George Bush and Mr Ross Perot, the
prospective independent US presidential candidate.
The latest Washington Post-ABC News poll has the likely Democratic nominee
rising from third to first place in the election race. It is the first time
this poll has put Mr Clinton ahead this year and the first time it has
relegated the president to third place, albeit by margins the pollsters
consider statistically insignificant.
The poll gave Mr Clinton 33 per cent of support, Mr Perot 31 per cent and Mr
Bush 28 per cent, against 36 per cent for Mr Perot, 30 per cent for Mr Bush
and only 26 per cent for the Arkansas governor three weeks earlier.
It is the second leading poll within a week to suggest that Mr Perot's
support may have peaked. He seems to have disappointed Democrats and the
better educated, both of whom had been big factors in his initial charge to
the front of the presidential field. Among Democrats, his support dropped to
24 per cent from 35 per cent earlier. Most of the support returned to Mr
Clinton.
Although the Post poll did not ask specific questions about Mr Perot's
alleged investigations into the Bush family and his countercharges of a
Republican 'dirty tricks' campaign, more than 40 per cent of those surveyed
said the more they knew about Mr Perot the less they liked him.
Meanwhile, as his two rivals have thrown invective at each other, Mr Clinton
has been portraying himself in the last two weeks as the moderate,
policy-oriented voice of reason. This seems to have paid off - with two in
three respondents in the Post survey saying they had heard of his recently
unveiled economic plan, and about half approving of it.
Unlike Mr Bush, Mr Clinton has also managed to shape a Democratic party
platform very much in his image. Although platforms often mean little in the
heat of a presidential race, this one offers few hostages to fortune by way
of expensive and quintessentially liberal policy commitments.
It makes much of 'traditional' family values, an issue which Republicans and
possibly Mr Perot have sought to make their own.
The president will still have to fight off Republican critics of his stand
against abortion. The Supreme Court's refusal on Monday to overturn the
landmark Roe vs Wade judgment, as Mr Bush wanted, may take some of the heat
out of the issue, since it left the demarcation lines in the debate blurred.
But it leaves the president out on a limb.
Mr Bush must be concerned that his poll ratings continue to decline. For an
incumbent president to be running third, even at an early stage of a
volatile campaign, is not a ringing endorsement.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920701

