FT922-13390

FT  11 APR 92 / Entertainment: Workshop crowded with disciples - The
Rembrandt exhibition


   By PATRICIA MORISON


FOR ALL the intense critical reaction excited by Rembrandt: The Master And
His Workshop, now at the National Gallery, one key issue has hardly been
mentioned: what did it mean to be a pupil in Rembrandt's workshop? And yet
this relationship of master to pupil is a crucial element in the debate,
over a century old, over what Rembrandt did or did not paint.
In addition to the marvellous display of paintings undoubtedly by Rembrandt,
the exhibition's second agenda is to show paintings securely ascribed to 11
of the master's associates: Jan Lievens, Frans Bols, Flink, Carel Fabritius,
Jan Victors, and so on - plus, in each case, one painting hitherto given to
Rembrandt.
The unattributing is, of course, the work of the notorious Rembrandt
Research Project. The Dutch government funds the RRP to the tune of Pounds
50,000 per annum, with additional sponsorship on the scientific side coming
from DMS, the Dutch chemical company. (A modest cost for an enterprise which
can wipe millions off the value of paintings as widely loved as the Frick
Collection's Polish Rider.)
For a highly critical account of the RRP's methodology, I recommend Simon
Schama's review in the Times Literary Supplement last March 20. With that
honourable exception, critical comment on the RRP has been a mixture of
parti-pris and arrogance.
Reaction to the proposed reattributions falls into two categories. Some
spring to the defence of a painting like The Vision of Daniel, raging
against the RRP like a 17th-century Dutch mother whose daughter's virtue had
been slighted. Then there are the triumphalists, shocked that weak-eyed
curators and connoisseurs could ever have imagined Rembrandt painting the
feeble Apostle Thomas (which, they fail to observe, is terribly damaged) or
the garish Feast of Esther.
Instead of all the howling and crowing, it is more rewarding to get one's
mind round The Master and His Workshop. Is it plausible that so many pupils,
for a time at least, painted so thoroughly in the manner of their
astonishingly various master?
I believe it is. For one thing, 'pupil' is a tricky word because it tempts
us to under-rate these artists. It was said that Rembrandt always had
children de bonne famille studying with him, and that he sold their work.
Presumably he only accepted pupils with talent - easy, in an age of amazing
precocity: Jan Lievens, Rembrandt's associate, set up in business when he
was 12.
Pupils, or disciples as they were also called, still accepted the medieval
view that they must sink their artistic identity in the master's. Today's
society, obsessed with individuality, find such a relationship hard to
grasp.
Another difficulty is the fashionable comment that Rembrandt ran a 'factory'
where artists laboured over canvases which Rembrandt, arch-capitalist and
unsuccessful stock-market speculator, signed to keep the business off the
rocks. But how many anachronistic assumptions underly this picture]
The atmosphere in the workshop must have been fiercely competitive, and the
young artists no doubt dreamed of the day when they would (and did) take the
bread from their task-master's mouth. Did emulation or affection inspire the
many portraits of Rembrandt, subsequently often labelled self-portraits?
Think of Frans Hals, each night taken home roaring drunk by pupils,
undressed, and tucked up in bed. Probably the pupils felt pride and
cameraderie in belonging to Rembrandt's gang.
Modern research shows Rembrandt as a pretty rough character, but that does
not necessarily give us leave to smirk because his signature appeared on
pupils' work. Le Corbusier did exactly the same. Contemporary collectors
listed both Rembrandts and copies in their inventories, suggesting they were
bought as separate items. It seems quite plausible that Rembrandt told
clients, 'An Oriental head by me is pricey, but one by a top pupil with my
signature comes cheaper.'
Unlike Rubens or Van Dyck, it seems that Rembrandt almost never let
assistants work with him on a painting, in which case a painting was either
the master's or it wasn't. Furthermore, the Amsterdam art-market was
regulated. When a Jewish customer complained that a portrait looked unlike
the sitter, asking Rembrandt either to repaint or repay back the fee, the
dispute was laid before the Guild of St Luke. Would Rembrandt have risked
scandal by selling workshop paintings as his own when the work of his
talented pupils fetched a good price?
The pity of the current show is that the selection of work by the other
artists is too small. Many will not realise that good, even terrific,
paintings by 'mere' pupils hang in abundance in our public collections.
Carel Fabritius's self-portrait merits its place among the Rembrandts
hanging upstairs. The young Jan Lievens was a superb painter. I, for one, am
very fond of Bols's drummerboy in Rotterdam, and Aart Van de Gelder's
glowing paintings of Esther.
Van de Gelder - sadly not in the exhibition  - was the only pupil who stuck
to a Rembrandtesque style once it became unfashionable. Young women, as
Nicholas Maes noted, disliked all the brown in Rembrandt. The very fact that
Maes and Co. adapted so swiftly to fashion presupposes an age of artistic
chameleons, as quick to change out of Rembrandt browns as into them.
Recently a critic wrote that the idea of Gerrit Dou painting Anna and Tobit
is 'only marginally more sensible than to argue that Walt Disney painted the
Sistine ceiling.' And yet, later paintings such as the well-loved Quack
Doctor mark Dou as a brilliant artist of the Golden Age. Dou, earliest of
Rembrandt's pupils, soaks up his finely detailed manner of the 'thirties,
and surpasses himself with this haunting scene. Is it such an incredible
scenario?
A splendid spin-off from the RRP would be a major exhibition of paintings by
Rembrandt's best pupils, separating the sheep from the sheep, so to speak.
If Drost painted the Wallace Collection's atmospheric Unmerciful Servant and
The Polish Rider, then he is indeed an intensely interesting artist.
I am not saying the RRP's judgment is 100 per cent correct. But at least the
team's views are based on scrutiny of an enormous number of paintings. I
rate them higher than the petulance of critics. When it comes to
narrow-mindedness, who is more at fault: art-historians supposedly obsessed
with 'narrow taxonomies,' or sentimental status quo-ites unwilling to
consider a different view of Rembrandt?
National Gallery until 24 May: sponsored by American Express.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920411

