FT923-10960

FT  28 JUL 92 / Arts: The US consummates a romance with Monet - The opening
of a US-inspired museum in Monet's beloved garden at Giverny


   By PAULA DEITZ


ON A recent summer day in the French village of Giverny, the old stone
houses along the rue Claude Monet were draped in banners that read:
'Parkings Exterieurs; Vie Meilleure.' No students' or farmers' protest this,
but a village at war with its fame and the tourists' cars which residents
would like to restrict to areas away from the narrow streets in order to
maintain their quality of life.
The occasion of the protest was the opening of the Musee Americain, a small
museum on the rue Claude Monet devoted primarily to American Impressionist
painters. But the roots of it go back to that day in 1883 when Monet saw -
fleetingly from a train - the property in Normandy he made famous as his
home in this village along the Epte, a tributary of the Seine, 45 miles
north west of Paris.
Soon after, Giverny became a mecca for those American artists who sought to
treat art as Monet did, in Paul Valery's words, as 'the eye's most delicate
reactions to light.' Influential among the strong Boston contingent that
arrived after studying in Paris was the artist Lilla Cabot Perry, who lived
in the house next door to Monet, whom she befriended during her sojourns
there. She also maintained small studios for her friends, and at one time
more than half the houses in Giverny were occupied by US artists.
In a sense, this American romance with Giverny has never abated, for when
the time came in the 1970s to restore Monet's house and the water garden
that inspired his water-lily paintings, the job was largely done with
American funds. Successful as was this restoration, the village has been
overrun ever since by tour buses. Still, the magic is there for Chicago art
collector Ambassador Daniel J. Terra and his wife, Judith, who found out in
1986 that the Perry house was for sale. They purchased it with the notion,
which later proved impractical, of creating a small gallery for the American
Impressionist paintings in their collection.
They developed instead the idea of building an American Museum in the
village to commemorate that period of cross-pollination. On the eve of the
opening of their Terra Museum of American Art in Chicago in 1987, they
purchased a site on the rue Claude Monet, formerly the haystack fields of
Monet's paintings. (A Reagan cultural affairs ambassador, Daniel Terra's
invention in 1936 of ultra-rapid drying ink transformed the magazine world
and led to his financial success.)
After many long meetings with the mayor of Giverny and the village council,
the architecture for the museum came about almost by accident. The main
concern of the Terras was to return American canvases painted in Giverny to
the natural light there. Rural though the site is, it shares the same street
with the mairie and the church and is in close proximity with village
houses. French architect Philippe Robert of Reichen & Robert found a
solution by doodling a design based on the stepped terraces that cascade
down the hillside village. The result is a quiet architecture, more a
conversation with the landscape than a statement in it.
Inside, the galleries are like three enclosed terraces descending a steep
slope, and the light that enters through north clerestories is reflected off
exterior stone walls and diffused into the galleries across inclined
ceilings. Periodically, glass walls overlook wheat fields with poppies.
Without resorting to the vernacular, Robert has been careful to preserve the
character of the village with a series of low limestone rectangular
buildings that almost disappear under flat rooftop terraces planted in
heather. (Some 70 per cent of the structure is actually underground.)
One of the prettiest parts of the whole project is the parking lot for 250
vehicles, a lush green field planted with fruit trees that is
indistinguishable from any orchard on a local farm. For the gardens that
front the museum on the village street, pains had to be taken to make them
attractive without duplicating either the flower borders and trellises of
the Monet garden across the road or the landscape paintings on view. Here
again, Mark Rudkin, an American landscape gardener who lives in France,
appears to have drawn inspiration from the small front gardens of the
village houses across the way.
For the opening exhibition 'Lasting Impressions: American Painters in
France, 1865-1915' (until November 1), the curator has gone to great pains
to convey the Giverny experience both in terms of artists and range of
styles by securing loans to complement the Terras' collection. The 90 works
on view represent 40 artists. Not since the late 1880s and 1890s at the St.
Botolph Club in Boston have so many of these canvases been shown together.
In the first two galleries are paintings from the early and late periods in
Giverny; and in the third, works by compatriots living elsewhere in France
including Brittany and Paris.
The one painting that speaks for the whole period is Theodore Robinson's
'The Wedding March' (1892), which celebrates from memory the ceremonial walk
from the mairie to the village church for the marriage a few weeks earlier
of Monet's stepdaughter to the American artist Theodore Butler (father and
bride lead off the wedding party.) Robinson wrote in his diary, according to
the catalogue, that his only model was the groom's silk hat, but what he had
learned about light, colour and brushwork can be summed up in the fragile
transparency of the bride's veil.
Although there are paintings of Giverny gardens and of haystacks in changing
light, some of the strongest works in the show, by among others Willard
Leroy Metcalf and Theodore Wendel, have as their subjects the River Epte and
the streams and brooks eddying around the village through green fields with
pollarded trees. When they returned to America, the artists brought this
same sensibility to New England scenes: Wendel's 'Bridge at Ipswich' (ca.
1905) could almost be Giverny if not for the architecture of the
neighbouring houses.
Three oil sketches and a study by John Singer Sargent for 'Oyster Gatherers
of Cancale' (1878), united in the show with the finished painting, offer
rare documentation of how he developed his fluid brushwork and muted
palette. With Childe Hassam's 'French Peasant Girl,' Mary Cassatt's prints
influenced by the Japanese style and Maurice Prendergast's view of the
Tuileries Garden (that predates his Boston Public Garden Sketchbook), the
viewer is introduced to a wide spectrum of American art, albeit as practiced
abroad.
As a showcase for American art, the museum plans to broaden its programme to
include exhibitions, for example, of early abstract paintings by such
modernists as Arthur Dove. Otherwise, as an attraction with good public
facilities, it could be that the Musee Americain will disperse the
concentration of visitors to Monet's garden over a wider area and decrease
congestion in the village. Judging by the still tranquil stretch between the
mairie and the village church, the essence of Giverny has been preserved.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920728

