FT921-1147

FT  25 MAR 92 / Observer: The test of tradition


Are Britain's big banks and insurance companies examples of good corporate
governance or class-ridden institutions run by gentlemen employing players?
The question is prompted by the sight of the orderly succession at Lloyds,
arguably Britain's most successful high street bank.
In any other business, Brian Pitman, Lloyds' chief executive, might have
been expected to be rewarded with the chairmanship given the sterling job he
has done.
However, Lloyds has never picked a chairman from its own management, and, as
at the other clearers, it is only relatively recently that its managers have
been given seats on the board. The cerebral Sir Jeremy Morse is handing over
to Sir Robin Ibbs, an older ex-ICI man, with the clear implication that if
Sir David Walker, the outgoing chairman of the SIB, does not blot his
copybook, he will eventually get the job.
Lloyds' behaviour is not unusual. Midland Bank tends to pick industrialists
as its chairmen and NatWest specialises in country land-owners. The Bank of
Scotland's Bruce Pattullo and Barclays' Sir John Quinton are rare examples
of career bankers who have made it into the officers' mess.
The big insurers are even more inbred. General Accident's chairman - the
Earl of Airlie - doubles up as the Queen's Lord Chamberlain, Sun Alliance is
headed by Henry Uvedale Antrobus Lambert, a scion of Barclays, Commercial
Union's boss is a Baring and Charles Hambro heads GRE.
The traditional arguments for employing such toffs is that their
institutions need statesmanlike figures who know their way around Whitehall
as well as the City. Creative tension is one thing but the danger of
promoting a strong chief executive like Pitman is that he might second-guess
his successor.
Separating the role of chairman and chief executive seems de rigueur these
days but the City's big financial institutions are hardly ideal role models.
NatWest's Lord Alexander and the TSB's Sir Nicholas Goodison are typical
bank chairmen, yet their institutions are struggling. The same is true of
most of the big composites. Lloyds Bank is one of the few big City firms to
have got the mix right. Given Sir Jeremy Morse's record, one must assume
that he and his board have made the right choice now.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920325

