FT924-12173

FT  22 OCT 92 / The climbdown in words


Tuesday October 13
'British Coal cannot go on producing coal which cannot be sold. These
decisions have been taken only after the most careful consideration. They
are painful but they are essential to secure the industry's future and
cannot be postponed'
Michael Heseltine Friday October 16
'I do not anticipate any changes in the timetable'
John Major 'If it could have been avoided we would have avoided it'
John Major Sunday October 18
'An announcement of this sort is bound to produce that sort of reaction but
it doesn't make the decision go away'
Michael Heseltine 'Well, I mean, that is going to cost dramatic sums of
money and that will come off, what - hospitals, schools, roads?'
Michael Heseltine, asked if there could be a moratorium 'I do not think
there is a case that I can see for changing the recommendations that I have
made. What there is a case for doing . . . is to refine and expand and
specify the nature of the help that we can give'
Michael Heseltine Monday October 19
'I called a meeting last night of senior colleagues and interested ministers
and we discussed the question of the coal problem for some 2 1/2 hours. The
purpose of this morning's cabinet meeting is to consider the conclusions we
reached'
John Major 'The government recognise the concern at the speed of the rundown
and about the very great difficulties it would cause to the communities
involved. We have therefore concluded that, for the time being, British Coal
should be allowed to proceed with the closure of only 10 pits'
Michael Heseltine to MPs 'During this moratorium, the government and British
Coal will set out the full case for the closures'
Michael Heseltine 'One is led remorselessly to the uncomfortable conclusions
that I first announced. I shall not say that at the margin there will be no
change in policy'
Michael Heseltine Tuesday October 20
'He (Heseltine) has convinced us it is going to be a full and open review'
Sir Marcus Fox after ground was given on review's scope 'When we have
completed the consultation and examination
. . . there will be every opportunity for every view to be taken into
account'
John Major at prime minister's questions 'There would be little point in
having a pause . . . if it was merely a device for getting the government
off the hook
. . . The purpose of the pause is to look again at the issues'
Lord Wakeham Wednesday October 21
'The consultative process will be aimed at studying all views without
restrictions and there will be no pre-ordained out-
come . . . It will be a genuine review'
Michael Heseltine

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921022

