FT924-787

FT  22 DEC 92 / Stock Exchange recommends closure of USM by end-1995


   By MAGGIE URRY


THE Stock Exchange recom-mended yesterday that the Unlisted Securities
Market should close at the end of 1995 as it no longer fulfilled its role of
providing capital for smaller companies.
The exchange intends to open 'an identifiable smaller companies sector' on
the official list. The 308 USM companies would have to move to the official
list or lose their quotations.
To help companies make the transition, the initial fee payable on admission
to the main market will be waived and companies will not be required to
produce listing particulars.
A final decision about the USM will be taken in March, and the exchange will
take into account comments received before March 5. If the closure goes
ahead, no new issues will be allowed on the USM after June 30 next year.
Mr Ian Salter, deputy chairman of the exchange, said: 'The USM was a very
successful market for smaller companies raising capital in the 1980s. Our
research shows it is no longer fulfilling that role. A decision to close the
USM on a fixed date with clear arrangements in place . . . is preferable to
allowing the market to disintegrate gradually.'
Speculation about the proposed closure of the market, which opened in 1980,
has grown during the last year while the Stock Exchange was conducting a
review of its future.
The review concluded that there had been a convergence between the USM and
the official list and 'investors' and companies' perceptions of the USM have
markedly deteriorated'. The USM 'is now widely regarded as a dying market'
it said, with companies remaining on the USM because of the cost of moving
to a full listing.
Many USM-quoted companies and followers have welcomed the expected decision.
But there have been some voices of dissent from those who believed the USM
could again provide an important source of equity capital for smaller
companies once the recession lifted. During its review, the exchange
considered a new market for immature companies but found there was
'insufficient demand'.
Enterprise looks for a way out, page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921222

