FT924-1043

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: Give even more to the even richer - Off the Wall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


THIS WEEKEND the axe falls on at least 50 staff at Sotheby's offices in
London and Europe. On Tuesday Christie's made over 60 staff redundant.
Phillips is staying mum. Only at Bonhams, which on Monday will announce
sales up 22 per cent on the year, can auction house staff sleep safely.
What is rather shocking about this new wave of redundancies is that it
follows earlier shake outs, which were sold as the final solution to the
salerooms' problems, and includes distinguished specialists like Anton
Gabszewicz, whose only fault is that he heads a small, and therefore not
very profitable, department in ceramics.
The salerooms are supposed to have turned the corner; the big winter sales
of Impressionists and Old Masters were quite good; why then this inability
to make a profit?
The problem is that both Sotheby's and Christie's are giving it away to
major sellers. When the experts from the two major auction houses arrive to
discuss terms with the owner of a Pounds 1m Canaletto or a Pounds 2m
Picasso, who is thinking of auctioning it, they find that there is nothing
to discus. The rival firm has already been there and offered to put it up
for sale for nothing.
In the past the salerooms made their money by charging sellers a 10 per cent
commission; now the big clients with multi-million properties play Sotheby's
off against Christie's and vice versa. As well as insisting on zero charges
they often want perks, like hard backed catalogues and big marketing
campaigns, to help their art works sell.
By sacrificing profit in the hunt for valuable properties the salerooms must
cut their operating costs, which means shedding staff. Or charge buyers
more. They started to extract a 10 per cent premium on top of the hammer
price from buyers during the recession of the late 1970s. From January 1
Sotheby's is raising this to 15 per cent. Christie's is wavering but will
probably follow suit next week. It is a weird business in which buyers pay
over the odds so that sellers, the real clients, get served for nothing.
Who is the mysterious American who has promised the Tate Gallery Dollars 10m
(Pounds 6.5m) to build new galleries and to convert the existing building
into the Tate Gallery of British Art? The guessing stops at Paul Mellon, who
owns the finest collection of British art in the US and who is rich, and
venerable, enough to make a grand gesture.
Within a couple of months of the London Philharmonic Orchestra coming into
its own as house band at London's South Bank the achievement is acquiring a
hollow ring. The LPO's young (31) music director Franz Welser-Most, has
fallen foul of the critics, and now its managing director, John Willan, has
resigned early. He was expected to go at the end of the season after nine
stormy years at the helm. But now he has asked to be excused by April. He
has plans for a new job in the music world, but a series of rows with the
musicians, and falling out over Welser-Most, have given victory a bitter
taste and speeded his departure.
It is unwise to ask the Italian dealers and collectors currently flooding
London where the money they seem determined to spend comes from - it is
probably something to do with living in a cash, rather than a tax paying,
economy - but they are certainly cheering up the London dealers and auction
houses.
Their excuse for being here is the Accademia Italiana in Rutland Gate where
the Orangerie, easily the most classy small-scale antique fair, ended
yesterday. It is devoted to Italian antiques and is displayed like a
particularly grand Venetian palazzo. The flashy things sold best  - the vast
tapestry bearing the Barberini arms and priced around Pounds 40,000, and a
set of views of a Neapolitan villa, at Pounds 100,000.
But the happiest man to date at the Orangerie is a humble English porcelain
dealer, Clive Gill. He was rummaging through a small country auction when he
came across an Italian manuscript. He thought it worth a flutter and secured
it for Pounds 1,650.
It turned out to be a major discovery, an early secular manuscript on
astronomy, produced in Rimini around 1455. It sold this summer, to the
Rimini Museum, for Pounds 105,000 at Sotheby's. On top of his profit Mr Gill
has been awarded a small bronze horse, which is the Leonardo Prize,
sponsored by Crowley Colosso, which the Orangerie awards each year to the
most important discovery relating to an Italian work of art.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

921219

