FT922-13388

FT  11 APR 92 / Private View: The man who discovered Japan Inc - Professor
James Abegglen has spent 40 years in a country he believes the West
misunderstands


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


WHEN THE shambling bear of Soviet Communism lost his claws, Americans found
a new bogeyman in Japan. Their fear of a Kremlin plot to conquer by force of
arms was replaced by fear of a Japanese conspiracy to achieve world economic
domination.
One of the first people to alert the world to Japan's post-war success story
was Professor James Abegglen, the American son of a Swiss cheesemaker from
Riplinger, Wisconsin. Abegglen is the man who invented the phrase 'Japan
Inc', and who gave the Japanese a word for their system of lifetime
employment: shushinkoyo.
As a US marine he fought on Guam and Iwo Jima and was twice wounded. Later
he joined the team that surveyed the bomb damage in Hiroshima. Ten years
after the war, armed with a Chicago PhD in social anthropology and a Harvard
diploma in Japanese, he went back.
He has lived there ever since. He is married, for the second time, to a
Japanese wife, Hiroko; they have a small flat in Tokyo and a big seafront
house in a picturesque fishing village on Chiba Bay.
A young and humorous 66, Abegglen claims to be the first westerner to make a
serious study ofJapanese industrial organisation after the war, thus may be
considered the doyen of management consultants in his field.
So, on one of his flying visits to London, I asked him whether Americans -
or any of us  - were right to fear the Japanese.
'At a micro level' (this is how management consultants talk) 'you could say
that to the extent Japan succeeded in automobiles and the US failed, someone
has lost a job. It's not surprising that as the US senses its diminished
position in the world, it casts about for a scapegoat.
'But in any ultimate sense, of course, no. The enormous economic success of
the US was not at the expense of Europe. Economics isn't a zero-sum game.'
Abegglen's thesis is that the West, encouraged by the rhetoric of ignorant
Washington politicians, has invented a cunning Oriental demon to explain
away Japan's startling success. We have made a mystery where there is none.
But what about the unfair trading practices which have been identified over
the years? I asked.
'No, I'm sorry. It's all very well to say the Japanese cheated on this or
that, but everyone does. The US is protectionist in its way. I've no doubt
that Britain has its own little protectionist games, too. In the last decade
or so the Japanese economy is as open to trade and investment as any - and
in some ways more open.'
Did Japan succeed in spite of protectionism, or because of it?
'One has to be careful not to get too sweeping about these things. Every
nation has always had to protect infant industries. Until the late 1960s
Japan was the most closed economy in the world. But as it reached a certain
degree of competence, size, scale and efficiency, it opened. Had it not
opened it would not have become as powerful as it is now. 'In the US we had
enormous amounts of protection through the 19th century. As we took off, we
opened up - in our own interests. It wasn't because we were nice fellows.'
So what do people mean by 'Japan Inc.', then?
'I rather wish I could take that phrase back. As I used it originally I was
trying to convey the sense of a quite homogeneous society where there was
competition between divisions but a common financial policy. It seemed
useful at that time. to describe Japan as a kind of super-conglomerate.
'Unfortunately, because the term turned out to be very catchy, it came to
mean conspiratorial Japan - some bearded gentleman at the console of a
computer, that kind of thing. And that of course was never the case.'
But whole books have been written about their industrialists' secret
cartels, I said.
'You know, I think we should really face a couple of things. Japan's success
has had no historical precedent. That in itself is very hard for us to get
used to. The other is that it came from Asia, and Asians are not supposed to
be industrially rich. Emotionally, we in the West find this very, very hard
to deal with.
'That leads us to say it must have been done by cheating. But I don't think
we have any sense how long Japan was working at it - its industrial efforts
go back to the 1870s. Also, I suppose, we took for granted that we have some
commanding position in technology and income levels. Americans think they
have some God-given right to be the richest.'
The professor agreed, however, that the Japanese contribute to foreigners'
suspicion by their own responses. 'In trade negotiations, instead of telling
the Americans to go to hell, they always try to give ground. The Americans
take that as a sign there's something there, and ask for more.'
Do none of the racial stereotypes have any truth? What about their
reputation for conformism?
'Certainly Japan has eccentrics - though perhaps quite not to the British
degree. I mean one thinks of the extraordinary achievements in drama,
poetry, design. One has to be careful. If I describe the Japanese as a bit
more group-focussed, family-oriented, more prone to identify with the
company, that's a fact, a sociological fact. But I'm not saying that they
all conform.
'I suppose the fact they are very far away, that they all look alike to us,
has a great deal to do with it. We like simplicity. It's nice to say, well,
they're a bunch of conformists, they all march together. Surely we're aware
that if that were the case they would not have so successful a society.'
What about the common allegation that they can't invent?
'Well, it's not true. I think we're past that. You say they can't invent but
they have the Noh Theatre, the Kabuki Theatre.'
That's pretty stylised and traditional.
'Someone had to invent it.'
But it hasn't changed since 1300 or something.
'Yet we find that in Paris Japanese designers are high fashion. They have
great architects, Nobel prizewinning novelists. How can we still insist
there's no originality?'
'But they do have a talent for picking up other people's ideas, don't they?
'Yes, I would say that. And simultaneously preserving their system. But the
first stage of development is always copying, as you know.'
Why, asked the professor, were we so reluctant to give the Japanese the
credit for what they had done?
'Here are people who came out of extraordinary destruction and defeat. They
do not trade in weapons. They do not contribute to these ghastly wars that
man is engaging in. They do not impose their values on other nations by
seeking to change governments. They mind their own business and are now the
largest suppliers of aid in the world.
'Why is it that we have to view them as an enemy and try to say they don't
really succeed in technology - that they just change the colour from fuchsia
to chartreuse and slap a patent on?'
What is your answer to that?
'In the first place, I don't think the Japanese are terribly comfortable
people - not very relaxed or casual. They don't have quite the ease of
humour: they're a bit towards the German end of the spectrum. They don't
blend easily with others which makes them, I think, a little harder to
handle. But I say again, we find the speed and magnitude of Japanese success
terribly threatening.'
Prof Abegglen can easily sound like a mere apologist. So I asked him: Have
you gone native?
He laughed. 'I don't feel I have.'
But perhaps your analysis is mistrusted?
'Well, that happens. Certainly I'm accused of being an apologist because I
disagree with some of the more hostile cliches about Japan. But I still have
major international companies as clients. They don't see me as a patsy.'
If Japan had an institutional weakness, he said, it was its political
immaturity: 'There isn't the political leadership to take care of things
like reducing the working week.'
Is their success threatened by the young becoming westernised?
'That's a tricky area. Heavens, I don't understand my own children so I
don't profess to understand young Japanese either. If one of my
stepdaughters - I have two lovely Japanese stepdaughters  - wears blue jeans
instead of kimono has she changed her basic values? Or is she simply
consuming differently?
'My own sense is that the values have changed rather slowly. One doesn't see
signs of increased criminal activity, for example, or dropouts from school.
People worry about it, but the incidence isn't going up.'
Abegglen is unapologetic admirer of Japanese companies' ability to combine
intense commercial competition with egalitarian and humane employment
policies.
'When they compete they compete hard. It's not a marshmallow roast. But the
grotesque compensation paid in the US to chief executive officers would be
unthinkable in Japan.
'Their system is very attractive and it produces marvellous results. They
have gone further than any in the world to deal with people in a decent
fashion. In the US, we throw people away.'
Westerners should not make the mistake of seeing the Japanese as ten feet
tall, he concluded.
'We focus on the massive successes, the two huge engines that drive the
economy - electronics and autos. But I will give you a parallel list in
which Japanese companies have no distinction whatsoever: they have no
aerospace industry to speak of, their chemical industry is fragmented,
petroleum refining is a disaster both technologically and financially . . .
There's a long list.'
The forces slowing Japan down were already visible: the population was
ageing, which would lead to a decline in savings. That would affect
investment and labour supply. Growth would slow to 2 or 3 per cent a year,
normal for a mature economy.
'But by the time that happens,' said Professor Abegglen with a smile, 'the
Japanese will be by far the richest people on earth.'

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920411

