FT921-11749

FT  30 JAN 92 / International Company News: ANZ seeks ADollars 780m by
rights issue


   By BRUCE JACQUES


   SYDNEY


AUSTRALIA and New Zealand Banking Group (ANZ) has continued the trend for
leading Australian banks to top up their equity bases with a one-for-five
rights issue seeking almost ADollars 780m (USDollars 586.4m).
ANZ, one of Australia's four leading trading banks, yesterday confirmed
market speculation with a fully-underwritten issue at ADollars 3.76 a share,
well below yesterday's price of ADollars 4.35 on the Australian Stock
Exchange.
The offering follows a ADollars 600m preference share issue by ANZ in May
last year, and brings the amount of major bank equity raised in Australia in
the past year to more than ADollars 4bn.
This includes ADollars 1.65bn raised in the flotation of 30 per cent of the
Commonwealth Bank and a ADollars 1bn share issue by National Australia Bank.
Conspicuous by its absence from the equity raising queue has been Westpac,
the other leading Australian bank. But with speculation continuing on the
possibility of another big bank merger, the market is bracing for an
imminent Westpac issue.
Westpac also lost ground against its competitors yesterday with the release
of bank debt ratings by Standard and Poor's Australian Ratings. The ratings
agency lowered various debt ratings for Westpac and some of its
subsidiaries, but reaffirmed ratings of the National Australia Bank and ANZ.
The agency said the Westpac downgrade was due to the weakening of asset
quality through emergence in 1991 of substantial property-related problem
exposures. But it commended Westpac management's efforts to address
problems.
The rash of Australian bank equity raisings reflects a desire to take
advantage of a relatively strong Australian share market, and the need to
maintain capital adequacy ratios at or above international standards.
Announcing the issue at ANZ's annual meeting in Melbourne yesterday, Mr
Milton Bridgland, chairman, said he recognised the need for additional
capital over the next two years.
'The funds raised by the issue will further strengthen our capital base,
which, whilst already sound by international standards, will be subject to
some statutory adjustments over the forthcoming 18 months,' he said.
'These adjustments relate to the deduction of future income tax benefits
from our capital base calculation with effect from October 1 1992, and the
similar deduction of general provisions relating to rescheduled debt a year
later.
'This share issue will adequately compensate for both these adjustments
about six months in advance in each case. Our capital adequacy ratio is
projected to be well in excess of 10 per cent over the next two years,
substantially above the 8 per cent required by the Reserve Bank.'
Mr Bridgland said ANZ, which is among the more international of Australia's
banks through its control of the UK-based Grindlays group, would apply for
listing of the new shares in Australia, New Zealand and London.
The issue is payable in two tranches, ADollars 1.88 by March 27 this year
and the balance a year later.
Rights trading is scheduled to begin in Australia and the UK on February 13
and in New Zealand on February 19.
Stockland Trust Group, one of Australia's largest listed property trusts,
will raise ADollars 62.4m from a placement of converting preference units
and shares to institutional investors.
The issue will involve 24m new securities at ADollars 2.60 - ADollars 2 for
the units and 60 cents for the shares - with 12m attaching options which
will be separately listed.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920130

