FT924-8130

FT  12 NOV 92 / Hizbollah strikes raise stakes for Israel-Syria talks


   By HUGH CARNEGY and REUTER


   JERUSALEM, OTTAWA


THE most significant exchanges this week in the Middle East peace talks have
taken place not in the cerebral chambers of the US State Department, where
Arab and Israeli delegations are meeting, but in the dangerous hills of
south Lebanon.
Guerrillas of the Hizbollah Islamic fundamentalist militia have once again
kicked the shins of the mighty Israeli military by firing volleys of
Katyusha rockets across the border into Israeli territory. Israel,
frustrated that its frequent punitive air raids and occupation of a
'security zone' inside Lebanon have failed to prevent such attacks, has
moved tanks and extra troops into the area and protested furiously in
Washington.
In its latest retaliatory move, Israeli aircraft last night attacked a
Hizbollah target in a village south-east of Tyre in south Lebanon.
As an implacable foe of the peace talks, the Iranian-backed Hizbollah must
be delighted that its raids have had the desired effect of souring the
negotiations between Israel and Lebanon. But, in Israeli eyes, the events on
the border have much more to do with the Israeli-Syrian talks than those
with Lebanon.
Syria is the predominant power in Lebanon. Some 40,000 Syrian troops are
deployed in the country. Although not in areas directly abutting the
Israel-occupied zone, they control large areas where Hizbollah is active.
Israel believes that Syria is deliberately allowing Hizbollah to attack it
to increase pressure on the Israeli government to give back the Golan
Heights, the occupied Syrian territory that is Damascus's chief concern in
the peace talks.
'The Syrians are exploiting Hizbollah to deliver the following message to
Israel: Only we can liquidate Hizbollah - on condition that you pay a price.
And the price is the Golan,' said Prof Moshe Maoz of Hebrew University on
Israel Radio yesterday.
Israel's problem is that it does not know how to respond. It can hardly pull
out of the peace talks. As Mr Shimon Peres, the foreign minister, remarked,
Israel will not let Hizbollah bring the process to a halt. The government
has said it is ready for a partial withdrawal from the Golan, but not the
Syrian demand for full withdrawal. Nor could it make such a dramatic
concession under duress.
Militarily, there is also a dilemma. The Hizbollah rocket attacks into
Israel, both in recent weeks and during the summer, ended a seven-year
period during which such cross-border strikes (as distinct from regular
clashes within the security zone) had virtually halted. But yet another
round of air raids, or even a large-scale ground attack north of the
security zone, is unlikely to have much effect against Hizbollah's small and
mobile groups of fighters.
Much of this week's carefully orchestrated publicity about Israeli
reinforcements - the normally assiduous military censor was strangely silent
 -appears to have been intended mainly as a warning to Hizbollah and Syria
to back off.
But Damascus and the militants will continue to hold a potent card against
Israel as long as Israeli forces remain in Lebanon. In a new blow to Middle
East peace, Israel on yesterday walked out of an international conference on
Palestinian refugees because it refused to sit in the same room as the head
of the Palestinian delegation, Reuter reports from Ottawa.
AP adds: Israeli troops shot and killed four Palestinians and wounded 21 in
clashes in the occupied lands yesterday, the army and Israeli radio said. It
was the highest one-day casualty toll since April. One soldier was seriously
wounded in a Palestinian ambush.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921112

