FT924-6272

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (8): Fountain pens make a big comeback
with the smart set - Stephen Bayley considers the merits of a small but
relatively affordable status symbol


   By STEPHEN BAYLEY


THE FOUNTAIN pen has never been so popular. For manufacturers, designers,
buyers, consumers and sociologists brought up with a belief in technical
progress, this is a daunting reversal.
There is no good reason why leaky, expensive, fragile and unreliable
fountain pens, temperamental ghosts from the past, should be in demand
today.
Except that people demand them. They are a sure and relatively affordable
status symbol. The choice and use of a fountain pen speaks volumes not only
for discretionary spending, but about your respect for writing.
While ten or 15 years ago you would have had to look hard in dusty
specialist stationers to satisfy a perverse whim to buy a fountain pen,
nowadays they are one of the fixed currencies in the language of luxury
goods.
In airport duty free shops, in full-page advertisements in glossy magazines
big names such as Parker, Sheaffer, Waterman and Montblanc take space and
demand attention.
Ever more expensive, ever more luxurious pens regularly appear.
Manufacturers in the US, Germany, France and Britain are trawling the
archives to find yet more obscure antique prototypes to revive. It is as if
a telecommunications expert was wanting to restore Marconi's telegraph.
History is in reverse, but why is it happening?
Memories of awful, scratchy things, delivering too much - or too little -
ink, haunt the imaginations of anyone born before 1960. For the fountain
pen, familiarity bred neglect. Those born later have never known the
miseries of a rapid disgorgement of permanent blue all the way across their
homework, and subsequently over the cuff and up the forearm.
Instead, the current generation has become flabby in its discriminations,
numbed to the niceties of handwriting and blotting paper by the mass
availability of cheap ballpoints and felt tip pens, often technically
excellent. We tend to believe that progress and technology lead to
perfection. Maybe, but the evidence is that technical perfection bores
consumers.
The technical problem with creating a pen is (a) storage of the ink and (b)
delivery of the ink and (c) the ink itself.
Broadly speaking this means: (a) external dip or internal reservoir; (b)
whether you get no ink at all, or all the ink at once and (c) does the ink
have density and dry immediately, but rot the nib, or is it thin stuff with
long-term wetness which rots the paper?
The answers to these questions involved rubber sacs, ancient valves, pistons
or levers and some of the patents which define the history of technology in
its most hucksterish phase.
Their appearance was not rapid: it was, for instance, quite a long time
after the discovery of rubber that someone developed the rubber sac.
Lewis E. Waterman's technical achievement was to develop a simple capillary
valve (comprising three extremely thin slits at the working end of the
barrel interior) which allowed air to enter the reservoir as the ink
escaped, obviating rushing blobs, scratches, and facilitating easy
handwriting.
Waterman, of New York, was followed as a pioneer of the popular fountain pen
by George S. Parker of Janesville, Wisconsin, whose Duofold of 1921 was a
breakthrough in product design.
In 1937 Parker introduced the '51' to celebrate the company's 51st birthday.
Technically, it evolved from the Parker Company's experiments with
fast-drying inks. Eventually, the '51', a masterpiece of streamlined
styling, became a totem of the industrial design movement. The popular
appeal of the '51' brought production into the millions every year but, just
as the fountain pen appeared to reach its apotheosis, it was sabotaged by
two fundamental developments in the proletarianisation of the pen - the
ball-point and the felt-tip.
In 1943 a Hungarian called Lasso Biro, working in Argentina, patented a
design for a ball-point pen with quick drying ink which did not blot. By
1945 it was being manufactured in Europe. Crucially, by 1953, a Frenchman
called Marcel Bich made it disposable.
When he dropped his 'h' Bic became synonymous with ball-point. In a similar
mood of post-War endeavour in 1946, a Japanese called Yokio Horie founded a
company called Pentel (a Japanese-English word combining the sense of pencil
and pastel). Pentel's innovation was to adapt traditional Japanese practice
to industrial production. Using the principles of bamboo-based techniques
(where the fibrous core soaked up and delivered the ink to a chiselled point
by osmotic pressure), Pentel Introduced the felt-tip marker in 1960. In 1963
came the sign pen and in, 1970 came the famous green-barrelled R50 roller
ball. And all the rest was graffiti.
Of all new technology, mass-produced, inexpensive pens, the R50 Ball Pentel,
has been outstanding. It replaced the Bic as the universal, global writing
instrument. It seemed another example of Japanese ingenuity taking advantage
of Western complacency.
At about the same time as the bright green Pentel (about 50p) was becoming
ubiquitous, the fat, shiny expensive Montblanc Meisterstuck (two to three
hundred times more expensive) was becoming familiar in well-heeled pockets.
The massive, reactionary, archaic, intensely desirable Montblanc is the
paradigm of the pen, not as a functional tool, but as luxury product.
Luxury is the opposite of function, which is not to say it lacks utility. It
is a marvellous testament to our civilisation that a functionally perfect
pen can be bought for a matter of pence. But that is the problem. The
consumer is capricious. As soon as his basic needs are satisfied, he seeks
more obscure appetites to grafify.
Bored with sterile perfection, he wants the unpredictable. An individual's
pen has always been an expression of self-esteem because the act of writing
is so intensely personal. Our own word 'style' derives from the Latin
stylus. Lewis E. Waterman recognised this: his great commercial innovation
was to sit in a New York shop window demonstrating his pens to a sceptical
public. Consumers are once again enjoying the same sense of showmanship.
The massive interest in fountain pens is not simply a taste for nostalgia,
although for the time being this may be the expression favoured by most
manufacturers with their evocative lacquers, finishes and names.
It is also an expression of a growing interest in the process of owning and
using everyday things, of taking serious pleasure in small details. People
who want to own a decent fountain pen want to do it right, whichever way you
spell it.

The Financial Times


London Page V

921121

