FT921-3702

FT  13 MAR 92 / East Asia arms build-up is other side of peace dividend
coin: Weapons makers turn to Pacific's western shores to compensate for
declining business elsewhere, writes David White


   By DAVID WHITE


ASIA LOOKS likely to see the fastest growth in military spending of any area
of the world up to the end of the decade. Facing declining business in North
America and Europe, arms manufacturers are plying the route to growth
markets on the western shores of the Pacific.
Since 1988 developing countries in south and east Asia have overtaken the
Middle East in purchases of weapons, according to the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute (Sipri).
At a recent Singapore conference on Asia-Pacific defence, senior officials
and academics from 10 countries in the region underscored the extent of
military modernisation plans.
Dr Yeo Ning Hong, Singapore's defence minister, predicted a continued rise
in the region's military outlays. He cited widespread fears - despite
reassurances by Washington - that US involvement would continue to shrink.
Japan, he said, might then feel compelled to arm to safeguard trade routes,
prompting a 'chain reaction' from the Chinese and Koreans.
'No country in south-east Asia is overjoyed with the reduction in US
presence,' he warned. 'None of them has declared a peace dividend. None has
reduced its defence expenditure.'
An impressive array of sophisticated armoury is being acquired. Ten
countries in the region have warships armed with French Exocet or US Harpoon
anti-ship missiles, or both. Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore and South Korea
all have US F-16 fighters. Around them, Japan is equipped with US F-15s,
Australia with F-18s, India with MiG-29s and French Mirage 2000s, and China
is buying Russian Su-27s.
In the five years to 1990, according to Sipri, India and Japan were the
world's biggest importers of large conventional weapons. During the same
period, five other Asian counties - North and South Korea, Pakistan, Taiwan
and Thailand - all imported more arms than Libya.
Annual US military sales to east Asia and the Pacific have been running at
more than Dollars 3bn, but face strong competition from Europe and from
local industries.
South Korea has ordered 120 F-16 jets in a Dollars 5bn deal, as well as US
Black Hawk helicopters, British Lynx helicopters (already delivered),
British Hawk jet trainers, Mistral ground-to-air missiles from France and
submarines from Germany.
Taiwan, looking to European shipyards to update its navy. has also shown
interest in German submarines. It has two Dutch submarines and was reported
to be considering more, but the Netherlands has vetoed any new sales to
protect its relations with China. France has hit on a compromise by selling
six frigates to Taiwan without weapons.
Most members of the Association of South East Asian Nations (Asean) -
comprising Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and
Thailand - are also actively arming. Thailand is the biggest military
spender of the group, embarking on what Mr Sukhumbhand Paribartra, director
of the Institute of Security and International Studies at Bangkok's
Chulalongkorn university, describes as 'the largest arms procurement
programme in the kingdom's history'. This is despite the outbreak of peace
in Indochina and the withdrawal of Russian warships from Vietnam's Cam Ranh
Bay base.
Thailand has switched from reliance on Chinese weapons to US army surplus
and more state-of-the-art weapons. It has ordered a helicopter carrier from
Germany, Swiss trainer aircraft and in addition to its US F-16s has been
dithering over procurement of a light strike fighter.
Mr Sukhumbhand says the plans partly reflect a 'bureaucratic momentum' built
up during the 1980s.
Indonesia has received the sixth in a series of second-hand Dutch frigates
and is considering buying and co-producing British Aerospace Hawks.
Singapore is completing a fleet of six German-design missile corvettes.
Malaysia was to have bought Tornado strike jets from Britain but changed its
mind and ordered 28 Hawks instead. It is in protracted discussions over two
corvettes which would bring its purchases from the UK under a 1988 arms
supply agreement to more than Pounds 1bn. It is meanwhile considering
another aircraft buy - possibly one or two squadrons - and is studying the
Russian MiG-29 as well as US and French options.
Brunei also wants Hawks from the UK, providing its air force with its first
jet aircraft. But, along with plans for three offshore patrol vessels, it
has delayed the purchase.
Western military consultants in Asia find the rationale for new weapon
acquisitions - other than sheer prestige - in many cases unclear.
Vice Admiral Soedibyo Rahardjo, chief of Indonesia's general staff, said the
Asean countries felt menaced not by a definite military threat but by
uncertainty about how the balance in the region would evolve between the US,
Russia, Japan, China and India.
New US 'access facilities' are being set up in south-east Asia to compensate
for the withdrawal, at Manila's behest, of forces from the Philippines,
where the US Navy is due to complete its pullout from Subic Bay by the end
of the year.
Singapore has agreed arrangements for rotating deployments of US fighters,
port calls and the transfer of a naval logistics branch from the
Philippines. Malaysia is to let US ships use a naval repair yard. Expansion
of arrangements with Thailand is under discussion. According to Vice Admiral
Soedibyo, Indonesia could in future also provide maintenance facilities.
A continued US presence is seen as preventing a 'power vacuum' which would
encourage the flaring of tensions in a region henceforth bristling with new
weaponry.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920313

