FT923-10939

FT  28 JUL 92 / Dasa joins race for BAe's space business


   By DANIEL GREEN


DEUTSCHE AEROSPACE (Dasa), a subsidiary of Daimler-Benz, Germany's largest
industrial group, said yesterday it had joined the race to buy British
Aerospace's loss-making satellite business.
The news is a blow to GEC, whose joint venture with Matra of France,
Matra-Marconi, has been in talks with BAe since last year to acquire the
space division. BAe and Matra-Marconi are long-standing partners in the
space industry and their talks were close to completion.
It appears they planned to announce the joining of their space businesses at
the Farnborough air show in September. Senior executives at Matra-Marconi
said yesterday Dasa's entry had delayed its merger plans indefinitely.
'The timing does not now depend on us, it depends on British Aerospace,'
said Matra-Marconi. 'Dasa has made an offer, but we don't know what the
decision is.'
British Aerospace confirmed it was in talks over the future of its space
business but would not say with whom. It said the unit was not up for sale,
but it wanted a partnership or joint venture.
However, Dasa said: 'British Aerospace is selling the division entirely. We
are looking at what they have to offer.'
BAe makes satellites, their components and ground control equipment, but the
operation is small by world standards. BAe does not reveal sales figures for
its space business, but Dasa put the figure at about Pounds 150m a year.
It has received no new satellite orders since last year and last month it
halved its satellite-making capacity with the loss of up to 640 jobs. It
blamed the loss of an order for a Japanese satellite.
But, it emerged yesterday, the industry interpreted that move as preparing
the company for disposal. By cutting costs, the business would be more
attractive to a potential partner or buyer.
If Dasa secured the BAe arm, it would probably merge it with Space
Systems/Loral of the US, in which it has a 12 per cent stake.
Dasa paid Pounds 57m for the Space Systems/Loral stake last month to join
other European shareholders Alcatel and Aerospatiale of France and Alenia of
Italy. The company is controlled by Loral, the US defence contractor.
Dasa is also considering the future of the space activities of Fokker, the
Dutch aircraft maker it agreed to take control of last week. Fokker makes
control and power equipment for satellites, but the business is small,
Fokker said yesterday.
BAe faces increasing competition in a Dollars 1bn (Pounds 500m) a year
industry dominated by US suppliers.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920728

