FT923-9490

FT  05 AUG 92 / Foreign Affairs: How to contain conflict - Peacekeeping is
much more than a matter of manning a line between two opposing armies


   By EDWARD MORTIMER


Last week I tried to suggest ways of preventing conflicts of the Croat and
Bosnian type elsewhere in Europe, especially by giving early attention to
the problems of national minorities. The premise was that conflict
prevention failed in those two countries. It has also failed in
Nagorno-Karabakh, appears to be failing in Moldova, and will almost
inevitably fail in other places soon.
This week I shall concentrate on ways of containing and ending conflicts. At
a conference last week on 'conflict in the states of central Europe and the
former USSR', sponsored by the Austrian government and the International
Peace Academy, an Austrian diplomat helped me by dividing the necessary
measures into four time - scales:
immediate humanitarian ones to help the victims;
short-term ones to contain the conflict and bring about an effective
ceasefire;
medium-term ones to consolidate the ceasefire, creating the minimum of
confidence and communication needed for a political settlement; and
long-term 'peace-building'.
Even in the first stage, military forces may be involved, whether to secure
'safe zones' or havens for refugees, or to protect airports and convoys so
that supplies can reach civilians. But the crucial need, illustrated by the
confusion which prevailed in Turkey and Iran in the early stages of last
year's Kurdish crisis, is for one international agency to be given the
leading role, with responsibility for co-ordinating everyone else's
contributions; and for that agency to work openly rather than secretively,
so that everyone else knows what is happening. In Yugoslavia this role is
being played, effectively, by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.
As far as possible local resources should be used. Recently, public works
ministers from all the ex-Yugoslav republics attended a meeting in Vienna,
and said they had human resources at their disposal but not financial ones.
They claimed that, given even one per cent of the cost of the UN protection
force (Unprofor), they could set up more effective aid programmes of their
own.
The caveat here, of course, is that local humanitarian organisations,
however sincere, are seldom completely separate from the parties to a
conflict and often closely identified with them. International monitoring is
needed to ensure supplies are fairly distributed and not manipulated for
political ends.
That can best be done by a UN liaison office on the spot, something even
more necessary for the second task, of containing hostilities and working
for their suspension. This task has to be carried on simultaneously with the
first, even though it may take longer to have any tangible effect.
The biggest difficulty, amply illustrated in Yugoslavia, is that one may
have to 'take sides' by identifying the party most responsible for
prolonging the fighting or violating ceasefires, and to bring pressure on it
to stop; whereas peacekeepers on the spot - engaged in fact-finding
missions, negotiating ceasefire terms, or monitoring compliance - can only
operate effectively if accepted by all sides as impartial. There needs to be
a clear distinction between peacekeepers and those involved in any kind of
punitive action, even if at the top level both should be co-ordinated by
some kind of 'conflict management unit'.
One aspect of conflict management often neglected is information and public
opinion, both in the conflict zone itself and in third countries trying to
help resolve it.
Fear and hatred between communities are constantly nourished by one-sided
atrocity stories; often totally contradictory statements of fact are
published and believed on opposite sides. Sometimes the media of third
countries in turn fall victim to such one-sided accounts. The Austrian and
German media have portrayed the Yugoslav conflict in much starker black and
white than those of most other countries. Without resorting to control of
the media, governments and international organisations seeking to contain
the conflict should make efforts to publicise a balanced account of the
facts.
Accurate and credible information is also central to the next task, that of
peacekeeping proper, which comes after a ceasefire is in force. The essence
of peacekeeping is confidence building: to enable each side to desist from
hostilities without fearing that it will thereby expose itself to hostile
action by the other. The more confidence peacekeeping forces can create, the
more durable the ceasefire is likely to be.
But in an increasing number of cases - Yugoslavia is certainly one - this is
not simply a matter of manning a line between two opposing armies.
Unprofor's mandate in Croatia requires it to ensure that the 'protected
areas' are demilitarised, 'through the withdrawal or disbandment of all
armed forces in them', to 'monitor the functioning of the local police there
to help ensure non-discrimination and the protection of human rights', and
to 'facilitate the return, in conditions of safety and security, of civilian
displaced persons to their homes'.
This means that successful peacekeeping has to include tight control of all
weapons coming into the area, and of existing arms depots within it (likely
to be an acute concern for peacekeepers operating in ex-Soviet territory);
disbandment of irregular forces, or at least their incorporation into
recognised armies with a clear chain of command; and collection or
decommissioning of unauthorised weapons, especially those of a
'destabilising' nature, such as hand-held surface-to-air missiles.
Peacekeeping forces will often have to exercise police powers, to search for
weapons, arrest malefactors, and prevent the intimidation of civilians.
All this requires significant resources - and they have to be available at
short notice. In the Yugoslav case the UN Security Council was lamentably
slow in making up its mind to put in a peacekeeping force, and when it did
so it authorised a force so small that it could only have carried out its
mandate on 'best case' assumptions. Needless to say these were not
fulfilled, and the secretary-general was soon back asking for more.
But peacekeeping will not in the long run be considered successful if the
peacekeepers become a permanent feature of the landscape, which cannot be
removed for fear of precipitating a resumption of the conflict - as has
happened in Cyprus and south Lebanon. So it has to be accompanied by
peacemaking and 'peace-building', defined respectively by the UN
secretary-general as 'action to bring hostile parties to agreement' and
'action to identify and support structures which will tend to strengthen and
solidify peace'.
These long-term efforts take us back into the realm of conflict prevention,
since their object is to prevent backsliding into violence once it has
stopped. But they have to confront the additional thorny question of how far
peace requires the reversal of changes (especially population movements)
brought about by violence, and how far, on the contrary, it requires their
acceptance.
In principle, everyone supports the former proposition: it is unthinkable to
'reward the aggressor'. In practice, as Greek Cypriots and Palestinians have
both been obliged to recognise, negotiated settlements generally involve the
weaker party accepting a fait accompli, in part if not in whole.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920805

