FT924-12186

FT  22 OCT 92 / Argentina faces trade deficit of up to Dollars 1bn


   By JOHN BARHAM


   BUENOS AIRES


ARGENTINE economy minister, Mr Domingo Cavallo, has admitted for the first
time that the country faces a trade deficit of 'up to Dollars 1bn' this
year. He had consistently denied that Argentina would see such a deficit in
1992, forecasting instead a small surplus or equilibrium.
However, dining with businessmen on Tuesday, Mr Cavallo recognised that,
while exports remained steady, imports were surging to a forecast Dollars
13bn in 1992 and leading to the country's first annual trade deficit since
1981.
'Of course this deficit worries us. We do not want to enter a period of
trade and current account deficits,' he said. The government is now working
on a package of measures to improve Argentina's international
competitiveness.
The minister explained that free market policies had set off a consumer boom
and heavy capital inflows, driving imports up by 60 per cent. Last year,
Argentine exports were worth Dollars 11.96bn and imports Dollars 8.09bn,
giving a trade surplus of Dollars 3.87bn.
However, imports began to outstrip exports last November. The latest
available trade figures show Argentina stayed in deficit until May, when it
reported a Dollars 160m surplus.
The government says there is no reason to panic, public finances being
sound, inflation low and productivity and investment increasing. But most
Argentine companies have poor management, obsolete technology and no
aggressive export strategy.
Industrialists say an overvalued currency and inexorably rising domestic
costs are making it impossible to export profitably. Manufacturing exports
are declining and exports of unprocessed raw materials increasing, they say.
Business leaders are bitterly critical of Brazil, Argentina's largest market
and a partner in the Mercosur common market. They accuse Brazilian companies
of flooding Argentina with artificially cheap products. A Brazilian official
countered: 'Argentina has an overvalued currency and excessive demand. In
Brazil, the problem is the opposite.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921022

