FT923-9803

FT  03 AUG 92 / International Bonds: Banks hungry for capital as Basle
deadline nears


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


BANKS ARE still hungry for capital, as the deadline for meeting Basle
capital adequacy ratios at the start of next year approaches.
Investment bankers are responding by creating some ingenious ways of
structuring debt offerings so that they will meet investors' rather picky
appetites and satisfy regulators.
While many US banks have taken advantage of the strong stock and credit
market conditions prevailing for most of this year to raise fresh capital,
their European counterparts have generally been slower to move.
Consequently, the next wave of bank capital financing is likely to be
concentrated among European - and perhaps Japanese - banks.
Last week four financial institutions - JP Morgan of the US, Credit Local
and Societe Generale of France, and Germany's Landeskreditbank, - raised
Dollars 700m of subordinated floating-rate notes (FRNs) in the Eurobond
market, using an unusual 'collar' structure, incorporating minimum and
maximum interest rate levels. The notes qualify as lower tier 2 capital
under Basle capital adequacy rules.
At this point in the US interest cycle, with US rates at historical lows -
money market rates are around 3 1/2 per cent - investors are less keen to
lock in fixed-rate returns, and an initially higher coupon appears
attractive.
Kidder Peabody, which is active in the secondary floating-rate note market,
had noted a strong appetite among Swiss investors for outstanding bank FRNs
with the same structure. A spate of such issues, then known as mini-max
floaters, was launched in 1985, but have since been a virtually forgotten
casualty of the fall-out from the collapse of the perpetual FRN market in
1986.
Some of the bankers who remember the panic-selling of the crashing
floating-rate note market remain sceptical about these instruments.
A floating-rate note incorporating an interest rate cap and floor is
structured in this way: effectively, the issuer buys a cap from the
investor, and then sells a cap in the market to hedge that position. The
issuer effectively sells a floor to the investor and hedges that position by
buying one in the wholesale market. However, the issuer benefits from the
spread between the wholesale market and the terms offered to the FRN
investor.
'Investors are not getting fair value for the cap, but they do not care,
because they are being offered a high initial coupon to compensate,'
explained one banker.
Consequently, the market for such paper is limited to specific pockets of
demand. The Dollars 700m of paper launched so far has already stretched that
demand, according to some underwriters. While the Dollars 200m JP Morgan
deal launched by Kidder Peabody met strong demand due to the rarity of the
name, later deals met a less favourable reception. The pocket of Swiss
demand was only accessible to credits of double-A and above. European
markets are effectively closed to lesser credits, which will have to find
other sources of capital.
Most likely, they will turn to the US, where the market in dated
subordinated fixed-rate debt has been expanding. However, the heavy supply
of paper in the US market has caused yield spreads over US Treasuries to
widen by about 20 basis points in the last month.
The US market is virtually the only source of tier 1 capital, apart from
straightforward equity financing. The US market in preferred stock has been
active recently. European banks such as France's Banque Indosuez and Spain's
Banesto have raised preferred stock, and others are set to follow.
Bankers said investors were buying preferred shares which offer a premium
over rates available on dated bonds sufficient to repay principal after 17
to 20 years. Because of the steep shape of the US yield curve, preferred
shares are also attractive to borrowers.
A further seven borrowers have added D-Mark options to their medium-term
note (MTN) programmes. From today, borrowers can issue D-Mark medium-term
notes under multi-currency programmes, following a liberalisation of rules
announced a month ago by the German Bundesbank.
Previously, D-Mark MTNs could only be issued under a separate programme,
which involved substantial costs including legal and listing fees. Bankers
said the cost of adding a D-Mark option to an existing programme amounted to
around Dollars 2,000. A D-Mark MTN programme would cost over Dollars 100,000
to set up.
The seven borrowers are: Norway's Export Finance, Finnish Export Credit,
Halifax Building Society, Woolwich Building Society, Monte dei Paschi di
Siena, the Italian bank, GMAC Europe, the European finance arm of General
Motors of the US, and Compagnie Bancaire, the French financial services
group.
Merrill Lynch Bank in Germany is acting as arranger of all these D-Mark
options. Halifax has abandoned its planned D-Mark MTN programme, which had
run into technical problems prior to the liberalisation.
Another 10 borrowers are to add similar options to their programmes this
week, in addition to Abbey National and Nationwide Building Society, which
did so earlier. On Friday, the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development signed the first new programme to incorporate a D-Mark option.
The signing of the Ecu1bn programme was delayed to allow the D-Mark option
to be included.
A NUMBER of European banks are considering raising capital in the US using
an innovative structure which offers greater flexibility, writes Tracy
Corrigan.
Barclays Bank, National Westminster Bank, the Royal Bank of Scotland, and
Sweden's S-E Banken were among the banks looking at the structure,
investment bankers said. With little opportunity to raise capital in Europe,
many European banks are turning to the more receptive US market.
The structure would allow banks to raise upper tier 2 capital, with the
option later to convert it into tier 1 capital. Certain proportions of both
types of capital must be held by banks to meet the Basle capital adequacy
standards, which come into force at the start of next year. Although UK
banks are among the best capitalised, most banks are seeking means of
raising increasingly scarce capital.
Under the structure, a bank issues undated subordinated debt, which
qualifies as upper tier 2 capital. But this can be exchanged, at the option
of the issuer, into preferred stock, which qualifies as tier 1 capital. The
issuer would pay a premium to investors for the conversion. It is based on a
recent offering by Bankers Trust.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920803

