FT921-1465

FT  24 MAR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Equities fall after poor trade
figures


   By STEVE THOMPSON


MUCH worse than expected trade figures for February set the seal on a dismal
trading session and saw London's equity market close at its lowest level
this year. At the close of business, the FT-SE 100-share index showed a 15.6
decline at 2,441.0.
The poor trade figures were seen as damaging even more the chances of the
ruling Conservative government being re-elected on April 9. The figures came
hard on the heels of the latest batch of opinion polls published over the
weekend. Of the five poll results, four indicated a Labour lead over the
Tories with one favouring the Conservatives.
Dealers were said to be bracing themselves for more bad news in the
never-ending stream of polls, with today expected to bring another reading
of the nation's current political leanings. However, it was pointed out by
traders that the City had absorbed the latest bad news on the economy with
minimum fuss.
They said that, although the trade figures ruffled the stock market, they
did little to upset the foreign exchange and bond markets. Sterling closed
higher against both the dollar and the D-Mark, promoting stability in the
gilt-edged market, where prices closed virtually unaltered after initial
small gains and a subsequent bout of nervousness in midsession.
The first trading session of the new account began relatively brightly, with
marketmakers opening prices around Friday's levels in the hope that much of
the political news had been expected and factored into prices last week. An
opening decline of four points on the Footsie reflected an unusually large
number of constituents - including BAT Industries, Legal & General, Reuters
and BTR - going ex-dividend, a factor that lowered the index by over five
points. Little genuine institutional business was transacted during the
early part of the morning, with the Footsie future again leading the primary
market lower after a relatively sedate start to trading.
Evidence of a small programme trade and growing nervousness about the trade
figures then began to unsettle the market, which showed a loss of 18 points
before the trade numbers were published. After this, the market fell
sharply, reaching the session's low of 2,427.9, or down 28.7, as Wall Street
came in lower.
A determined rally developed towards the close, however, with buyers said to
have been stimulated by hopes of a better showing for the Conservatives in
an opinion poll expected this morning and by a firmer trend on Wall Street.
The Labour party's election campaign bore down on the media sector, hitting
shares in Pearson, Reed International News International and Granada as Mr
Roy Hattersley, deputy leader of Labour, said his party would launch a
monopoly inquiry into cross-media ownership if it wins the election.
Property shares were sold hard as investors took fright at the latest
developments surrounding international property development group Olympia &
York.
Equity turnover remained at miserably low levels. Yesterday's 370.6m
compared very badly with Friday's 587.8m.

The Financial Times


London Page 44

920324

