FT923-15686

FT  01 JUL 92 / Institutions cool on Telegraph flotation


   By NORMA COHEN, MAGGIE URRY and RICHARD GOURLAY


A LUKEWARM response to the flotation of The Telegraph is expected when
applications for the public offer close today.
Cazenove, one of the joint brokers to the issue, said yesterday last week's
placing of half the 26m shares on offer had gone well. Demand for the 13m
shares being sold through a public offer would only be known after 10am
today, the deadline for applications.
However, institutional investors contacted by the FT yesterday expressed
little enthusiasm for the offer. A weak stockmarket has cast a cloud over
new issues.
The flotation at a price of 325p values The Telegraph, whose main businesses
are the daily and Sunday newspapers of that name, at Pounds 435.5m. The 26m
shares being sold are raising Pounds 84.5m before expenses for Hollinger
Group, Mr Conrad Black's investment company. Hollinger is retaining a 68 per
cent stake in The Telegraph.
Analysts said they expected The Telegraph offer to be fully subscribed,
although it was difficult to gauge retail demand. However, one analyst said:
'I have not spoken to one institution in favour of the shares.'
Many investors and analysts expressed concern about the price of the issue,
compared with other companies in the sector.
There was also concern about Mr Black's plans for future investments in
media businesses. The prospectus outlined a possible bid by Hollinger for
the New York Daily News with The Telegraph then being offered a half share
in that newspaper, although Mr Black has since played this down.
Brokers said the shares would at best trade at a small premium to the issue
price when dealings begin on July 8 and could open at a discount.
Shares in Anglian Group, the double-glazing company, go on sale to the
public next week at a price of 210p, valuing the Norwich-based group at
about Pounds 183.5m, writes Richard Gourlay. Advisers NM Rothschild had been
hoping for a price of 250p as recently as two weeks ago.
Yesterday 21.05m shares were placed with institutions and underwriting was
secured for the same amount of stock being offered to the public.
The 210p price gives Anglian a pro forma historic price earnings ratio of
12.2 times and pro forma historic earnings per share of 17.2p.
The company is raising Pounds 56.5m through the flotation.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920701

