FT924-11273

FT  27 OCT 92 / China puts markets strategy in place


   By REUTER


   BEIJING


CHINA'S cabinet has set up a watchdog agency headed by Zhu Rongji, who is in
charge of economic policy, to monitor the country's growth in securities
business, according to the official media, Reuter reports from Beijing.
The cabinet will oversee another new group, the China Securities Supervision
and Administration Committee, in setting day-to-day policy for the
securities industry.
Zhu, appointed to the Standing Committee of the Communist party's politburo
this month, laid the groundwork for the Shanghai stock market as the city's
mayor in the mid-1980s.
The Supervision and Administration Committee will be chaired by Liu Hongru,
a former central bank vice-president and now vice-minister of the State
Commission for Restructuring the Economy.
The dual committees are the final piece in Beijing's plan to spread its
experiment with financial markets across the country. Three new
state-controlled brokerages are operational and a national system for
securities trading is taking shape.
'(The government) is making great efforts to be a fair judge and will unify
and co-ordinate related policies concerning shares and state treasury bonds
to protect the interest of the broad masses of investors,' the Xinhua news
agency said.
Since China officially established its two stock markets in Shanghai and
Shenzhen in 1990, securities policy has been handled by the People's Bank of
China, the central bank.
A lack of coherent policy and poor supervision became apparent last August,
when a botched issue of share application forms provoked rioting in
Shenzhen. The riots, fanned by allegations of official corruption and
insider dealing, shook planners in Beijing and raised the threat of wider
social unrest.
The official securities watchdog joins the three newly-established national
securities companies as part of Beijing's strategy for keeping control over
the markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921027

