FT924-752

FT  22 DEC 92 / International Company News: Assault on corporate Germany's
defences - David Waller examines the intensifying attacks on the country's
system of voting rights restrictions


   By DAVID WALLER


Corporate Germany is under fire - both from outside and from within its own
ranks.
Two weeks ago a representative of Calpers, the big US pension fund, stood up
at the annual meeting of RWE, a large German utility, and denounced the
voting restrictions in place at dozens of leading German companies.
This was unprecedented - the first time that an important Anglo-Saxon fund
had delivered such a critique at the annual meeting of a leading German
company.
Equally unprecedented was the call last week from Mr Christian Strenger, the
chief executive of DWS, the investment management arm of the Deutsche Bank
and Germany's largest fund management group, for the introduction of
voluntary rules to govern takeover activity in Germany.
The two issues are interrelated, as Mr Strenger made clear when he proposed
that companies should give up their voting right restrictions as a quid pro
quo for embracing a voluntary takeover code and rules defining disclosure
requirements.
The justification for the voting rights restriction - in place in one form
or another at many large German companies including Deutsche Bank, the DWS
parent, and introduced in the early 1970s amid fears that the crown jewels
of German industry would be bought up by oil-rich countries - is that it is
a company's only defence in the absence of formal rules setting out the way
in which bids should proceed.
This was exactly the argument used by Morgan Grenfell, Deutsche Bank's
investment banking subsidiary, in its successful defence of the Continental
tyre company against a foray from Pirelli. Continental has been able to
preserve its independence to date because it has managed to keep voting
restrictions in place, despite two attempts from shareholders to remove
them.
This put Morgan Grenfell in the embarrassing position of defending something
which would be indefensible in the UK, its home market. In the UK, as in the
US, it is a cardinal principle that all shareholders should be treated
alike.
'Most countries in the world stick to the principle of one share one vote,'
said Mr Joseph Lufkin, the Calpers representative who was incensed at the
voting anomalies in place at RWE, Germany's eighth biggest industrial
conglomerate. For historical reasons, a group of local authorities owns 30
per cent of the company's shares - but wields 60 per cent of the votes.
'There is no reason why one shareholder should get better treatment than
another just because he happens to be more of an insider than the others,'
said Mr Lufkin.
Strenger, like Lufkin, points to another inequity: the lack of any rule
obliging acquiring companies to make a full offer to all shareholders. It is
standard practice in Germany for one company to win control of another by
taking a simple majority or a blocking minority. This means that no premium
is paid for corporate control and the value of remaining shareholders'
holdings can be much diminished.
It was this concern which led to a battle this year between the management
of Aachener und Munchener Beteiligungs (AMB), Germany's second biggest
insurance company, and Assurances Generales de France (AGF), a large
state-owned French insurance group which accumulated 25 per cent of the
German company in what was then interpreted as a hostile move.
The management then argued, with the help of SG Warburg, the UK investment
bank, that the French company was trying to win control with the minimum
outlay possible, and refused to recognise the full votes attached to the
share stake.
The argument was subsequently settled when AGF helped find a buyer for AMB's
stake in BfG Bank, the insurance company's troubled banking subsidiary. But
not before the then chief executive resigned and SG Warburg resigned their
mandate.
The sale of the bank to Credit Lyonnais is due to be finalised on December
30 at a special meeting of AMB shareholders. But last-minute difficulties
have emerged in the negotiations and it is possible that Fondiaria, the
Italian group with 20 per cent of AMB's shares, could scupper the
transaction by voting against it at the same meeting.
Analysts suspect that the Italian company feels aggrieved at being left in
the position of minority shareholder, the value of its shares diminished by
the influence accorded to the French.
The AGF/AMB/BfG imbroglio highlights another way in which shareholders are
ill-served by the current regulatory environment. There is minimal
information about the details of a transaction which has been settled over
the head of the shareholders in secret negotiations initiated by the
companies' supervisory boards.
Information obligations are rudimentary. Take just disclosure of share
stakes. In Germany a company does not have to disclose a shareholding until
it reaches 25 per cent, compared with 3 per cent in the UK. This leaves
shareholders - and companies - in the dark.
Mr Strenger proposes that companies should disclose holdings of 5 per cent,
and that banks should help them do this by reporting stake-building. But
this raises the question of the role of the banks, particularly Deutsche
Bank, the biggest bank and owner of numerous substantial portfolios in big
German companies.
The official Deutsche Bank line is that it puts up with voting rights
restrictions only because there is no takeover code. But critics say that
the bank profits from the current state of affairs, being so much better
informed about corporate developments because of the holdings and the
supervisory board mandates which go with them. Why commit itself to equality
between shareholders, when the current inequality works in its favour?
The European Community has drawn up a directive on takeovers and mergers,
but it has yet to be ratified. Strenger says that would be serving its own
interests by introducing a voluntary code long before the law comes into
force.
In practice, it would take years for a voluntary code to take effect.
Takeovers, especially hostile ones, are still regarded as profoundly
anti-social in Germany, as witnessed by the fuss which accompanied the early
stages of Krupp's move to win control of its steel rival Hoesch. German
companies are likely to worry that a set of rules would simply encourage
such behaviour.
At a time when companies are preoccupied with dealing with recession, it is
unlikely that they will encourage anything which would make them vulnerable
to takeover - even if that vulnerability works in the interests of
shareholders.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921222

