FT923-15557

FT  01 JUL 92 / Rescheduling of ex-Soviet debt likely


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


THE PARIS Club of western creditor governments is likely to agree a
rescheduling of the former Soviet republics' Dollars 65bn (Pounds 35bn)
foreign debt before a full programme of economic reforms is agreed between
Russia and the International Monetary Fund, Mr Nicholas Brady, the US
treasury secretary, said yesterday.
He said it was one of the few times that a debt restructuring would be
agreed before the signing of an official 'standby' economic programme with
the IMF. However, provisions would be inserted so that if an IMF standby
were not finally agreed, the restructuring would be halted.
Mr Brady confirmed that western nations are likely to favour a 'phased
approach' to Russian economic reform at next week's Munich summit of leaders
from the Group of Seven biggest industrial nations. Russia would receive
Dollars 1bn from the IMF in the form of 'first tranche' of funds,
representing a quarter of the Dollars 4bn that will be available once
agreement is reached on a full standby programme.
The advantage of a first tranche payment is that it involves fewer
conditions than a standby, increasing the chance of agreement between the
IMF and Russian negotiators. First tranche agreements are rare but have been
used before with India, Venezuela, Chile and Algeria.
The Paris Club deal, however, is controversial because other debtor nations
have been expected to sign a standby agreement with the IMF before being
granted a debt rescheduling.
Group of Seven leaders are expected to support this special concession as a
way of indicating support for President Boris Yeltsin's reform efforts even
if IMF talks remained bogged down.
On the wider agenda for the Munich summit, Mr Brady said the US's priority
was to strengthen world economic growth. He said the US would push for lower
world interest rates but he expected the main focus to be on fiscal
measures.
He said Japan's plan for a Y7,000bn-Y8,000bn (Pounds 29bn-Pounds 34bn)
fiscal stimulus announced at the weekend was 'important, significant and
different'. It was potentially as big a stimulus as that announced in 1987,
he said.
Mr Brady declined to say he was satisfied with German fiscal policy but he
praised Bonn for its steps to contain its budget deficit. His caution
suggests the US is seeking to avoid a row on interest rates at Munich. He
said another central objective at the summit would be to make progress on
the Uruguay Round trade talks.
President George Bush showed more support for Mr Yeltsin by announcing that
the US would accelerate the release of credits to Russia, allowing it to buy
Dollars 300m of farm products.
Ukraine seeks Dollars 1.52bn stabilisation fund, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920701

