FT921-11803

FT  30 JAN 92 / Technology: Communications in power struggle


   By RICHARD WILSON


Information technology managers grappling with the problem of creating
corporate communications networks could do worse than look at the experience
of Britain's three privatised electricity generators.
With the break-up of the Central Electricity Generating Board in 1989 into
three competing generating companies - National Power, PowerGen and Nuclear
Electric - the company's communications infrastructure was torn apart. The
generators either lost or were forced to share vital infrastructure with
their new rivals.
In 1990 National Power started a three-year programme to build optical fibre
networks between its 43 sites which would support the company's needs for
voice, data and videoconferencing until the end of the decade.
The network would transform the generator's business by improving
efficiency, changing the way it worked with its customers and providing
revenues in its own right.
Faced with a similar problem PowerGen had to completely rebuild the
infrastructure in its 26 sites. To keep costs down conventional copper
cabling was used to network the company's 2,500 PCs and workstations.
According to Jeffery Jones, PowerGen's telecommunications services manager,
optical fibre was only used when necessary to meet network capacity
requirements or for safety considerations within power stations.
As a result, by the end of 1990 PowerGen had spent more than Pounds 6m on
its telephone and computer networks.
National Power's was a more ambitious programme costing Pounds 20m, but
Chris Yates, head of telecommunications services, was convinced the
long-term approach to the network was the correct one. 'We did not plan to
do this again in another two or three years, which other companies may find
themselves doing, like it or not,' he says.
The first priority was the company's phone network with 15,000 extensions
spread around the country and connected by lines leased from BT, formerly
British Telecom, or Mercury. Even before this was finished at the end of
1990 important decisions had already been made about which equipment to use
in the rest of the programme.
Yates decided to use a single supplier for the core network hardware and the
network management software. It would be easier to gain the operational
expertise which would improve network efficiency and contain the running
costs.
AT&T of the US was chosen to supply the core network infrastructure which
included more than 2,000 miles of optical fibre cable and 1,000 miles of
copper cable.
A team of four contractors were used to build the network, and the overall
project management responsibility was shared between National Power and PA
Consulting.
National Power decided not to put the main contract out to competitive
tender even though it could have reduced the final cost. 'For a key product
such as this you cannot afford to go to competitive tenders and the
professional relationship with our suppliers has more than repaid that
decision,' says Yates.
The quality of the relationship between AT&T, the contractors and National
Power meant that the project was completed in nine months. This was despite
the unforeseen difficulty of flying equipment from the US at the height of
the Gulf War.
According to Yates, current network usage did not dictate the need for
high-capacity optical fibre. He expects it to be five years before the
company sees the real benefits of its decision to use more advanced optical
fibre for most connections.
At Power Gen, Jones is already reconsidering the need for increasing network
capacity with optical fibre to the desktop. 'The need for document imaging
may force us down the route for greater use of fibre,' he says.
National Power expects to gain the competitive advantage from its early
investment in optical fibre. 'The choice of fibre over copper will influence
the company's business over the next 10 or 15 years,' says Yates.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920130

