FT923-9716

FT  04 AUG 92 / Single-member company change


   By ANDREW JACK


COMPANIES can now be created with a single shareholder, under legislation
published yesterday in response to the EC twelfth company law directive.
The Companies (Single Member Private Limited Companies) Regulation amends
the 1985 Companies Act, which previously required at least two people to
create a company with limited liability.
It also protects from insolvency or the loss of limited-liability privilege
existing companies that become single-member companies, after events such as
the transfer of shares.
The Department of Trade and Industry said yesterday that the legislation
represented a simplification of red tape in company formation, in accordance
with the EC directive introduced in 1989.
The DTI denied that it was likely to create more fraudulent companies, with
only one person required to create a company. It said that was no more
likely than under existing legislation with just two shareholders, one of
whom could be a nominee and therefore offer little more protection.
The regulation for single-member companies provides safeguards by requiring
that contracts, corporate decisions and other information are put in writing
and specifies criminal penalties for any breaches.
The Inland Revenue has tightened the regulations over profit-related pay
schemes that it will accept for registration.
A new statement of practice says any schemes that give a formula for the
distribution of profits without specifying the figures used will no longer
be accepted. Existing legislation permits schemes that use either a fixed
percentage of profits or a pool for a specified amount to be accepted. The
use of formulae in place of figures was allowable in schemes registered
until yesterday. PROPOSED Treasury guidelines on money laundering are
burdensome and omit certain important groups, the Institute of Chartered
Accountants in England and Wales said yesterday, Andrew Jack writes. A
submission to the government from an institute working group raises
questions over the idea of creating an offence for any person acting in the
course of any trade, business or profession not reporting money laundering
suspicions to the authorities. It says that is a considerable extension from
original proposals covering simply credit and financial institutions. It
emphasises that secondary legislation on laundering should be extended to
the unregulated financial sector, to include businesses such as Bureaux de
Change, which are currently not mentioned.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920804

