FT922-641

FT  26 JUN 92 / World Stock Markets: Accra reaches critical time in widening
its equity base - Extensive divestment by the Ghanaian state, and new issues
are in prospect


   By JULIAN OZANNE


A historic event occurred earlier this month for the young Ghana Stock
Exchange. Super Paper Products, a Ghanaian manufacturing company, became the
GSE's first new listing since it started operations in November 1990.
With blackboard and chalk, and a public trading floor laid out like a
classroom, Ghana's nascent stock exchange is laying the foundations of what
its officials hope will prove to be one of Africa's most promising emerging
markets.
Given a current equity capitalisation of only C31bn (Dollars 77m) from 15
listed companies, the twice weekly call-over of offers and bids among the
three registered brokers, acting mostly for individuals, appears slightly
incongruous with the GSE's ambitions.
But Mr Yeboa Amoa, managing director of the GSE, says that after years of
macro-economic adjustment and liquidity squeezes the stock exchange has
arrived at a critical time: the government has deepened its commitment to
the divestment of more than 330 state-owned companies; and private
companies, having gained confidence in the economy, are looking at raising
money through new issues.
Meanwhile, low volume and the limited number of shares in the public float
are the market's major problems.
One of the greatest hopes of the GSE this year is that the government will
agree to its proposals to float at least a part of the 55 per cent holding
in Ashanti Goldfields in Accra. The government is preparing to sell up to 20
per cent of the equity in AGC, in which Lonrho, the international
conglomerate, holds 45 per cent.
A possible dual flotation on the London and Accra exchanges has been
suggested as one likely avenue for the divestiture of AGC, which posted a
net profit of C23.5bn last year from production of 589,452 ounces of fine
gold. Sixty per cent of the government's holdings in several state-owned
banks, including the giant Ghana Commercial Bank, are also due to be
divested within 18 months.
Mr Amoa also believes that Ghanaian companies such as Super Paper Products
are now beginning to look seriously at the GSE as a means of raising
capital, to expand their operations or pay off crippling debts. At least
three new listings and three rights issues are expected within the next nine
months.
Institutional investors, who previously put their money into high-interest
treasury instruments, are also looking at the GSE as interest rates come
down with falling inflation. Furthermore, the GSE is hoping to attract, by a
nationwide media campaign, the estimated C80bn to C100bn of money
circulating outside the banking system.
Critical changes in government policy, however, are anxiously awaited to
give the GSE the boost it needs. First, the government has to make either
administrative or legislative changes to allow participation of foreigners
and non-resident Ghanaians in the GSE.
At the moment the Foreign Exchange Control Act would prevent foreigners from
trading in shares on the GSE - a regulation out of step with the
government's stated commitment to foreign investment and the protocols it
has signed with the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
allow free movement of capital.
Mr Amoa says: 'We want the big emerging markets funds and foreign pension
funds to come here. Our aim is untrammeled access to this market.'
The second measure which must be taken is to allow government bonds to be
traded in the secondary market, and to abolish the 10 per cent withholding
tax on dividends which makes government paper more attractive than equities.
At the moment government bonds can only be resold to the central bank at a
discount.
Finally, the members of the GSE are waiting for a clear timetable of the
government's extensive divestiture plans, including its plans to sell
significant shareholdings in companies already listed.
On an average trading day in Accra only 17,000 shares change hands. Good
quality shares in sufficient quantity are not available and the market shows
some distorted prices, such as Mobil Ghana's - trading at two times earnings
in spite of having posted a 30 per cent dividend this month.
The GSE, however, believes its inevitable breakthrough is just about to
happen.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

920626

