FT922-7253

FT  19 MAY 92 / Pay deal boost for D-Mark and shares


   By DAVID WALLER, JAMES BLITZ and DAVID MARSH


   FRANKFURT, LONDON


GERMAN share prices and the D-Mark were boosted yesterday by news that the
German government had reached agreement on a 5.8 per cent wage package with
metalworkers. But market relief was tempered by uncertainty over the impact
of the settlement on the rate of inflation.
The DAX index of 30 leading German shares closed about 2 per cent higher
yesterday, gaining 34.6 points to 1,758. The D-Mark also gave its first
strong performance on currency markets for several weeks. By the end of
European trading yesterday, it was at a three-month high against the dollar
at DM1.5955, and had gained against most currencies in the European Monetary
System.
The markets' bullishness reflected a positive, but not jubilant, response to
the settlement. Markets had been expecting a strike and were pleasantly
surprised at the last-minute turn of events. 'It was a lot better than it
could have been,' said Mr Gunter Kirchhain of Deutsche Bank's
Dusseldorf-based institutional equities team. 'It suggests that the
much-heralded German disease may have turned out to be no more than a viral
infection after all.'
Others attributed the zest in the foreign exchanges to technical factors.
Some D-Mark traders believed the currency's strength yesterday resulted from
continuing uncertainty about the dollar rather than the pay settlement.
Foreign exchange traders fear that the Federal Reserve in Washington might
cut rates at its Federal Open Markets Committee meeting today, widening the
differential between US and German rates still further.
Traders in all markets agreed the settlement was positive for the economy,
but they said the complexities of the deal made immediate assessment of its
impact on inflation difficult.
Mr Hans-Peter Hodniock of James Capel in Frankfurt was emphatic that the
settlement removed the threat of a 'wage-price spiral' in Germany. He hoped
the Bundesbank would take the same view and consider relaxing monetary
policy.
The Bundesbank itself was relatively sanguine. Mr Otmar Issing, the
Bundesbank directorate member responsible for economics, said in London that
the deal was 'a step in the right direction'.
Although wages were still rising by more than the country could afford, Mr
Issing argued that a settlement in the region of 5.5 per cent was in line
with mainstream wage-rise forecasts at the beginning of the year.
Others were less convinced that the deal - which would give an average rise
of 4.8 per cent over 21 months if a previously agreed reduction in the
working week is taken into account - was so positive.
Brokers in equity markets agreed that investors are unlikely to become
enthusiastic buyers until there are clear signs that the Bundesbank has
decided to cut interest rates again. The wage settlement is only one factor
influencing this decision.
Currencies, Page 36 World Stock Markets, Back Page Section II

The Financial Times


International Page 1

920519

