FT922-4217

FT  06 JUN 92 / Travel: Safe train to Buenos Aires / Beating off the
bureaucrats across the Andes


   By TOM LYNCH


EL GRAN CAPITAN is one of the safest trains in South America. It covers the
400 miles between Posadas and Buenos Aires in only 20 1/2 hours, with a
large complement of railway officials tending a thoroughly-vetted group of
passengers.
Flying to Buenos Aires from the waterfalls of Iguazu is quick and relatively
cheap, but the two-day bus and train alternative offers the scenery of
northern Argentina, ruined Jesuit mission stations, railway nostalgia and an
encounter with bureaucracy.
You can never find a bureaucrat when you want one. The area around Iguazu,
where Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay meet, is green with uniformed frontier
guards, but the local bus from Foz do Iguazu (Brazil) to Puerto Iguazu
(Argentina) speeds through the Brazilian border post unchallenged and stops
for a matter of seconds at the Argentinian border, where a lone civilian
does little more than count the wheels.
Entering Argentina without an entry stamp in your passport is not
recommended, but trying to sort things out in Buenos Aires seemed a better
idea than going back to explain to an Argentinian border guard.
The road from Puerto Iguazu to Posadas winds through country that ranges
from dramatic to bucolic: near-jungle in the north, trim farms in the south,
their mate (tea) bushes clipped as neatly as suburban privet hedges.
The bus takes seven hours, tailing great lorryloads of timber and swinging
into dirt roads to visit villages, some brightly painted, others reminiscent
of the shanties of Rio.
Posadas itself is a grid of dull streets, a concrete square and phone boxes
which are prey to a school for vandals. An hour-and-a-half back up the road
is San Antonio Mini, the most accessible of the Jesuit mission stations.
Buses are cheap and frequent, but not generally at the times given by the
information kiosk at Posadas bus station.
San Ignacio was hacked out of the jungle after rotting roofless and
forgotten for a century. It was one of the missions built by Roman Catholic
priests in the early 16th century to help speed the conversion of the
indians. A community of 40,000 or more was centred on a still-magnificent
church of carved sandstone.
The settlement, and others like it, fought off slave raiders for a while,
but the Spanish government and the Pope became increasingly nervous that the
Jesuits might develop an independent theocratic enclave, so they told them
to get out in the 18th century. Most of the missions were abandoned over the
next 100 years.
The Argentine government has rehabilitated the huge settlement sensitively,
leaving enough trees to give shade and tranquility; there are not many
visitors. There is a museum at the gate. Other missions are emerging from
the jungle nearby.
Posadas railway station, a Victorian-style gem, reflecting the influence of
the British engineers who built the Argentinian network, sits beside
overgrown sidings at the northern end of the overgrown line. It handles only
two trains a day, but dealing with foreign tourists gives the staff plenty
to do.
The ticket clerk inspected my passport. The left luggage staff inspected my
passport and asked for a statement of what was in my bag. A railway
policeman inspected my passport and the bag and became irate when he
discovered I had forgotten to mention books in the contents list.
When I got back from San Ignacio, my bag had been loaded into a luggage van.
A ticket collector inspected my passport. A railway official inspected my
passport. A railway policeman inspected my passport. The inspections were
all conducted slowly and seriously, but failed to pick up the fact that I
had no entry stamp.
A large red and yellow diesel was attached, with much yelling of advice, to
the long line of blue, white and red coaches, and the train pulled out
roughly on time.
The train stopped in the almost-dark and was shunted into a siding to make
way for a faster freight train. The twin-berth sleeper compartments were
comfortable, and the bottom bunk folded up to become a proper seat - just as
well, given the length of time passengers spend on the train. The restaurant
car has Formica tables and metal slats on the windows. It is mainly used by
railway officials, who play cards through the night.
Getting to it is a little unnerving, as the air-conditioning consists of
leaving the carriage door open. There are menus, and you can place an order,
but nothing comes of it.
The morning run is through the pampas: millions of featureless
cattle-rearing acres, scattered houses and a few gauchos leading spare
horses.
The railway line itself is a sight, with ranks of signal levers at the ends
of the platforms of the little stations. The track is overgrown and the
long, slow bridges over the twisting Parana river offer glimpses of deserted
riverside factories.
The tourist police office in BA is an echoing hall in a ramble of buildings
near the docks. A frosty official asks exactly how long you want to stay in
the country and gives out a piece of paper with permission to stay one day
less.
Ten days later, at a remote frontier post in the Andes, a couple of border
guards were very reluctant to accept the piece of paper at all. I passed
into Chile in a cheerless farewell burst of form-filling, far from the
sunny, careless informality of the Brazilian border.
The cross-Andes trip was undertaken during a round-the-world trip arranged
through Trailfinders: London, Rio, overland to Santiago, Easter Island,
Tahiti, Sydney, Darwin, Cairns, Bangkok, London - Pounds 2,393.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920606

