FT921-518

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Top vintners go underground - Why London is
the focus for the world's wine trade


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


ON TUESDAY Henri Jayer, the most famous winemaker in Burgundy, will be
celebrating his 70th birthday at a smart French restaurant. Nothing
remarkable in that, perhaps, except that the restaurant he has chosen is not
in Saulieu, Chagny or even Paris. It is Le Gavroche in London.
Last Monday the most influential man in the Medoc, Jean-Michel Cazes,
trekked across the Channel to convince Sotheby's customers of the worth of
his wines.
On Thursday it was the turn of Christian de Billy of Champagne Pol Roger,
while two of Germany's best-rated wine producers, Ernst Loosen and
(Gunderloch's) Fritz Hasselbach, have been buzzing around London all week.
To the busier bees of the wine world, London is the honey pot. Only Germany
imports more wine in total than the UK (950m litres of wine in 1990 to the
UK's 640m) but most of it is pretty basic stuff. And Britain, as well as
being the prime market for good quality bordeaux, burgundy, Loire, sherry,
port and antipodean wines, has just one obvious centre of connoisseurship,
London.
Words have to be chosen carefully here because London cannot claim a
monopoly on Britain's top quality wine merchants. East Anglia and Edinburgh
have more than their fair share of first-rate vintners, but most wine
activity takes place in the capital.
This sort of slurping and spitting is at its most obvious at the tastings,
lunches and dinners that the wine world takes so much for granted.
The London Wine Trade Diary is crammed with these godsends for the thirsty,
sometimes as many as seven a day in the high seasons of early summer and
autumn (although in August it is blank).
The Diary, aimed at preventing the most frustrating clashes, is kept by the
Wine Promotion Board in offices next door to Vintners' Hall in Vintry Ward,
the medieval wine quarter of the City of London. Only wool was traded more
than wine when the king of England was also king of Aquitaine.
The wine trade moved gradually east and west of Southwark Bridge. And
nowadays the international conglomerates soused in wine have decamped from
London altogether to bottling plants and bonded warehouses in places such as
Worksop and Southampton.
But subterranean London is still shaped by its wine trade history. Below the
pavement, much of St James's is or was a wine cellar. The Stafford Hotel in
St James's Place has particularly atmospheric cellars which can be hired for
anything from a serious wine tasting to a teetotal reception.
Ultra-traditional wine merchants Justerini & Brooks and Berry Bros & Rudd,
both still employing cellar staff, face each other across St James's Street,
their landmark premises signalling very obviously which was founded in 1749
and which in the 17th century.
Berry Bros in particular, with its bare boards, mostly bare shelves, ledgers
and Beau Brummel's weight records is worth a place on the least bibulous
tourist's London itinerary.
On particularly busy days in the Wine Trade Diary a network of inter-tasting
tunnels would be useful, for there are more cellars, in varying stages of
their working life, around Trafalgar Square, the City and, typically, in
dank railway arches, notably around Tooley Street just south of London
Bridge.
One of these rattling, tenebrous warehouses, Trapps, houses the 'cellars' of
thousands of wine collectors, some as far afield as Hong Kong and San
Francisco, as well as the constantly changing stocks of the auction houses
Christie's and Sotheby's which have been crucial in maintaining London's
supremacy in the wine world.
Christie's has fine wine sales on April 6 in the City at the Institute of
Chartered Accountants 11 Copthall Avenue, EC2 and on April 9 and 16 in King
Street, SW1. Sotheby's main April sale is on the 8th at New Bond Street W1.
James Christie's very first sale in 1766 included 'a large Quantity of
Madeira and high Flavour'd Claret' and the dominant wine auctioneer would by
now have 225 years of continuous wine sales under its gavel were it not for
restrictions on auctions after the second world war.
Today, if first-growth Bordeaux chateau owners want to send a ripple of
their claret round the world of wine, they are most likely to begin it in
London, either by organising a high-profile auction of some particularly
rare older vintages, or with a tasting or dinner.
The sadness for many of us is that we are too busy justifying our place on
the invitation list to take full advantage of every glass available. My
dream is a retirement not so complete that the invitations stop.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920328

