FT924-980

FT  21 DEC 92 / Management: Warhorses on parade - What does it take to be a
business guru? Christopher Lorenz finds the nature of the job is changing as
the experts listen to their own advice


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


AT FIRST glance, it seems quite like old times. Almost all the well-worn
international warhorses have just reappeared on parade, or will do so during
the next 12 months. In the front rank, as for the past decade, stand one
Canadian, Henry Mintzberg, and four Americans: Rosabeth Moss Kanter, Tom
Peters, Michael Porter, plus the captain of them all, Peter Drucker. They
are now accompanied by an old British hand, Charles Handy, who has been
accepted as an international leader only in the last 18 months.
But behind them, things are stirring in the lesser ranks.
Struggling to be noticed, and succeeding handsomely from time to time, is a
fresh breed of warriors with a more focused approach to business warfare.
Most of them are also Americans, such as David Nadler, Peter Senge and
George Stalk. But they also represent a rather broader smattering of
nationalities, including - appropriately for the guru business - several
Indians.
Military metaphors are more appropriate than one might think for the world
of business gurus. True, the rivalry between them for fame and fortune is
decidedly cerebral, and most go to great lengths to be polite about each
other - in public, anyway.
Many of their ideas also overlap. Most agree on the changes being wrought by
the growth of 'knowledge-based organisations' (in Drucker's phrase) and by
the accelerating pace of change in every aspect of business, including the
need for managers and other employees to be 'liberated' (a Peters-ism) from
the bureaucracy which often stifles companies.
But some clashes of approach will emerge with a vengeance in 1993, to a
degree which could create a real battleground around one particular book
next autumn (see right).
Battle is certainly the right word for the commercial jostling going on
between publishers to promote their younger authors as tomorrow's Moss
Kanters, Handys, Porters - even perhaps Druckers.
The redoubtable Drucker, who at the age of 83 is still producing a new book
a year, has already sold 80,000 copies in the US of this year's Managing For
The Future, 90,000 in Japan and more than 40,000 in its UK edition. Tom
Peters, whose fatter blockbusters now tend to appear about every five years,
is thought to have chalked up over 750,000 copies just in the US of his last
book, Thriving on Chaos (1987). His new one, Liberation Management, hit the
ground running on its publication a few weeks ago.
These days, book sales are only the base of the guru business. Way above
them, in terms of dollars per hour of expended effort, soar videos (selling
at Dollars 2,000 or more per cassette), speeches and consulting. With speech
fees of Dollars 25,000 a session (or up to Dollars 50,000 for Peters), plus
US consulting fees which can reach several times a senior business
professor's salary of up to about Dollars 140,000, even a minor guru is
minting it.
In Europe such fees are lower, but they can still propel a professor-guru to
several times his (rarely her) academic salary. The Brussels-based
Management Centre Europe runs an especially broad range of conferences for
top executives which star old warhorses as well as younger specialists in
strategy, marketing, technology, leadership, human resources and so on. Many
are continental Europeans.
Such activities can put even European academics on a similar level of
overall earning power as the businessmen-gurus (there are few women as yet).
The appeal of most such people tends to be domestic. But, as John Sculley
has found in the US, Sir John Harvey-Jones in Britain and Alain Minc in
France, that does not make them paupers.
Meanwhile several of the best known US and European academic names are
thought to have almost trebled their earning power as speakers in recent
years by signing up with an agency which made its name by acting for the
original Star Trek crew and Vincent Price, the horror actor. Which is
entirely appropriate given the entertainment value offered by the best of
the mega-gurus.
But what of the research and ideas behind all this mammon? The way things
are shifting is evident from the events of the past decade.
When business books first exploded into mass-market products in 1982, most
business gurus were generalists. Their doyen, Peter Drucker, exemplifies the
genre by his very stretching of its boundaries. Alone among the business
gurus, he can range comfortably from advising on individual management
styles and organisational culture right into macro economics, politics and
society. He does so again with his latest book, Post-Capitalist Society,
which will appear in a few weeks' time.
From the 'soft', organisational end of the spectrum, Charles Handy comes
closest to him, but would not pretend to Drucker's economic expertise. At
the 'hard' end of the spectrum, Harvard economist Michael Porter plunged
into the world of business strategy and transformed it before broadening his
field still further by turning to the competitive advantage of nations. His
latest foray has been into the US capital investment system, the subject of
a big book next autumn.
Like Handy, Moss Kanter and Peters use society as a backdrop to investigate
the shifting nature of business organisations.
Apart from Japan's Kenichi Ohmae, the list of today's mega-guru generalists
stops there. By contrast, most recent books have plunged into detail about
only one or at most two of these areas.
Whereas much of the focus in the mid-1980s was on business strategy -
including globalisation, product differentiation and alliances - almost the
only outstanding strategy book of the last few years, other than Ohmae's,
has been Pankaj Ghemawat's Commitment - The Dynamic of Strategy (1991).
Instead, the main focus of most business books since the late 1980s has been
on organisational issues. They have ranged from a spate of works on quality
to a rush on the management of change. Since 1991 there has been a veritable
flood on 'organisational architecture', 'business process redesign', and
various aspects of so-called 'organisational re-engineering'.
This shift of emphasis by so many writers is no coincidence. It reflects two
trends. The first is the growing preoccupation of business people with the
difficulties of implementing strategies, and with the urgent need to make
their organisations more cost-effective and responsive to customers.
The second reason is what one might call the coming-of-age of the business
books business. As industries from cars to fast food have matured, business
academics have advised them to 'segment' (specialise) their markets more.
The academics are now applying the same formula to themselves, partly to
create more demand, and partly in response to the growing sophistication of
the customer. Thanks to all the generalist literature of the early and
mid-1980s - from In Search of Excellence to the One Minute Manager series -
most managers have learned basic concepts, and want to focus on the
complexities of how really to make things happen.
That, with the exception of the mega-gurus, is why most books now tend to be
relatively specialised. But it will also make it harder for the new
generation of authors to ring the changes often enough to be able to return
to the battleground with a string of best sellers. To be a true guru, you
have to do that.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921221

