FT922-4076

FT  08 JUN 92 / Arts: Mario and the Magician - Opera


   By ANDREW PORTER


Janos Vajda's and the late Stephen Oliver's versions of Mario and the
Magician (both 1988) were one-act operas; the first was given in a
double-bill with Dido, the other with Offenbach's Ba-ta-clan. Harry Somers's
Mario and the Magician, which had its premiere in Toronto last week, is in
three acts and lasts three hours. The Canadian Opera Company maintains a
steady output of new Canadian operas, but Mario was its first 'mainstage'
premiere in 18 years - preceded by Charles Wilson's Heloise and Abelard in
1973, and Somers's own Louis Riel in 1967. It was a success: warmly
acclaimed by the public, brilliantly performed by the company.
Canadian Opera, with Brian Dickie as general manager and Richard Bradshaw as
music director, is flourishing. Thirty-five of the 36 singers in Mario, most
of them young, came from the company, and were there space enough all would
be named and praised, for there was a vivacity and precision in the
performance that held eye and ear. Among the prominent were Theodore Baerg
(Mann, renamed Stefan), Marcia Swanston (his wife), Andre Clouthier (the
chief heckler), Heather Thompson, Cornelis Opthof, Benoit Boutet (Mario),
and the treble Patrick Torcat.
But wherever the eye fell, it fell upon performers alert in response and
reaction; and the orchestra of 26 (woodwind and brass quartets, saxophone,
harp, piano, percussion, and strings), conducted by Bradshaw, played with a
like animation. Robert Carsen, the producer, combined dynamic stage
pictures, ingeniously and economically devised, with attentive inspiration
of each individual character.
The work itself? Shadowed, for me, by Britten's Death in Venice; I'm still
under the impact of Covent Garden's recent production, and Philip
Langridge's Aschenbach. In Mann's Mario und der Zauberer, the
Aschenbach/Mann of Der Tod in Venedig is developed and split into two
separate characters - the German narrator, striving to keep Apollonian
detachment, and the Magician, Cipolla, shamelessly flaunting his Dionysian
powers and at last bringing the boy into his arms and onto his lips. Der
Zauberer - the hypnotic manipulator of words to bring people to his way of
thinking - was Mann's family nickname.
But there are also what Mann called 'minor political highlights and topical
allusions tucked away' in the successor tale - the grotesque but potent
Cipolla as a Mussolini hypnotising decent Italians into indecent behaviour.
But 'I should prefer to see its significance in the realm of ethics rather
than politics,' Mann said.
In Somers's opera the minor political allusions were not tucked away but
dominant: a portrait of Il Duce hung on the back wall, replaced at the close
by one of Der Fuhrer; Giovinezza, the now-banned Fascist anthem, was the
first-act finale. (It is a fiendishly catchy tune; during the interval
people could be heard happily humming it.)
Carsen, on a stage bared to a blackened back wall, and with almost all his
characters black-clad (even on the beach), displayed not a smiling,
seductive Italy menaced but one already blightened, blackened, and
bellicose; blackshirted, jackbooted squadristi were prominent supers. The
fabulous, enduringly apposite qualities of the novella were diminished to an
historical episode - an effect emphasised by the framing of the tale within
a 1919 Munich lecture on the menace of totalitarianism. Acts 2 and 3, played
without an interval, were Cipolla's show.
Rod Anderson, the librettist, left nothing out (as Vajda and Oliver did),
conscientiously underlined and expanded what was there, and added more of
his own. This was a protracted music-theatre account of Mann's novella. But
one that was gripping, for Somers is an able, efficient, and experienced
composer. His manner varied from neoclassical Stravinskian scherzo (complex
only on the page and for the performers, with its ever-changing metres) to
Britten-type - but not Britten-great  - lyricism. There was free-range
harmony, often with parallel fourths beneath figuration. The score was not
boring.
The opera was done not in Toronto's 3200-seat O'Keefe barn but in the
company's other house, the 1500-seat Elgin, where operas can tell. (Its
bright, intimate acoustics allowed some of Somers's exuberant brass writing
to drown the words.) Cipolla's audience, until he summoned them to the
stage, was seated in and sang from open boxes rather like those in the
Edinburgh King's. As the Magician, the American tenor David Rampy gave a
terrific performance. It is a role that calls for a Jon Vickers. Rampy has a
heavy, clumsy, powerful voice - a potent character-tenor without beauty but
on an heroic scale - and a presence and utterance that from his first,
insolent entrance until the melodramatic finale nearly two hours later, held
spellbound both his figured and the real audience.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920608

