FT924-11401

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (12): Rebuilding from the ruins - The east
German labour market / Planners take a more creative approach


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


EARLY in 1991, at the end of the unification party, west German workers had
their first taste of what was to come. The western economy was motoring
along, unemployment was falling and new jobs were being created by the
thousand. Contributions to unemployment insurance, fixed at 4.3 per cent of
gross pay, were in line for a fall to around 3.5 per cent. But the truth
about the communists' 'full-employment' society could not be concealed for
long.
Contributions instead rose to 6.8 per cent to cover the enormous costs of
managing the east's labour market, and although they have since fallen to
6.3 per cent, no further cuts can be expected.
The Federal Labour Office, deprived of subsidies from federal funds by the
finance ministry's budget-capping decree, still confronts an intractable
situation in the former GDR while conditions are deteriorating rapidly in
the west.
Unemployment there has risen by 10 per cent this year, and the creation of
new jobs has stopped. In the east, meanwhile, at least two out of every five
jobs has been lost under the twin influences of the collapsed market in
eastern Europe and the radical restructuring of the old east German combines
by the Treuhand privatisation agency.
Official unemployment of around 13 per cent masks a mass of 'hidden' jobless
who have been retired early, diverted into training projects, on short-time,
or working in so-called work-creation schemes.
Last year, when the labour office was concerned mainly with holding the
fort, it poured almost 70 per cent of the funds it spent in the east into
passive measures: the dole, pay for short-time workers who, in the main, did
nothing except clock-on every day, and pre-pension compensation for people
taking early retirement. This year, however, it is adopting a more creative
approach.
This year, almost exactly half the labour office's DM85bn budget will be
spent in the east, home to 20 per cent of the total population. While
unemployment pay will absorb almost a quarter of funds available, the share
allocated to all such purely defensive measures will fall below 50 per cent,
with resultant gains for 'active' projects such as education and training
and work creation schemes.
Although such projects seldom involve conventionally productive work, and
focus mainly on tasks such as cleaning up the environmental mess left by the
communists, they keep people within the active labour market.
According to Mr Heinrich Franke, head of the labour office, the will to
learn and work is 'extraordinarily' strong, rather more than in the west,
although all too often freshly-trained workers find no job at the end of
their courses.
Spending on work creation has more than doubled this year to DM7.3bn, while
a similar proportional increase has diverted DM10bn into further education
and vocational training. Overall, active measures account for 43 per cent of
spending, compared with 27 per cent last year.
This is still not enough, according to Mr Hans-Peter Klos, an expert from
the IW economics research institute in Cologne. Even though it is above the
OECD average of 38 per cent, he says, the 'rich uncle' approach, in which
the west simply pours in funds for mainly defensive policies, will
pre-programme inactivity into the eastern German way of life, and ossify the
hard-core of unemployment.
Urging programmes to increase worker mobility and unconventional measures
such as lump-sum one-off payments instead of weekly unemployment pay to give
the jobless a chance of setting up an independent business, Mr Klos may be
asking too much of a labour market which is already infected with some of
the rigidities established in the west, and too much of a government
committed to medium-term budgetary restraint.
Western unions, which have been steadily losing membership in their home
territory, were quick to recruit in the east, where they won considerable
benefits for their new members.
Basic wage deals, guaranteeing pay parity with the west by 1994, have been
struck in many important industries. As a result, even though average
productivity in the east is around 30 per cent of west German levels, labour
costs are already higher than in the US.
Meanwhile, blanket pay and conditions packages, mirroring those in the west,
make virtually no allowances for regional or skill differences. Some 25
years ago there was a 25 per cent differential between the basic pay of
engineering workers employed in various parts of west Germany. It is now 2
per cent. An unskilled worker who earned 73 per cent of the skilled rate,
now earns 86 per cent.
According to recent estimates, 2m new and permanent jobs have to be created
in the east in the medium-term as a pre-condition for the establishment of a
viable, self-supporting economy.
There are few immediate attractions for an international business community
which is reining in investment even in established markets. Nor is there any
of increased contributions from the not-so-rich uncle in Bonn, which is
already chafing at the proliferation of work creation schemes. Each place
costs around DM24,000 per man per year, compared with DM15,000 for
unemployment benefit.
But Mr Franke, who has lived with the eastern labour market crisis from the
start, stoutly defends job creation as his main management tool.
'As long as business does not invest, we must hold the bridge of work
creation,' he said recently.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

921026

