FT921-14275

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Company News: Telecom groups bring Dollars
150m to Ukraine


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


AMERICAN Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T) and its two partners in a new Ukraine
joint venture set up earlier this week plan to invest a total of Dollars
150m over the next few years in establishing and operating a
telecommunications network in the former Soviet republic.
AT&T and PTT Telecom, the Dutch telecommunications authority, are to lend
the majority partner in the venture, the Ukraine state committee of
communications, the capital it needs to take part.
The two western companies will be repaid from revenue generated by the
telecommunications system, which encompasses a new international network and
a long-distance domestic network that will link 13 of Ukraine's 25 telephone
networks.
The Ukraine state committee will own 51 per cent of the joint venture, AT&T
will hold 39 per cent and PTT Telecom 10 per cent.
The venture is the first time that either AT&T or PTT Telecom has owned and
operated part of a telephone network outside their own countries.
Mr Sam Willcoxon, AT&T's international group executive, said the former
republics of the Soviet Union were now confronting decisions on how to set
up modern communications as independent states.
'Some appear to be interested in arrangements like this, others are not,' he
said. Until now, Ukraine's international telephone traffic and that of the
other former republic have largely been routed through Moscow.
The Ukraine agreement, signed on Tuesday in Kiev, will continue for 15
years, with an option on a five-year renewal. AT&T's portion of the
investment will take the form of 13 digital switching stations which will be
used to connect half of Ukraine's telephone districts.
Mr Ben Verwaayen, president of PTT Telecom, said his company expected to
break even on its investment after four to five years and then reap a profit
over the rest of the life of the contract.
Besides helping to create international and long-distance networks, AT&T and
PTT Telecom will assist Ukraine in drawing up a short-term proposal for
nearly doubling the number of telephone lines in the country to 13m.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920116

