FT922-4198

FT  06 JUN 92 / Books: Americans at sea - Fiction


   By STEPHEN AMIDON


OUTERBRIDGE REACH by Robert Stone Andre Deutsch Pounds 14.99, 409 pages
BRIGHTNESS FALLS by Jay McInerney Bloomsbury Pounds 15.99, 415 pages
ROBERT Stone made his reputation as a writer with a deft touch for
profundity, a novelist who could plumb the depths of the American psyche
from within the confines of a clean, well-paced narrative. Whether he was
examining right-wing politics in Hall of Mirrors or the after-effects of the
Vietnam War in Dog Soldiers, Stone kept the reader close with a style as
likely to crackle with gunfire as with ideas.
Outerbridge Reach displays Stone's characteristic willingness to plunge in
at the deep end. Based loosely on a true story, his fifth novel details the
attempt by Owen Browne, a former naval officer and Vietnam veteran, to sail
solo around the world in a big race. Browne is a gung-ho, all-American guy
who lives comfortably with teenage daughter and white bread wife, making an
easy living working for a yacht company. But his landlocked security is not
as gratifying as it first seems, and when the opportunity to enter the
competition pops up, Browne jumps at it, seeing the challenge as a way of
confronting the demons he has been avoiding since the war.
His preparatory efforts for the long voyage are recorded by Strickland, a
cynical documentary maker who becomes intimately involved with Browne's wife
after the sailor casts off. Meanwhile, back at sea, Browne's worst fears
about his own competence surface, particularly when it becomes apparent that
his boat is a dud. So he holes up on a forsaken Antarctic island and begins
to fake his progress reports back to the race headquarters, perpetrating a
deception to match the lie his life has been.
It is easy to see what attracted Stone to this story, so ripe with
opportunity for examining the nature of heroism and self-deception. You can
certainly make a case for the book being a thorough examination of the sort
of soul that swallowed the American Dream whole only to have it come back
up, like a swell of seasickness, as something nightmarish. But, unlike in
his early work, the author fails to find the narrative drive needed to power
his ideas along, relying on awkward plot devices such as Biblical passages
overheard on a radio. The result is a top-heavy book that founders under its
own profundity.
Jay McInerney's Brightness Falls suffers from just the opposite difficulty,
sacrificing any sort of real insight for the sake of a boisterous narrative.
Russell and Corrine are an amiable yuppie couple riding the crest of the
prosperous mid-1980s wave through hip Manhattan. Russell is a flash book
editor, while Corrine works with noble reluctance as a stockbroker. Their
marriage is an oasis in the city's emotional desert, secretly envied by
single friends. Russell soon falls prey to the giddiness of the times,
however, launching a hostile takeover bid for his firm in order to gain more
editorial clout. Gradually, hubris eats away at the couple, threatening
their marriage as things start to go disastrously wrong in the days leading
up to the Crash of 1987.
There's no doubt that McInerney has fashioned a good read here, but at what
expense? He seems so eager to please that he has milked his book of nuance
and originality. Everything seems designed to strike the reader as familiar
 -voracious female stockbrokers wolf down meat and chomp cigars, rich
businessmen are referred to as 'moguls', models are stupid, writers wacky
and difficult. Drugs, the homeless, AIDS and eating disorders all make
appearances, yet are dealt with in a perfunctory way. (Corrine's concern for
the dispossessed in her neighbourhood is so pathetic I kept hoping it was
intended as satire, though I fear it wasn't)
This is less an examination of the 1980 than a skilful rehashing of accepted
wisdom on the era, a wink and a nod to its truisms, as if Vanity Fair
magazine has already figured everything out and it is now up to the novelist
just to give it some juice. Robert Stone may founder in the depths of our
era, but McInerney, like some souped-up speed boat, glides fast and free
over its surface, a mile wide, an inch deep.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920606

