FT923-15698

FT  01 JUL 92 / Foreign Affairs: A Greek tragi-comedy - Macedonia should be
recognised without further delay


   By EDWARD MORTIMER


In any contest for the silliest political statement of 1992, the following
paragraph from Monday's FT will surely be a strong runner:
'Under pressure from Greece, EC leaders said they were ready to recognise
Macedonia's independence provided it chose a name which does not include the
term Macedonia.'
With this affair the absurdity of nationalism has reached its acme. Not that
the absurdity is all on one side. A Greek friend has given me a copy of a
Macedonian leaflet which not only shows Macedonia stretching to the Aegean,
with the southern half of it 'under the Greek terror of occupation since
1913', but insists that Alexander the Great and Aristotle were not Greek,
and that the Macedonians of today are not 'Slavic'. You and I may imagine
that Macedonian is a Slavic language closely related to Bulgarian and more
distantly to Serbo-Croat, Russian, Polish etc, but apparently the boot is on
the other foot. 'The Macedonians were not 'Slavicized',' the leaflet says.
It was the Slavs who were 'linguistically 'Macedonianized', ie they accepted
the ancient Macedonian language as their own which deteriorated over the
centuries into the languages we know today as Russian, Ukrainian, Polish,
Slovakian, Serbian etc.'
A lot of the blame seems to fall on the Byzantine empire, under which 'the
Macedonian and all other nations were subdued to massive denationalisation
and assimilation, a process that entails the denial of the most fundamental
human rights . . . To an Australian this may seem absurd,' the leaflet adds,
'but is not unusual when an Athenian government has territorial aspirations
towards her neighbours.'
Indeed, Australians might not be alone in deploring the human rights record
of the Byzantine empire. The leaflet's citation of such ancient injustices
to support a contemporary cause makes it a classic nationalist document,
worthy to be included in political science text books. But it is only a
leaflet, published by (or in the name of) the Macedonian community in
Australia. By using it and other similar documents to prove that the very
use of the name Macedonia is a threat to Greek territorial integrity, the
Greek government is bringing itself down to the authors' level.
The Macedonian government has given assurances that it harbours no such
irredentist claims, and has even written those assurances into the
constitution of the state. Greece does not accept them as sincere, given the
history and ideology of Macedonian nationalism. But why should a change of
name be any more sincere or permanent?
It is an old mistake to suppose that you can legislate away the ideology of
other people's nationalism. Arabs have thought the same about Jews, and
Israelis about Palestinians. You can make agreements with people about what
they will do or not do, and you can take precautions against their failure
to deliver. But people's beliefs and desires can only be changed by
experience, not by requiring them to sign loyalty oaths or friendship
treaties, and still less by asking them to change their name.
If the Greek principle were to be accepted throughout the EC, Belgium should
long ago have withdrawn recognition from the Grand Duchy of 'Luxembourg', a
state which by so calling itself lays claim to the adjacent Belgian province
of the same name. And France can hardly continue to recognise a neighbouring
country as 'la Grande Bretagne' without fearing the loss of the smaller
Bretagne on its own side of the Channel.
It would all be irresistibly comic if it were not so likely to end in yet
another Balkan tragedy.
Of all the ex-Yugoslav republics, except Slovenia, Macedonia is the one that
best qualifies for international recognition. Its government controls its
territory, and has won the support of the ethnic Albanian minority. Yet if
not helped to consolidate itself rapidly it is vulnerable to destabilisation
and even partition, especially if fighting breaks out between Serbs and
Albanians in neighbouring Kosovo. Albanians in Macedonia would want to help
their kith and kin. Suspecting that they were doing so, Serbia would all too
likely take action against Macedonia. Bulgaria and even Turkey might then
feel they should come to Macedonia's assistance, while Greece would be
tempted to come in on the Serbian side.
The stage would thus be set for a full-scale Balkan war, vintage 1913. The
best way to avert this would be to recognise Macedonia now and admit it to
the UN, so that all UN members would be obliged to respect its integrity. If
the EC is held back from doing this by its need for unanimity (though this
did not seem to inhibit Mr Francois Mitterrand on his excursion to
Sarajevo), then let the 'sole remaining superpower' take the lead.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920701

