FT921-3803

FT  12 MAR 92 / Pragmatism rules the day as Drexel saga concludes:
Settlement leaves issues untried


   By NIKKI TAIT


ON Monday afternoon, as yet more lawyers poured into Room 1305 in the
Manhattan district courthouse, someone noticed that the clock was slow.
'Is that 'Pollack' time?' muttered a former employee of Drexel Burnham
Lambert, referring to the fierce octogenarian judge who has overseen a mass
of civil litigation flowing from the investment bank's collapse in 1990.
'Pollack mean time,' remarked his neighbour, tartly.
It was an appropriate quip. It took another hour's wait and more last-ditch
manoeuvring before a beaming Judge Milton Pollack could complete his final
act of coercion, and declare that a single 'global' settlement to hundreds
of suits resulting from the bank's demise had been reached. What had looked
to be 'mission impossible' when negotiations started at Thanksgiving, he
declared triumphantly, had been achieved in less than four months.
In one respect, this final act in the Drexel saga should be welcomed. Had
the cases been contested in the courts lawyers estimate they would have been
extended into the next century, with associated expenses.
But, in other respects, the settlement, which creates a Dollars 1.3bn
(Pounds 730m) 'pool' to be divided between the numerous claimants, is less
satisfactory. It leaves much of the controversy about Drexel - probably the
most significant force on Wall Street in the 1980s - untried in any
objective forum.
It also allows Mr Michael Milken, former head of the bank's junk bond
department and its chief money-spinner, to remain extremely rich. The
political niceties of this - Mr Milken has, after all, pleaded guilty to six
breaches of securities law - appeared to give the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, a leading government claimant, pause for thought. However, it
approved the settlement, with some added safeguards.
Finally, the deal permits 200 former Drexel employees to swap the bulk of
their lucrative interests in the Drexel employee partnerships (which
invested in many of the bank's junk bond offerings), for immunity from
future lawsuits. That is an option which few can probably afford to refuse.
But the notion that money buys legal peace, regardless of innocence or
guilt, is scarcely an admirable judicial cornerstone.
The debate surrounding Drexel has always involved two issues, connected but
often confused. The first centres on the use of junk bonds, which the bank,
via Mr Milken's department, pioneered. Critics claim that this was
'boot-strap' financing, allowing ill-qualified entrepreneurs to gain control
of big corporations. Many of today's bankruptcies are cited as evidence of
the folly.
Mr Milken, to judge from a recent Forbes magazine interview conducted in his
prison's canteen, remains unrepentant - although he acknowledges that
debt-financing should have ended much sooner.
The argument will probably rage on - and no court would have ever addressed
the matter. But there was a second, narrower aspect to the Drexel debate,
which might have been resolved by litigation. Did the junk bond department,
as many believe, function so successfully thanks to a carefully cultivated
network of customers to whom it offered illegal favours and inducements? Or
was it a basically honest operation?
A partial, and largely unsatisfactory, effort to prove the former was made
by government lawyers in Milken's pre-sentencing hearing last year. Now any
full-scale trial of this matter has been obviated.
Pragmatism overtook principle in the Drexel litigation long ago. In June
1990 the FDIC set up a special task force to investigate whether Drexel had
contributed to the failure of various thrifts, which had been big customers
of the bank. A few months later - in conjunction with the Resolution Trust
Company, which is overseeing the savings and loan industry bailout - the
federal agency called in a New York law firm to see if monies could be
recovered from Drexel's demise.
The FDIC/RTC and their lawyers have since been a driving force in both the
Drexel bankruptcy and the civil litigation. The bankruptcy, which began in
February 1990, was tackled first. Drexel assets were relatively easy to
calculate - about Dollars 2.6bn - and a deal struck which split these
between the bank's creditors and the various parties suing Drexel.
One lawyer calculates that once priority claims and expenses have consumed
around Dollars 750m, the other 'fixed' creditors will share well over
Dollars 1bn. The rest will be divided between the 'securities litigants' -
including the FDIC/RTC and the individual investor 'class action' suits.
(The bankruptcy reorganisation plan, essentially winding up the bank's
affairs, was also approved on Monday.)
All parties then looked at the more ill-defined monies that might be
recovered from former Drexel employees, notably Mr Milken. The result has
been to create the Dollars 1.3bn settlement pool. Of this a small amount,
perhaps Dollars 85m, flows back to Drexel's fixed creditors, while the
bank's own interests in the employee partnerships - valued at about Dollars
185m - are released from litigation. The rest gets split between the
litigants under court and SEC supervision.
The chief contribution to this Dollars 1.3bn pool comes from Mr Milken. Some
Dollars 400m comprises monies he had already paid into a Securities and
Exchange Commission disgorgement fund, and to this he is adding a further
Dollars 500m. The new money will be contributed in tranches over five years.
This Dollars 500m is said to represent 80 per cent of his remaining personal
wealth - but that does not allow for the assets held by his wife and
immediate family.
Meanwhile, 200 former Drexel employees - a small proportion of 10,000 which
the bank once employed - are giving up Dollars 300m worth of partnership
interests. Some lawyers have suggested the total value of these is Dollars
500m. A final Dollars 100m in the Dollars 1.3bn pool comes from insurance
carriers, including Lloyd's, under directors' and officers' liability
policies.
'You know you have a good settlement when nobody likes it,' said one lawyer
at the hearing. That seemed to sum up the pragmatic outcome of one of Wall
Street's most controversial episodes.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920312

