FT921-400

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (18): Light
fingers on the keys / A look at risks in the age of electronic theft


   By TREVOR PETCH


IN THE early 1920s, an enterprising underwriter and broker called Harrison
wrote, on behalf of his five-member syndicate, a number of financial default
policies guaranteeing hire-purchase agreements for cars and particularly
taxis.
Further premium income could be generated, he discovered, by covering unsold
vehicles still on dealers' stocks, and credit instruments drawn up not to
fund purchases but for sale in the financial markets. It must have seemed
but a short step to the logical conclusion of insuring vehicles which were
also imaginary.
Not surprisingly, the enterprise ended in tears. Mr Harrison's book-keeping
was as creative as his underwriting. The syndicate was unable to meet its
commitments, and its losses were met by a special policy underwritten by
every single member of Lloyd's at a guaranteed loss.
The episode was instrumental in the establishment in 1927 of Lloyd's Central
Reserve Fund. An even more direct result was a ban, which continues to the
present, on presentation in the Underwriting Room of credit insurance
covering debts owed to a commercial trader, although this was not
universally supported.
Cuthbert Heath, the most influential underwriter of his generation, was a
strong believer in credit insurance, but despite his protests he was forced
to continue his interest through CE Heath & Co's shareholding in the Trade
Indemnity Co (now Trade Indemnity plc).
Mr Heath and his supporters did gain one concession: reinsurance, rather
than direct cover, of such credit risks was permitted, and continues to be
written.
Furthermore, the restriction applies to commercial risks only. Political
risks, where the debtor is a governmental entity, may still be written and
Lloyd's is one of the largest markets for such business.
The collapse of the command economies of eastern and central Europe has led
to the decentralisation of international trade away from state organisations
to individual commercial enterprises, which Lloyd's cannot technically
underwrite. If nothing else, this has highlighted the artificiality of the
1923 blanket ban, which sections of the market are lobbying to be modified.
Lloyd's is also a leading source of cover for financial institutions. At the
core of this class of business is fidelity and theft cover for banks,
enabling protection of cash against the threat of appropriation by employees
as well as expropriation by robbers. Such cover is compulsory by law for US
banks, and one of Lloyd's early innovations was the Banker's Blanket Bond
providing comprehensive protection in one package.
During the 1960s, demand for policies of this kind grew as financial markets
increased in sophistication and the type of financial institutions became
more diverse. Simple cover for theft of cash on the premises and in transit
together with employee fidelity became patently inadequate, according to
Alec Sharp, underwriter of Castle Underwriting Agents syndicate 839, and a
leader in the financial institutions market.
What had once been staid leading banks in the US and the UK, as well as in
Europe, began to develop their range of activity; merchant banks grew in
strength; and these were supplemented by an expansion of hire-purchase
companies, leasing companies, trust funds and other manifestations of what
became known as the secondary banking sector.
The new patterns of business led to the reappraisal of insurance
requirements. 'Insurance can be proactive or reactive,' Mr Sharp comments.
'In this case, it was reactive to the situation, but proactive in developing
the covers.'
By the early 1970s, however, the so-called secondary banking crisis
evidenced by the collapse of some of the new financial institutions had
indicated that there were deficiencies in the system. From the institutions'
point of view, business had grown out of proportion to its underlying
technical structure, while insurers perceived that the risk element had
escalated beyond that previously considered.
One element, for example, was insurers' exposure to losses which were
primarily commercial in nature but contained an element of infidelity.
In one well-known case, a foreign exchange dealer employed by a leading UK
clearing bank in Switzerland began losing money. In an attempt to cover his
losses, he concealed information from head office and attempted to cover
them by further overtrading. When it was eventually discovered, the insured
portion of the loss was paid, but subsequently a joint Lloyd's and London
company market committee agreed that events of this kind should not be
covered in future.
The result was the introduction of the standard wording that actions
involving the infidelity of employees would be covered only when they
involved 'improper personal gain'. The analogy with theft was now clear, and
together with cover of cash on the premises and in transit, forgery,
counterfeit currency and fraud, the primary purpose of the core policy to
protect against losses due to criminal activity rather than bad debts or
trading losses was boosted.
In a faint echo of the Harrison case, the dangers inherent in covering
leasing business were further reinforced in 1975-6 by heavy losses suffered
on policies written to indemnify computer leasing companies against the
effects of the termination of the contracts. These caused Lloyd's worst
results of the 1970s, but they were the result not of fraud but of an
inadequate appreciation by most of the underwriters involved of the effects
of rapid technological change upon the risk element of the business they
were writing.
The development of financial institutions cover is, in Mr Sharp's view,
Lloyd's major innovation in the last 20 years, and further refinements have
continued. As the international banking system has come to rely increasingly
on telecommunications and computer operations, perils covered have been
extended to include fraudulent manipulation of telex, fax and
'voice-initiated' transfers.
The first computer crime policy was developed by David Newman in 1982, but
market conditions at the time were not conducive to innovation. However, the
cover has grown in importance over the last few years. As well as electronic
communications media, these policies also cover external manipulation of
banks' computers.
'The exposures are massive, but the controls are good,' Mr Sharp says, since
the perpetrator faces the problem of converting the electronic balance into
real cash. Most sums stolen in this way have been subsequently recovered not
only due to controls against such thefts per se, but because of controls
introduced to prevent the laundering of profits from drug dealing and other
crimes.
Such cover is now an integral part of any financial institution's insurance
package, and includes protection against damage to electronic data, media
and transmissions caused by computer viruses.
Trevor Petch is editor of the FT World Insurance Report.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920330

