FT923-10705

FT  29 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee prices fall as warm
Brazil chills the market


   By RICHARD MOONEY and BARBARA DURR


   LONDON, CHICAGO


COFFEE PRICES fell again on the London Futures and Options Exchange
yesterday as the absence of frost in Brazilian growing areas continued to
chill market sentiment.
The September position, which on Monday had added Dollars 23 to last week's
Dollars 29 fall, dipped another Dollars 25 to Dollars 705 a tonne shortly
after the opening. But it rallied later to end the day only Dollars 7 down
at Dollars 723 a tonne.
At New York's Coffee, Sugar & Cocoa Exchange, the prompt September coffee
price, which had tumbled four cents a lb on Monday, slipped another 10 cents
in early trading to 56 cents a lb. It then managed a small recovery to 56.60
cents late in the morning before edging back to 56.10 cents a lb in
mid-afternoon.
New York traders had expected a large sell-off in London, in response to the
overnight sell-off in their own market. When that did not occur it helped
steady the CSCE market.
Also, the trade came back in with a little support. But analysts did not
expect prices to recover much and some thought they would soon move lower.
With too much production and too little demand 'nothing fundamental is
supporting this market', according to Ms Melissa Trout, coffee analyst with
Cargill Investor Services.
Ms Trout said that unless production was curbed the picture would continue
to be bleak.
The general drift lower for coffee had been held off last week in the New
York market because some traders hoped that cold weather in Brazil might
hurt some of the crop there. But when the cold snap did not materialise
prices fell.
The prospect of some crop damage in Brazil 'encouraged traders not to sell
as much as they should have,' according to Ms Judith Ganes, coffee analyst
at Merrill Lynch. She believes prices could dip to 50 cents per pound and
foresees 'no bounce, not in the short term'.
Contributing to the market's sourness is the lack of progress on a new
International Coffee Agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920729

