FT924-5976

FT  24 NOV 92 / Business and the law: Flash warning - The potentially
far-reaching implications of the US Supreme Court's Kodak judgment


   By ROBERT RICE


The recent US Supreme Court ruling against Eastman Kodak reinstating an
antitrust lawsuit filed against the photographic equipment giant in 1987 by
18 service companies, came as a rude shock to America's commercial lawyers.
Lawyers for the companies, which accused Kodak of violating federal
antitrust laws by operating an illegal 'tying-in' agreement involving sale
and repair of photocopiers, hailed it as the most important decision for US
business in a decade.
Mr Richard Fine, a Los Angeles attorney who filed a brief on behalf of the
California State Electronics Association (CSEA) in support of the
independent service providers, said the decision guaranteed survival of a
domestic service industry for all products, including cars, computers and
consumer electronics.
The decision would reduce the amount consumers pay for service and repair of
products and boost the provision of parts manufacturing. Ultimately, by
reducing US dependence on foreign made parts, the ruling would reduce
America's balance of payments deficit, he said.
Antitrust lawyers regard the decision as no less revolutionary but for
different reasons.
The Supreme Court move came as a big surprise, says Mr Roy Englert, a
partner in the Washington office of the law firm Mayer Brown & Platt. This
is because the ruling delivered a sharp rebuke to the free-market, Chicago
School approach to competition issues that has dominated the Supreme Court's
handling of antitrust cases in recent years.
'The court has relied on heavier and heavier doses of economic theory in its
antitrust decisions. Most people expected the Kodak case to go the same
way,' he says.
Instead the justices said there could be no blind reliance on economic
theory. The theory must relate to the evidence of the market.
On another level, by ordering Kodak to go to trial on the 1987 lawsuit, the
Supreme Court decision has sown fresh confusion about the extent to which
antitrust cases can be disposed of by summary judgment without going to full
trial.
The US still has juries in civil cases. Corporate lawyers believe juries
invariably rule against companies accused of anti-competitive policies
because they do not understand the issues. It is in their clients' interests
therefore to dispose of antitrust cases before trial.
The case against Kodak was that by refusing to sell independent service
groups parts to fix its copiers, the photographic equipment giant was, in
effect, trying to squeeze them out of the market. Kodak's policy was to only
sell parts to owners of its copiers that had to use Kodak to service the
machines, or who performed repairs themselves.
Service companies argued that this policy amounted to an illegal 'tying-in'
arrangement. Kodak insists this was not anti-competitive because it only
controlled a quarter of the market in copier machine sales. Consequently,
its monopoly on parts and servicing was legal.
In other words companies that contracted to buy Kodak copiers knew what they
were letting themselves in for. So long as there was strong competition in
the equipment market itself, tied service agreements were not necessarily
anti-competitive.
The court rejected this argument by six to three. If Kodak had won, the
result could have been the domination of the US service industry by a few
original equipment manufacturers, a disastrous outcome for consumers, Mr
Fine says. As it is, the decision has given the service industry a new lease
of life that will lead to greater competition and drive prices down.
The importance of this cannot be underestimated, he adds. The US is no
longer a manufacturing based economy. More than 60 per cent of its gross
domestic product is service oriented. In the car industry in 1990 about
Dollars 255bn (Pounds 169bn) was spent on parts and servicing, dwarfing the
Dollars 147.8bn spent on new car sales. The high-tech equipment service
market, worth Dollars 250bn a year, is forecast to grow by more than 17 per
cent a year.
Mr Fine also believes more competition in the service sector will create a
demand for cheaper spare parts. Many manufacturers seem to be discouraging a
market in service and repair of their products by pricing parts at levels
that encourage consumers to buy new models when existing ones break down
rather than get them fixed.
Mr Fine points to a brand of Japanese television on sale in California for
Dollars 300 new; yet to replace its four most expensive parts would cost
Dollars 800. New wide-screen televisions cost about Dollars 2,500, but a
replacement picture tube costs Dollars 2,600. This pricing policy should
create the opportunity for new American parts manufacturers to spring up and
for existing ones to expand, he says.
The Kodak case is now back in San Francisco's federal district court for a
trial on the facts; Kodak shows every sign of fighting it - in spite of the
perceived wisdom that if the case goes before a jury the plaintiffs will
win.
Mr Jim Hennefer, the attorney running the case for the independent service
companies, says he is knee-deep in documents requested by Kodak, while new
evidence of abuse by Kodak arrives daily. The next preliminary hearing is
set for December 17, when the district court judge will set a trial date for
autumn 1994.
Meanwhile, Mr Fine is pursuing a Dollars 600m class action suit on behalf of
CSEA against 34 of the world's biggest consumer electronics manufacturers.
CSEA alleges that the makers fail to compensate independent service
companies properly for doing their warranty work as required by state law.
He says he is close to agreeing settlement terms with some of the companies,
but last week was forced to file fresh class action damages suits against
Sony, Sharp, Toshiba and Sansui, which have shown no signs of settling.
In spite of these actions in California, the avalanche of litigation between
manufacturers and the US's 250,000 independent service providers predicted
by Justice Scalia in the wake of the Kodak ruling, has yet to materialise.
Some lawyers say the impact of the Kodak decision may be narrower than first
thought. Kodak's policy was aggressive and its terms stringent. It may yet
turn out to be a one-off.
'The Motor Vehicle Manufacturers' Association filed a brief in support of
Kodak. It hoped Kodak would win, because if Kodak's policy was ruled OK then
theirs definitely would be. But just because Kodak lost doesn't mean the car
manufacturers' policy on after-sale service and parts violates antitrust
law,' says Mr Englert.
There is good news for antitrust lawyers too. Last week the Supreme Court
accepted for review a predatory pricing case in the tobacco industry from
the 4th Circuit Court of Appeal in Richmond, Virginia. That will provide an
early opportunity for the justices to make it clear whether or not they have
really abandoned the Chicago School approach to competition issues.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921124

