FT922-4247

FT  06 JUN 92 / Moscow on the trail of missing billions


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


MR JULES KROLL, a US investigator who helped trace the missing Marcos
millions, is now on the trail of vast sums of hard currency stashed abroad
by Moscow's former communist regime.
He says the money could be worth more than western aid pledged to the former
Soviet republics.
Mr Kroll, who was also involved in tracking down the assets of Haiti
dictator 'Baby Doc' Duvalier, appealed yesterday for help from central
banks, governments and businessmen to find the money.
At a time when the west was considering giving Russia and the other former
Soviet republics Dollars 24bn (Pounds 13bn) in aid, uncovering the funds
would be 'one of the cheapest forms of aid' it could offer, Mr Kroll said.
Hired by the Moscow government, Mr Kroll has a team of 15 people working
full time tracing the missing money.
His consultancy, Kroll Associates, is hunting for three types of funds:
profits sent abroad illegally by state-owned enterprises; bribes paid by
foreign companies to Russian officials for concluding deals on terms
unfavourable to the state; and public funds transferred abroad by the
now-banned Communist party.
'This is going to require some government-to-government negotiations,' Mr
Kroll said. 'If you leave it to a bank that has possession (of illicit
funds), you're going to have a long wait.'
'We're getting a range of reactions - all the way from the helpful to the
non-responsive.'
The money is believed to be in bank accounts in Cyprus, Greece, Switzerland,
Austria, Germany, the UK, Jersey, the US, and any other countries where
beneficiaries either had 'trusted friends' or 'consultancies'.
'There's no doubt we are talking about billions,' Mr Kroll said, adding that
it was impossible to be precise.
In the four months since his consultancy was hired by Mr Yegor Gaidar, the
Russian first deputy prime minister, it has found 22 bank accounts of a
suspect nature, all set up since 1985, although none of the money has been
retrieved.
Mr Mikhail Gurtovoi, the head of Russia's anti-corruption service, has
evidence of 160,000 people who have illegally transferred money out of the
country.
Mr Kroll and his team are paying special attention to commodity trading  -
particularly that involving imports of agro-industrial products, where
foreign sellers have an unusually high profit margin. They also will be
watching oil-related exports (where foreign buyers have been given
exceptionally cheap deals).
In many cases, Mr Kroll's task will be made easier by the fact that the
state owns many of the entities which have done the crooked deals - avoiding
the barrier of banking secrecy which has been raised in his work for other
countries.
Apart from returning the money to Russia, Mr Kroll also sees his role as
helping with 'preventative medicine' - to cut back such practices in future.
Mr Kroll and the anti-corruption authorities will offer foreign businessmen
a reference service to help them avoid crooks in Russia's corrupt business
environment.
Mr Gurtovoi guaranteed anonymity and help to any company which came forward
with information on bribe-takers.
'We want our country to conduct business in a civilised manner,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920606

