FT924-11386

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (3): A good ride in
most markets - Those who have increased exposure to bonds are looking fairly
content


   By RICHARD WATERS


SEEN from one perspective, it has been a good year for bond market
investors. The rally in the world's main government bond markets has been
surprisingly uniform: the US, Japanese and German bond markets all gained
over 7 per cent in the first nine months of this year, with the latter two
managing more than 8 per cent, according to the J P Morgan government bond
index.
With further interest rate falls in prospect in all three - and with
sustained falls in Germany still awaited - it is not surprising that fund
managers who have increased their exposure to bonds are looking fairly
content with life.
Turmoil in the currency markets, of course, has made any such view overly
simplistic. Whereas domestic investors have had a good ride in most markets,
international fund managers have seen concern over currency risk deepedn. A
domestic UK investor could boast an 11 per cent return from gilts in the
first nine months: but an unhedged USDollars -based investor had made a gain
of only 5.6 per cent, while a D-Mark investor was looking at a loss of 1.4
per cent.
Europe's currency upheaval has upset two of the favourite pastimes of fund
managers over the past two years. The first involved dabbling in higher
yielding European bond markets, both at and beyond the margins of the EC, to
benefit from the economic and monetary union that European politicians had
promised. This so-called 'convergence' play came to an abrupt halt when
Danish voters rejected the Maastricht treaty in early June, and could have
been finished off for good by the turmoil in the European exchange rate
mechanism in September.
The obvious casualties were bond markets such as Italy's, where the yield on
10-year bonds, having narrowed to nearly 250 basis points (2.5 per cent)
above the yield on German bonds, jumped back to more than 500 basis points.
Even yields on French bonds have leapt from 40 to more than 100 basis points
above German levels, in spite of France's strong economic fundamentals.
One result is that Ecu bonds are now worth considerably less than the sum of
their parts. Touted as the future for Europe's bond markets only a matter of
months ago, few now expect this battered basket currency to regain centre
stage as the vehicle for European monetary union. The rushed exit of market
makers and investors, all of whom are long on bonds they no longer want, has
forced the yield on Ecu bonds to rise to nearly 50 basis points above its
theoretical level.
The second ploy that had developed around the ERM involved a form of
cross-hedging. With short-term US interest rates at a low level, money
market funds in the US had taken to investing heavily in higher yielding
European bonds. To hedge their exposure, most had used the D-Mark or the
Ecu.
That seemed a safe bet when the ERM was perceived as a fixed exchange rate
system. Its weaknesses were savagely exposed in September, though, as
sterling and the lira were ejected from the mechanism and the peseta was
devalued.
The question now hanging over the European bond markets is to what extent
the convergence process can be kicked back into life. Markets like France
and Denmark, putative members of any 'hard core' of European countries
centred on the D-Mark, may offer the safest short-term gains. Currencies
such as the peseta, the lira and sterling are likely to remain off many fund
managers' buy lists.
Meanwhile, predicting the timing and scale of interest rate reductions
around the world has become the main pastime of fixed income investors.
Although German money market rates have already slid by a percentage point
from their peak, the Bundesbank has offered little encouragement to those
who believe a rapid fall is on the way. Despite the relatively low interest
rates in Japan and the US, both countries' economies continue to sag,
suggesting neither has hit the bottom of its interest rate cycle. Against
this background, bond markets could be the place to be - and the investors
who do best will be the ones who predict where interest rates will fall.
Two considerations could hold back gains in the bond markets: fears about
the scale of fiscal deficits in some countries, and a concern that falling
interest rates will push up inflation once the world economy strengthens.
So far, inflation generally remains a distant concern. The German and
Japanese authorities have applied their monetary squeeze for longer than
most market commentators thought necessary. The risk of plunging these
economies into a sharp recession, rather than the danger of inflation, is
uppermost in investors' minds.
The need to fund large fiscal deficits could pose a more serious threat to
bond yields, preventing the sort of falls that might otherwise be expected.
This is particularly true in Europe in the short-term. Since the Danish
referendum first unsettled European markets, a number of countries - among
them Italy, Spain and Sweden - have delayed moves to fund their fiscal
deficits, preferring to wait for conditions to improve. The result is an
overhang of new bonds, which will help to keep yields up.
The size of deficits in a number of countries next year could also put a
strain on bond markets. Any further delays to economic upturn would hold
down tax revenues and force social security spending higher, keeping
deficits in the forefront of investors' minds for some time to come.
Some fund managers regard this fear as exaggerated. Mr Paul Abberley of
Lombard Odier, which manages Dollars 2.7bn of international fixed income
funds, predicts the impact of higher deficits will be small: 'Yields may be
around 15 basis points higher than they would otherwise be.' Savings rates
have risen into double digits to compensate, he says, and anyway the gains
from falling inflation far outweigh the cost of higher deficits. The outcome
of this tussle between the effects of gathering recession and the threat of
returning inflation will set the mood in bond markets in the future.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921026

