FT924-11283

FT  27 OCT 92 / White House attacks Perot for 'paranoia'


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE White House yesterday launched an all-out attack on Mr Ross Perot,
dismissing the independent presidential candidate's allegations of a 'dirty
tricks' plot by the Republican party to disrupt his daughter's wedding as
'crazy' and attacking him as 'paranoid', writes George Graham in Washington.
'I think the news media needs to look into this,' said Mr Marlin Fitzwater,
the White House spokesman. 'They're the only ones left who can investigate
this and prevent us from electing a paranoid person who has delusions. This
man simply cannot see the truth,' Mr Fitzwater said.
Mr Perot edged slightly away from the allegations he had made on Sunday,
admitting he had no proof and saying he accepted the Republicans' denial at
face value. Nevertheless, he repeatedly insinuated that the party's
behaviour was suspicious.
'Am I the only guy in the room that finds it strange that at a time when all
of them want my support and I tell them the first thing we have to talk
about is my daughter and the effort to smear her, that nobody calls back and
says: 'Ross, we don't know what you're talking about'?' he asked reporters
yesterday.
Political analysts were scratching their heads yesterday over whether voters
would see Mr Perot's claim as a credible example of the Republican party's
propensity for 'dirty tricks,' or as further evidence of the Texas tycoon's
penchant for plots and conspiracies - a penchant which has already spawned a
host of 'Perotnoia' and 'Inspector Perot' puns.
The episode might be dismissed as a trivial aside, but it comes at a time
when the campaigns of both President George Bush and Governor Bill Clinton
are agonising over the likely path of Mr Perot's support in the run-up to
next Tuesday's election.
Mr Perot, who re-entered the campaign at the beginning of this month, has
gained ground steadily since the three televised debates in which he
appeared with Mr Bush and Mr Clinton. Several opinion polls now put his vote
at about 20 per cent. His advance has come mainly at Mr Clinton's expense.
Pollsters wonder whether the independent's support will prove to be a
short-lived fever, reaching a peak and dropping away before November 3, or a
more enduring phenomenon.
Public reaction to his charges could play a considerable role.
In June Mr Perot's standing in opinion polls slid rapidly in the face of
repeated stories about his habit of using private investigators against
business foes, Mr Bush's sons and even his own family.
'He is, after all, accusing the president of the United States of organising
an assault on his daughter's wedding. Either he is going to marginalise
himself or the president is going to be involved in controversy. I think
it's more likely he will marginalise himself,' Mr Stanley Greenberg, a
pollster for the Clinton campaign, told the New York Times.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921027

