FT923-6645

FT  22 AUG 92 / Houston, awakening of the president: The Republican
convention sees a revitalised George Bush train his sights on two elusive
quarries


   By JUREK MARTIN


WHEN George Bush kept defensively insisting that he would hold his fire
until Houston, the assumption was that his target was Bill Clinton, not
Saddam Hussein. Now that he has both the Democratic presidential candidate
and the president of Iraq in his sights, one metaphorically, the other
looking at the wrong end of a barrel, he seems a happier man.
There was a bounce, a snap, to the president of the United States this week
not seen all year. Perhaps it was the coming home to Houston, where he spent
his post-university formative years in the oil 'bidness' and where he now
maintains a room in a bankrupt hotel and a rather small undeveloped lot to
prove his Texan residence.
Perhaps it was the sufficiently adulatory welcome he ultimately received in
the Astrodome from the Republican party convention, which had spent most of
the early part of a fractious week with conservatives and moderates biting
each other's ankles.
But neither explanation really suffices. Nor was there more than tentative
evidence in the ubiquitous public opinion polls, which now dissect and
discern, though with uncertain accuracy, every thought that may or may not
have crossed the mind of the average American citizen, to put the president
in a better frame of mind. Acknowledging their exceptional volatility this
year and allowing that Bush will get his 'bounce' from the convention, they
are still not predicting that he will beat Bill Clinton on November 3.
No, the answer can only lie in something almost chemical. It seemed as if
George Herbert Walker Bush had suddenly woken up from a long sleep and come
to a conclusion about what he had to do to win, at home and abroad. No more,
to quote Martin Luther King, 'the paralysis of analysis,' no more moaning
about political gridlock in Washington, no more complaints that the US was a
country, in his words, 'with the will but not the wallet.'
What he promised this week was war in a good cause, with few, if any, holds
barred. In his acceptance speech he drew his line in the sand with Clinton
and the Democrats in Congress, with the sort of one-liners that only a great
speechwriter - in this case Ray Price - of Nixon vintage can supply.
Opinions about the US president are many but fall into two broad parts. The
indictment is that he is an empty shell, with no agenda for the country
other than his own re-election, a captive of the ways of Washington, a
patrician who has always needed patronage and not cared too much about its
source, a leader without principle, lost unless stiffened from behind the
arras, be it by Margaret Thatcher after Iraq invaded Kuwait or by his old
friend James Baker, already available though he does not formally move back
from the State Department to the White House until tomorrow.
The defence is that Bush is a good man on the important things, a devoted
and experienced public servant whose resolve has been tested in the Second
World War and in the Gulf, a congenital optimist who is kind and loyal to
others, sometimes to a fault. Above all, as the Republican party tried to
get its act together this week after the right wing had had its dominant say
in shaping the party platform, he has the great virtue of not being a
Democrat and not being Bill Clinton.
There is truth in both counts. This itself made him intrinsically the most
interesting person on display in Houston this week, for which title he was
not without competition. That league does not include the delegates
themselves, the usual crowd of button-festooned, funny-hatted faithful often
more intent on the party circuit, profoundly suspicious of, and sometimes
impolite to, anyone wearing a press badge, and overwhelmingly white,
straight and Christian.
But the convention was treated to former president Ronald Reagan at his more
visionary; to Barbara Bush at her most matriarchal; to Pat Buchanan at his
most ferociously ideological; to vice-president Dan Quayle at his most
earnestly combative; to Jack Kemp, the housing secretary, at his most
open-minded; to Phil Gramm, the Texas senator, at his most partisan; to
Governor Bill Weld of Massachussetts at his more provocative, and, above
all, to James Baker, the president's past and hopefully future saviour, at
his most discreetly invisible. And if those who spoke failed to engage, it
was perfectly all right to invoke the Almighty.
Collectively, they put together a convention that started badly, moved
through a tedious middle passage and finished on a reasonable note of hope,
not so much because they had resolved their own manifold internal
differences but because they thought they had found a leader again and had
definitely located the enemy, and he was not within their own ranks.
Bill Clinton, that enemy, has long known he was in for rough treatment at
Republican hands in the election proper and must now understand how rough
that is going to be. The high and low roads will be travelled with abandon.
Much will be heard, legitimately, about his record in Arkansas ('the failed
governor of a small state' was this week's mantra); his lack of formal
foreign policy experience (a youthful internship on the Senate foreign
relations committee, according to one speaker); the costly impracticability
of his economic proposals; his identification with the demon Democrats in
Congress (his health care plans are not his own, the charge goes, but the
work of that 'sultan of the status quo,' George Mitchell, the Senate
majority leader).
But it will be equally commonplace for presidential surrogates to say what
they like about him and his wife, be disowned one minute by the president
and perhaps apologise for overstepping the mark, and then go back to saying
what they like about him. Where one is reined in, another will burst loose.
The litany will run to innuendoes about Bill Clinton's marriage, his alleged
draft dodging and his wife's perceived radical feminism. This week's trial
assaults were purveyed by Catalina Villalpando, the US treasurer, and Robert
Mosbacher, former commerce secretary and party big-wig. Both naturally
apologised, on paper, and seemed not to mind one bit. Their job was done.
And if the media objects to the low road, as it showed signs of doing this
week when the attorney general of California once again raised the
supposedly exorcised spectre of Willie Horton, the criminal treated
leniently by Michael Dukakis, it will be dismissed for its liberal bias.
Barbara Bush herself, trying so hard to appear above the partisan fray while
being plunged into the thick of it with her exposition to the convention of
traditional family values, kept saying in countless interviews that what was
being done to Clinton was only on a par with what the Democrats in New York
had inflicted on her husband. Of course she disapproved of personal attacks,
but, she asked one persistent questioner, 'where were you last month?'
Whether this all works really does come down to the two men on the top of
their tickets, Bill Clinton and George Bush, and, to an infinitely lesser
extent at the margins, to their running mates, Al Gore and Dan Quayle. Since
the prehensile grip of the two parties on the political process has
weakened, presidential elections have become intensely personal.
Money and campaign organisation are factors, but federal funding is a
relative equaliser and, with James Baker back on board, the advantage the
impressive Clinton team once had has probably been neutralised.
Platforms have their day in the sun, but are often discarded once
conventions are over. Rich Bond, the Republican party chief, was quick to
argue that the controversial plank on abortion - demanding that it be
constitutionally banned in all cases, including those where pregnancy is the
result of rape and incest - was 'only 1/150th part' of what the party agreed
to. In this case, he must hope the electorate sees it that way and does not
also pay too much attention to the exclusionary right-wing dogma of much
else in the document.
This brings ultimate consideration back to George Bush, defender of the
faith and the White House, and the trickiest man of the two to judge. That
he likes a fight cannot be doubted. David Broder, the veteran Washington
Post journalist, described him this week as 'a competitor who psyches
himself to a high level of performance for critical tests.'
Bush would concur. He has now taken to likening himself to Harry Truman, the
much derided little man who gets off the floor and bashes Congress and his
opposition into submission. That Truman was a Democrat is irrelevant. But
this posture is 'all window dressing,' Broder went on. 'On the journey from
New Orleans (site of the 1988 convention) to Houston, Americans have learned
two important things about this president: he has no real regard for his own
campaign rhetoric; and while he may hire good speechwriters for occasions
like this week, he has virtually no capacity or interest in regularly using
the forum of the presidency to shape and inform the public debate.'
Tough words, and from a writer who, unlike some counterparts on the right
also disaffected from the president, does not normally shoot from an
ideological hip. Another generally dispassionate dean of the trade, Johnny
Apple of The New York Times, describes Bush as 'a political version of the
19th century Yankee merchant, always genteel and mannerly in private, but
sometimes cunning and ruthless in business.'
Even Bush has conceded that domestic business bores him, not entirely
surprising after a public career devoted, by turn, to China, the United
Nations, the Central Intelligence Agency, and, as vice-president and
president, to great affairs outside the US. A brief stint as a congressman
from Texas and as Republican party national chairman are little more than
footnotes in the resume.
The one counter-argument this week was, essentially, that a president is
principally supposed to preside over the events of the world and, in this
respect, George Bush is supremely qualified. Circumstances may dictate
otherwise, but they must be exceptional, on a par with the Depression
confronting FDR, or the need for social justice addressed by Kennedy and
Johnson, or, as conservatives would maintain, the necessary burst for
individual freedom and less government pursued in Reagan's first term.
If Bush is a late convert to this domestic cause, which will determine the
outcome of the election, then, his supporters argue, it is better to be late
than never. It matters less that he has switched over the years with the
prevailing winds - on taxation, on abortion, and any number of other issues
 -than that he has seen the light at the right time. If ideology sits
lightly on a self-confessedly unreflective man, happier on the golf course
than with a book, then that may be seen as a tribute to his inner sense of
security.
After all, nobody ever accused Truman or Eisenhower or Reagan of being
intellectuals, but their presidencies were considered successful. Nixon,
Johnson and Carter had brains to spare, as may Clinton, but were ultimately
undone by the inner demons and conflicts that so often visit the best, the
brightest and the worst. All Bush has to do is to persuade the country that
he can change his spots and let the heart and mind follow.
But that alone will not be enough. He must also in the process destroy Bill
Clinton, by fair means or foul. That scent of the target, that setting of
the sights on the rifle, albeit directed mostly by the unseen hand of James
Baker, explains why George Bush seemed happy this week. But the quarry looks
tough and elusive, and the economic and societal terrain on which the chase
will take place is not as friendly as it was four years ago. It is possible,
too, that the public appetite for dirty pool has been finally sated. Saddam
Hussein, no easy mark, could be tougher, though not impossible, to bring
down.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920822

