FT924-6371

FT  21 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Debt level leaves Evode unstuck - The
reasons behind Wassall's hostile offer


   By ROLAND RUDD


OVER the next few weeks Mr Christopher Miller, chief executive at Wassall
said he would repeatedly ask Evode how it planned to finance itself if it
remains independent.
Wassall, the mini-conglomerate run by former Hanson executives who have
launched a Pounds 94.3m hostile bid for Evode, is likely to highlight the
chemical and plastics group rise in net debt when it publishes its offer
document, expected early next week.
According to the conglomerate's financial adviser the document is likely to
underline Evode's net indebtedness which is estimated to be about Pounds
62m, including the Dollars 43m (Pounds 28m) in US redeemable preference
shares.
Mr Andrew Simon, chairman of Evode, has said its borrowing facilities were
sufficient for its needs. The group's financial adviser said it would not
comment further until it sees Wassall's offer document.
However, the weakness of Evode's balance sheet, stretched by borrowings to
fuel acquisitions, was one of the reasons that Wassall launched its Pounds
94.3m hostile bid.
Wassall is one of the few companies content to be labelled as a conglomerate
and Mr Miller was loath to justify a purchase on the grounds of product
synergy.
Wassall was no stranger to a number of Evode's businesses, such as
adhesives, sealants and plastics. DAP, a US supplier of construction
products and filling compounds, bought by Wassall last year, boasts similar
products.
But the fact that Mr Miller knew something about adhesives was not the
reason for the bid.
Wassall wanted it for the same reasons that it bought into office furniture,
luggage, bottle-tops and construction products and filling compounds. It
believed it had found a low-tech manufacturing business, which was
under-managed with low margins.
Evode's margins were around 5 per cent, similar to the those Wassall
inherited at DAP and Metal Closures Group. It managed to almost double them
at both businesses.
Mr Mark Cusack, conglomerate analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, believed
Evode was a classic vulnerable target. It was under-performing in much the
same way as Wassall's previous targets.
'In spite of good underlying businesses Evode is underperforming in
operational terms, he said. 'It is financially overstretched with effective
gearing of 200 per cent and little shareholder loyalty, having cut last
year's dividend by more than 40 per cent.'
Mr Miller did not pretend to be an expert in plastics any more than he
pretended to know much about bottle-tops when Wassall launched its
successful hostile bid for Metal Closures in 1990. 'What I do know about is
strategy,' he said.
Plant closures, cutting the workforce and a reduction in product ranges have
been some of the tools used by Wassall to boost margins.
However, Mr Miller is adamant that Wassall wants control of Evode not just
to streamline the production process but to expand the businesses.
Wassall has earmarked Dollars 20m of capital expenditure over the next two
years to replace old machinery, open a new warehouse and expand DAP's DIY
sheds.
Evode's capital expenditure was running at Pounds 1.8m for the half year to
March 28 compared with Pounds 9.4m for the end of its last financial year.
Mr Miller says he would expect to reverse that trend if Wassall wins its
takeover battle.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921121

