FT922-4156

FT  06 JUN 92 / Serb irregulars to give Sarajevo airport to UN


   By REUTER and JUDY DEMPSEY


   BELGRADE


SERB irregulars agreed last night to hand over Sarajevo airport to United
Nations forces so that humanitarian relief aid could be flown to the
embattled Balkan capital, the UN said, Reuter reports from Belgrade.
'It was agreed during talks today with all parties that the airport would be
handed over to UN forces as soon as the UN is ready to take over,' Shannon
Boyd, spokeswoman for the UN Protection Force, told Reuters.
Thousands of men, women and children have been trapped in Sarajevo, capital
of newly independent Bosnia-Hercegovina, by fighting between rebel Serb
forces and their Croat and Slav Moslem opponents.
Earlier in the day, pro-independence Bosnian forces ended a month-long
blockade of the strategic Marshal Tito barracks in Sarajevo, allowing 800
Yugoslav federal army soldiers and family members to be evacuated.
UN officials in Sarajevo termed the withdrawal 'a major breakthrough'.
However, Serb irregulars resumed shelling the city in the evening and
gunfire was reported to have hit the UN headquarters.
The US yesterday imposed a trade embargo on Yugoslavia in a tightening of
sanctions against the republic.
President George Bush signed an executive order prohibiting exports and
imports of goods between the US and Serbia and Montenegro, which make up the
federal republic of Yugoslavia. The order represented US compliance with UN
sanctions ordered last week against Serbia and Montenegro.
Serbia's rival political parties and nationalist movements yesterday began
jockeying for position as pressure on President Slobodan Milosevic to resign
gained momentum in the ruling establishment, writes Judy Dempsey in
Belgrade. In Mr Milosevic's ruling Serbian Socialist party, 14 deputies of
the parliamentary club yesterday broke ranks by withdrawing from the club.
The Socialists won the majority of parliamentary seats in last Sunday's
elections. The rival ultra-nationalist Radical party, led by Mr Vojislav
Seselj, won 33 of the 138 seats, which signals the the growing influence of
a militant, armed party in the republic.
Rapid fragmentation of Mr Milosevic's support is also taking place in the
Serbian Academy of Sciences, and Belgrade University, the cream of the
establishment and previously supporters. Forty-seven out of 90 academy
members present signed a petition demanding his resignation.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

