FT923-10878

FT  28 JUL 92 / World Trade News: SII talks open with new vigour - The US is
pressing Japan to redefine goals


   By ROBERT THOMSON


THE US today restarts the hunt for the 'structural impediments' said to be
behind Japan's persistently large trade surplus, which is set to reach a
record Dollars 100bn this year.
Two years ago, the two countries signed the Structural Impediments
Initiative (SII) pact that left behind day-to-day disputes and attempted to
alter the structure of the Japanese economy. US negotiators extracted
promises for infrastructure spending, reforms to the distribution system,
and a study of the keiretsu - the large corporate groups.
The original agreement, which took a year to negotiate, was extraordinarily
detailed, with Tokyo agreeing to increase the size of the average Japanese
house from 89 square metres to 95 sq m by 1995 and to add 25,000km of
footpaths over the next decade as part of the infrastructure package.
SII was repeatedly described as a 'two-way street' and, for its part, the US
was supposed to overhaul the education system, encourage executives to take
a 'longer-term' attitude, reduce the budget deficit, and speed the
introduction of the metric system.
At the time, the two agreed that the SII promises would need 'several years'
to take effect, but the surge in Japan's trade surplus this year and an
imminent US presidential election will encourage US negotiators to be more
impatient during this week's discussions.
Japanese officials say they have reason to be angry because the 'US hasn't
kept any of its promises and we have done a lot of work,' as one negotiator
put it.
The Japanese will produce the original report and emphasise that little has
been done on the deficit, the US corporate culture and even the metric
system.
A more assertive Japan will complain about 'Buy American' campaigns, which,
it argues, creates obstacles for overseas companies attempting to penetrate
the US market.
The Japanese government is concerned that the flagging popularity of
President Bush will prompt a tougher US response. The US Trade
Representative's office saw SII as a means of avoiding managed trade, but
the size of the US bilateral deficit and of Japan's overall surplus have
made easy-to-define concessions a political priority for the US
Administration.
In spite of SII, Japan accounted for 62 per cent of the US trade deficit in
May and 74 per cent in April, while Japan's overall trade surplus rose 49
per cent to Dollars 77.8bn last year and was a record Dollars 49bn in the
first half of this year.
The US will ask Tokyo to stimulate domestic demand and will again call for
studies of the country's corporate culture. The US wants further vigilance
in the monitoring of anti-monopoly laws and investigations into the business
habits of large trading houses.
One of the more obvious changes in Japan since SII has been the increasing
prominence of the Fair Trade Commission (FTC), the anti-monopoly body.
On Friday, the commission imposed surcharges totalling Y1.4bn (Pounds 5.85m)
on 28 companies in four industries for price fixing and cartel violations.
Two weeks ago, 166 construction and related companies were ordered to
disband a cartel in central Japan for allegedly rigging bids for public
works projects.
The FTC's success has prompted US officials to believe that cartels remain
commonplace and that the country's corporate structure is, by its nature,
restrictive.
Regardless of the merits of Japan's structure, there are differences in the
relationship between manufacturers and their component suppliers. The
Mitsubishi Research Institute has just found that 96 per cent of large
Japanese manufacturers hold shares in subcontractors, while the figure in
the US is only 15.6 per cent.
However, the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) emphasises
that there is nothing unique about the keiretsu. Miti officials will tell US
negotiators that Deutsche Bank has stakes in a range of leading German
companies, and that Morgan Guaranty Trust has small holdings in companies
such as IBM and Mobil that resemble the strategic stakes common in Japan.
The US is unlikely to be convinced and will press that private procurement
practices be made more transparent. A separate Miti survey of 247
manufacturing companies found that only 25 per cent have their sourcing
requirements in written form and 31.3 per cent have anti-trust guidelines.
Japan's convoluted distribution system was one important target two years
ago, and the government agreed to speed the approval of larger retail
outlets, which the US hoped would increase shelf space for foreign products.
But the slowing of demand in Japan has also prompted developers to
reconsider plans to open new outlets.
The US is set to raise the issue again, most likely as part of its assault
on corporate groupings. They are likely to find Miti more defensive of the
'distribution keiretsu', which 'offer a balanced mix of competition and
co-operation'.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920728

