FT921-14353

FT  16 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Dispute over subsidy for Airbus
intensifies


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


THE transatlantic dispute over Airbus subsidies is set to intensify
following a confidential report by a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
panel condemning German exchange rate support for Deutsche Airbus, the
German partner in the four-nation European aircraft consortium.
The panel was reporting to the Gatt subsidies committee, with which the US
government filed a complaint against the European Commission last February.
It concerned Germany's dollar exchange support mechanism for Daimler-Benz,
the German private car group which has absorbed Deutsche Airbus as part of a
restructuring of the German aerospace industry.
Under the mechanism, Daimler can ask the Bonn government to make good the
exchange rate difference if the value of the dollar over a year averages
between DM1.60 and DM1.80. Germany has argued that the exchange support
scheme was necessary to enable the transfer of Deutsche Airbus from state
control into the private sector.
But the US government and the American aerospace manufacturers complained
that the German move was a distortion of trade and represented a subsidy
worth an average of Dollars 2.5m (Pounds 1.4m) per aircraft produced by
Airbus.
The US has also filed with Gatt a second, more general complaint against
Airbus subsidies. This has been vigorously rejected by the EC and the
European aircraft consortium. The EC and Airbus have retorted by accusing
the US of directly and indirectly supporting its commercial aircraft
industry through state agencies and military contracts.
The panel's confidential report was circulated to the parties involved in
the dispute this week. But it will require a consensus by the Gatt subsidies
committee before being adopted.
The EC is likely to oppose the panel's findings. German officials indicated
last night that the Gatt subsidies committee was not an adequate forum for
commercial aircraft issues which were governed by a separate civil aircraft
code.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920116

