FT921-12007

FT  29 JAN 92 / International Company News: French computer industry thrown
a lifeline - A look at the result of six months hard bargaining between IBM
and Bull


   By ALAN CANE


MRS Edith Cresson, the French prime minister, must be savouring her triumph.
The agreements she was able to announce yesterday morning between leading
French and US electronics companies suggest that six months of hard
bargaining have paid off handsomely. The French electronics industry has a
deal worth much more than the sum of its parts.
Groupe Bull, the computer manufacturer, which lost over Dollars 1bn (Pounds
562m) last year and which cannot hope to return to profitability until 1993,
expects an injection of about Dollars 100m from International Business
Machines, the world's largest computer manufacturer.
It also has access to IBM's most strategic technology, reduced instruction
set computing (Risc), on which small and mid-range computers are expected to
be based for the foreseeable future.
IBM will buy large numbers of portable and notebook computers from Zenith
Data Systems, Bull's personal computer arm, which is struggling back to
profitability.
One of the most important features of the agreement involves collaboration
between Bull and IBM's Computer Design Centre, a collaboration with Apple
Computer and the semiconductor company Motorola set up to design advanced
personal computer chips and operating systems.
This part of the deal alone gives Bull a powerful stake in the future.
SGS Thompson, the semiconductor company in which the French and Italian
governments each have a stake and which lost Dollars 96m last year with
little hope of improvement this year, has a promise from IBM that the value
of its annual purchases of silicon chips including the Inmos transputer from
the semiconductor manufacturer will double to Dollars 100m. It will
collaborate with IBM in semiconductor research.
Mrs Cresson and her government negotiators have, moreover, managed to
persuade Hewlett Packard, the large US computers and instrumentation group
which had been vying with IBM to conclude the technology deal with Bull, to
continue talks with SGS Thomson although Hewlett Packard is not thought
likely to consider taking an equity stake in the Franco-Italian concern.
Hewlett Packard made its disappointment over the Bull decision known
yesterday. It said: 'Bull has made the wrong decision. It is clear the
French Finance Ministry took a decision on financial rather than technology
grounds. It has passed over the opportunity for a long-term solution in
favour of a quick fix.'
IBM was desperate to get the Bull deal settled in its favour and was
determined to deny victory to Hewlett-Packard. The drawn out negotiations
were conducted personally by Mr Michael Armstrong, a former head of IBM
Europe and now in charge of IBM's world trade.
Mr Armstrong said after the announcement yesterday that bargaining with the
French had been tough. 'I'm very glad to be here,' he added.
IBM's prize is two-fold: it will have access to to the lucrative French
government market, something difficult to achieve in France without equity
in a French company, and it will have enhanced its European credibility
before the single market takes effect at the end of the year.
It will have new markets for its Risc technology products which command
lower profit margins than conventional technology and are therefore very
dependant on volume sales. IBM is expected to benefit from Bull's expertise
in 'symmetrical multiprocessing' an advanced computing technique which is
likely to be increasingly important in the future.
For Bull, the deal has a powerful industrial logic.
It has been looking for a US partner to balance the 4.9 per cent stake held
by NEC of Japan. The Japanese company, which supplies Bull with mainframe
technology, broadly welcomes the tie-up between Bull and IBM.
Mr Takehiko Inoue, NEC associate vice-president said the company welcomed
any strategic alliance that would help the business. NEC did not want to see
its investment imperilled.
Risc technology, invented by IBM about a decade ago, is an important part of
open systems, the worldwide move in the computer industry towards standard
components.
While open systems make it simpler for customers to connect together
computers from different manufacturers, they command intrinsically lower
profit margins than proprietary designs and are a principal cause of the
crisis in the world computer industry. IBM, with sales in excess of Dollars
60bn, lost money last year.
Bull failed to catch the first wave of Risc products and is now trailing. To
develop Risc technology from scratch would cost many hundreds of millions of
dollars.
The deal with IBM gives Bull immediate access to proven Risc technology and
offers it a rapid way of catching up with the competition.
It remains to be seen how the alliance between Bull and IBM affects the
future of the European computer industry.
Of the European-owned companies, only Olivetti of Italy has yet to find a
strategic partner.
An agreement to merge with ICL of the UK foundered two years ago on
management differences. It finally collapsed when the UK company was bought
by Fujitsu of Japan.
However, it is a member of the so-called Ace consortium, a collection of
companies sponsoring a particular flavour of Risc technology.

The Financial Times


London Page 24 Illustration (Omitted). Illustration (Omitted). Chart
(Omitted). Chart (Omitted). Chart (Omitted). Chart (Omitted).

920129

