FT922-4199

FT  06 JUN 92 / Property: Perchance to dream - Audrey Powell goes to Florida
to meet a British builder


   By AUDREY POWELL


A BRITON has been picked to build the 1993 Florida Dream home: 32-year-old
Mark Wilson, from Birmingham, whose housebuilding company, London Bay Homes,
based in Fort Myers, Florida, specialises in custom-built properties.
The Dream Home project is not a competition but an invitation. The primary
sponsor is Home & Condo magazine, which keeps a close watch on housebuilding
in south west Florida, shortlisting companies which it rates highest; it was
from this list that the choice was made. Other contributors to the project -
architect, landscaper, furnishing and marketing companies - have been
selected in the same way; they form the Dream team.
The house will be built at Quail West, a new golf course development in
Naples, Florida, and unveiled in February 1993.
Home & Condo first decided in 1989 to explore the question 'what makes a
house a dream home?' Many new properties incorporate some 'dream' elements -
but what if the best architects and builders got together, listened to a
panel of consumers, and built a dream home from scratch? What if money were
not a primary consideration? What amenities and technology would be
featured? Home & Condo felt this could provide a useful lesson in consumer
preferences for builders throughout the US. So it gathered a 'focus group'
of consumers - some nationally known experts and sophisticated second-time
homebuyers - to gather data. From this, a team produced the first Florida
Dream Home in 1990.
The magazine is now repeating the exercise with its 1993 Florida Dream Home,
using a new focus group, a new team, 'and a new set of dreams.' The 1993
Home will reflect the changing values of today's upscale consumer, it says.
The setting is a 530 acre section of Quail West, where density averages one
home to three acres. The house is being built on a one-acre site with a view
of the lake and the first tee of the golf course. The low-built, five
bedroom, five bathroom, 6,400 sq ft property (about six times the size of an
average British estate house) will cost Pounds 800,000.
Architect Donald Evans, whose practice is part of the team, says: 'If you
were to label the house as to style, it would clearly be a Euro design' -
meaning brick, arches, columns and wrought iron.
Team manager Mark Wilson stresses that 'Naples is a fairly traditional place
 -it is not Miami'. So the exterior of the house must not be outlandish,
while the interior will be 'highly modern but completely livable-in.' But
then Wilson has to sell the house - each team member is responsible for the
cost of his or her own product until the property is sold, with marketing
costs shared between them.
Once built, the property will remain a 'showcase home' - furnished as a show
house, but used for functions and thus open to the public - for up to a
year. It will then be sold. If bought earlier, it will be leased back by the
builder.
The house is a widely-spread design, mostly at ground level. Cars drop
passengers under a broad portico. You enter a foyer with 14 ft ceilings.
There is much glass-walling, with views of the lake, golf course or swimming
pool, emphasising Florida's indoor/outdoor life.
There is a 'brain' room (obligatory for today's progressive home) housing
computers and other high-tech toys. The computerised home management system
will integrate heating, air-conditioning, lighting, security and garden
irrigation. Pressing a button will create different lighting patterns in
rooms. Pressing another in the master bedroom turns off all lights in the
house (which may not be popular with someone reading elsewhere).
One room forms a private theatre. There are various indoor and outside
entertaining rooms, and the house is scattered with subspaces, like a
'flashback' to the butler's pantry. Two double garages stand in separate
courtyards, with one for teenagers' and guests' cars. The other, presumably,
is for keeping parental cars in safety. A lake surrounds the swimming pool,
with pool water flowing down into it. Viewed from the house, it appears as
an unbroken body of water.
Mark Wilson's father was a quantity surveyor with George Wimpey, the British
contractor; he later started his own housebuilding and construction company
in Sutton Coldfield, near Birmingham. The Wilson Group had an Pounds 85m
annual turnover by the late 1980s.
Mark was trained in the building world; eight years ago he went to the US to
expand the commercial side of the family's business. After considerable
research he decided that south west Florida offered good investment value
and growth potential. In 1990 he formed his own housebuilding company there.
He aims to keep to the exclusive market, with a limited number of
design/build contracts per year: 3,500 sq ft to 13,000 sq ft homes in the
area's smartest beachfront, golfing or yachting communities.
'The first two years were tough,' Wilson admits of his early time in the US,
although he feels that starting a company from the ground up was 'an
experience invaluable for any businessman.'
'We originally found a very fragmented market, with no one dominant company.
Many were 'mom and pop' operations. We believed that by incorporating a
formal business approach to housebuilding, with financial structuring,
strategic marketing, quality control of construction and proper
communication with our clients, we would separate ourselves from the pack.'
Wilson thinks it takes a good five years fully to understand the US market
and to take advantage of the opportunities. 'It is easy to assume that
because we speak (almost) the same language, doing business is the same as
in the UK. Unfortunately that is not true.'
The markets are very different, and without a full time on-the-ground
commitment it is very difficult to turn a profit in the US, he says. 'We
never question the importance of real estate lawyers in England throughout
the development process, but in America you may well need a team of them,
each with a different speciality.'
Wilson also found the banking climate totally different. 'In our early years
we shopped for bankers for each deal and relationships seemed to matter very
little. With the current real estate recession and credit crunch things are
changing and I predict that relationships will become very important. Who
knows, it may end up more like England, where one keeps a banking
relationship for years.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920606

