FT923-6569

FT  24 AUG 92 / Russia's central banker 'playing political game'


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


MR Viktor Gerashchenko, chairman of Russia's central bank, has been accused
by a senior minister of playing a political game in calling for
renegotiation of the country's agreement with the International Monetary
Fund.
Mr Alexander Shokhin, the deputy prime minister responsible for foreign
economic ties, said in an interview yesterday that Mr Gerashchenko 'says one
thing to the press and another in real life.' He added that the central bank
chief had twice confirmed he supported an accord unlocking an initial
Dollars 1bn (Pounds 520m) credit tranche before the IMF board met to approve
it on August 4.
But on the eve of a meeting today with Mr Richard Erb, the IMF's deputy
director, Mr Gerashchenko said in a newspaper interview he wanted to change
IMF conditions for the loan. Mr Shokhin suggested the chairman might not put
the issue so starkly to the Fund.
A western official said Moscow had already asked whether it could increase
credits to boost the working capital of state-owned enterprises from
Rbs150bn to Rbs300bn in the second half of this year. The IMF agreement said
the Rbs150bn ceiling could be altered with Fund permission, but within an
overall ceiling of Rbs700bn for new credit to the economy.
Asked if the government had made the mistake of endorsing strict conditions
it could not meet, Mr Shokhin said: 'We can always talk to the Fund if we
have problems carrying out what we promised to do.' In contrast, Mr
Gerashchenko seemed intent on making a 'political drama' out of the issue.
Dumping the existing IMF agreement would make it difficult for Russia to
obtain a debt rescheduling and more western funds. It could further damage
faith in the country's reliability as a negotiating partner.
Even before Mr Gerashchenko's comments, it was obvious Russia was unlikely
to meet the targets of cutting its budget deficit to 5 per cent of GDP by
the end of the year and reducing inflation to 9 per cent a month. The
central issue now is how far he can undermine government attempts to
discipline enterprises through a tight credit policy.
A western official said: 'It looks like Gerashchenko is trying to capitalise
on the discontent of the industrial sector, to appear as the man who has the
courage to stand up to the IMF and who will negotiate better terms so that
the Russian economy is kept alive and not destroyed, as the IMF is supposed
to want to do.'
Although the central bank cannot unilaterally alter Russia's agreement with
the Fund, Mr Shokhin acknowledged that lack of support from the chairman
would seriously undermine the accord.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920824

