FT922-13344

FT  11 APR 92 / Company failure may affect football clubs: Ability to meet
costs incurred after promotion to higher divisions may be jeopardised


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE LIQUIDATION last month of a small insurance company may leave a number
of professional football clubs with financial difficulties. Continental
Insurance, which went into liquidation on March 27, sold a range of
high-risk insurances - including 'prize indemnity' contingency policies for
football clubs which protect against extra costs incurred as a result of
promotion to higher divisions.
With the league season coming to a close, a number of clubs that bought such
prize indemnity policies are running for promotion and will incur
substantial financial obligations as result.
The cash needed to pay contractually agreed bonuses to players and improve
grounds to higher-division standards would have come from their insurers,
but Continental's liquidators are unlikely to have sufficient resources to
meet potential claims.
Already many clubs, especially those in the lower divisions of the English
football league, are under financial pressure with the cost of ground
improvements a significant obstacle. In 1990 the government accepted the
terms of the Taylor Report into safety at football grounds and insisted that
first-division and second-division clubs should have all-seater stadiums by
1994, while third and fourth-division clubs should introduce similar
facilities by 1999.
Aldershot FC went into liquidation last month, while a number of other clubs
have decided to adopt semi-professional status.
Continental has found itself in difficulties partially as a result of more
than Pounds 700,000 in losses incurred on prize indemnity policies covering
the 1990-91 season. Its total shortfall amounted to Pounds 810,000,
according to a statement of affairs signed by directors on February 20. The
deficiency takes into account a reserve for unexpired premiums of Pounds
1.38m.
In a report to creditors, joint liquidators Mr David Buchler of Buchler
Phillips and Mr Chris Hughes of Cork Gully say that losses from high-risk
travel have also been particularly troublesome for the company.
Accounts for last year are not yet available, but in 1990 Continental
reported pre-tax losses of Pounds 1.3m on premium income of Pounds 3.8m,
compared with claims and expenses of Pounds 5.1m.
Total underwriting losses in 1990 amounted to Pounds 1.17m, and last year
reached Pounds 1.18m. Losses for 1990 losses include Pounds 700,000 incurred
on football contingency contracts during the 1990-91 season. In addition,
loans of about Pounds 2m made by Continental to its parent company,
Yorkdale, have proved to be irrecoverable, according to Cork Gully.
Soccer, Weekend Page X

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920411

