FT924-11434

FT  26 OCT 92 / International Company News: Grupo Torras makes a little
history - The accounting problems of KIO's Spanish subsidiary


  By PETER BRUCE


DURING the next few days, Grupo Torras, the Spanish industrial holding
company wholly-owned by the Kuwait Investment Office (KIO), will make a
little history by refusing to sign the 1991 accounts prepared by its
auditors, Coopers & Lybrand.
It will be the biggest Spanish company ever to reject a set of accounts in
this way, and the gravity of the action is compounded by the fact that
Coopers has apparently reversed a Pta2.9bn (Dollars 26.4m) consolidated
profit reported by Torras to a loss, understood to be close to Pta37bn.
The KIO's lawyers have advised them not to sign off the accounts, arguing
that to do so would be construed as agreeing they are a true and fair
reflection of the company's behaviour.
That is something no one in the KIO headquarters in London or the Torras
offices in Madrid is prepared to bet on. The KIO's lawyers, Stephenson
Harwood, and its auditors, KPMG Peat Marwick, are close to completing a
six-month investigation into claims by new managers at KIO and Torras that
the Dollars 4bn in cash put into Spanish investments by the KIO since the
mid-1980s has been wasted and lost.
Until last spring, the KIO had been run directly by members of Kuwait's
ruling Al-Sabah family. Its new managers, strengthened by the scale of
opposition to the Al-Sabahs in Kuwait's recent election, have begun to turn
on the heat in their efforts to discover what went wrong in Spain.
Their conviction that something has gone wrong has been strongly supported
by a three-month investigation into the future of the Spanish business by
Salomon Brothers.
'At June 30 1992,' Salomon says, 'Grupo Torras had a negative net worth of
Pta51.3bn. If we capitalise all the loans (to Torras) outstanding from KIO .
. . this figure would become a positive Pta5.99bn. If we further adjust for
present valuations of the companies (in the Torras portfolio), it goes to a
negative net worth of Pta58.06bn.'
What irritates the new KIO management is that the money the KIO invests is
from the Kuwaiti Fund for Future Generations, a sort of national pension.
Last November, Peat Marwick reported that Dollars 2.7bn in cash has been
invested in Spain. A further Dollars 1.2bn has been transferred from KIO to
Spain this year. What, they ask, has happened to the money?
Grupo Torras is a complicated animal. Salomon says 'it can be likened to the
conglomerates popular in the 1960s, when it was believed that financial and
management acumen could bring additional benefits to this type of
organisation (an industrial holding) - however, this was rarely proven to be
the case'.
But it was also Salomon Brothers who, in November 1988, designed the
flotation of Grupo Torras, praising it as 'a strongly profitable holding
company with pan-European ambitions'. Torras, the investment bank said then,
had carried out a diversification programme 'with timely acquisitions in
some of the fastest-growing sectors of the Spanish economy'.
Curiously, Torras is not following a Salomon recommendation that it find a
partner for the holding company itself. 'If KIO cannot find a suitable
partner who can . . . progressively take control of the investment, over
time the group should be eliminated and as each individual strategy for the
subsidiaries is adapted, the investments should be passed to other KIO
entities,' the report says.
But the past will not go away. Mr Javier de la Rosa, the Catalan financier
who teamed up with the former KIO management to build up Torras, has an 18
per cent stake in Ercros which he says he was merely holding for Torras.
Torras refuses to recognise this. Also, Mr Fouad Jaffar, the former KIO
managing director who led the expansion in Spain, and a US property
developer hold passive stakes in Prima which Torras is also refusing to
recognise.
The distrust between the old KIO management and Mr De la Rosa, and the new
KIO-Torras team, is considerable. The KIO was astonished to find a contract
signed in February 1990 between Torras and Mr De la Rosa's investment
company, Quail Espana, giving Quail control of the management of Torras,
plus commissions on business done by Quail on Torras' behalf and a Dollars
50m termination fee.
But this contract was just a renewal of an almost identical one signed in
June 1987, with the support of the KIO's long-standing chairman, now
retired, Sheikh Fahad Al-Sabah.
Mr De la Rosa says Quail had made about Dollars 120m in commissions from
Torras since 1987 but passed the bulk of these on to third parties it had
contracted. 'I have nothing to hide,' he says. 'We kept between Dollars 30m
and Dollars 40m and it was all declared.'
Whether the KIO investigation will be able to turn the suspicion that
something offensive happened to its money in Spain into fact is a moot
point.
Highly-geared developments by Prima and the Dollars 1bn investment in a
producer of commodity chemicals like Ercros were ill-judged, but will that
satisfy the Kuwaiti politicians demanding answers to the Spain debacle?

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921026

