FT924-1023

FT  21 DEC 92 / Private sector pay deals 'fall to 3.1%'


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


PRIVATE sector pay settlements are falling sharply again after a period of
stability and could soon drop below 3 per cent.
Between September and November they averaged 3.1 per cent and since August
one manufacturing group in three has introduced a pay freeze, the
Confederation of British Industry's manufacturing pay databank estimates.
The latest settlement rate compares with a 4.2 per cent average in the
quarter ending in September, and 4.4 per cent in the last quarter of 1991.
Employers welcomed the figures, which were released yesterday as part of a
new monthly series for CBI members. The figures will also please the
government, which wants pay in the private sector to fall as close as
possible to the 1.5 per cent public sector limit.
Pay awards in the service sector also fell sharply, according to the CBI,
from 4.5 per cent in the three months ending in August to 3.7 per cent in
the three months ending in November.
The data suggest that the national average earnings figure, which remained
5.5 per cent in October, will start falling again. Official average earnings
figures are usually higher than current settlements, especially when
inflation is falling, because they include overtime and bonuses and rises
from up to 12 months ago.
Manufacturing productivity increased by 2.7 per cent in the third quarter
giving an increase in manufacturing unit labour costs for that period of
about 1 per cent, according to the CBI. This is well below current unit
labour cost rises in Germany and Japan.
Mr Howard Davies, director-general of the CBI, welcomed the figures. 'If
these positive trends can be consolidated across the economy we will be well
positioned to compete effectively in world markets when recovery comes,' he
said.
The CBI notes that 70 per cent of survey respondents expect their next
settlement to be lower than the last. But it warns that UK earnings growth
has been well above the US and Japan.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921221

