FT924-1024

FT  21 DEC 92 / Siberian copper race loses appeal: Six companies drop
tenders


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


A RACE to develop Russia's biggest copper deposit has been reduced to just
two contenders after six large western companies dropped out of an
international tender for lack of time to complete proposals by a deadline
which expired last Tuesday.
The only two companies now formally in the race are Australia's BHP and the
Udokan Mining Company (UMC), considered the only 'Russian' participant
although it is indirectly half-owned by two little-known foreign companies.
Its lack of experience of a big mining project is being compensated for by
advice from Fluor Daniel, the San Francisco-based consultancy which puts
together international mining projects and has already submitted a detailed
feasibility study for the project.
In a sign of budding Russian co-operation with China, the UMC has also
arranged to sell the copper to the Chinese, who are just across the border
from the deposit in the eastern Siberian region of Chita. UMC's confidence
that it will get the contract also rests on a definite shift by the
authorities towards helping heavy industry find profitable new civilian
markets after decades of catering to the military establishment.
Mr Boris Yatskevich, deputy chairman of Russia's state geology committee,
who declined to confirm or deny which companies were taking part, said the
tender committee would produce its conclusions by January 15, leaving the
final decision to be taken by the Russian president and government. 'Eight
companies have expressed an interest in the project. Proposals have reached
the tender committee.'
But other sources confirmed that RTZ, Phelps Dodge, Placer Dome, Cyprus
Mining, Mitsubishi and Marubeni, despite being registered as tender
participants, had dropped out of the hugely complex project which requires
building not just a mine but lots of infrastructure to operate it. An
executive for one of the companies cited a lack of time to prepare properly
since the tender was declared this summer, and said that another
complicating factor was the metallurgical specificities of the ore.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

921221

