FT921-11903

FT  29 JAN 92 / Government to go ahead with tight controls on unions


   By DAVID OWEN and DAVID GOODHART


THE GOVERNMENT has shelved plans to make agreements between unions and
employers legally binding, but will otherwise press ahead with almost all
the reforms laid out in last year's industrial relations green paper.
Mr Michael Howard, the employment secretary, indicated that several of those
reforms would be included in the Conservative manifesto. He has, however,
amended the proposal to seek employees' consent for union dues to be
deducted from pay on 'automatic check-off' from every year to every three
years.
The manifesto commitments will include the new 'check-off' plan, taken from
a suggestion made by the Institute of Personnel Management, plus:
the right of ordinary citizens to take out injunctions against unlawful
strikes
seven days' notice of strikes
the right to join a union of choice regardless of the Trades Union Congress
arrangement for regulating inter-union disputes.
The package is also likely to include tighter controls on the way unions
ballot on industrial action, including the proposal (not in the green paper)
that voting papers should be distributed and stored by an independent body.
Strike ballots would in future have to be conducted by post and be subject
to independent scrutiny.
The timing of the announcement, in a Commons statement on last July's green
paper proposals, seemed designed to focus attention on Labour's trade union
ties in the frenetic pre-election atmosphere.
The government would aim to introduce legislation in the first session of
the new parliament. The issue of legally binding collective agreements has
not formally been dropped, but is unlikely to become part of any
legislation.
The Confederation of British industry and the Engineering Employers
Federation welcomed the decision to shelve legally binding agreements.
To Labour fury at Westminster, Mr Howard said the proposals were designed to
'consolidate and build on the improvement in industrial relations which we
have achieved over the last 12 years'.
Attempt to block AEU merger, Page 9
Major 'panicked' into concession, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920129

