FT924-8150

FT  12 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Industry plea rejected over
business rate


   By ALISON SMITH


THE GOVERNMENT has rejected pleas from industry organisations to keep down
the annual increase in the business rate, and will announce today that it
will rise by the maximum allowed under the legislation.
The move follows a direct appeal last week by industry to Mr Michael Howard,
the environment secretary. A letter jointly from the British Chambers of
Commerce and other organisations including those for small businesses,
called for a freeze in the business rate.
Today, however, Mr Howard will say that the rate poundage for 1993-94 will
rise by 3.6 per cent, the annual rate of inflation in September.
This aspect of the plans for business will be overshadowed today by the
autumn statement announcement and the package of measures to help industry
which Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, will announce with the public
spending decisions.
This 'package for growth' will be seen by the cabinet for the first time
this morning, as it has been kept closely within Treasury control and has
been discussed only with ministers directly involved.
The business organisations complain that when the government introduced the
business rate with the poll tax the impression was that the annual inflation
rate was the ceiling for any increase rather than the inevitable rise.
Since then, however, the government has raised it in line with inflation
every year.
Ministers say that business is still protected from excessive increases. The
government estimates that businesses are having to pay Pounds 1bn less in
rates than they would have done had the previous system still applied.
The 'charm offensive' to win support of the spending decisions will broaden
after the statement, as Mr Lamont holds a further meeting with Tory
backbenchers and gives a series of interviews.
Mr William Waldegrave, the public service minister, will use opportunities
in the next few weeks to highlight the importance of improving performance
in public services especially when spending is tight. That message will be
underlined in the Citizen's Charter white paper to be published late this
month.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921112

