FT921-11794

FT  30 JAN 92 / Sundered chains: The process of change within the Indian
economy


   By JOE ROGALY


India's industrialists are braced for a shock. They may soon have to face
competition. If they survive they could become serious players in the global
markets. They are by nature survivors. 'We enjoy the privileges of a
monopoly in some of our businesses,' acknowledged the beaming chairman of
Kanoria Chemicals & Industries in Calcutta, 'and we also welcome the
government's new economic policy, which opens the market to all comers.'
There was just one little thing. Competition should first be confined to
Indian companies. Then the newly strengthened enterprises should try their
hand at exports. Only when they had thus proved their mettle should foreign
imports be allowed in. But if there is to be no foreign capital, I
protested, local new entrants to highly capitalised industries will face
impossibly high start-up costs. Mr S S Kanoria smiled expansively.
A company boss in another sector spread his hands to emphasise a different
point. 'Of course I built my business cheaply by bribing officials to grant
licences,' he confessed. 'You call that corrupt. I call it the only way it
has been possible to do business in India. Now, under the new economic
policy, licences from the central government are no longer needed. We shall
have to learn new methods.' But Mr M Z A Baig, principal executive officer
of Tata Services, insisted that the Tata companies had never resorted to
bribes.
Another chairman, whose varied interests include a huge tea plantation, was
even more positive about New Delhi's liberalisation of the economy. 'As soon
as the rupee becomes fully convertible,' said Mr B M Khaitan of MacNeill &
Magor, 'we shall buy into certain companies in Britain.' Watch out,
Allied-Lyons.
Watch out, although not quite yet, Renault, Volkswagen and Fiat. The car
manufacturing plant of Maruti Udyog is just a half-hour's drive out of New
Delhi. Founded on the ruins of a venture initiated by the late Mr Sanjay
Gandhi, Maruti is 40 per cent owned by Suzuki, 60 per cent by the government
of India. The plant's snappy small cars have become the symbol of Indian
yuppiedom. Last year they exported 5,000 of the 123,000 they made; now they
are planning a new assembly line able to make 70,000 export models annually.
Their employees, well paid by Indian standards, seemed to my untrained eye
to be highly skilled, at home among the giant Komatsu steel presses and the
Kawasaki robots.
As many Indians see it, the government's plan to increase Suzuki's stake to
50 per cent is a dangerously revolutionary act of creeping privatisation.
Yet 10 years from now, Maruti should be wholly private - and able to
undercut most of the world's small-car manufacturers. Before that, the 200
per cent duty on imports also has to go. Meanwhile, as the number of local
carmakers grows (Tata has a new marque on the roads) the legal impediments
to the expansion of activities by large companies are to be removed.
Indian tycoons sit in palatial offices, surrounded by electronic
accoutrements familiar to their counterparts in New York, London or
Frankfurt. Outside you find the overpopulated pavements of Mother Theresa's
universe; as soon as you come down for a taxi a skeletal hand appears before
your face, begging. The India most foreigners can understand is confined to
the urban industrialised sector, minus the city poor. Indians call it the
'organised sector'. The real India, a nation of villagers and rural
labourers, is a closed book.
The organised sector accounts for perhaps an eighth of the population, or
some 110m people. Most of the top-level Indians mumble that something must
be done to raise the living standards of the other seven-eighths but, beyond
rapid industrialisation and trickle-down, few seemed to have any solution.
I have doubts about the efficacy of trickle-down. If it comes, it will come
slowly. Hundreds of millions of people will die in abject poverty before it
does. Yet to those who believe that there is no alternative it must be
conceded that the potential for rapid growth is there. All that is required
is that New Delhi's politicians exhibit qualities superior to those of most
other politicians in most other countries.
India's neo-Thatcherite trio - the prime minister and the ministers of
finance and commerce - are trying to rise to the moment. The prime minister,
Mr P V Narashima Rao, was regarded as a stop-gap when he formed a government
last June, following the assassination of Mr Rajiv Gandhi during an
inconclusive election campaign. Yet the 70-year-old Mr Rao has so far held
his government together in spite of continuing violence in Assam (where a
political deal may contain the troubles), the Punjab (where he hopes to hold
an election), and Kashmir.
He has also presided over the formulation of the most radical programme of
economic liberalisation in independent India's history. The question, much
debated in New Delhi, of how much is genuine and how much has been forced on
the government by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank is
secondary. The important point is that a start is being made on dismantling
the quasi-socialist state built by Nehru and his successors under Soviet
influence.
There will be setbacks. Soviet spares are missed, especially by the
military. Rouble-rupee trade, built up by previous governments, has
vanished. Inflation may topple the Rao government. The 'exit programme', an
Indian phrase meaning the redeployment or retraining or sacking of redundant
workers, has already led to one strike. With no social security safety net,
unemployment can mean a return to pavement life. Corruption will take at
least a generation to weed out. The bureaucracy will take years to uproot.
State governments will continue to be obstructive. You could cast doubt on
the whole experiment. Mr Swarj Paul, who travels frequently to India from
his Caparo Group headquarters in London, observes that, so far, little has
really changed.
Yet Mr Rao's two key ministers seem absolutely determined to press ahead.
The finance minister, Dr Manmohan Singh, is a distinguished economist. The
commerce minister, Mr P Chidambaram is a lawyer and a Harvard MBA. With Mr
Rao, this troika is trying to reconstruct India's economy. It has New
Delhi's sophisticated economists, although not its academics, behind it. So
far it has devalued the rupee, cut government expenditure, abolished
industrial licensing, slashed export subsidies and introduced 'exim scrip',
a foreign exchange permit allowing companies to import goods to the value of
30 per cent of their exports. The scrip is freely tradeable; the margin on
scrip sales constitutes a hidden export subsidy. Clearances for foreign
investors, once held up, have suddenly begun to flow through. General
Motors, General Electric, IBM and, sensationally in view of past
antipathies, Coca-Cola have all signed recent deals. These and other
liberalisation measures are advertised on New Delhi posters with the symbol
of an unchained elephant.
The powerful beast may turn on its new mahout. Next month's budget will be a
test of the popular will and the opposition parties' patience. Further
public expenditure cuts are required by the deal with the Fund. The
government's objective is that the overall public sector deficit, which
includes the states and public enterprises, is to be reduced from 12.5 per
cent of gross domestic product in 1990-91 to about 7 per cent within four
years. British or American treasury officials could not promise the
equivalent.
Dr Singh has also undertaken to reform the tax system, which at the moment
depends heavily on excise duties. The Indian government proposes to
restructure the banks (nationalised by Mrs Indira Gandhi), partly to
introduce competition and partly to reduce the requirements imposed on
commercial banks to hold large amounts of government debt at below-market
rates or, as bad, to lend to borrowers in sectors classed by the government
as 'priority'. (About half of lending is at subsidised rates of interest.)
He will also try to restructure his international borrowings, although from
a position of less weakness than on the day he took office, when he found
the foreign exchange reserves down to a fortnight's imports and had to pawn
Dollars 600m of India's gold. Dr Singh is not relying on a surge in foreign
investments, or a rush home of money from the wealthy diaspora of
non-resident Indians. Just restructuring, exports and hard slog, with the
loans to tide him over. Mexico, he points out, took seven years - from 1982
to 1989 - to come right. He muses that India could take half that time.
Maybe. But the sub-continent's many fundamental economic problems will not
be solved in one generation.

The Financial Times


London Page 18 Illustration (Omitted).

920130

