FT924-984

FT  21 DEC 92 / Cabbies try to give taxman a lift


   By ANDREW JACK


THE INLAND Revenue has found in the form of London taxi drivers new and
unexpected allies in its battle against tax evaders.
Drivers of black cabs - in a retaliation effort at a time of intense
competition for fares - are contacting the Revenue, the Department of Social
Security and the police in growing numbers with information on minicab
drivers.
Several drivers' associations are acting as collecting points for details of
minicabs which they gather on forms and from telephone calls from black cabs
in the City and the suburbs.
The authorities are then able to follow up those leads through their
investigators in local offices to see whether the drivers are declaring
their income.
'Minicab drivers have no insurance and half of them are claiming dole,' one
taxi driver alleged yesterday. 'I wouldn't trust my daughter or wife in one
of those.'
Behind the public spirit is a sense of hatred and frustration as the
capital's roads have become increasingly patrolled by minicabs, which the
black cabs claim are unlicensed and unscrupulous.
Mr Harry Feigen, general secretary of the Licensed Taxi Drivers Association,
said all of his 5,500 black-cab members were submitting thousands of number
plate details by calling its 24-hour 'tout line' and sending in 'tout cards'
giving details of minicab sightings.
'Minicabs are easy to spot if you know how,' he said. 'They all carry this
metallic aerial. A great section of them are operating illegally. We think
we're helping by reporting them.'
He said he hoped much of the matter could be reduced when the government
announces the details of new legislation on minicabs early next year.
In the meantime, he said the recession had boosted enthusiasm for the level
of informing in the past few months - although drivers have little reason to
love the Inland Revenue.
The Revenue won a court case as far back as 1947 ruling that tips are
assessable for tax, and its officials are believed to periodically pose as
drivers so they can discover the average amount that customers tip.
The Revenue insisted that it did not ask the drivers for their help, and it
would not say how useful the information was.
'We are not asking the drivers to shop people,' an official said. 'They came
to us. If that's what they want to do, we are always interested. I don't
think there's an ethical issue.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921221

