FT921-15335

FT  10 JAN 92 / Management: Sharpening up the safety drills - North Sea / A
look at moves to tighten procedures in the offshore oil industry


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


North Sea oil operators have always stuck to a complex set of regulations on
safety.
But since an explosion ripped through the Piper Alpha platform
three-and-a-half years' ago, killing 167 men, the industry has overhauled
its approach to offshore safety.
'The fact that Piper Alpha could happen fundamentally changed the industry's
perception,' said Harold Hughes, director general of the UK Offshore
Operators Association, the industry trade group.
'We thought the systems in place would stop an incident such as that before
it turned into a major conflagration.'
The change in the approach to safety management was embodied in the Cullen
report on the Piper Alpha disaster.
Lord Cullen recommended technological innovations to improve safety, such as
the installation of emergency shutdown valves, and the industry has spent
more than Pounds 1bn on hardware since the report was published. But more
importantly, he urged a revamp in the way safety was managed.
Lord Cullen called for a move away from proscriptive measures taken in the
past, where safety regulations would be laid down in minute detail, to a
more flexible regime which left individual companies to develop their own
guidelines.
'The industry had got itself into the position where it tried to dictate
what to do in every circumstance, said Bob Sheppard, production manager at
the UK arm of Amoco, the major US oil company.
'If everyone just follows the rules without thinking, you have removed one
of the most effective safety checks, and that is individual initiative.'
By the end of this year, all of the companies operating in the UK sector of
the North Sea must hand over their safety management guidelines for review
to the Health and Safety Executive which took responsibility for offshore
safety after the Cullen report.
The Offshore Safety Bill is also expected next month to enshrine many of
Lord Cullen's recommendations into law. But the oil unions have been
critical of the speed of implementation.
Ronnie MacDonald from the Offshore Industry Liaison Committee says that many
of Lord Cullen's safety recommendations are still being ignored.
In their defence, companies point to the mammoth task of drawing up a safety
case for each North Sea installation which must then be checked by the HSE.
For Amoco, that means developing safety guidelines for each of its 32
installations - all of which are based on the company's central management
philosophy but are tailored to the particular risks of the facility.
Sheppard has been working with employees to update the company's safety
procedures for the past three years and stresses the importance of involving
workers across the company from an early stage. 'One of the things we found
is that safety is often perceived as someone else's problem, whereas we
wanted everyone to see it as his or her responsibility.'
After consultations with employees on safety measures and talks with
executives on how these fit into the company's business plan, Sheppard has
drawn up a volume of guidelines on safety management which must then be
communicated to workers across the company.
He says the most difficult thing has been to draw the line between
formulating exhaustive regulations and giving no management guidance at all.
'We want a system that is flexible enough to be easily changed by the
workforce.'
The new approach to safety management tries to address the root cause of any
emergencies that may arise, rather than safety drills and evacuation
procedures which are already well-rehearsed. Sheppard points out that the
procedure for any general maintenance job would, under the old regime, have
been detailed point by point.
'Under the new regime, we are trying to examine the rationale behind that
procedure and whether it gives us a way to spot the hazards and do the work
in a really safe way.'
This approach to safety has been greeted with a certain amount of scepticism
by the company's employees. For this reason, Sheppard stresses the
importance of encouraging workers to come up with new safety ideas and then
acting on them. 'The management must also demonstrate that safety is good
business practice and that the individual will not be penalised if he
decides to close an installation because of a perceived safety problem.'
The system in place on each installation is checked by a series of audits
conducted by competitors as well as the company itself each year.
'This is not an old-style count of the safety hats and shoes, but a look for
suggestions as to where concrete improvements in the system can be made,'
said Sheppard.
But MacDonald suggests that there are improvements to be made even in
counting the safety equipment. He describes a gas leak that took place on
one of Chevron's Ninian platforms in early December. When it came to the
evacuation procedure, there were not enough of the survival suits - clothing
designed to protect workers from a drop into the sea - to go round.
Hughes at UKOOA acknowledges that there could be a problematical period
during the next two to three years as new legislation is still to be passed
and old rules are being phased out. He says that change must be gradual. But
in a business where employees' lives are at risk every day, managers cannot
afford to make mistakes.

The Financial Times


London Page 9 Photograph Everybody's problem, adopting a new approach to
safety (Omitted).

920110

