FT922-13328

FT  13 APR 92 / Pounds 350m in new funds needed for Canary Wharf


   By BERNARD SIMON and ROBERT PESTON


   TORONTO


OLYMPIA & YORK, the cash-strapped property developer, will today ask its
banks for some Pounds 350m of new funds for London's Canary Wharf project
and concessions on USDollars 4bn (Pounds 2.3bn) of existing debt.
In presenting a debt restructuring plan, the group will assure the banks
that they should eventually get all their money back once property markets
recover. But it will warn that opposition to the restructuring plan may
cause them enormous losses.
O&Y officials, led by newly appointed financial adviser Mr Steve Miller of
the New York investment bank James D. Wolfensohn, will present the proposals
to representatives of about 100 North American, European and Far Eastern
banks in the ballroom of Toronto's Sheraton Hotel.
Discussions will also take place over the next two days with smaller groups
of banks.
O&Y, which is privately owned by Canada's Reichmann family, is expected to
disclose that its debts total just over USDollars 15bn. Of that amount,
about Dollars 3bn is debt of non-property subsidiaries, such as
Abitibi-Price, the newsprint maker, and Gulf Canada Resources, oil and gas
producer.
The slump in property markets has slashed O&Y's estimate of its total equity
from a peak of CDollars 11bn (Pounds 5.3bn) in 1988 to CDollars 5bn-CDollars
5.5bn.
From being relatively conservatively financed, with a debt-to-equity ratio
of about 50 per cent, the company's debt ratio has moved up to 75-80 per
cent. It has also run out of cash.
O&Y will urge the banks to leave most of the debt in its vast real estate
empire outside the restructuring net. With the exception of Canary Wharf and
a handful of North American buildings, it maintains that cash flow from its
buildings is adequate to meet debt servicing obligations. It will also argue
that including these projects in the restructuring might endanger their
smooth operation, and thus their asset value.
More than two thirds of the Dollars 4bn debt at the core of the
restructuring has been provided by a group of 10 banks, led by Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce, Citicorp of the US, Hongkong and Shanghai Banking
Corp, three other Canadian banks and one Japanese bank.
The proposed Pounds 350m financing for Canary Wharf is required for work
over the next two years to ensure that the Docklands project is attractive
to prospective tenants. It also includes O&Y's initial contribution to the
Jubilee Line extension, although the company is expected to try and
renegotiate that commitment.
Mr Paul Reichmann, O&Y's chief strategist, is expected to devote more time
to Canary Wharf. Day-to-day operations in North America will be left in the
hands of a new president, who is likely to be appointed within the next week
or two.
Mr Tom Johnson, the US banker who left the company after only two weeks as
president, has indicated that he will not be returning to O&Y full time. It
has emerged that Mr Johnson's withdrawal was due in part to bank opposition
to certain elements of his remuneration package.
Observer, Page 15 O&Y offer, Page 17

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920413

