FT922-13389

FT  11 APR 92 / Hawks & Handsaws: Front line stuff


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


ELECTION Day. It is 1.45pm in Westminster North and I am scuttling round to
the polling station to cast my vote and help usher in an era of civilised,
consensual, coalition governance in these weary, wracked isles. I am also
hoping for proportional representation, Pounds 1bn more on education, faster
trains, better food, brighter newspapers, cleaner cinemas, smaller telephone
bills and a dramatic uplift in the price of gold.
Yes, I am voting for Wing-Commander Paddy Ashdown and his valiant Liberal
Democrats. The only blot on the landscape, the only fly in the pie, is the
knowledge that my vote for liberty, fraternity and Wing-Commander Ashdown
will be neutralised and ground to dust by the vote of Miss Lee, my executive
assistant, a hardline Thatcherite.
I saw her just a moment ago, wearing a lot of Jaeger. 'Good afternoon, Miss
Lee', I said. 'Off to vote for five years more of Tory Terror? Another four
nuclear subs? Tax breaks for stag hunts?'
I have to be careful how I goad her. If I overstep the mark she shuts
herself in her office and rings her 24-hour emergency gardener. Among the
Jaeger mob in Kensington and Notting Hill, 24-hour emergency gardeners are
very much the thing. All are tall and hirsute. I believe they have mobile
phones.
2.55pm. I have now walked about half-a-mile west, to the Portobello Road, so
have crossed the constituency boundary between Westminster North and
Kensington. The Tory MP in Kensington is Dudley Fishburn. The Tory MP in
Westminster North is an even nicer man, the unbelievably industrious Sir
John Wheeler. Pity he's got to go.
I am shopping for cauliflowers. Also a duck. This is Rasta territory, though
there is scant sign of the brothers, or of election fever. I can hear about
17 languages. I buy a cauliflower. Also an 8 lbs duck. I return to my own
constituency. Miss Lee is not impressed. She is wearing her afternoon
jewellery. 'That is not a cauliflower', she says, 'and that is not a duck.
We shall have to dine out this evening.'
6pm. On the Six O'Clock News, Anna Ford tells us that a high election
turnout is expected, and shows us pictures of the three leaders voting in
their constituencies. The Wing-Commander looks jubilant.
8.15pm. I and Miss Lee walk to Queensway to dine. It must be the most
cosmopolitan street in Britain: a mixture of Cairo, Marseilles and Mazatlan.
Quirkily, it sets me thinking about the ozone layer and the rainforests, the
Japanese stockmarket crash and the great wind machine of international
finance, refugees and immigration - in short, the sort of issues that were
virtually ignored during the election campaign because the media (not the
politicians) were lazily obsessed with cranking out stories about minute
fluctuations in the opinion polls, as though anyone apart from the pollsters
and pundits cared more than a paragraph's worth about such claptrap.
10.55pm. Not much action yet, though the TV channels are manufacturing vast
clouds of nonsense based on the projected swings shown by . . . exit polls.
11.45pm. On BBC1, David Dimbleby declares that a long night looms.
Friday, 1am. I stroll to Porchester Hall, hoping to attend the count for
Westminster North. The door is blocked by police. 'Where's your yellow
ticket?' a constable asks. 'You should have applied for a yellow ticket four
weeks ago. We cannot let you in, Sir. Those are our instructions. We are
only carrying them out.'
2.57am. 'John Wheeler holds Westminster N' flashes across the bottom of my
TV screen. The Tories look home and dry, which means I'll have to wait a few
more years for faster trains, better food, brighter newspapers, cleaner
cinemas and smaller telephone bills. God knows what the gold price is doing.
5.28am. Neil Kinnock makes a dignified and moving speech outside Labour
party headquarters which ought to haunt those who voted for a few extra
grubby pounds in their pay packets.
7.15am: Miss Lee sweeps into the room where I am eating a lonely breakfast.
She is dressed entirely in Chanel. There are emeralds all about her. Her
skin glows like silk. 'I expect you journalists will want to be at your
typing-stations pretty smartish this morning', she says. 'Most of you have
spent months writing drivel. You'll want to find some stories, want to get
back to news.'

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920411

