FT922-4363

FT  05 JUN 92 / Guide to company status for societies


   By DAVID BARCHARD


THE BUILDING Societies Commission, the industry regulator, has issued
guidelines for societies that want to shed mutual status and become
companies.
Although the commission says the guidelines have been issued without any
specific event in mind, their detailed nature has caused surprise and
aroused speculation in the mortgage industry that the sale of a small
building society to an outside buyer might soon be actively discussed.
The commission says societies must keep up-to-date registers of members with
voting rights and must be able to produce documentation from the Bank of
England that its application for a banking licence will be approved.
It also sets out the fees a society will have to pay for making use of the
commission's time.
The tone of the letter, sent to all building society chief executives,
treats the possibility of demutualisation in straightforward terms. That is
a shift away from the commission's attitude in the late 1980s when it made
little secret of its distaste for the shedding of mutual status.
Two top-10 societies are believed to be contemplating stock market
flotations, although probably not for another 18 months to two years. The
front runner is widely thought to be Cheltenham & Gloucester, the
sixth-largest society.
The guidelines may ease fears that a society attempting to convert would
have to run a gauntlet of complex legal and administrative difficulties.
The most likely institution to buy a small building society is Bank of
Edinburgh, a retail banking group set up two years ago to buy small and
medium-sized societies.
Last autumn, Bank of Scotland and Bank of Ireland are both believed to have
put out feelers to buy Town & Country Building Society, but decided to
withdraw after discovering the legal difficulties involved and the need to
match possible liquidity support provided for Town & Country by the building
society industry.
Building societies have had powers for four years to switch from mutual
status and become companies, subject to the approval of a majority of their
members. So far, there has been only one such conversion - Abbey National's
stock market flotation in July 1989.
Building societies are not the only mortgage institutions on the market.
This week JS Gadd, the issuing house, set up a company to package the UK
mortgage operations of small banks and insurance companies wanting to
withdraw from the market. Gadd finds buyers for the mortgage portfolios and
administers them until the sale. The company said it was already handling
mortgages totalling Pounds 150m from a well known lender.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920605

