FT924-11366

FT  27 OCT 92 / English Heritage cuts anger MPs


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT and DAVID OWEN


ENGLISH Heritage's plans to shed responsibility for 200 of its 360 historic
properties and cut 180 of its 1,600 staff yesterday prompted angry criticism
from MPs.
The proposals, announced yesterday as part of a 20-point strategy by Mr
Jocelyn Stevens, English Heritage chairman, mean that the properties would
be sold off or turned over to local authorities or trusts. The plans have
already received government approval.
Speaking to MPs yesterday, Mr Peter Brooke, national heritage secretary,
denied that the announcement was a prelude to 'commercial exploitation' of
heritage sites.
The proposals confirmed English Heritage's 'central role in the protection
of our heritage'. He added: 'That role will continue with my full support.'
Mr Robin Corbett, a Labour national heritage spokesman, criticised the
'total secrecy' with which the plans were drawn up and warned that some
historic monuments would be 'doomed to neglect'.
Branding Mr Stevens an 'unsuitable ideological ignoramus', he questioned
whether recession-hit councils and voluntary bodies could afford to take
over earmarked sites and claimed that job losses would involve people with
'unique skills'.
Mr Tony Banks, a Labour environment spokesman, said the proposals seemed
'rather like the country's final closing-down sale'.
Announcing his reforms yesterday, Mr Stevens said: 'This is a realistic plan
to safeguard the future of our heritage. The heritage is at risk from
neglect, pressure of use and lack of funds. We intend to begin by
streamlining our organisation.'
The organisation is offering voluntary early retirement to 100 headquarters
staff while 80 craftsmen in the directly employed labour force, which
repairs and maintains English Heritage properties, will lose their jobs.
Within three years the force, currently 380 strong, will be privatised. That
will reduce the English Heritage payroll to just over 1,000.
The sites to be disposed of have yet to be finally listed, but English
Heritage has grouped properties into three categories - the last group
containing the ones to be sold off.
The A division, 60 strong, includes flagship sites such as Stonehenge, Dover
Castle and Osborne House. The B division, of about 100, covers the more
important medieval ruins, such as Clun Castle in Shropshire. Those two
groups will remain under English Heritage control.
The other sites, mainly remote prehistoric remains, medieval remnants, or
destroyed buildings, will be offered to local authorities or
special-interest groups.
Mr Stevens said he was 'not keen' on selling sites to entrepreneurs, but did
not rule out the possibility.
Already Hampshire County Council has agreed to acquire two category C
properties: Portsmouth's Royal Garrison Church, which was largely destroyed
in the Second World War, and Fort Cumberland, a remote fortification in the
Solent.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921027

