FT922-4045

FT  08 JUN 92 / International Company News: Fears on Fokker deal revealed


   By RONALD VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


GROWING unease in the Netherlands about the proposed sale of a 51 per cent
stake in Fokker, the Dutch aeroplane builder, to Deutsche Aerospace (Dasa)
of Germany was underlined at the weekend by reports that the company's
supervisory board chairman, Mr Frans Swarttouw, had threatened to resign.
In a letter leaked to the press, Mr Swarttouw warned the deal must not lead
to Fokker being downgraded to a simple assembly plant and to the loss of
Dutch high-technology expertise.
The letter, addressed to the company's management board and to the Ministry
of Economic Affairs, which owns 32 per cent of Fokker, also said the company
should be looking for alternative partners to Dasa in case no suitable
agreement could be reached with the German group.
The main outlines of the confidential letter appeared on Saturday morning
just hours before the eight-member supervisory board was scheduled to meet
with the company's chairman, Mr Erik-Jan Nederkoorn. Mr Swarttouw described
the leak as a 'disaster'.
After the meeting, Fokker said the letter had been 'overtaken' by events and
that the entire supervisory board now fully supported the management board.
Nevertheless, the misgivings of Mr Swarttouw, who ran Fokker's management
board for 11 years until 1989, reveal the extent to which the company is
worried about its future as part of a Dasa-led European aeroplane
consortium.
The German group says that it is conducting the negotiations with Fokker on
behalf of its partners in the European 'Regioliner' joint venture -
Aerospatiale of France and Alenia of Italy.
Controversy about the deal was heightened last week after comments in Munich
by Mr Jurgen Schrempp, Dasa's chairman, who seemed to cast doubt on Fokker's
claim that it would be the 'leading partner' in any joint development of
regional aircraft.
Dutch unions and members of parliament are concerned that Fokker might lose
its ability to design and sell its own aircraft if it were taken over by
Dasa, bringing to an end the Netherlands' independent role in international
aviation.
Talks between Fokker and Dasa are scheduled to continue in the Netherlands
tomorrow.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920608

