FT924-6477

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment (1): Science fiction becomes
reality - Multimedia, which is the combination of video, photography,
animation, data, voice and audio in one medium, is the hottest trend in
electronic entertainment today


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


Rapid advances in technology in the latter half of the twentieth century
have had a dramatic impact on how people entertain themselves in their free
time at home.
The boundaries of home entertainment have widened to encompass a huge array
of electronic products ranging from video games and laser disc players to
personalised stereos.
In Japan, where trends in consumer electronics are increasingly set,
toy-makers report that for the past few years children have shown little
interest in bicycles and bats, which can only be used outside. These changes
in how we spend our free time, brought about by new technologies and new
needs, have had a significant impact on how we relate to one another.
For one thing, the sheer variety of consumer electronic products on offer
and the dramatic fall in prices over the years, have made entertainment much
more personalised.
Instead of one family television set in one corner of the living room and
the grand stereo in the other, there will often be two or three television
sets in a household and an audio set for each member of the family.
Pioneer captured the trend in one word when it introduced an audio series
several years ago with the brand name 'Selfie.'
But it was Sony which took the concept of personalised entertainment to its
extreme when it introduced the Walkman, its portable cassette tape recorder,
although strictly speaking this is more often used outside the home.
The spread of video games, which are essentially an interaction between one
player and one machine, has now taken the trend to a point of no return.
This self-absorption in a world of science fiction is aggravated, in the
minds of many concerned parents, by the difficulty the older generation has
in relating to the thrills of shooting green lemmings and exploding
mushrooms. The world of video games is not of the same order as the world of
Mickey Mouse or Winnie the Pooh.
And while parents will always find it difficult to relate to their children
at some point, video games - highly popular among children from about the
age of five - may be pushing that alienation threshold significantly lower.
The popularity of video games points to another trend that is gathering
momentum in the home entertainment market - that of interactivity.
Video games entertain their players by propelling them into another world
which they not only observe but can actually interact with.
The immense appeal of video games has shown that, contrary to what the large
number of couch potatoes may suggest, many people enjoy active and
interactive participation, which conventional forms of in-house
entertainment such as television, radio and video, only provide vicariously.
Camcorders, which involve people in the creative process of filming, and
sing-along karaoke systems, also point to the popularity of interactive
entertainment.
But the technology that promises to bring out the full potential of
interactive entertainment is multimedia.
Multimedia, which is the combination of video, photography, animation, data,
voice and audio in one medium, is the hottest trend in electronic
entertainment today.
What it provides, apart from the combination of many forms of entertainment
in one convenient package, is a superb ability to interact with the material
 -to alter the visual image, combine different sound tracks with different
pictures, move one picture from a scene to elsewhere - much in the same way
that computers enable writers to alter vast amounts of writing at the touch
of a button.
A good example of how multimedia can be used for interactive home
entertainment comes from Philips, the Dutch electronics group, which has
launched a multi-media entertainment system it calls Compact
Disc-Interactive (CD-I).
By connecting a CD-I player to the television, players can wander through
the vast collection at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, learn how
to play the guitar in lessons complete with slow-motion movement, or test
their creative skills in a musical game.
The increasing use of the digital format in consumer electronics is what has
brought interactivity into the home and future developments promise to take
this interactivity into other realms of entertainment.
So, rather than interact with material that is specifically created for that
purpose - such as video games and CD-I titles - we will increasingly be
interacting with films and music that have been produced primarily for other
purposes.
Sega, the video games player, has already launched a video game that allows
players to make their own music videos using film footage of popular
musicians and interact with characters in the recent box-office hit Batman
Returns.
Continuing work on digital television, and the US decision to adopt a
digital advanced television standard, means that we may soon be able to
interact with what is on the television screen.
Developments in technology are also at the root of the enormous increase in
the choice of entertainment programmes and the improving visual and aural
quality of the programmes that are available.
Greater choice in software again means that entertainment becomes more
personalised. In addition to choosing what we want to buy or rent at the
video store, we will soon be able to chose what we want broadcast into our
homes.
For example, digital technology is likely to bring a significant change to
radio broadcasting soon in the form of digital audio broadcast (DAB), which
will offer not only the possibility of vastly increased numbers of radio
channels available but also the ability to chose the contents and record
them in CD-quality sound.
The advent of DAB has prompted the idea of the arm-chair record shop where
consumers could choose to listen to specific tracks from a pre-published
catalogue and make perfect digital copies of the music on their recordable
digital tapes or discs.
The same idea could be taken further to 'video on demand,' an idea which has
already caught on in the US. Telephone companies, such as Bell Atlantic,
have been testing systems for video on demand over the telephone line.
While there are still some regulatory hurdles and, in the case of DAB,
industry resistance, technological developments and consumer demand indicate
that things are going in that direction. Pay per view is already widespread
in the US and could become more so in Europe in the near future. The picture
that these developments draw, and consumer electronics manufacturers would
like us to envision, is of an evening at home that is becoming more like an
evening at the concert hall or cinema.
High definition television and wide-screen TV are the obvious examples of
new products that are taking the home entertainment experience one notch
higher in terms of quality - although not necessarily of the quality of
programmes.
Eventually, flat-screen TVs and projection TVs are likely to encourage more
people to stay home and watch a film rather than go to the cinema.
These technological advances aim to replicate as best they can the
experiences in life which we define as entertainment; to create something
closer to the real thing.
All of which appears to be leading inexorably to a world of virtual reality.
And what can be more personalised, more interactive and more close to the
real thing than to don a VR helmet and experience the sensation of speeding
your way through shooting stars in a runaway spaceship?

The Financial Times


London Page I

921120

