FT921-14069

FT  17 JAN 92 / Wide consultations set to slow change: Reforms At Lloyd's
Insurance Market


   By RICHARD LAPPER


OFFICIALS at the Corporation of Lloyd's were yesterday grappling with the
practicalities of implementing reforms at the insurance market in the wake
of acceptance by Lloyd's of the task force recommendations. They are
admitting that the pace of change could be slow.
According to an insider at the corporation, which provides regulatory and
market support services to the Lloyd's market, the need for wide
consultation among the corporation's various committees, departments and
market associations will slow change.
'This one will run and run - it's a market,' he stressed. 'We haven't got a
chief executive who can simply order five heads of department to get on with
it.'
The conclusions of the task force's 12-month investigation into business
practices at Lloyd's were published on Wednesday and recommend a programme
of short-term measures - which can be introduced relatively easily by
Lloyd's - and longer-term changes which require modifications of the Lloyd's
Act, the legislation which outlines the way Lloyd's is regulated.
Lloyd's Council identified six priority areas for action when it met last
weekend: A high-level compulsory stop-loss scheme to limit the losses of
Names, the individuals whose assets support underwriting at Lloyd's.
Drafting of a Names' charter outlining the rights of Names which would allow
them to veto big transactions and hold annual meetings of the syndicates
into which they are grouped.
The formation of members' agents pooling arrangements (Mapas), the vehicles
which will allow Names to spread their investments in syndicates more widely
in order to reduce the risk of heavy losses.
The drafting of new guidelines outlining best practice for Lloyd's agents
including provisions stipulating more disclosure of fees and expenses.
Ways in which CentreWrite, the reinsurance company owned by the corporation,
could reinsure the open years of individual Names rather than syndicates as
at present. Syndicates leave years open when they are unable to settle
accounts because of uncertainty over future claims.
The introduction of limited liability capital into Lloyd's, initially via
more flexible co-insurance and reinsurance arrangements.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920117

