FT924-11961

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (6): Compensation
took three years - Hindsight / When a pension transfer was misused, help was
needed from many quarters


   By JOHN AUTHERS


IN FEBRUARY 1989, John Brewer, a company director from Nottinghamshire,
received a shocking letter from the managing director of his brokers:
'Dear Mr Brewer, I am most truly sorry to say that I have let you down very
badly. I have used part of your pension transfers to keep my business
afloat. I have no excuses for this. The reason I am telling you now is that
I am going to make amends and to cease trading.
'My wife Jennifer knew nothing of this and I am truly sorry.'
That letter was the starting signal for a three-year fight for compensation.
Mr Brewer had to wait until April 23 this year before he received a cheque
to reimburse him for all that had been stolen.
Consumers can take heart from the fact that the compensation eventually
arrived - but the details of the intervening three years, which were spent
haggling with life companies, solicitors, bailiffs and regulators, are
harrowing.
Mr Brewer only gained compensation after enlisting the support of his new
financial advisers, Towry Law, and his MP, Mr Kenneth Clarke, now the home
secretary.
He had first had contact with Upperstock, the broker, when arranging
insurance for his textiles company. Upperstock had converted his business
partner's pension funds into one fund, and transferred them to Devonshire
Life, a life company which is now part of Acuma.
Mr Brewer, already aged over 60, was advised to do the same, and did so. He
gave instructions for the funds from his three pension schemes - with Allied
Dunbar, Standard Life and Target Life, totalling Pounds 30,060.36 - to be
transferred in a lump-sum single payment to Devonshire Life.
In July 1988, Upperstock wrote to him saying that the lump sum had been paid
to Devonshire Life. This was not true.
The next six months were spent unhappily trying to gain confirmation of the
deal from both the broker and the product provider. Devonshire Life said it
could only give information to its agent. Upperstock procrastinated - the
papers, it claimed, were being processed, lost in the post, or left on the
desk.
In fact, Upperstock was engaged in a juggling act. The pension plan it had
opened involved regular monthly premiums of Pounds 2,500, to be dribbled
slowly into the new pension plan. This was a far worse deal for Mr Brewer
than a straightforward lump-sum investment would have been. But Upperstock
could use the balance to keep the brokerage afloat.
A total of Pounds 12,500 was paid to Devonshire Life before the policy
lapsed in November - three months before Upperstock admitted that there was
any problem at all.
Under the original terms of the contract, the policy could lapse without
value. Thus Devonshire Life initially declined to pay any compensation.
But in May 1990, after the company had been taken over by Acuma, and after
permission had been received from the Inland Revenue, the Pounds 12,500 was
finally paid to him.
However, the life company could scarcely be expected to provide the rest of
the money, totalling almost Pounds 20,000, which had never been paid to it.
The other avenue he pursued was to retrieve the money directly from Mr
Raymond Gorman, the managing director of Upperstock. He had initially
offered to sell his house, and reimburse Mr Brewer with the proceeds.
Mr Brewer employed solicitors to obtain a charge over his broker's property
 -an expensive and time-consuming process. But his hopes had been cruelly
raised.
Three lenders had prior charges over the house, and in any case the house
could not be sold at auction. It was eventually repossessed by the building
society, nullifying all the expensive efforts which had been made to obtain
a charge on the building - the solicitors' bill was Pounds 1,036.27.
His verdict on the solicitors is blunt: 'They achieved nothing and cost me a
lot of money.'
Fortunately, Towry Law, whom he had approached for financial advice,
reported the matter to the regulators. Upperstock had been authorised by
Fimbra, the watchdog for independent intermediaries, and so the matter was
covered by the Investors Compensation Scheme.
Mr Brewer was entitled to think that he had an open and shut case - after
all, the broker had written to him to admit embezzlement.
But he was not prepared for the painstaking process which unfolded. Working
with the Investors Compensation Scheme was no easier than with the
solicitors.
Towry Law first contacted Fimbra in October 1989. Fimbra wrote to Mr Brewer
for the first time six months later.
At the end of May, the ICS wrote to him for the first time, with a list of
eight questions. He answered them by return of post. From then on, the
watchdogs, to use Mr Brewer's own words, 'kept moving the goalposts'. 'Every
time you thought you had got there, they moved the goals again.'
In January 1991 - almost two years after receiving his broker's mea culpa -
the ICS wrote to tell him that there could still be no guarantee of
compensation, because Upperstock was not in formal insolvent liquidation.
They failed to provide him with any more explanation, so Mr Brewer now wrote
to Kenneth Clarke. Mr Clarke then gave the regulators a hefty prod.
Unfortunately, the law was also a problem. A dispute between Fimbra and the
Securities and Investments Board over exactly who was eligible for
compensation needed to be settled at the High Court, and Mr Brewer's claim
had to be put on ice. Meanwhile, in April 1991, the ICS sent him two
follow-up questions - 11 months after receiving his replies to the first
eight.
Mr Brewer answered them by return of post. Five weeks later, the ICS sent
him another seven questions to answer.
Now, at last, things seemed to be moving. The High Court decided to take a
broad view of the scope of the ICS rules, meaning that he was eligible for
compensation. Then, in September, Upperstock was declared formally in
default.
Mr Brewer breathed a sigh of relief. After 30 months, he was at last going
to receive his money.
A month later, the ICS sent him a 'preliminary information form'. Aghast
that matters were still only 'preliminary', he filled it in and sent it by
return of post. Was relief finally at hand?
It was not. He spent the next four months providing formal authority for the
ICS to gain access to the records of the insurance companies involved. Then,
in April, he had to make a formal oath that the information he had provided
was true.
Compensation - including interest - did not arrive until April this year. Mr
Brewer remains very grateful to Towry Law, and to Kenneth Clarke.
'Ultimately, I'm happy that I've been adequately compensated, but the
regulators took too long to do so and caused a lot of worry. It's a big
shock to find you have lost such a big sum of money so easily.'
In particular, he believes the ICS process could be streamlined down to
filling in one form. But at least the compensation arrived, in time for Mr
Brewer and his wife to start their retirement. 'It was a once-in-a-lifetime
experience, I hope. I can look back and laugh about it now.'

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921023

