FT924-8151

FT  12 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Wandering in the long grass -
Political Notebook


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


There is a new golden rule of politics at Westminster. The government's
response to each new explosion is to delay, defer and, if necessary, to
prevaricate. Until, that is, the economy comes right.
Mr John Major's decision this week to announce a judicial inquiry into the
tawdry political backcloth to the sales of defence-related equipment to Iraq
fits neatly into this damage-limitation strategy.
The hope is that for a few months at least the affair will join in the
political long grass the row over coal industry closures, the Tory civil war
over Europe, and half-a-dozen other potentially damaging issues.
The logic is simple. When the economy is in recession, MPs and voters will
pick up everything and anything to throw at the government. Give them
economic recovery, job security and cash in their pockets and arguments over
sales of lathes to Saddam Hussein, redundancies in the coal industry, even
the implications of Maastricht, will take on a more rational perspective.
Maybe. But first the government has to get from here to there. And Mr Major
was wrong this week when he forecast that the outcome of the inquiry by Lord
Justice Scott into the Iraqi sales, like that of Lord Justice Bingham into
BCCI, would leave his government unscathed.
The documents which surfaced from the collapse of the prosecution of three
directors of Matrix Churchill do not in themselves provide evidence of a
conspiracy to subvert the restrictions on defence-related sales to Iraq.
It may be that such a conspiracy does emerge - none of the papers so far
released indicate just how much the cabinet of the day knew about what was
going on. Maybe not. No-one knows yet what if anything Mr Major - foreign
secretary and chancellor during crucial periods - was or was not told. The
answer offered yesterday by one of the key participants was encouraging for
the prime minister: 'probably not very much'.
But what has emerged so far will give Lord Justice Scott plenty of
ammunition to castigate ministers past and present for setting out one
policy in public and then systematically flouting it in private.
The picture which emerges is one of ministers and officials so accustomed to
power that they had become indifferent to any constraints on its exercise.
There are exceptions. Though one or two of the most embarrassing documents
emanated from his office, Mr William Waldegrave, minister at the Foreign
Office, appears for the most part to have been on the side of the angels.
His argument that the government should seek to abide by its own rules were
consistently beaten back by ministers and officials at the DTI and,
latterly, the MoD. The flamboyant Mr Alan Clark was far from alone in his
indifference to official policy. In the climate of the times the Foreign
Office knew that taking the battle to No 10 Downing Street would do it no
good.
All this, and presumably much more, will be digested by Lord Justice Scott.
Today, though, it will be back to the economy - and an Autumn Statement
designed to deliver the recovery which will put all these things in
perspective. After the Treasury's exhaustive briefings in recent days
everyone knows the bad news in the statement. The level of public borrowing
will be horrendous, there will be deep cuts in most Whitehall programmes,
council tax bills will soar and public-sector workers will face real wage
cuts.
Some of the better news also has been fed out. Capital projects have been
protected, the private sector will be freed from some red tape which
prevents it building roads and bridges, and councils will be able to spend
more of the receipts from asset sales. Assuming the markets behave, Mr
Norman Lamont will deliver another interest rate cut.
But what else? The government's supporters at Westminster are desperate for
a trick, a white rabbit to show that the government still has the
imagination needed to deliver recovery. If Mr Lamont does not produce one,
they may well decide to wander again in the long grass of Europe, coal mines
and arms sales.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921112

