FT922-7276

FT  19 MAY 92 / UK government pressed to act against US 'friendly fire'
pilots


   By RALPH ATKINS and ROBERT RICE


THE GOVERNMENT faced calls last night to take action over the involvement of
US pilots in the deaths of nine British servicemen during the Gulf war,
after a UK inquest ruled the victims had been 'unlawfully killed'.
The jury's decision could force government law officers to choose between
souring US-UK relations or facing a backlash from the victims' families and
MPs.
However, indications were that British law officers have little jurisdiction
over a 'friendly fire' war incident outside the UK and allegedly committed
by foreigners. The government may be able only to complain to the US
government - which would fall far short of some demands for the possible
extradition of the pilots.
Mr Geoffrey Robertson, QC, counsel for the families, said there was no
defence for the pilots' actions under international rules of war. The jury
had found they had behaved recklessly in not checking the target
co-ordinates before opening fire.
According to a jury statement, 'there were clear errors and failure to
observe recognised procedures for engaging the enemy'.
Labour called for a Commons statement and for Sir Nicholas Lyell, the
attorney-general, to give extradition proceedings 'serious consideration' if
the US authorities did not co-operate.
Last night the Ministry of Defence said only that the government would be
'considering the implications of the jury's findings and verdict'.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, told the US government last week of
the victims' families' concern about the US pilots' refusal to give evidence
to the Oxford inquest. But ministers have shied away from public protests
against the US.
Mr John Major is likely to face questions on the incident in the Commons
this afternoon.
The soldiers, six Royal Fusiliers and three Queens Own Highlanders, died
when two US A10 aircraft fired Maverick missiles at their Warrior armoured
troop carriers in the Iraqi desert on February 26 last year.
Mr Mark Stephens, solicitor for the families, said the verdict meant the
jury had found US pilots had committed manslaughter. 'We will be asking for
the papers to be handed to the Director of Public Prosecutions with a view
that criminal proceedings could be contemplated,' he said.
Mr Nicholas Gardiner, the Oxford coroner, told the jury that to bring an
unlawful killing verdict it had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the pilots acted in a way that would have created an obvious and serious
risk to friendly forces, and that either they gave no thought to the
possibility of that risk or, if they did, they chose to ignore it.
Last night the US Air Force in Washington said it had yet to receive the
detailed findings of the jury and it would be inappropriate to comment. But
it added: 'It is obvious that a terrible accident occurred in the fog of war
on the battlefield, and that the questions raised in this inquest and in
other forums may simply never be resolved. We reiterate our deep compassion
for the families.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920519

