FT922-3999

FT  08 JUN 92 / EC sports shoe quota treads on a few toes: A footwear
dispute is forcing Brussels to tackle curbs on imports from non-Community
countries


   By ANDREW HILL


The chill wind of global competition is beginning to blow through the
European market in espadrilles and galoshes.
National trade experts and European Commission officials have seen an awful
lot of shoes over the past few weeks. They range from smart ladies' court
shoes, imported into the UK for just Pounds 3, and selling very nicely thank
you at Pounds 9.99 the pair, to top-of-the-range 'pump' training shoes,
which are snapped up for more than Pounds 54.90.
All these shoes are made in the People's Republic of China. The difference
between them is that, following agreement by trade officials last Thursday,
EC imports of waterproof footwear and beach-shoes should be completely
unrestricted from January 1 1993, while court shoes and trainers are likely
to be subject to a Community-wide quota.
The agreement has implications beyond the price and style of footwear in a
single European market. If the decision is confirmed at a meeting of EC
member states, to be held within a few weeks, it could represent an
important test case for reform of the chaotic system of national quotas
between EC members and external trading partners.
The sensitivities of reform are manifest in the shoes saga. While a number
of parents would doubtless welcome some Community-wide restriction on their
offspring's purchase of expensive training shoes, the quota proposal has
trodden on the toes of several companies. Nike, Reebok, LA Gear and others
have all employed legal counsel to fight their case in Brussels.
Their lawyers and lobbyists argue that the political point of imposing a
Community quota - to protect the EC footwear industry and the 500,000 or so
jobs dependent on it - is not relevant in the case of trainers. The
so-called 'high-tech' shoes which spearhead the lucrative market are not
made in the EC. A quota will needlessly increase costs, and possibly prices.
But Brussels officials are more concerned to tackle the fundamental trade
question: with the advent of the single market, what should be done about
residual national quotas applied over decades to imports of everything from
bicycles to umbrellas made in so-called 'state trading countries' - China,
North Korea, Vietnam?
These countries are outside the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(Gatt); as a result, the EC can freely impose trade restrictions and duties.
The problem is that individual national restrictions do not work. For
example, Britain - the only country this week to oppose a Community-wide
quota - has a tough national limit on Chinese shoe imports, but the Irish
Republic has no limit. As a result, Commission officials say there has been
a 380 per cent increase in Chinese shoes imported into Ireland in the first
quarter of this year. Trainers are crossing the Irish Sea in huge numbers.
In other areas of trade, the national quotas are a standing joke. 'We get
people calling us up saying: 'We can't export into the UK because the
British quota is used up - which other countries are free?' ' says one
Commission official.
When internal EC frontier controls are abolished at the end of this year,
national limits will be even more difficult to enforce, so the Commission
has to decide how to rationalise the network of restrictions. It has two
options: to 'communitise' - to set a single Community quota, enforceable at
external EC frontiers - or to liberalise.
Reform of the system of restrictions likely to be a painfully slow process.
This is mainly because the history of commercial links with state trading
countries is not really about trade at all, but about politics. Central and
east European nations used to be classified as state trading countries, and
movement to harmonise national restrictions was imperceptibly slow. That was
the case until one Friday in 1988, when member states suddenly decided that
Hungary was emerging from behind the Iron Curtain, and a Brussels official
had to prepare a regulation abolishing all EC trade curbs affecting it by
Monday.
In the case of China, it will take some time to find the same political
will. But in the meantime the Commission is trying to chip away at the
national quotas. For the trainer manufacturers, however, the fight is not
over: national experts must meet again to discuss member states' technical
objections to the measure, including its effect on the sports shoe market.
But Commission officials believe the fuss kicked up by the sports shoe
companies is less important than the battle Brussels appears to have won
with the member states. If agreement on a harmonised quota can be turned
into a formal decision, the way could finally be opened to further
simplification of the byzantine structure of individual barriers to trade
with non-EC countries before the end of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920608

