FT921-475

FT  28 MAR 92 / US and France in last-ditch effort to solve air row


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


THE French and US governments are to make a last-ditch attempt next week to
resolve a deadlock over dividing capacity on transatlantic air routes. If it
fails, there could be restrictions on flights in the next few weeks.
The row is over US demands for a more than 40 per cent average rise in the
number of seats alloted to US airlines this summer on routes between France
and the US.
France's Direction Generale de l'Aviation Civile (DGAC) says this is far too
much to ask, on the grounds that air travel between the two countries is
expected to rise by only 10 per cent this year and that US airlines already
have the lion's share of Franco-American transatlantic travel.
The DGAC and the US Department of Transport will meet in Washington early in
the week to try to settle the row, which has been building up since their
annual talks on the share-out of transatlantic air route capacity began in
December. France will apply from tonight the 15 per cent average increase it
is prepared to accept in transatlantic flights from the eight main US
airlines, said a senior DGAC official.
However, France will not apply the 15 per cent rise evenly to all US
carriers. It is planning to freeze flights by TWA and Continental Airlines
at last year's levels, on the grounds that they are trading under Chapter 11
protection from creditors, considered an unfair advantage.
Other carriers would accordingly get more generous treatment, within the
overall limits. Failing agreement, any flights from the US above these
levels could be refused landing rights in France, said the official.
US airlines already occupied 70 per cent of the routes between France and
the US, a steep rise over the past eight years, because of their greater
capacity. Air France and its subsidiaries take the rest.
This is roughly in line with the share-out between Germany and the US,
though Britain has achieved a more favourable share of routes with the US.
A bigger swing in the US favour would make it harder for Air France to
allocate capacity to independent French airlines, a condition of EC
deregulation, said the DGAC. Industry officials accuse US airlines of
dumping, using high internal fares to subsidise transatlantic routes and
undercut European competitors. Air France was unable to comment.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920328

