FT924-6181

FT  23 NOV 92 / Arts: Sought after troupe - Theatre


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


Three years ago its tours were banned because so many directors defected to
the west; now Bucharest's Bulandra Theatre is among the most sought after
troupes in the world. Shakespeare is its special strength, and after a
realpolitik Hamlet in London two seasons back, we now have a Midsummer
Night's Dream, which I caught at the European Theatre Festival, whose
Bulandra hallmarks of originality, frenzy and up-to-date reanimation place
it among the best Shakespeare productions anywhere in recent years.
Forget politics or Transylvanian fairy tales. This is a raw, sexy,
intoxicating show with a kernel of pure lyricism. The mood recalls the magic
light-heartedness of Peter Brook's famous 1970 Dream reworked through 1990s
images and sounds. A huge yellow moon is suspended above a shiny red floor
and reflecting red panels. Mortals come in white cotton dresses and suits,
fairies disco-dance in black T-shirts and leggings, Oberon and Puck are
bikers in crinkly leather with metal-studded bracelets and striped
headbands. The shimmering, hypnotic repetitions of Philip Glass's music echo
the rhythmic pattern of the setting.
What gives Liviu Ciulei's staging its effervescent sensuality is a series of
rapid vignettes based on conflict and polarity. Titania floats up to the
moon on a translucent glass bed from where she writhes with desire for the
earth-bound Bottom in his asses head. Helena, a dreamy blonde bimbo who at
once hugs and fights her rival, the spiky-haired, dark, woman-of-action
Hermia. Titania and Oberon argue across an empty dinner table stretching
from opposite ends of the stage.
This is the imagery of a tense, dynamic Dream. Sex means sex - from the
first shiver of eroticism when Amazon Hippolyta is divested of her Kate Adie
commando jacket into a svelte bridal number and Theseus gasps with desire.
Violence is violence - Demetrius kicks Helena around like a dog ('Use me but
as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me') in a sado-masochistic dance ending
with a flick of knives. Lysander reacts so painfully to the love potion that
he sleepwalk-assaults Puck, who limps off with a broken ankle.
Movement, gesture, looks of menace or desperation, camp little kicks of
Bottom's fat legs, for example, are the more immediately effective as we do
not understand the language. Desire governs character in this tenderly
defined rendering. Puck is a podgy tomboy girl who giggles fearfully at sex.
Demetrius is a narcissist in love with power, Lysander is older, troubled,
urgent. The detail is a joyous affirmation of the individual, yet the bold
outline is never lost.
Ciulei co-ordinates his star troupe brilliantly. Brittle wills and spirits
clash with just controlled energy, each touch or glance is acutely timed,
the slapstick of the mechanicals, wryly dignified in their incompetence, is
a masterstroke of precision. Ciulei's genius is to place human detail within
a powerfully sustained dramatic vision, so that the whole is greater than
the sum of parts - surreal setting, minimalist black and white costumes,
Glass's haunting crescendos - all of which alone enchant.
This production, Heiner Muller's Mauser, and the fabulous ensemble playing
of Budapest's Katona Josef Theatre in Platonov, assure triumph for Giorgio
Strehler's first European Theatre Festival in Dusseldorf and his bold choice
of eastern companies - five of the ten participants were once behind the
Iron Curtain.
A quick rave. Platonov, the early Chekhov tragi-comedy about a village
school-teacher, seen at the National Theatre in 1984 as Wild Honey, is here
set by veteran Chekhovian Tamas Ascher in a sumptuously light, creamy world
of wooden villas, rattan furniture and white suits and directed at a
galloping, hysterical pace.
It stays just within Chekhov's mix of irony, melodrama and elegy and shows
extraordinary sensitivity and exhilaration.
The European Theatre Festival, to November 27, Dusseldorf Schauspiel-haus.
0211 36 87 136. A Midsummer Night's Dream continues at Teatrul Lucia Sturdza
Bulandra, Bucharest; Platonov at Katona Josef Theatre, Budapest.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921123

