FT923-15433

FT  02 JUL 92 / International Capital Markets: Spain brings a succulent
fruit to market - The country's plan to push on with privatising public
sector banking


   By PETER BRUCE


SPAIN is considering ways of relaunching the privatisation of the huge
public sector banking operations which it brought together a year ago under
the name of Argentaria.
There is a lot at stake. In terms of assets, Argentaria outweighs all the
private sector banks combined. Its collective loan portfolio totals some
Dollars 65bn. At book value, the group is worth about Dollars 5.5bn.
Madrid wants Spain to have a bank capable of fighting its corner in a united
Europe where big British, German and French groups are capable of forming
powerful lobbies to mould Community banking regulations.
The government is concerned that Spain's private sector banks may never
achieve the critical mass needed to compete on an equal footing. In
Argentaria, Madrid believes it has created the ideal weapon.
Argentaria consists of all the public sector financial institutions,
including Banco Exterior, the post office savings bank, and the
publicly-owned industrial, mortgage, agricultural and municipal banks.
A flotation planned for last year, designed to reduce the state's ownership
in Banco Exterior from 69 per cent to 51 per cent, was halted after Mr
Francisco Luzon, Argentaria's president, began to have serious doubts about
its implications.
Mr Luzon is determined to shed Argentaria's image as a bloated public sector
institution too closely linked to government policy. He is searching for a
balance between public and private ownership that will force Argentaria to
be competitive while not abandoning its role as a national flag bearer.
He has to decide whether to float part of the holding company, Argentaria,
which is 100 per cent owned by the state, or a further tranche of Banco
Exterior which is 69 per cent owned by Argentaria. A third possibility would
be to buy back the 31 per cent privately-held minority in Exterior and then
sell Argentaria.
One of Mr Luzon's problems in designing a flotation is that if he opts for
pressing ahead with Exterior only, it would rob Argentaria of its most
valuable and best-known asset and make a later flotation of Argentaria much
more difficult, if not impossible.
However, the problem with trying to sell part of Argentaria is that hardly
anyone knows what it is. 'I would like to privatise as soon as possible,'
says Mr Luzon, 'but it would be absurd to take Argentaria to the stock
market this year. We still have a lot of value to add.'
And even if, as he hopes, a first partial privatisation can occur next year,
it will be small. The point here is that the local markets are simply not
big enough to absorb the group. 'I would need four years to privatise just
20 per cent of Argentaria,' says Mr Luzon.
'If Spain does not make it to the top banking table in Europe it will be
very serious indeed,' he says. 'Europe is going to be nationalist for a long
time."
Adding some of the bureaucratic state banks to a streamlined Exterior has
not been easy. BCI, for instance, had been forced by the state to take big
positions in hugely unprofitable industries. Mr Luzon found himself, when
Exterior absorbed BCI, owner of Pta50bn of convertible bonds in a troubled
Basque steelmaker. He offloaded them back to the government.
He is also in the process of tracking down about 50 fishing trawlers, spread
around the Atlantic, built with BCI credits which have never been paid back.
He wants the money, not the boats.
Plucked from the upper echelons of Banco Bilbao Vizcaya in the late 1980s to
run Exterior, Mr Luzon has spent the last year developing unified computer
systems for 'his' new banks and selling unnecessary office space.
He says many of the institutions pooled into Argentaria are rich in hidden
assets but have been poorly run. The Caja Postal, for instance, owns most of
the post offices in the country.
One of the problems in designing a flotation of Argentaria, Mr Luzon says,
has been that he does not know for sure how much it is worth. 'At least
Pta800bn (Dollars 84bn),' he says, adding about Pta300bn to its book value.
The group's other fundamental problem is that while the bulk of its loans
are long term and either guaranteed by the state or secured against assets,
its financing is basically short term, making it vulnerable to interest rate
movements.
Mr Luzon says he expects the group to make pre-tax profits of Pta100bn this
year after Pta78bn in 1991. First-quarter figures for this year, show
pre-tax group profits of Pta24.8bn. They also reveal a return on assets of
0.8 per cent and a return on equity of 14.42 per cent, both significantly
below the average of Spain's top five banks.
Closing that gap will be a slow process, but Mr Luzon says he is about to
start a campaign to introduce Argentaria to the kind of small shareholder he
wants to attract when the privatisation process begins. The smaller the
better because one of the key elements in any offering of shares inside
Spain will have to be a mechanism to keep other Spanish banks from buying
Argentaria shares.
Spanish banks are traditionally the biggest players in the local stock
market. If Argentaria is as succulent a fruit as Mr Luzon says it is, rival
banks would be strongly tempted to to take positions in it.
That would throw a considerable spanner into Mr Luzon's grand design. But
how will he encourage a small shareholder to hang on to the shares? 'We will
have to give them presents,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920702

