FT921-3853

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Capital Markets: Swiss urge change in Japanese
savings law


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


REGULATIONS preventing rich Japanese from putting their savings into banks
abroad should be eliminated, the Swiss government says.
Bern has put this item, which is of considerable interest to Switzerland's
large private banking industry, at the top of its agenda for bilateral talks
with officials of Japan's Ministry of Finance later this month.
Under MoF regulations, an individual can take up to Y30m (Dollars 226,000)
out of the country without prior authorisation, and up to Y100m with
authorisation. He or she must declare the amount as an asset in an annual
income tax declaration, and any appreciation in value over Y100m must be
repatriated.
'It is difficult to understand why there are still restrictions on movements
of Y30m to Y100m. It is no longer justified,' Mr Alexis Lautenberg, head of
the financial and economic division of the Swiss federal department of
foreign affairs, said yesterday.
Mr Heinrich Looser, a director of Bank Julius Baer in Zurich, said no other
developed country had the same rigid controls on outward flows of individual
savings.
However, Mr Looser thought the MoF would resist demands for liberalisation.
'The Japanese economy is not growing. They want to bring capital back home
these days,' he said.
Also, even if the controls were eased, he did not expect any sudden surge of
Japanese business. 'The Japanese have no history of placing their money
abroad,' he said. 'But I would love to see the limit pushed up to Y500m for
a start.'
Mr Lautenberg, speaking to a meeting of the Swiss-Japanese Chamber of
Commerce in Zurich, said the forthcoming round of bilateral talks provided a
unique opportunity to make progress on several issues.
He noted that the talks came as the year-end deadline under a 1989 Swiss law
requiring non-banks to convert themselves into banks approached. Reciprocity
is one of the conditions for a foreign bank to qualify for a banking
licence. More than 20 Japanese securities companies with offices in
Switzerland have still to get their banking licences.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920312

