FT921-11718

FT  30 JAN 92 / Wakeham to lift gas import ban: Approval of UK-Norwegian
deals linked to plans for cross-Channel pipeline


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


THE government is to remove its longstanding ban on gas imports. The
announcement may come as early as today when Mr John Wakeham, energy
secretary, is expected to give the go-ahead for two import deals in a
statement to the Commons.
The decision to sanction imports will represent a significant policy switch
for the government which has resisted moves to open the market since it
vetoed a bid by British Gas to buy Norwegian gas supplies seven years ago.
It comes as the EC Commission presses ahead with plans to liberalise the
Community's energy market. The plans have been supported by the government.
However, the removal of the import ban is unlikely to make up for the supply
shortfall which British Gas believes will hit the UK market by 1994. Norway
has little spare capacity available for export before the mid-1990s.
Mr Wakeham is believed to be linking his approval of the import arrangements
to the construction of a cross-Channel gas pipeline which would allow the
export of UK gas to the continent. He is expected to announce a feasibility
study into the Pounds 200m-Pounds 300m project soon.
Mr Wakeham's statement on imports will sanction an agreement between BP and
two Norwegian energy groups, Statoil and Norsk Hydro, to form a company that
will challenge British Gas in the UK's industrial gas market.
The joint-venture project, which will be headed by a Statoil executive, will
rely on the import of substantial amounts of gas from Norway later this
decade.
At the same time, Mr Wakeham is expected to give the go-ahead for a Pounds
150m deal between National Power, the privatised electricity generator, and
Statoil, Norway's state oil and gas company, to import 2.2bn cu ft of gas a
year. The 15-year pact will provide National Power with enough gas to fuel
two gas-fired power stations.
Under the agreement between BP and the Norwegian companies, and Norsk Hydro
will buy into BP Gas Marketing, which has been supplying industrial users
for 18 months.
The company currently supplies some 25m cu ft of gas a day to about a
hundred customers, but its expansion has been hampered by the lack of
available gas supplies in the UK. The Norwegian gas will enable it to
increase its presence in the UK market where the government is trying to
encourage competition.
BP will hold 50 per cent of the venture, with Statoil taking a 40 per cent
stake and Norsk Hydro 10 per cent. The financial details have yet to be
finalised and depend on the price of recent gas supplies acquired by BP.
In return for government approval of the venture, BP is understood to have
agreed to contribute to the study of the Channel pipeline. The link will
allow UK producers to take advantage of growing competition in Europe's
energy market as the Commission moves to liberalise the energy market.
In the long term, it could also provide access to the UK for cheap gas from
the former Soviet states.
The UK subsidiaries of two major US oil companies, Chevron and Conoco,
signed an agreement yesterday to go ahead with the development of one of the
UK's largest gas discoveries.
The Britannia field is estimated to contain 2,500bn to 3,000bn cu ft of gas
and could enter production in late 1997. The field is expected to have a
life of 30 years.
Page 8
Gas shortage raises pressure to liberalise market

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920130

