FT921-669

FT  27 MAR 92 / Arts: City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


1913 was not only the year of the premieres in Paris of Debussy's Jeux and
Stravinsky's Rite of Spring - the orchestral twin peaks of modernism - but
also saw the first performance of Elgar's Falstaff, at the Leeds Festival.
Such a conjunction was too good for 'Towards the Millennium' to pass over,
and so on Tuesday, in the latest instalment of the celebration, Simon Rattle
and the City of Birmingham Symphony sandwiched Elgar's symphonic study
between the two masterpieces. Both Jeux and The Rite are very much Rattle
party pieces. He conducts the Debussy in particular with astonishing and
ever growing fluency, weaving its strands together into a web of fluctuating
tempos and changing textures with a naturalness and sense of shape that made
light of the work's difficulties.
By most standards too the Stravinsky was exemplary, vivid and immaculate,
without a moment of slackness, and with every detail etched into place. Yet
in the first part especially, it seemed curiously lightweight, fast and
slick rather than darkly menacing. Part 2 moved on a much more certain
trajectory; a single startling accelerando in the final Danse sacrale aside,
it had a relentless momentum and machine-like accuracy.
Alongside those two supreme pieces Falstaff necessarily seemed high on
rhetoric and thin on invention. Rattle's view of Elgar is in any case not
unduly sympathetic, tending to push forward when a little more indulgent
nobilmente would be appropriate, and making textures almost spikily
expressionist when a Brahmsian blend seems to be called for. Yet the
forwardness and vigour of the playing sometimes compensated for the lack of
real warmth. Played for all their expressive worth,the closing pages in
particularcan be as moving as anything in English music; here, though, they
just an elegant, dry-eyed pastiche.
With this Falstaff too, it must be reported that surtitles have arrived in
the concert hall. In what the CBSO described as an 'experiment", captions
outlining the narrative of Elgar's scheme were projected onto a screen. If
it catches on, the possibilities are endless. Strauss's symphonic poems
would be ripe for such treatment: those for the Sinfonia domestica,
unexpurgated of course, will be awaited with lubricious interest.
Symphony Hall, Birmingham. Sponsored by Bull HN Information Systems Ltd

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920327

