FT922-4434

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (7): Moderate rhetoric - The ANC's
economic policy


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


THERE has been a revolution in the economic rhetoric of the African National
Congress (ANC) in the two years since ANC economists returned to South
Africa from exile. Only time will tell whether policy itself reflects the
moderation in rhetoric.
The movement's first economic policy document, issued in September 1990,
refers to the capital markets as a grand 'paper chase', which must be
harnessed to broad development objectives by a powerful state; calls for the
establishment of 'new state-owned financial institutions' to direct
international and domestic finance toward development; proposes a National
Development Plan to govern economic policy; and suggests voluntary or
compulsory nationalisation of strategic enterprises.
The guiding aim of the whole was to create 'growth through redistribution',
an idealistic policy based on the premise that spending money - on social
services and basic consumer goods - would somehow create wealth.
Mr Tito Mboweni, senior economist in the ANC's department of economics,
points out that the movement's April 1992 policy document does not mention
growth through redistribution. 'That is no longer our policy,' he notes,
musing: 'It's more complicated than that.'
The new policy document was debated at a crucial policy conference at the
end of last month. Its moderate message survived the conference.
Partly, this can be explained by the fact that the document skirts many
contentious issues. It eschews any 'rigid ideological framework' in
determining the role of the state in the economy, then sets out three
possibilities:
Increasing public sector economic activity through, for example,
nationalisation (subject to compensation) or by purchasing a shareholding in
companies through the market process;
Establishing new public corporations or joint ventures between the state and
the private sector; or
Reducing the role of the public sector by privatisation.
With such a list to choose from, outsiders can be certain of only one thing:
the ANC is keeping its options open on state ownership.
This also seems to be true of many other areas of policy. The old
interventionist certainties, which many ANC economists brought back from
exile in the eastern bloc, have not survived a brush with South African
economic realities.
One senior economist spent his first weeks back in Johannesburg in 1990
confidently plotting the dismemberment of Anglo American Corporation, and
the other conglomerates which dominate the economy. Now he argues that big
is not necessarily bad, and cautions against any action that would impede
the ability of the conglomerates to compete internationally. Chances are
that the ANC will, in the end, pursue an active anti-trust policy which will
reduce the exaggerated concentration of economic power; but officials insist
they will carefully weigh the risks.
'We want to mobilise resources for development, but we don't want to destroy
the economy in the process,' says Mr Max Sisulu, economics department head.
That caution is reflected in almost every recent economic pronouncement: ANC
officials favour some kind of post-apartheid levy, or wealth tax, to finance
development in the immediate aftermath of apartheid; but, in spite of
squeals from white South Africa, this is not without international
precedent.
Mr Mboweni stresses the need for fiscal discipline: 'There is a need to
avoid inflationary deficit financing at all costs'. He mentions,
approvingly, the IMF guideline that the government budget deficit should not
exceed 3 per cent of GDP; yet the present government will be lucky to run a
deficit of 5 per cent of GDP.
Given a chance, Mr Mboweni will also argue the case against a compulsory
national minimum wage, stressing the importance of job creation which might
be jeopardised by an imposed minimum. And while the September 1990 document
focuses on the responsibilities of foreign investors, - Mr Mboweni now says
the best way to attract foreign investment is to create a favourable
environment: stability, democracy, guaranteed profit remittance.
It is too soon to say whether the new moderate rhetoric of the technocrats
will survive the demands placed on the ANC's politicians when they assume
power. For some of the ANC's senior political figures take a much harder
line on nationalisation and other issues than the economists who write
policy documents.
In the battle to win and keep power, populist economics may yet win the day.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920605

