FT921-670

FT  27 MAR 92 / The Property Market: New towns show their age


   By VANESSA HOULDER


England's new town movement, one of the most ambitious programmes of city
building ever undertaken, is about to take its place in history.
The Milton Keynes Development Corporation is due to hand over its assets to
the Commission for the New Towns, a government-appointed group overseeing
the winding up of all new town corporations, on March 31. It will be the
last of 21 English new town development corporations, set up at a cost of
Pounds 4bn since 1946, to be wound up.
Most new towns have a low key, even dreary, image that belies the enthusiasm
with which they were founded. The movement traces its roots back to the
Victorian idealist Ebenezer Howard.
His 'garden city' concept was embodied in Letchworth in 1903 and in Welwyn,
which became a new town in 1948. It was not however until the years
following the Second World War that the new town movement came into its own.
The desolation and congestion of bomb-scarred London inspired reformers such
as Lewis Silkin, formerly of the London County Council, and Lord Reith to
set up new towns in the countryside. The New Towns Act 1946 gave wide powers
to the newly-established development corporations to acquire land, create
infrastructure and build factories, shops, homes, civic buildings and
leisure facilities.
The first generation of new towns, such as Stevenage, Harlow and Crawley
were designed chiefly to accommodate the overspill from London. An exception
was Corby, which needed housing for workers attracted to its
rapidly-expanding steel industry.
The second generation of new towns, such as Redditch, Washington and
Telford, were designed primarily to revitalise depressed areas of the
country. Of the later towns, Milton Keynes, established in 1967, was a
planning exercise in a car-based society. The first generation of new towns
did not take account of the rising levels of car ownership, leaving the town
centres cluttered with multi-storey car parks. Milton Keynes is an
exception: typically, it takes 10 minutes for a resident to travel to work
in the town.
The verdict on the new towns is mixed. They have certainly provided vastly
improved environments for a large number of people. 'They are popular places
in which to live,' says Mr Adrian Webb, deputy director of the Town and
Country Planning Association, a charity which has promoted new towns.
However, new towns are also accused of lacking soul and community spirit,
and of possessing some uninspiring architecture. Many new towns have also
failed to attract sufficient industry, thereby forcing residents to commute
to nearby conurbations for work. (That said, levels of inward investment are
sometimes impressive: there are 43 Japanese companies in Milton Keynes.)
New towns have also been criticised for siphoning off the young and mobile.
That is only partly true: a study by the Greater London Council in the early
1980s revealed that in London only about 7 per cent of the population that
had moved elsewhere went to the new or expanded towns.
Financially, the new towns present a mixed picture. The first generation of
new towns, (Aycliffe, Basildon, Bracknell, Corby, Hatfield, Hemel Hempstead,
Peterlee and Welwyn Garden City) were largely successful. Development
surpluses repaid the investment in infrastructure.
However, the second and third generation (Runcorn, Skelmersdale, Milton
Keynes, Northampton, Peterborough, and Warrington) suffered from less
favourable locations, high interest rates, a flagging economy and the less
buoyant property market of the 1970s. In many cases, they have had to run to
stand still.
These towns were also affected by a shift in government policy in 1977,
which resulted in more funds for the inner cities at the expense of new
towns. The effect of this shift was to curb the towns' growth, by upwards of
a third, resulting in an over-provision of infrastructure.
The election of the Conservative party in 1979 prompted a further shift in
policy. Public involvement and spending on the new towns was curbed and a
programme of privatisation of new town assets launched.
Initially, the privatisation proceeded slowly. In response, in 1982, Mr
Michael Heseltine, the environment secretary at the time, responded by
shaking up the Commission for New Towns, which was seen as a sleepy,
bureaucratic quango.
Sir Neil Shields, a Conservative businessman, was installed as chairman,
with a strong remit. Under his leadership, the commission drastically cut
its staff and increased takings from property sales. 'When I came in, the
rate of achievement of development corporations was way behind target,' he
says. After exceeding targets in the late 1980s and raising Pounds 2bn from
asset sales, the corporations' sales have now slowed down.
The commission faces a large task in the case of Milton Keynes. The town
corporation still possesses enough development land to build the equivalent
of another small town; its population of 150,000 is eventually expected to
reach 210,000. Indeed, the corporation fought hard for a reprieve, at least
for another three years, to complete the town's development. Although Sir
Neil was not totally unsympathetic to its case, he is confident of the
commission's ability to attract enough investment to complete the town's
development. 'We are not slouches at this,' he says.
It seems likely that whichever party ends up in power after the UK election
on April 9, the commission will continue to privatise new town assets.
The prospect of more new towns provokes vehement opposition from people who
see them as an autocratic piece of social engineering. Yet deteriorating
housing stock in many areas makes the case for such towns compelling.
According to the Town and Country Planning Association, 2.8m new dwellings
will be needed in Britain between now and 2011; about the total number of
dwellings in Greater London.
The Town and Country Planning Association has called for a revised new towns
programme. 'There is a strategic necessity for some new settlements' says
the association's Mr Webb.
During the past decade, the private sector has tried to gain a direct role
for itself in the development of new towns. In 1983, Consortium
Developments, backed by the property developers Wimpey, Barratt, Beazer,
Tarmac, Bovis, Laing, and McCartney and Stone, announced that it was looking
at sites for between 12 and 15 news towns to meet the demand for homes.
However, after repeatedly becoming bogged down in the planning process, the
project was abandoned.
Eagle Star has also submitted proposals for a new country town at
Micheldever in Hampshire as part of that county's structure plan. This has
been fiercely opposed by the county council and environmental groups. The
Prince of Wales has also lodged his own proposal for a new town at
Poundbury, near Dorchester.
Mr Heseltine has also hinted at another proposal for new towns as part of
the development along the East Thames Corridor.
If new towns are to be set up in relatively unpopular areas, there will be a
need for government intervention. A renewed new town movement, driven by the
public sector, may not be entirely a thing of the past.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920327

