FT922-4208

FT  06 JUN 92 / Cookery: Fishy feasts


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


SUCKING thoughtfully on his pipe, Harold Wilson opined memorably in 1962:
'If I had the choice between smoked salmon and tinned salmon, I'd have it
tinned. With vinegar.' It was, I suppose, what is now called a politically
correct statement.
Those who do not share his views often choose smoked salmon for winter
celebrations and they see spring and summer as the time when fresh salmon is
king.
Fisherfolk, like those who shoot, sometimes feel there is such a thing as
too much game, the charm of it lying more in the sport than at table. For
the rest of us wild salmon remains a special food - and the price of the
farmed version is undeniably attractive.
The festive associations of salmon were well illustrated recently at the
Savoy Grill where diners were treated to a revival of menus from the 1950s,
when le saumon au champagne was a favourite dish.
To make this fishy feast, a salmon is first cut down the backbone, opened
out so that the flesh is clearly seen, and the bones are removed leaving the
head and tail intact. The fish is then lightly poached and quenelles of
salmon and turned mushrooms are laid, alternately, down its length. Finally,
the whole thing is napped with champagne sauce and decorated with egg and
crumbed goujons of sole and fleurons of puff pastry.
A tour de force, I will tuck into it willingly at the kind invitation of a
chef, but it is not the sort of dish I would dream of making myself.
Home cooks now feel more at ease with recipes that boast less cream, less
napping and less fanciful touches. Cleaner cut flavours are favoured, time
is at a premium and practicality is an admired trait.
To unzip mini tins of red salmon and serve one to each of your guests with a
communal bottle of malt vinegar to shake over the fish would certainly be
simple, but too crude. The more moderate line of the recipes that follow
seems better suited to the 1990s.
The second recipe is my own. The first comes from The Salmon Cookbook by
Tessa Hayward (to be published on June 18 by Ebury Press at Pounds 16.99) a
volume of recipes old and new for all occasions prefaced by notably thorough
coverage of salmon basics.
Hayward's practice of spelling out everything in great detail will delight
novice and nervous cooks. Those blessed with a good fishmonger may never
need to gut, scale, skin, cut fillets, steaks and escalopes for themselves
but reading and seeing how these things are done helps the cook understand
the structure of the fish.
CARPACCIO OF SALMON (serves 4)
This admirably simple first course dish comes from Tessa Hayward's new book.
She describes it as another form of ceviche but differently flavoured and
the fish is cut into escalopes (smoked salmon-like slices) so that the
citrus juice penetrates and 'cooks' it with great speed.
8-10 oz salmon fillet;  1/2 - 3/4 inch piece of ginger root; the finely
grated zest of 1 lime and the juice of 2 limes; 1 tsp sugar;  1/4 pt olive
oil; 1 tbsp balsamic vinegar.
Peel and finely chop the ginger and put it into a small pan with the lime
zest, sugar and 2 fl oz water. Simmer until the liquid is reduced by half.
Pour it into a bowl. Mix in the oil and vinegar, salt and pepper, and set
aside.
Cut the salmon fillet into very thin slices. Unless you are a real whizz at
cutting, you will then need to put each slice between a double layer of
greasproof paper and beat it out gently with a rolling pin.
Transfer the slices to four plates: the easiest way to do this may be to
remove the top layer of greaseproof paper, invert the salmon onto a plate,
then peel away the second layer of paper.
When all four plates are prepared, brush the lime juice over the fish. Leave
for 15 minutes so the salmon softens and turns light pink. Whisk up and pour
on the dressing, and serve with brown bread and butter.
SALMON WITH COURGETTES, CORIANDER & LIME (serves 2)
If you have a large shallow pan this agreeably speedy recipe can be doubled
to serve four, but I find it especially useful for busy midweek evenings.
2 salmon tail fillets weighing 4-5 oz each; 6-8 oz courgettes;  1/4 pt fish
stock; half a large juicy lime; 1 generously heaped tablespoon chopped fresh
coriander leaves;1-1 1/2 oz butter.
Slice the courgettes and chop the herbs. Grate the zest from the lime and
squeeze the juice. Season the fish with sea salt and black pepper.
Bring the stock and lime juice to simmering point in a 10 inch saute pan.
Add the courgettes, spreading them in a single layer if possible, and
sprinkle the citrus zest over.
Bring back to a simmer then lay the salmon fillets side by side, skin side
down, on the bed of vegetables. They will stand proud of the liquid, cooking
mainly in the rising steam. Cover and cook over moderate heat for just 3-4
minutes until tender and succulent.
Lift out the solids and keep them warm. Turn the heat up under the pan, add
the coriander to the bubbling liquid and whisk in the butter to enrich the
sauce and make it syrupy. Check seasoning, pour the sauce over the fish and
serve.
Cookery courses: Last week we omitted the list of locations where Sonia
Stevenson's sauce and fish courses are scheduled during the next few months.
A few places are still available on courses due to take place in:
Twickenham, Middlesex; Cullompton, Devon; Blackheath, Kent; Warwick, and
Inverness. Fixtures for Glasgow and elsewhere are in the pipeline. Contact
Mrs Stevenson for details: 7 Lynn Court, Mitcham Lane, London SW16 6LL
(081-677-1172).

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920606

