FT922-4427

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (14): Hopes for psychological boost -
The potential for foreign investment


   By PHILIP GAWITH


YEARS of international isolation have left a deep scar on the psyche of
white South Africa, reflected in a desperate desire to be fully
re-integrated into the community of nations.
The international travels of President F W de Klerk and the national cricket
team's reacceptance into world cricket have given satisfaction. The acid
test, however, lies at home. South Africans need to see three things to let
them know all is well again: foreign tourists, foreign sportsmen and foreign
investors. A plethora of national carriers at Jan Smuts airport and visits
later this year from the All Blacks and the Wallabies offer reasonable
comfort on the first two counts. Of foreign money, however, there is little
sign.
The reasons for this are not hard to find, nor are they particularly
ominous. The issue, however, is not one of economic need; South Africa is
not so much short of money as it is of investment opportunities that inspire
confidence. The problem, rather, is psychological: foreign investment is
sought as the imprimatur that the outside world believes South Africa has a
reasonable future. Without it, South Africans are prone to believe that
clear-thinking outsiders have seen the future, and they do not like what
they see.
Since February 1990, there has been little flow of capital into the country.
Indeed, there has been a net outflow of foreign money from the capital
markets, albeit at a progressively slower rate in recent years. In 1991, net
equity sales by foreigners amounted to R4.1bn, while net purchases of gilts
amounted to R2bn.
In terms of direct investment, it is instructive to look separately at South
Africa's four main trading partners: Germany, UK, Japan and US. The chances
of seeing any large headline investments from either of the UK or Germany is
very small for the simple reason that most large companies from these
countries are already invested in South Africa. Mercedes-Benz, Volkswagen,
BMW, Hoechst, Bayer, Siemens - they were all here before sanctions and they
never left. Likewise with BP, Shell, GEC, Lonhro, RTZ, Unilever and others.
Most of these companies, naturally, are continuing to invest in their
operations here. Mr Peter Bacon, the British commercial consul, comments:
'Having stuck it out through all the political problems and the economic
recession, they are determined to stay and reap the benefits.'
The US and Japan offer most scope for new entrants to the country. Although
the six main Japanese trading houses have offices here, and companies such
as Nissan, Toyota and Panasonic are present, albeit in a local guise,
Japanese companies were banned from investing in South Africa from 1968
until recently, and hence are under-represented. The US position is
different; many companies were here, but about two-thirds left during the
sanctions period. Mr Don Steinberg, counsellor for economic and commercial
affairs at the US Embassy, notes that in 1984/5 there were about 360 US
companies in South Africa, with a total investment of about Dollars 2.7bn.
This has now dropped to 110 companies with investments worth about Dollars
900m.
Mr Steinberg reports a 'dramatic increase in interest in South Africa. My
visitors' list looks like a list of the Fortune 500. This is too important a
market not to find out what is going on'. Indeed, South Africa remains by
far the largest site of US investment in sub-Saharan Africa, being home to
about half of all US non-oil investment in the area.
Mr Steinberg says that US investors are not, as many suppose, taking a
'wait-and-see' attitude. He says that there are four to five companies on
the verge of announcing 'major new deals' in South Africa. They are merely
waiting for some trigger political event, such as an interim government or
an ANC welcome to foreign investors, before going ahead. The names most
often mentioned in the Press are Pepsi, Heinz, Sara Lee and Apple.
Mr Steinberg cites five main areas where US investors have shown an
interest:
Black consumer market - cosmetics, appliances, food franchising.
Electrification projects are expected to open up vast consumer markets, as
is the rising income levels of employed blacks;
South Africa as an export platform into the region, which was previously
serviced by other subsidiaries;
Involvement of US contractors in regional projects where South Africa is
likely to be the importer of the final good or supplier of capital and
expertise;
Socio-economic spending in South Africa, which should have spin-offs in
areas such as health and education equipment; and
Investment by existing companies.
Although the US is the most likely source of a 'headline' investment in
South Africa, other countries are certainly not standing still. Some of the
existing German companies are spending heavily, with Mercedes-Benz and BMW
engaged with capital expenditure programmes of R500m and R300m respectively.
There has also been a string of high profile visitors from Germany including
the minister of economic affairs, the agricultural, economic and transport
committees of the Bundestag, various deputy ministers and numerous
individual politicians.
Likewise, Mr Bacon reports a fourfold to fivefold increase in the number of
business visitors and market information inquiries compared to two years
ago. Last year also saw about 10 large, officially-funded British trade
missions to South Africa. Mr Bacon estimates that about 35 per cent, or
Pounds 2bn, of foreign investment in South Africa is British. He notes that
in terms of profits and dividends, South Africa is the UK's seventh largest
foreign earner.
South Africans dream optimistically about being swamped by waves of Japanese
investment. The truth is likely to be more mundane. Mr Shuji Okita,
president of the newly-formed Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industries in
South Africa, says that although Japanese investors believe South Africa has
a lot of potential, they are not in a hurry and it will take time for them
to develop their investments. He believes they are more likely, in the first
instance, to seek joint ventures with well-established local companies than
to invest directly.
Mr Bacon endorses this view suggesting the logical order for development is
that companies are first likely to appoint distributors for their products.
If this goes well they will consider manufacturing under licence, or some
sort of joint venture, before taking the route of setting up their own
operation.
From the foreign investor's perspective, there is clearly ample reason for
caution. There remains a high degree of political uncertainty and the
economic policies of a future government are also unclear. Add to this a
familiar list of sins - high inflation, high tax, low labour productivity
and the risk of a depreciating currency - and one has a fairly powerful list
of disincentives. South Africa also has many powerful and well-established
companies which are likely to give any foreign competitor a torrid time.
Finally, South African companies have not exactly been falling over
themselves to invest in new capacity. There are no grounds for expecting
foreigners to be any different.
The flip-side is obvious: the market has enormous potential. It promises
also to be very profitable. Mr Steinberg says that in 1991 the US investment
of Dollars 900m earned profits of Dollars 126m. There are not many countries
offering that sort of return.
From South Africa's point of view, foreign investment will be a bonus rather
than a necessity. The main benefits are likely to flow in terms of enhancing
competition and allowing technology transfer, rather than in terms of sheer
volume of capital flows. Even here, the flows would not have to be
particularly large to make an important difference.
For the time being, though, investment trends are being obscured by the
underlying growth environment. With South Africa likely in 1992 to record
its third successive year of negative growth, investors can hardly be blamed
for holding off until there are some signs of growth returning to the
economy.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920605

