FT923-6612

FT  22 AUG 92 / Books: A working-class hero who found himself revolted - The
latest in the renaissance of George Gissing, champion of the poor


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


THE NETHER WORLD by George Gissing Oxford (World's Classic) Pounds 5.99, 404
pages
NEW GRUB STREET by George Gissing Ryburn (Hunter & Foulis, Edinburgh EH7
4NP) Pounds 30, 439 pages
IT WOULD be sad if George Gissing, who spent much of his time writing novels
about - and experiencing - poverty, were to be priced out of the range of
the common reader, that self-educating reader whose needs were so dear to
his heart. During the so-called Gissing Renaissance, which began in the
early 1970s and lasted well into the 1980s, it looked as if we were to have
two complete editions of his works to choose from: a scholarly one, from
John Spiers's Harvester Press in Sussex, and a 'popular' paperback one from
Carmen Callil's rejuvenated Hogarth Press. Any Gissingite who bought either
of those editions when they came out was shrewd, because both are now out of
print.
Whereas the Harvester Gissing volumes cost on average Pounds 8.50 (for an
originally three-volume novel bound as one), the latest hardback Gissing
reissue from Ryburn costs more than three times as much. This is for a
solidly bound re-setting of the text, not a facsimile of one of the old
editions, but, even so, Pounds 30 seems excessive. Meanwhile, World's
Classics has brought out The Nether World, an important early work set among
the London poor in Victorian times. It is good to see the Gissing flag
flying still in paperback, but again it seems to me overpriced, almost
Pounds 6 for an edition on nasty paper with a greyish type hard on the eyes.
If the pricing of Gissing's fiction is suffering from an inflationary spiral
against the national trend, this prohibitive cost is even more severe in the
case of the much-to-be-desired Collected Letters of George Gissing. Volume
One 1863-1880 appeared in 1990 from the Ohio University Press as part of a
project to produce one volume a year, the whole to end with Gissing's death
in 1903, and eventually making eight or nine volumes. Volume Two 1881-1885
came out last year and Volume Three 1886-1888 has just appeared.( Volume One
now costs Pounds 53.75, and Volumes Two and Three Pounds 60.10 each.)
Gissing's father Thomas first inculcated in George a love of literature. He
used to read from Dickens and Tennyson to the whole family after lunch on
Sundays. Tom Gissing was a hard-working chemist in Wakefield. George and his
two brothers and two sisters were brought up over their father's shop until
Tom died suddenly and they had to move, but luckily it did not disrupt their
schooling. George proved to be an outstandingly clever boy who won many
academic prizes. As he grew up, his able mind and abnormal power of
application accompanied an acute social conscience. He was much concerned by
the plight of the urban poor as he moved among the lowest levels of society
in Manchester and London.
But when Gissing matured as a professional novelist and discovered the
insolubility of the problem of poverty, and at the same time became
acquainted with the kind of people who suffered it, he underwent a violent
revulsion against the poor. Around 1890 he found his material in the rising
middle class and sought a refuge from life's ills in the world of literary
and classical culture.
The nature of the retreat made by Gissing is described in the
semi-fictional, semi-autobiographical The Private Papers of Henry Ryecroft
(1903). By contrast The Nether World (1889) represents the lowest depths of
Gissing's immersion in outcast London. It is - as Stephen Gill, who
introduces this edition, admits - a depressing novel, but a powerful one, a
dispassionate depiction of sordid living conditions, crookedness, cruelty,
vain hopes and degradation. It differs from the works of Dickens and George
Eliot in that there is no benevolent alternative, no ultimate salvation
suggested.
Gissing's private salvation was simply to write and write and write. No
sacrifice of his physical and mental health, material well-being, emotional
contentment, family responsibilities, leisure and social life was too great
for him to make in pursuit of his great goal. That was to gain an
established literary reputation and the respect of his peers. Gissing had
certainly won that reputation for himself by the time he died aged 46 - but
at what a cost] That he did what he did with his eyes open, and was fully
aware of the cost, is borne out by a reading of New Grub Street (1891).
As John Halperin, Gissing's most recent biographer, puts it in his
introduction to this edition: 'New Grub Street is perhaps the greatest novel
ever written about the collision of the creative impulse with material
circumstances.' In it, Gissing's fearsome uphill struggle is parcelled out
among the various characters, all of them writers. They are observed with
savage humour slaving away at their manuscripts in the Reading Room of the
British Museum, swapping experiences under the shadow of the great dome.
However fully Gissing may have fictionalised his early experience, no
understanding of it is complete without reference to his letters, many of
them written to his brothers and sisters. The American and French editors of
the collected edition, Paul F. Mattheisen, Arthur C. Young and Pierre
Coustillas, are currently doing a splendid job in preparing what will
certainly become the basis for all future biographies. It was necessary not
only because of the accumulation of unpublished Gissing letters in the US,
but also because the ones that were previously published in 1927 were
horribly mangled and censored by the members of his family anxious to
conceal Gissing's criminal lapse while a student at Owens College and his
subsequent marriage to a young Manchester prostitute.
Unfortunately, nothing that sheds any new light on this hidden period of
Gissing's life emerges. There are no letters referring to his trial for
theft of money from the students' locker-room nor to his harsh sentence (he
was given one month's hard labour which he served in full). There are,
though, some letters that refer to Nell, the street-walker who was the cause
of it all. The editors print a couple of letters to Gissing from a fellow
student. He appears to have been a lusty fellow who had paid for Nell's
favours and made a joke of it to Gissing. In the letters he apologises to
him for his coarseness and ribaldry, saying he did not realise how seriously
Gissing was involved with her.
Another sequence comes from Gissing's brother William, a music scholar
suffering from the consumption which soon would kill him. Polite
conventional phrases like 'I am sorry to hear your wife is unwell' sound
ironic when one reads them in the light of Nell's demise a few years later.
Her death was caused by a combination of starvation, venereal disease,
bronchitis and alcoholism. Gissing's doomed crusade to redeem her had
wrecked his youth; now the injustice of her life would spur on his writing
about the state of the nation.
The Gissing Journal containing fresh appraisals and the latest scholarship
is published quarterly by the Gissing Trust at Pounds 8 a year to private
subscribers. Copies from Ros Stinton, 7 Town Lane, Idle, Bradford BD10 8PR,
a bookseller who specialises in Gissing's works and related material.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920822

