FT921-486

FT  28 MAR 92 / Bush urges action to stop trade talks failing


   By NANCY DUNNE and DAVID DODWELL


   WASHINGTON, LONDON


SIX-YEAR talks aimed at liberalising world trade may 'collapse', says
President George Bush. He called for 'a political push from whatever
source'.
The extraordinary comments, expressing more pessimism than the White House
has previously shown over a long-standing stalemate in the Uruguay Round of
talks on world trade reform, were delivered yesterday by Mr Marlin
Fitzwater, President Bush's spokesman.
'We are very concerned about the (Uruguay) round, concerned about its
possible collapse,' Mr Fitzwater said.
'We want a successful round. We think the world needs that kind of trading
arrangement, and so we will encourage a political push from whatever
source.'
The comments followed secret talks in Washington between Mr Arthur Dunkel,
director-general of the Geneva-based General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(Gatt), and Mrs Carla Hills, the US trade representative.
Mr Dunkel also met Mr Clayton Yeutter, a former US trade representative who
is now an adviser to the president.
Mr Dunkel tried to break the deadlock in December last year by publishing a
draft Uruguay Round agreement. This was rejected by the European Community
in January, largely over its proposals on the reform of the EC's fiercely
protectionist Common Agricultural Policy.
The US and the EC remain at loggerheads over farm trade reform, and it has
become clear that without compromise on farm trade, no agreement will be
possible.
Mr Dunkel is understood to have talked of deepening frustration and
disillusion among negotiators in Geneva.
There are fears that immense potential gains for the world trading system
are being put in jeopardy.
Meanwhile, Mr Rufus Yerxa, US ambassador to Gatt, said yesterday: 'Failure
has a high cost. The more people think about this, the more they should be
motivated to reach an agreement.'
He nevertheless echoed the sense of 'impuissance' widespread in Geneva when
he said that differences could no longer be resolved by the negotiators in
Geneva. 'It has to be solved in the capitals,' Mr Yerxa said.
Mr Dunkel also met in Washington the MTN Coalition, a private sector group
formed to support the Uruguay Round. Mr Harry Freeman, the group's executive
director, interpreted the White House statement as a message to Chancellor
Helmut Kohl of Germany.
A meeting between Mr Kohl and President Bush at Camp David two weeks ago
raised hopes of a breakthrough on the Round. However, the meeting between
the two leaders failed to make any significant progress on the issue.
Mr Kohl is known to want to resolve the deadlock on trade talks before a
summit of the Group of Seven leading industrial nations which he is hosting
in Munich in July.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920328

