FT922-4194

FT  06 JUN 92 / Books: On sex and obscenities - AC Grayling welcomes two
books delivering mighty blows for good sense


   By AC GRAYLING


SEX AND REASON by Richard A Posner Harvard Pounds 23.95, 458 pages
GIRLS LEAN BACK EVERYWHERE by Edward de Grazia Constable Pounds 19.95, 814
pages
SEX IS a controversial subject because most people are more interested in it
than informed about it, and because its urgencies and ecstasies make it
threatening. Sexual pleasure, said Aristotle, impedes rationality, and his
remark is the premise for persistent hostility from religions and rulers: if
sex is irrational it is a threat to order and therefore authority.
In consequence sexuality has been constrained by laws and customs in most
cultures throughout history, with Christianity as the worst offender. In
1808 more people were hanged in England for sodomy than murder; in the
Middle East adulterers are still stoned to death; in most countries
censorship of art continues on 'obscenity' grounds. As a further consequence
sex is shrouded in hypocrisy, guilt, exploitation, anxiety and perversion,
adding fuel to its fires and making it a real rather than merely perceived
problem.
In Richard Posner's view a chief reason for repressive public policy towards
sexuality is ignorance. Despite the increased openness which permitted
Kinsey, Masters and Johnson to undertake their celebrated research, there is
still no widely accepted theory of sexuality upon which public policy-making
can rely. Posner seeks to supply it. And as he shows, there has never
existed greater need for it than now, because sexuality is currently
offering Western society dramatic challenges: the AIDS epidemic, abortion,
contraception, surrogate motherhood, artificial fertilisation, homosexual
demands for the repeal of sodomy laws and the right to marry and adopt
children, teenage sex and pregnancy, 'obscenity' complaints over art funding
by government, sexual harassment, marital and 'date' rape, child abuse,
pornography - all are severely straining the American legal system. Where
America leads, others soon follow.
Posner is an Appeal Court judge on the US Seventh Circuit, and a lecturer in
law at Chicago University. He is a prolific writer on legal and social
issues, famous (or notorious) not just for his prodigious output but his
championing of free-market economics and his application of its principles
to legal and social analysis.
In this book Posner applies economics to the task of explaining sexuality.
The idea is not as odd as it first seems. Economics is the science of
rational behaviour, where by 'rational' is meant the appropriate fitting,
whether conscious or otherwise, of means to ends. It may seem quixotic to
apply a theory of rational choice to sex, given the latter's problematic
irrationality, but although sexual instincts are biological, the strategies
people adopt to satisfy them are rational. Consider the analogy of hunger:
we do not will hunger, but we take thought about appeasing it.
Posner analyses sex in cost-benefit terms. Among the benefits are pleasure
and progeny; among the costs, the effort of finding a mate, averting rivals,
and tending offspring. A simple example is afforded by 'opportunistic
homosexuality' among men in prison who, usually heterosexual, turn to
homosexuality because in the circumstances the benefits outweigh the costs.
So stated the theory seems simplistic, but Posner carefully elaborates it
for a whole range of sexual transactions, showing how cost calculations
influence behaviour.
The result is a surprisingly powerful model for understanding, for example,
differences in styles of marriage and attitudes to sexual practices across
societies and epochs. A major conclusion is that the occupational position
of women is a principal determinant. In societies where wives are uneducated
and much younger than husbands, companionate marriage cannot exist, so sex
is formal and occasional. Women are sequestered to 'protect their virtue',
but men are freely permitted extra-marital sex. In societies where women
have high status, as in the contemporary West, companionate marriage is the
norm, and prostitution, in earlier times a provider of what was in short
supply domestically - namely, normal sex - becomes a source of specialist
sex supplementing, without threatening, marriage.
Posner's intention is to reduce ignorance and prejudice among his fellow
judges and society at large, aiming to encourage more liberal attitudes to
sexuality. He admires the Swedes in this respect, and repeatedly cites them
as a model.
This is an outstanding and important book. Admirably written, it takes a
synoptic view of the huge literature on sexuality in many diverse fields,
and superinduces order on a riot of speculation. Of course the level of
generalisation is high, and of course analysing sexuality in economic terms
is controversial. But Posner's discussion is extraordinarily
thought-provoking. His liberalism will anger feminists, oddly allied to the
Right and the churches on many sexual questions; and both the Right (to
which Posner otherwise belongs) and the churches will be furious at his
belief that legal control is not appropriate for most aspects of sexuality.
This shows that Posner has struck a mighty blow for good sense.
In his early career Posner was an assistant to Justice William Brennan, who
was chiefly responsible for the liberalising decisions of the US Supreme
Court during the 1960s and 1970s, especially in obscenity cases. Part of
Edward de Grazia's aim in his excellent book is a celebration of Brennan's
now increasingly threatened achievements. But de Grazia's primary concern is
to show how, from the 1888 imprisonment of Henry Vizetelly for publishing
Zola in Britain, to the recent storm in America over Robert Mapplethorpe,
the struggle against obscenity laws has fared. The story covers Joyce,
Lawrence, Miller, Burroughs and other celebrated cases, in some of which de
Grazia himself - lawyer and playwright - took a leading role in the defence.
It is de Grazia's technique to let the documents speak for themselves,
interweaving a commentary. The result is riveting. Classic examples are
afforded by Mapplethorpe's homoerotic photographs and Andres Serrano's 'Piss
Christ'. Clearly the orifices penetrated furthest by Mapplethorpe were the
noses of the US Establishment, whose response, led by Senator Jesse Helms,
has been to threaten a new inquisition of censorship in American artistic
life. The passages quoted by de Grazia are exquisitely telling. The
intellectual conservatism of the Americans, illustrated on almost every
page, makes one gasp half in rage and half in incredulous laughter; either
way making for an extremely good, highly informative, and very sobering
read.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920606

