FT922-4525

FT  05 JUN 92 / Technology: The number crunchers crack


   By ALAN CANE


The data processing department, principal conduit for management information
in large organisations, is in jeopardy. It seems unlikely to survive in its
present form much beyond the end of the century; unless DP specialists learn
to build new and more effective partnerships with their management
'customers' it may not survive at all.
This is the chief conclusion of a new study* from Pagoda Associates, a
London-based consultancy specialising in the training and motivation of
information technology staff. The decline of centralised data processing
will be accelerated, it says, by:
Shrinking computing budgets. A Pagoda survey in the UK revealed that two
thirds of big companies are reducing their IT budgets for the first time.
Decreasing staff numbers. The survey showed that more than half the
companies canvassed have cut the number of staff they employ while some
central IT functions have disappeared completely.
Declining influence. A trend in the past two years has been 'outsourcing',
passing over all or part of the organisation's data processing requirements
to an outside computing services company.
Among the reasons for the decline are a reluctance on the part of large
organisations to spend more on IT before reaping the benefit of heavy
investment over the past few years, coupled with disappointment over
attempts to secure a competitive edge through technology.
Pagoda says that in order to ward off the threat of their departments being
disbanded or devolved, IT managers are trying to establish a new partnership
with their 'customers' - business managers who request and make use of data
supplied by the DP centre. DP managers have been forced to come down from
the remote and isolated computing ivory tower to try to help the business
gain real benefits from IT.
The new partnership should ideally have three components:
IT management must take a wider role in business planning, helping to shape
and develop corporate strategy.
IT management should be increasingly concerned with overseeing the orderly
devolution of computing technology through the business, giving leadership
and guidance.
There may still be some data services which can be provided most
economically by the data centre and IT management should ensure the
efficiency of their operation.
The role of the IT director will change significantly, Pagoda says. There
are several possibilities; the IT director could become the computer
strategist, responsible for ensuring value for money in IT investments but
without service management responsibilities.
IT directors could become service managers providing commercial
cost-effective IT services to the business without responsibility for
identifying IT solutions to business problems. Finally, the IT director's
role could expand into a board-level position encompassing office services
and change management as well as IT services.
Whichever path a particular organisation follows, however, the numbers of IT
staff are likely to decline and the skills they will need will change
profoundly. Some argue that only 30 per cent of today's staff numbers will
be needed in 2000.
*Building Partnerships with the Business, Pagoda Associates, 55 Neal Street,
London WC2. Pounds 240 plus VAT.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920605

