FT923-9755

FT  04 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Drought adds to eastern
European farm problems


   By REUTER


   VIENNA


EASTERN European farmers, already struggling to cope with life in the
private sector and disappearing subsidies, are also contending with one of
the region's worst droughts in years, reports Reuter from Vienna.
The result is that the huge grain surpluses built up last year will
disappear, and many of the countries will have to import grain to feed their
people or rebuild reserve stocks.
The farmers have been caught in the pincers of falling demand for their
produce and higher prices for the inputs they need to produce it.
Proper agricultural markets have not yet developed and the scope for
distorted prices or outright speculation is great.
Crucial to the formation of a healthy farm sector is the development of
related industries, such as those producing fertilisers or farm machinery,
the Vienna Institute for Comparative Economic Studies said in a recent
report. But the necessary privatisation of these operations depends on
foreign investment and capital, which has so far been slow in coming, it
said.
On a national scale the market reforms have also sown confusion.
In Czechoslovakia co-operative and state farms transformed into private
agri-businesses or genuine co-operatives are operating in an environment of
legal uncertainty. At the same time the country's restitution laws, which
allow the original owners or their heirs to reclaim property confiscated by
the communists, have seen much land taken up by people who do not want to
farm it but just lease it out.
Czechoslovakian radio said in a recent commentary that the situation is a
vicious circle of supporting overproduction followed by state-funded export
subsidies.
An ambitious privatisation of farmland in Romania has left the authorities
in the dark about what is going on.
'It is very difficult to make a forecast of crops, as Romania switched from
100 per cent state ownership in agriculture in 1989, to 82 per cent private
land ownership at present,' said Mr Radu Mateescu, agriculture ministry
spokesman. And Romania's agriculture lacks infrastructure for modern
data-gathering and forecasts.
Romania has some of Europe's most fertile land, but is importing 1m tonnes
of wheat this year. The government will set up a wheat monopoly to fend off
speculators.
Since 1989 Romania has faced a steady drop in farm output, mainly because of
chaos on the land as it switches to a market economy and private enterprise
after 40 years of communism.
But the authorities see farming as one of the country's potential strengths,
and grain acreages are to be increased.
Hungarian farmers have sown wheat on 25 per cent less land than usual, the
daily Nepszabadsag said. Mr Ferenc Nyujto, an agriculture ministry official,
said the grain harvest this year would be average.
But he conceded that because of drought the yields on the lower acreages
would be 10 to 20 per cent down on last year's.
The result, according to London traders, is that Hungary, the region's most
successful agricultural producer, will cut its wheat exports to 450,000
tonnes in 1992-93 (July-June), compared with 1.5m tonnes in 1991-92.
Hungary is likely to be the only exporter this year from the region, which
was once the bread basket of Europe, and has the potential to become so
again.
The drought means Poland, another big producer, will import between 1m and
2m tonnes of grain this year after last year's 150,000 tonnes, Polish
traders say. The agriculture ministry says the Polish harvest will drop to
21.2m tonnes this year from 27.8m in 1991.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920804

