FT922-7417

FT  19 MAY 92 / Arts: Roland Petit in Rome


   By CLEMENT CRISP and FREDA PITT


Roland Petit has always known that the theatre is a box of tricks. He has
ever been a master of those tricks, a conjuror ready to pull some
simple-seeming but astonishing feat from an empty sleeve. (In his very
earliest success, Les Forains of 1945, Petit cast himself as a manager of a
troupe of strolling players who was also a conjuror.) Charlot danse avec
nous, which I saw last Tuesday at the Teatro Eliseo, is a fine example of
Petit as a producer for whom revue, music-hall, cinema, ballet, are facets
of the theatre he loves. It is a fantasy about Charlie Chaplin (from whom
Petit once requested, and received, a libretto), with 20 scenes that are
variations on the theme of Chaplin as clown and film-maker. In them Petit
juggles ideas, styles, ingredients with entire mastery.
That said, I have to admit that I am one of those for whom Chaplin is rather
less entertaining than bubonic plague. WC Fields - now there was a comic -
dismissed Chaplin as a ballet-dancer, and his worst suspicions would be
aroused by the present show, in which Chaplin is indeed a dancer (Luigi
Bonino from Petit's Ballet National de Marseille). Yet Petit pulls off the
trick of the homage/commentary with real verve, in an entertainment cleverly
designed for touring. The stage is a black box, like the best conjuror's
setting, into which minimal properties are introduced, and every hallowed
feat of legerdemain is permitted.
With only six dancers - five men from the Ballet de Marseille; Elisabetta
Terabust as guest - we are treated to quick changes, spaghetti eaten by
strobe lighting, ombres chinoises, a snow-storm, captions as in the silent
cinema, an 'invisible' dresser from Noh drama, speeded-up Keystone Cops,
scenes from The Kid and The Gold Rush, and the flickering agonies of early
film melodrama. There is also an unabashed sentimentality which brings us a
blind flower-girl, Chaplin's own sticky little melodies, and the tramp
Charlie regularly down-trodden and achieving thereby a kind of immortality.
The evening has its uneven moments - Petit cannot escape the limitations of
Chaplin as a screen hero - but Luigi Bonino has the physical resource and
the unfailing timing that gives his portrait a theatrical edge. Terabust
(who now directs the Rome Opera Ballet) is enchanting throughout: grandly
serious when she needs to be in pas de deux; genuinely pathetic as the
flower-girl; irresistibly stylish as The Kid - she has true physical wit -
and as a saloon floozie. Jean-Charles Verchere, Laurent Dalibert, Thierry
Hauswald and David Vincendeau are admirable in the myriad things they have
to do.
Design is by Luisa Spinatelli, who helps Petit create a world through
suggestions of scenery and properties. There is a problematic score, owed in
part of Fiorenzo Carpi, who has produced an effective sound-track, with
Chaplin's own egregiously sentimental tunes woven into its fabric. But to
seek to assign a certain universality to Chaplin by accompanying his scenes
with chunks of JS Bach is worrying, and less justifiable than the playing of
the Bach Passacaglia for Petit's Le Jeune Homme et la mort all those years
ago. Here the music dwarfs the character and the occasion. The evening is
otherwise continuing proof of Roland Petit's vitality as a creator; if
Chaplin is to be celebrated, then let it be with such verve and affection,
and such loving theatricality.
The Petit quadruple bill at the Teatro dell'Opera, which preceded the
Chaplin Show, had a much less enthusiastic reception, apart from
L'Arlesienne, which pleased by virtue of Bizet's attractive and familiar
score and also Raffaele Paganini's striking performance as the tortured
young man of the Daudet story.
After a low-key opening with two extracts from the Soiree Debussy (with
greater satisfaction supplied by the orchestra than by most of the dancers),
the half-hour novelty arrived, Valse Triste ou le retour des cygnes, to a
collage of music by Sibelius.
If this pas de quatre was not in general much liked, perhaps this was on
account of a lack of clarity - a rare criticism to make of Petit. The flaw
may lie in his source, a piece of rather convoluted prose by Pierre
Combescot, last year's winner of the Prix Goncourt. The theme encompasses
swans, Wagner, Ludwig of Bavaria, Elisabeth the Empress of Austria and the
ill-fated couple of Mayerling fame, Mary Vetsera and Archduke Rudolf. What
is disconcerting is that on their entry the four dancers (Dominique
Khalfouni with Kader Belarbi in pale grey, and Elisabetta Terabust with
Cyril Pierre, in Black) are meant to represent their characters, which they
then abandon, according to the choreographer, in their formal solos, pas de
deux, and so on, each dancing eventually with all the others.
The doom-laden atmosphere, the dim lighting and the sepulchral make-up -
especially Terabust's and Belarbi's - call up a vision of graveyards, which
is reinforced at the end when they all make their exit through a trap-door.
It is also fostered by the music; Sibelius is hardly a favourite composer in
France or Italy, but it seems the choice was Combescot's.
If in conception the work is an addition to the long list of Petit's
love/death ballets, the absence of narrative transforms it into an
interesting and inventive piece of pure classicism, which repays attention.
While all four dancers have abundant opportunity to display their
considerable prowess and artistry, it is Khalfouni - above all for her solo
to the inevitable Swan of Tuonela - who stays in the mind. If Petit's
frequently announced remake of Swan Lake materialises, she will be a superb
Odette.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920519

