FT924-6112

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (9): Declining fortunes
 -Profile of Iveco


   By DAVID LANE


WHEN the Turin automobile group Fiat closes its accounts at the end of
December it will not be expecting a positive contribution from its Iveco
industrial vehicle subsidiary. Iveco looks set to follow last year's loss of
Fl199m (Dollars 111m) on sales of Fl12.244bn with another negative bottom
line.
Fiat notes in its half-yearly report that Iveco's sales volume in 1992 has
continued to follow the downward trend that began two years ago. The decade,
which opened with 1990s' meagre net profit of Fl23m on sales of Fl11.689bn,
has started badly.
Yet only three years ago the company was posting record results, closing
1989 with a post-tax surplus of Fl591m on sales of Fl12.426bn. The second
half of the 1980s had seen good performance following heavy losses that had
only been interrupted by small surpluses in 1981 and 1982.
Senior management at Iveco, whose Dutch corporate nationality reflects its
trans-border origins, point to three factors that have caused the sharp
worsening in the profit and loss account. Essentially a European business,
with less than 12 per cent of turnover coming from markets outside western
Europe, Iveco has been hit by 'falls in production volumes and sales prices
due to the market crises'.
Last year Iveco invoiced a total of 122,300 vehicles, compared to 125,000 in
the previous year. Moreover, the figure for 1991 included sales of 6,600
units by the Spanish Pegaso subsidiary which became part of the Iveco Group
last year.
But the purchase of a controlling stake in Pegaso did not make a positive
contribution to Iveco's financial results. Indeed, senior management says
that it was one of the three factors that caused the worsening recorded last
year, the Spanish subsidiary posting a loss of Pta19.738bn (Dollars 173m).
In the Pegaso operation, under which it acquired a 60 per cent stake from
the INI Spanish state holding corporation, Iveco continued the strategy of
expansion by acquisition that has been a characteristic. Iveco's own
establishment in 1975 provided the example, the company being born from the
merger between three subsidiaries in Italy's Fiat Group (Fiat Veicoli
Industriali, Lancia Veicoli Speciali and OM), France's Unic and West
Germany's Magirus.
Since then, Iveco has undertaken nine operations. These include the purchase
of a 48 per cent stake in the ordinary share capital of Ford's truck
operation in the UK in 1986, now called Iveco Ford Truck. In addition to its
Spanish acquisition, last year Iveco also subscribed the total issue of
preference stock made by Iveco Ford Truck and acquired the UK company Seddon
Atkinson with Enasa.
In Italy Iveco has grown by the acquisition of coach and bus makers Orlandi
(1977) and Sicca (1989), the construction truck manufacturer Astra (1986)
and the fire-fighting vehicle maker Baribbi this year. An important Magirus
activity is fire-fighting vehicles, and in 1987 this had been boosted by the
acquisition of Bachert, another west German company.
While forming part of a full model range, fire-fighting, other special
vehicles and coaches are not, however, the core of Iveco's business. This is
trucks, where over the past two years it has tried to update its range.
Indeed, the third factor to which senior management attribute last year's
loss are the costs of introducing new models.
Iveco's investment in the EuroCargo range of light 6-to-10 tonne vehicles
was rewarded by the Truck of the Year Award last year. The company has
focused on technological innovation to reduce running costs, increase
reliability and improve driver comfort and safety. Iveco's EuroCargo range
offers users a wide choice, with six engines, three cab types, two
wheelbases, four solutions for suspension and three types of rear axle.
Higher up the scale, Iveco has also been updating its models. Earlier this
year the company launched the EuroTech family of heavy-duty trucks. To
satisfy the wide range of applications that includes municipal vehicles, and
town and suburban deliveries as well as long-distance transport, Iveco's
EuroTech offers many combinations of engine, chassis and cab. And at the
other end, Iveco extended its Daily/Turbo Daily range of light commercial
vehicles by starting production of new models.
The Daily/Turbo Daily range was updated in 1989 and the range for off-road
applications has been updated this year. Senior management says that the
investment undertaken on this and on the EuroCargo and EuroTech ranges gives
Iveco a new combination of products that is unequalled.
Over the past five years Iveco's investment plan has involved spending of
Fl8bn on fixed assets, research and development, training and new production
ventures. The results are evident in the rationalisation of product range
and the new models bearing the Iveco badge.
But, notwithstanding management claims that it has finally been possible to
eliminate the inefficiencies deriving from the many different industrial
histories of Iveco's component companies, perhaps more can be expected in
terms of plant rationalisation. At present Iveco's 41,300 employees (about
24,000 in Italy) are spread between 21 plants (11 in Italy).
The company's management points to the prospects of still fiercer
competition in an already tough European market. Range flexibility, product
personalisation and quality are deciding factors. So also is cost. Further
rationalisation of production would give Iveco, whose sales in the first six
months of the year were 3.5 per cent down on January-June 1991, a sharper
competitive edge. It would ease the compression on operating margins and
help in stemming losses.
Seventeen years ago Iveco's founding members, led by Fiat, decided that
concentration was the only viable strategy. And Iveco's creation and
development has involved a rationalisation process. Perhaps more is to come.
Last year a little-noticed, but significant, step was taken when Iveco Fiat
changed its name to Iveco. In consolidating its single, European image, the
Magirus, Unic, Ford Truck and Pegaso names are probably targets for similar
treatment.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921123

