FT921-14337

FT  16 JAN 92 / Water improvements will need 50% charge rise, Heseltine says


   By JOHN HUNT, Environment Correspondent


THE WATER industry's Pounds 28bn investment programme over the next decade
amounts to Pounds 130 for every household in England and Wales and will have
to be paid for by a 50 per cent increase in water charges in real terms by
the end of the century Mr Michael Heseltine, environment secretary, warned
yesterday.
He sought to blame the increased charges, needed to improve water quality
and the environment, on 'starvation' of investment under the Labour
government when the water industry was still in the public sector. He
accused Labour of 'hopeless confusion' over water and challenged the party
to say whether it would carry out its policy of renationalising the
industry, which was privatised under Mrs Thatcher's Conservative government.
Mr Heseltine said at a seminar held by the Water Services Association in
London: 'I think the environment will play an important part in the election
campaign.
'This government has one of the most comprehensive and effectively managed
environment programmes in any part of the world. The Labour party has a
vacuum.'
He said Labour did not seem to know what its policy was on the water
industry. The policy on renationalisation depended on who you spoke to - the
left wing said yes and the right wing said 'not yet'.
'Neither the consumer, nor the industry, nor the economy, nor the
environment would benefit from the uncertainty and indecision that Labour
would bring,' he warned.
Over the first five years of privatisation, 1990 to 1995, investment would
be double what was spent in 1974 to 1979 under a Labour government - at
least Pounds 2.7bn a year against Labour's average of Pounds 1.3bn.
Nevertheless, Mr Heseltine said water charges in Britain were among the
lowest in Europe, averaging only 43p a household a day. The French, Germans
and Italians all paid substantially more.
He claimed that the quality of drinking water and rivers in Britain compared
well with other West European na-tions.
Mr William Courtney, the chairman of Southern Water and new chairman of the
Water Services Association, said the water companies were investing a total
of Pounds 7m a day and 70 per cent of profits were being ploughed back into
new investment.
They were having to increase prices very significantly to pay for that, but
would keep them as low as possible.
Mr Heseltine's speech provoked a political row with Mrs Ann Taylor, Labour's
spokeswoman on environmental protection, who said the increase in water
bills of 50 per cent would come as a shock to many on top of the 'record
increases' in prices since privatisation.
She said there had been 'shocking and outrageous' salary increases for water
company chairmen, the use of compulsory water metering 'and putting of
profits before pollution control'.
'Mr Heseltine's words are alarming in their complacency,' she said.
A party official said it remained party policy to take the water industry
back into public ownership. 'We will do it as a priority.'
Mr Simon Hughes, Liberal Democrat environment spokesman, said Mr Heseltine
had not considered the effect of price increase on the elderly and low
income families. 'Water bills should be based on need, not the greed of
water bosses,' he said.
Ms Liana Stupples, Friends of the Earth water campaigner, said: 'The
Government has presided over the continued abuse of the water environment.'
Thames Water acquisition, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920116

