FT922-710

FT  26 JUN 92 / Arts: Touchbase - Ballet


   By CLEMENT CRISP


The Rambert season continues at the Royalty Theatre with a second programme,
whose centre is a much-mentioned novelty for the company by Merce
Cunningham. This Touchbase is one of the few pieces that Cunningham has made
for an ensemble other than his own, though its creation is also shared with
the choreographer's troupe. It can not be coincidental that the evening also
offers us a chance to see apprentice work by two Rambert dancers - Mark
Baldwin and Paul Old - whose debuts are strongly influenced by Cunningham's
manner, since his has been a defining aesthetic for Rambert during recent
years. What is ironic is that these disciple creations are so much fresher
and more appealing to the eye than the work of the master.
Touchbase is characteristic Cunningham in its disarming lack of obvious
structure. The seven dancers go blithely about their business against the
yellow luminosities of Mark Lancaster's set, with a pair of white gates to
mark their comings and goings. They wear disastrous beach outfits - the
piece has an out-of-doors feel to it - and various whistlings and clankings
are made by Michael Pugliese's score, which only lacks a voice saying 'I'm
sure there's something wrong with the central heating; it's making the most
dreadful noise'. The dancers pose and stretch; Paul Old indulges in a
vestigial hornpipe; Amanda Britton, Alexandra Dyer, Sarah Warsop and Shelley
Baker move beautifully, and the result looks like Cunningham parodying his
own most hallowed procedures. The choreography, I gather, was in part
'generated' by a computer. Luddites, arise]
Far more enjoyable Mark Baldwin's Island to Island and Paul Old's Still
Dance. The first is a light-hearted, light-footed study in which the dance
sometimes looks as if it is being fast-forwarded, so quick and flashing its
effects. A sound-track makes faintly Polynesian noises; the movement and the
dancers are alert, handsome (in nice, anonymous clothes), and while paying
his debts to his elders, Baldwin shows himself his own man as a creator. He
treats his dancers felicitously - Sarah Warsop soaring in big jumps; John
Kilroy ebullient in step; Jacqueline Jones radiant and contemplative - and
the dance has a pristine air. Very touching.
Paul Old's Still Dance is performed in silence. Four dancers move quietly,
and Old's sense of harmony - a feeling that effects are balanced one against
the other; that every action has its counter-action, and every movement its
echoing response - gives the choreography a delicate but perceptible
architectural order. It is refreshing to watch. The dancing of the company
in all three works was exemplary. Lighting was excellent.
The Rambert Dance Company is at the Royalty Theatre until June 27, with
varied programmes. Sponsors include Digital Equipment Company and the
National Westminster Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920626

