FT924-11924

FT  23 OCT 92 / Bingham Report - Investigation into the BCCI scandal: The
main recommendations


Call for exercise of informed judgment
Lord Justice Bingham concludes that the BCCI shutdown should not lead to
greatly intensified supervision of all banks, or to the substitution of a
code of detailed rules for 'the exercise of informed judgment'.
He does not recommend 'any radical recasting' of bank supervision.
Supervision ultimately relies on the 'skill, alertness, experience and
vigour' of supervisors, but he makes a number of detailed suggestions to
strengthen it:
UK banking supervision
The Bank of England's board of banking supervision lacked important
information needed to fulfil its role over BCCI. The board's members should
be alerted to 'any fact which even might cause their antennae to twitch'.
The Bank's traditional techniques of supervision based on trust, frankness
and a willingness to co-operate 'on the whole have served the community
well'. But the Bank needs to be alert to the possibility of fraud, astute in
recognising it, and active in investigating it.
The Bank should establish a trained and qualified special investigations
unit within the supervision division to consider all warnings and suspicions
of malpractice, and ensure that they are investigated effectively.
The Bank should take steps to strengthen its internal communications, which
were exposed by the inquiry as 'a significant weakness'.
The Bank should strengthen its legal unit following the BCCI affair. The
main value of such a unit is not to warn supervisors of what they cannot
lawfully do, but to ensure they are aware of the full extent of their powers
under the law.
The Bank has powers to refuse or revoke authorisation on the grounds that a
bank cannot be effectively supervised, and to make banks locate their head
offices in the country of authorisation. If its hand would be strengthened
by a change in law, this should be done.
European Community
The principles that European Community states should stop supervisory
'forum-shopping', that a bank's place of incorporation is treated as its
home, and that head offices should be in the same state as registered
offices should be articles of the Second Banking Co-ordination Directive.
The directive should explicitly confer on EC states the right to refuse or
withdraw banking supervision in the case of bank structures considered
inappropriate for bodies carrying out banking activities.
There should be an EC directive establishing a banking deposit guarantee
scheme in all member states, and imposing the guarantee obligation in
respect of qualifying liabilities in member states other than the bank's
home state.
International supervision
There should be some form of international monitoring of supervisory
standards, possibly by the Bank for International Settlements.
Whenever a 'financial centre that offers impenetrable secrecy' is involved
in the affairs of a bank, that should be sufficient reason for any
supervisor to refuse or revoke authorisation.
Disclosure
There should be a UK review of the circumstances under which bodies
discharging public functions should be allowed or required to pass
information about a bank's activities to each other and to regulatory
authorities.
There should be an international database listing those whom a supervisor
has found to be not fit and proper to be a director, manager or controller
of a bank.
Auditors' duties
Auditors should have a legal duty to report to the Bank anything they know
to be relevant to a bank's fulfilment of criteria in the 1987 Banking Act.
They should also have a duty to provide information reasonably requested by
the Bank for supervisory purposes.
All companies in a banking group should have the same accounting dates.
A report covering all aspects of accounting and annual controls should be
commissioned annually from the reporting accountant of a bank incorporated
outside the UK, rather than every four or five years as at present.
The Bank should consider introducing checks and remedies to prevent
organisations under the common control of banking groups from having
opportunities for fraud and manipulation.
The Bank should have the power to require a separate audit of banks
domiciled outside the EC.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921023

