FT921-1405

FT  24 MAR 92 / Union leaders accept freeze in pay at foundries


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


UNION LEADERS of 10,000 workers employed by foundry companies and appliance
manufacturers have agreed to a six-month pay freeze in a move which has
implications for many other engineering employers.
It is one of the first freezes to be agreed by workers whose pay rises are
covered by a national multi-company agreement.
Since the collapse three years ago of a national agreement covering
mainstream engineering workers, many employers in the sector have used the
rises agreed by foundry and appliance companies as a guide in their own
negotiations.
Under a deal due to be signed today, unions including the AEU engineering
workers and the National Metal Trades Federation have agreed that minimum
time-rates will be frozen for six months from January 1, the traditional
settlement date, and will rise by 3.6 per cent from July.
The federation had originally proposed a freeze for the full year. Pay
freezes have become increasingly common in Britain during the recession,
particularly among manufacturers, but they remain rare in industry-wide
negotiations.
Among other sectors which retain national bargaining, print employers this
year abandoned plans for a pay freeze. Footwear employers are still seeking
a three-month pay freeze from March 1 followed by a 3.75 per cent rise from
June. That proposed deal has been rejected by employees, however.
In the NMTF negotiations, minimum time-rates are the lowest that can be paid
by the federation's members. The rate rises are traditionally used by
companies and unions as a benchmark for rises that are negotiated at company
level. They also have an effect on overtime and shift premiums.
In pressing for the freeze the federation told unions that its 50 member
companies did not expect any 'meaningful' recovery in business conditions
this year.
Last year's settlement, which took effect in January last year, was for 6.7
per cent and led to the minimum time-rate rising to Pounds 139 a week by
last June. That agreement included provision for a two-hour reduction in the
39-hour week by August this year.
This year the federation rejected union calls for a further reduction in the
working week and for an increase in the holiday provision of 33 days.
Mr Nigel Harris, an AEU executive councillor, said he was unhappy with the
outcome of the negotiations.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920324

