FT923-6414

FT  25 AUG 92 / World Trade News: EC copier makers still fighting Japan - To
end dumping duties would be seen as a blow to business


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


THE European Commission's decision to review its 20 per cent anti-dumping
duty on Japanese photocopier imports highlights the depressing reality that
after five years of protection, European manufacturers are still struggling
in the face of Japanese competition.
The Commission has announced it has opened a formal investigation into
Japanese photocopiers, after complaints from European manufacturers that the
20 per cent anti-dumping duties imposed in 1987 had not achieved intended
objectives.
The European makers, Rank Xerox, Oce of the Netherlands and Olivetti, claim
further that if the duties were allowed to lapse this year as scheduled, it
would injure their business. 'We have not seen the improvement in
profitability in our copier business that we should have seen as a result of
the anti-dumping duties,' says Mr David Whibley, senior legal counsel at
Rank Xerox, the US-UK company.
The photocopier duties were imposed five years ago after the Commission
found that Japanese photocopier manufacturers were dumping products in the
EC  - that is, selling them at prices lower than those in their domestic
market. The duties were to lapse automatically after a period of five years
which ended this February. Over that period, however, the duties were
supposed to have raised the prices of Japanese photocopiers sold in Europe.
This, in turn, was to have improved the competitiveness of European
manufacturers by raising their profitability, plant capacity utilisation and
market share.
Instead, the main effect of the anti-dumping duties was to quicken the pace
of Japanese investment in facilities in Europe and reduce imports from
Ecu1bn (Pounds 720m) to Ecu500m. Prices meanwhile have stayed level or even
declined and 'consumers are continuing to enjoy a price honeymoon', says Mr
Whibley. Rank Xerox points out that the price of one particular
Japanese-made machine sold in Germany has fallen from DM3,600 (Pounds 1,276)
in 1988 to DM3,480 for this year's model.
These price levels show that the Japanese have been bearing the extra amount
of the duty and have in effect continued to dump products, the Europeans
say. Rank Xerox says that because of the artificially low price levels set
by the Japanese, it has not been able to obtain a reasonable rate of return
on sales, which the Commission considers is about 12 per cent for the
photocopier industry.
It further blames the low prices for its inability to increase market share.
Furthermore, Rank Xerox itself has maintained its market share, running at
11 per cent, according to Dataquest, the high-technology consultancy, but
the aggregate market share for European manufacturers has declined.
This is not surprising, as the number of European manufacturers of
photocopiers has fallen from five when the duties were imposed to just
three. The other two have been acquired by the Japanese.
Meanwhile, European dependence on Japanese manufacturers has increased.
Olivetti manufactures copiers through a joint venture with Canon; this
relationship has led the Commission to exclude it from its list of Europeans
that would suffer from removal of the anti-dumping duties.
In addition, the Commission is also considering extending the duties to
higher-end machines able to copy 75 or more pages a minute which had been
exempted from the original action because they were not made by Japanese
manufacturers at the time. However, the Japanese have now entered this
market, which had previously been the preserve of Rank Xerox and Oce.
Japanese companies deny that prices have been kept at artificially low
levels. 'The 20 per cent duty has raised prices so we have tried to bring
manufacturing costs down,' says a representative for Ricoh in Europe.
Canon says it has been able to maintain the largest market share in Europe
without necessarily having the lowest prices.
The Japanese feel that the Europeans are also responsible for their lack of
competitiveness. Rank Xerox and Oce have concentrated their efforts on
higher-end machines and neglected the lower end of the market, one Japanese
manufacturer says. 'It is no surprise that they cannot compete in that
sector.'
As a result of that strategy, Rank and Oce dominate the higher end of the
market, where profit margins are higher. Although Rank Xerox trails Canon in
terms of market share, it is ahead in terms of revenue.
Neither do they agree with the European view of what constitutes reasonable
profitability. European manufacturers may say that a reasonable return on
sales is 12 per cent but Japanese companies would consider a return on sales
of 3.5 per cent respectable. 'In Japan, no company has a return on sales of
12 per cent. If the Europeans expect a 12 per cent return, we can only sigh
in response,' says one manufacturer.
The Commission will spend many months examining prices in Japan and the EC
in an attempt to determine whether dumping has continued.
The most important question it needs to address, however, is whether it is
ultimately in the Community's interest to continue imposing duties on
Japanese photocopiers. 'Do they merit the protection, or should we let these
companies sink?' asks one Commission representative.
If the duties are continued and extended, the most likely effect is not to
raise prices but further to encourage Japanese manufacturing in Europe.
Recent history has shown, however, that this in itself is not likely to
improve the Europeans' competitiveness to their satisfaction.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920825

