FT924-6393

FT  21 NOV 92 / No place for classic theories


   By DAVID WHITE


A medieval kind of war is being waged in Bosnia, with this century's
weapons. Over seven months it has settled into a pattern of prolonged
sieges, in which towns are held in terror by seemingly casual pounding from
tank guns, mortars, howitzers and rocket launchers, and local warlords
ignore one ceasefire agreement after another, writes David White.
The fighting, in which Bosnian Moslems and Croats have been in loose
alliance against Serb forces since independence in April, has already lasted
as long as last year's war in Croatia. It is also a continuation of that war
by proxy. Despite official denials, soldiers from both Croatia and the rump
Yugoslav federal republic are directly involved.
Bosnia's Croats were much more prepared than the Moslems to face attack by
the Serbs, and had managed to stockpile some arms.
The Serb militia has taken 70 per cent of the territory, reducing so-called
'free' Bosnia to a gradually shrinking core, with a few isolated patches
north-west and east, and with the capital, Sarajevo, under permanent siege.
Across the north of the country the Serbs have established a corridor
linking Serbia itself to the Serb stronghold region of Croatia, the Krajina.
An apparent tacit agreement about the limits of Serb territorial claims is
now in question. The front line passes around Turbe, a deserted small town,
prey to Serb gunners, just west of Travnik. There Filip Filipovic, former
general manager of a nearby ironworks, was commanding the local Croat HVO
militia from a barricaded headquarters. He glumly described how Serb forces
had concentrated there since the overrunning of the besieged town of Jajce,
further to the west, three weeks ago. 'It seems their appetite is growing,'
he said.
Croat forces have mounted recent offensives in the south, pushing east of
Mostar to try to secure territory behind the thin coastal strip of Croatia
where Dubrovnik is. They have also managed temporarily to cut off the Serbs'
northern corridor, at one point only a few miles wide. There are some signs
that the Serbs could now try to slice through the northern salients of
Moslem and Croat-held territory along an axis from Maglaj to Olovo.
What is puzzling is that the Serbs, with their military tradition and
ostensibly with all the advantages, have not been achieving greater success.
They have more artillery and more ammunition, and their senior officers from
the former Yugoslav national army are immersed in Soviet-style training.
But this schooling in high-tempo warfare is of little application in Bosnia.
The mountains are no place for the classic theories of armoured battle. The
top level evidently has difficulty controlling local commanders, and Serb
forces are stretched out over a long front. On the other hand, they have
little difficulty protecting their hilltop gun positions and pursuing
sporadic shelling of towns and link roads. They are believed to be using
helicopters to bring up ammunition, in breach of the ban on military flying.
High-flying Nato Awacs aircraft deployed for the UN cannot always detect
them.
The forces on the other side eye with envy and some wonderment the military
hardware being deployed by British, French and other UN troops to protect
aid supplies. But many Croat and Moslem militiamen carry new weapons. Small
arms and ammunition are known to have been arriving through the Croatian
port of Ploce, and possibly also in consignments of Islamic aid coming
through Split.
Motley foreigners have also joined Croat and Moslem ranks. The village of
Mehurici near Travnik, said to be packed with mujahedin from various Islamic
countries, is now out-of-bounds for journalists. 'Don't even try,' a local
commander said. In Travnik itself I approached three men in uniform who had
been talking among themselves in German. 'Sprechen Sie Deutsch?' I ventured.
'Nein,' was the reply.
In places, the mood is close to defeatism. Outside one town, defended
jointly by Moslems and Croats, more than 40 military trucks and coaches were
concealed, waiting for the evacuation. This is a war in which the targets
are mostly civilian.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921121

