FT921-1338

FT  25 MAR 92 / Lockerbie puts Arabs in quandary: Libya's allies bristling
at western 'bullying'


   By MAX RODENBECK


A YEAR after Arab and western armies joined forces to expel Iraq from
Kuwait, the test of wills between western governments and the regime of
Colonel Muammer Gadaffi over Libya's harbouring of the suspected Lockerbie
bombers has forced Arabs to ponder their place in the new world order.
Since the confrontation began last November, Libya's Arab allies have
bristled at what is seen as bullying by Britain and the US. In private, they
have advised Libya to be more accommodating.
Like Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the affair has put pro-western Arabs in a
quandary. Street opinion throughout the Arab world has strongly backed
Libyan protestations of innocence. Libya's offer to try the suspects
domestically was seen as a reasonable offer, and its refusal to extradite
them was widely accepted as understandable in the light of Libyan mistrust
of its accusers.
By contrast, the west's uncompromising demand has been viewed here as an
assault on Arab dignity. US hints of resorting to force and the use of the
UN Security Council to escalate international pressure have created
uncomfortable parallels with the beating suffered by Iraq. As a result many
Arabs are again accusing the west of applying double standards.
Moderate Arab governments, whatever their distaste for the Gadaffi regime,
have been obliged to respond to public pressure. At the same time they have
been annoyed by the stridency of western demands, which have in their view
exacerbated the problem. Arab analysts note that before the confrontation
Libya had shown signs of a desire to improve ties with the west. Moderate
countries such as Egypt assured their western friends that the Gadaffi
leopard was trying to change his spots.
By coupling attempts to try the terrorist suspects with veiled threats of
force, the west missed a chance to work out a quiet deal that would have
preserved the revolutionary Libyan regime's legitimacy, Arab observers say.
As they see it , backing the Libyan leader into a corner could provoke him
to extremism or - worse for his poorer neighbours - into cutting trade and
expelling their surplus labour.
As time has passed Libyan friends, and in particular, Egypt, have grown
uncomfortable with Tripoli's dithering. They have come to feel that Libya
cannot expect to put its past behind it without paying some price.
To Libya's chagrin, the Arab League's 21 members turned down a draft
resolution calling on them to defy sanctions against Libya which the UN
Security Council has threatened to impose. Instead, they urged the UN to
delay punitive measures until the world court rules whether international
law requires Libya to hand over the wanted men.
In effect, the resolution declared sympathy with Libya, but within the
framework of respect for international law. With its earlier face-saving
proposals rejected Libya appears to have felt obliged to hold on to the
skimpy cover offered by its erstwhile brothers by volunteering to place the
Lockerbie suspects in Arab League custody.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920325

