FT924-6267

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: Drama of silences and double-talk


   By KAREN FRICKER


WHEN IT appeared last year that the New York Theatre Workshop's excellent
American premiere production of Caryl Churchill's Mad Forest, despite
excellent reviews, several Obie (Off-Broadway) Awards and a sold-out run at
the 99-seat Perry Street Theatre, was not going to find a future life in a
larger off-Broadway or Broadway theatre, many in New York's non-profit
theatre community were ready to throw in the towel. Particular
congratulations must be extended, then, to the Manhattan Theatre Club for
its last-minute rescue of Mad Forest, which is now playing at the 299-seat
City Center Theatre. Mark Wing-Davey's production has only improved in the
transfer.
Churchill developed the play, about the 1989 Romanian revolution and its
aftermath, through hands-on research in Romania with Wing-Davey and students
from London's Central School of Speech and Drama, of which Wing-Davey was
then Artistic Director. He directed the world premiere at the Central
School, which transferred to the Royal Court in 1990.
Mad Forest communicates the subtleties and complexities of a political
situation through theatrically innovative and exciting means. In the play's
silences, double-talk and misinformation, Churchill skillfully merges form
and content by making language as undependable and indeterminate to the
audience as it was to the Romanian people under Ceaucescu. The smashing of
an egg conveys all the anger and misunderstanding of a family torn apart by
political strife, and one oblique scene of blackmail belies a world of
suspiciousness and dishonesty. Wing-Davey's production is a masterwork of
understatement; Mary Mara, Mary Schultz, and Christopher McCann stand out
among the fine 11-player ensemble.
Wing-Davey, set and costume designer Marina Draghici and lighting designer
Christopher Akerlind have not only retained the claustrophobic intensity of
the Perry Street Theatre production but added new levels of meaning in their
use of the whole theatre as their playing area. Performers enter through the
theatre and deliver many of the Romanian/English phrasebook translations
which precede each scene from the aisles, lit by exposed bulbs over their
heads, drawing the audience into the play.
Akerlind uses the metaphoric potential of light and darkness to its fullest,
as when, in an otherwise dimly lit food line, the blond head of young
revolutionary Radu (Jake Weber) is caught in a shaft of light and glows
seraphically as he whispers 'Down with Ceausescu.' Draghici's set of dark,
nubbled walls which swing and slide unexpectedly to reveal gilt-laden
murals, furthers the play's themes of unreliable appearances and layered
truths.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

921121

