FT924-6516

FT  20 NOV 92 / Letter: Kenneth Clarke's message on Bosnian refugees must be
reversed


   From Ms SARAH SPENCER


Sir, What kind of statement does Kenneth Clarke think he is making to the
rest of the world when he denies entry to Bosnian refugees stranded on the
Slovenia border ('Furore grows over Bosnian refugees', November 18); when he
requires them to obtain visas, knowing that they cannot reach the towns
where consular facilities are available? It can only be that Britain is
uncharitable and illiberal, unwilling to shoulder its international
responsibilities and share its peace and relative prosperity with those who
are manifestly less fortunate.
No wonder the foreign secretary feels that his authority on the world stage
has been undermined.
Of more lasting damage, however, may be the message Mr Clarke is sending to
the British people that Britain is for the British, that Bosnian refugees
are undesirable, an unacceptable burden, outsiders who should not be allowed
to share our way of life.
If Mr Clarke rests his closed door policy on fears of an anti-refugee
backlash from the far right then he should be aware that he is playing into
their hands. He cannot counter their arguments by singing their song. The
message he projects must be reversed: that refugees need not be a burden but
an asset. In the short term they need our help. In the long term, if they
stay, they will contribute to the economic prosperity and cultural diversity
of our nation as generations of refugees have done before. The German
Interior Ministry has belatedly launched a publicity programme of this kind.
The Swedish government has for many years provided Swedes with positive
information about people who have moved to live in that country.
The extraordinary humanitarian efforts of agencies like Alert demonstrate a
generosity of spirit from which Kenneth Clarke has much to learn. But
opening the doors would not be enough. We must tell the British people not
only that this is the right course of action for Britain to take but that
both internationally and domestically, it is in our interests to do so.
Sarah Spencer,
Institute for Policy Research,
30-32 Southampton Street,
London WC2E 7KA

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921120

