FT923-6511

FT  24 AUG 92 / Peace hopes and war fears: Iraq's intransigence and
Arab-Israeli talks provide opportunities for President Bush


   By ROGER MATTHEWS and TONY WALKER


The threat of war in the Middle East will again dominate Washington's
foreign policy agenda this week, pushing into the background negotiations
that could lead to a breakthrough in the seemingly intractable conflict
between Israel and its Arab neighbours. For President George Bush, fresh
from launching his re-election campaign in Houston, it is a dual opportunity
to prove to a sceptical electorate that his qualities of international
leadership more than offset the doubts about his handling of an ailing
economy.
The issue of war is again dictated by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and
the unfinished aspects of the Gulf war. Last week in Houston Mr Bush claimed
credit for the collapse of communism and the Soviet empire, the
reunification of Germany, the staging of Middle East peace talks, and even
the improvement in race relations in South Africa. But his supposedly
greatest personal triumph, the victory over Iraq in the Gulf War, is
beginning to turn electorally sour.
President Saddam Hussein, probably with an eye on Mr Bush's re-election
campaign, has chosen this time to intensify his defiance of the conditions
imposed on him by UN Security Council resolutions at the end of the war. He
will not allow UN inspectors to visit ministries in search of evidence
relating to weapons of mass destruction; he has denied visas to other UN
staff overseeing aid efforts; and most frightening of all, he is said to be
preparing his army for another large-scale assault on the Shia population in
the south.
It is not a challenge that Mr Bush can ignore and, unlike the disaster of
Bosnia-Hercegovina, it is not one that can so easily be evaded by references
to 'quagmires' and Vietnam. Together with Britain and France, the US has
responded by planning an air security zone at the 32nd parallel below which
Saddam's aircraft will be forbidden to fly.
The details are expected to be announced tomorrow. It is aimed at delivering
a further blow to the prestige of the Iraqi leader and to offer limited
protection to people in the south, particularly in the marshes north of
Basra, where the Iraqi army finds it difficult to deploy armour and heavy
artillery.
But it is also likely to prove an open-ended allied commitment to protect
the people of southern Iraq who number more than 50 per cent of the
population. With protection already being given to the Kurds north of the
36th parallel, it brings closer the division of Iraq into three distinct
parts and the eventual involvement of the allies in the country's political
reorganisation.
Baghdad is unlikely to challenge the air ban, but if it continues to pursue
the Shia, the allies will have to decide if they are prepared to attack
Saddam's forces on the ground, increasing the risk of full-scale hostilities
against Baghdad.
An extended conflict brings wider regional repercussions. Opponents of
superpower involvement in the Gulf, such as Iran, have already warned the US
to stay away from Iraq, while Jordan and Syria, two of the participants in
this week's Arab-Israeli negotiations in Washington, have also objected to
the air exclusion zone.
Jordan and Syria will this week be attempting to gauge, along with the
Palestinians and Lebanon, just how much the peace process launched last
October in Madrid can be advanced following the June elections in Israel and
the extent to which the US remains committed to its success.
The more pragmatic approach of Mr Yitzhak Rabin, Israel's new Labour prime
minister, to the demands of the Palestinians living under occupation since
1967 contrasts sharply with that of his predecessor Mr Yitzhak Shamir. In
the wake of defeat, Mr Shamir admitted his aim had been to negotiate for 10
years if necessary, during which time so many Jews would have been settled
in the West Bank and Gaza that the territories would become irreversibly
part of Israel.
It was that determination to continue building settlements, considered by
the international community to be the biggest obstacle to peace, which made
the US deny Israel the Dollars 10bn in loan guarantees it was seeking to
absorb new immigrants. The Labour government said from the outset that it
was prepared to freeze most new settlement building not required for
security - although it will complete more than 10,000 apartments under
construction - and wanted to negotiate within nine months a form of autonomy
for the Palestinians. On the basis of that encouraging statement, Mr Rabin
was welcomed to the US earlier this month and returned home triumphantly
with the promise of the Dollars 10bn in loan guarantees.
American unwillingness to insist on a total ban on new settlements caused no
more than a temporary hesitation among the four Arab delegations about
travelling to Washington. They complained about a US tilt towards Israel,
hoped that it would resume an 'honest broker' role, but tacitly acknowledged
that proposals could emerge in Washington which will interest them.
Mr Rabin would probably like to press ahead more quickly in negotiations
with the Palestinians than with Syria, but has been told by the US that it
would be 'unhelpful' if the parallel discussions did not proceed roughly in
tandem. Israeli observers say that in spite of the improved negotiating
climate, Mr Rabin will prove especially tough on all security issues. They
note that he has retained Mr Elyakim Rubinstein as the chief negotiator with
the Palestinians, a decision designed to underline his security concerns.
But Mr Rubinstein's reappointment has been balanced by the selection of
Professor Itamar Rabinovich, an expert on Syria and a pragmatist, to lead
the team negotiating with Damascus.
Arab negotiators like to emphasise that UN resolutions lie as much at the
heart of their negotiations as they do in the conflict between Iraq and the
western allies. In the case of the Arab-Israeli conflict, it is resolutions
242 and 338, passed after the 1967 and 1973 Middle East wars, which call for
the return of territories occupied by Israel and assert the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of land by force. For Syria that means regaining control
of the Golan Heights and for the Palestinians it means achieving
self-determination in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
'Let's see now if the US will be as keen on UN resolutions affecting Israel
as it is on enforcing those on Iraq,' an Arab diplomat commented.
The core of the Israeli-Palestinian talks for the next month will be on an
interim self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza to administer the
territory for five years. During the final two years, negotiations will be
held on the precise borders and status of the territories. The Palestinians
tabled their concept of the Palestinian Interim Self-Governing Authority
(Pisga) in Washington on March 3. It is the embryo of an independent state.
'The success of the transitional process is only possible if the Pisga is
vested with all the powers of a true self-governing authority,' asserts the
Palestinian document.
The Palestinians will press for elections to a 180-member legislature,
together with a 20-member executive council and a judiciary. Israeli
officials, baulking at anything which hints at a Palestinian state, said
recently that a much smaller 'self-governing authority' would be sufficient.
Mr Faisal Husseini, the leading Palestinian in the territories, argues that
the numbers issue is not so important. 'What we want to be sure is that the
source of authority is a Palestinian one, that the source of legality is a
Palestinian one. . . . It is not the numbers; it is the principle.'
In one important respect the assumptions underlying discussions on elections
will be very different following the change of Israeli government. Whereas
Mr Shamir was at best offering municipal elections covering about 30 per
cent of the population of the West Bank and Gaza, Mr Rabin is talking about
a poll encompassing all the territories with their population of about
1.75m.
The Palestinians, in their preparations for Washington, have formed no fewer
than 37 committees to plan for the transfer of authority over such functions
as health, education and social welfare.
The Camp David accords negotiated between the US, Israel and Egypt in 1978
and reviled at the time by the Palestine Liberation Organisation and almost
all Arab governments, provide the fullest offer made by Israel for
Palestinian autonomy and accepted 'the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people and their just requirements'. But in the nearly 14 years since then,
the number of Jewish settlers in the territories has increased to 110,000,
and the Palestinian uprising, which started late in 1987, has intensified
the bitterness on both sides.
The suggested 20,000-strong, locally recruited Palestinian police force,
operating in areas vacated by the Israeli military as envisaged in Camp
David, would be sure to be resented by militant Jewish settlers whose future
must seem less secure in the wake of Mr Rabin's electoral victory.
Syria, robbed of the security umbrella and assured arms supplies provided by
the former Soviet Union, may prove marginally more flexible in its demands
for the unqualified return of the Golan Heights. Mr Rabin is said to be
willing to discuss shared sovereignty and US troops being stationed on the
Heights. But in return Israel would insist on a full peace, a prospect that
many Israelis suspect would be too much for President Hafez al-Assad to
accept.
Few of the parties to the conflict doubt, however, that for negotiations to
have reached this stage, a massive diplomatic effort was required by the US
and in particular by Mr James Baker. And therein lies the main reason for
continued caution about the prospects for real progress. Mr Baker, who
yesterday took over as White house chief of staff, is now far more concerned
about the uphill task of getting Mr Bush re-elected than with monitoring the
peace talks.
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, his acting successor at the State Department, is
unlikely to be able to devote the same time or energy to the issue. And all
the time, forcing himself on American public attention is the man Republican
party leaders refer to as the 'Baghdad bully'. They know that in the next 10
weeks he can damage the president's electoral chances far more than peace
talks can boost them. Deep in his Baghdad bunker, President Saddam Hussein
may not fully appreciate just how much Mr Bush wants his political scalp.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920824

