FT923-6611

FT  22 AUG 92 / Books: Storm clouds over Europe - Fiction


   By ISABEL QUIGLY


THE YEAR OF THE DEATH OF RICARDOREIS by Jose Saramago Harvill Pounds 14.99,
358 pages
SEPARATE ROOMS by Pier Vittorio Tondelli Serpent's Tail Pounds 8.99, 186
pages
THE TROUBLESOME OFFSPRING OF CARDINAL GUZMAN by Louis de Bernieres Secker &
Warburg Pounds 14.99, 388 pages
IT rained a lot in Lisbon in 1936, if The Year of the Death of Ricardo Reis
is to be believed. Or perhaps it is the pathetic fallacy at work, a weather
of the spirit that seems to affect externals: gloom not just in the air but
of the heart.
When Ricardo Reis from Rio docks in Lisbon on the Highland Brigade, a famous
Portuguese poet has just died. So, at about the same time in England, have
Kipling and George V. Though local in ambience, the book's range is
international. Clinging like a small limpet to the edge of Europe, Portugal,
already in the grip of a long dictatorship, watches fascism in the ascendant
 -Mussolini conquering Abyssinia, Hitler flexing his muscles, Spain erupting
into civil war. When a sailor is killed in an attempted mutiny, he seems to
embody everything about the humble, underlying decency of resistance.
Reis has made the young man's sister pregnant - a maid at the hotel he
stayed in on first landing. Is this a further exploitation of the humble?
What will happen to her, to him, to the ghost of the dead poet who haunts
him? Behind them, Lisbon looms, a powerful presence, attractive and
menacing, riddled with often friendly-seeming spies and grand, chattering
refugees from the Spanish fighting.
The poetic ghost stalks the streets and cafes, his relations with Reis too
complicated to explain, fact and fiction interwoven, imagery and stylistic
modes that recall Borges used to quirky effect. The translation by Giovanni
Pontiero of what must have been a nightmare to translate (weird punctuation,
curious syntax) reads well, and the whole sombre enigmatic tale gives a
sense not of spiritual portentousness but of importance.
It does Separate Rooms no service to call it, as James Kirkup does, 'a
homosexual Romeo and Juliet'. As the title implies, it is not a story of
love, fulfilled or tragic, but is about being apart rather than being
together, about homosexual life rather than strictly homosexual love.
Leo wants a lifetime of committed separation with (and without) Thomas:
summers travelling together and faithful winters working far apart, Thomas a
musician in Germany, Leo a writer in Italy. He needs space, his own
territory, time and peace for his own thoughts: domesticity and homosexual
marriage are the last things he seeks. But Thomas, in the lonely winter
apart, finds a girl and finally dies of some terrible unnamed illness (to
make it the more poignant, Tondelli himself, the author, died of Aids eight
months ago).
The lifestyle of a homosexual in present-day Europe is shown in an
atmosphere of cosmopolitan greyness, of brooding bad weather not unlike that
of Saramago's Lisbon; in both cases, one feels the determined downbeat
glumness of Latins who dislike their reputation for sunshine and exuberance.
Again, the translation (by Simon Pleasence) reads well. Tondelli's was a
meticulous talent, precise and particular, his writing full of nicely
observed detail and an almost microscopic view of everyday things and
feelings. He showed homosexual life not as a seedy underworld, but as a
simple alternative to the bourgeois provincial life of his parents and
background; yet one in which homosexual partners had no rights, even on a
deathbed being allowed only five minutes of farewell.
In a week of foreign fiction, The Troublesome Offspring of Cardinal Guzman
is an oddity, being set in South America but written in English by Louis de
Bernieres who, from the note about him on the jacket, sounds British; or
anyway, not Hispanic. Since Colombia is his base, the fictional state he
writes about is as corrupt and high-coloured, as full of churchmen, whores,
terrorists, peasants, drugs, tortures, demons and ebullient beauties as
might be expected.
And very amusing, as well as stomach-turning, much of it is, savagely
indicting every institution, political or ecclesiastical, sparing no
feelings, trampling on all complacency, shocking one by describing physical
and moral horrors which, if taken to heart, should surely tear that heart
out. But it is hard to take it seriously. It seems too much like a spoof of
every fashionable Latin American novel, a carnival of pain and pleasure,
violence, tenderness, high jinks of every sexual sort, quaint customs and
quainter jokes. I wish I knew if it was all a big tease and whether the
author, whose third South American novel this is, had simply hit on a
long-running Latin soap.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920822

