FT921-526

FT  28 MAR 92 / Briefcase, Q&A: Switching to winners


I HAVE a number of unit-linked retirement annuity policies with different
insurance companies under Section 226 ICTA 1970. The investment performance
of some of these policies is dismal compared with the others and I would
very much like to transfer the funds in the poorly performing policies into
the care and control of the insurance companies responsible for the better
performing policies.
Can this be done as a right in the absence of any contractual provisions to
the contrary in the policies applicable to the funds I would wish to
transfer?
Unfortunately, you will usually find it difficult, if not impossible, to
transfer from one 226 policy to another. Some insurance companies operate a
number of different unit funds within the same umbrella policy and allow
lateral transfers from one unit fund to another. It means doing the homework
of what other funds that particular insurance company has to offer.
At retirement you will normally be able to take the money from existing
policies and use it to buy an annuity with whoever may be giving a good rate
at that time.
On the broader issue, however, of getting money back from one insurance
company to pay to another, you are usually face a brick wall obstacle.
While there may be no solution for money paid in the past, there is a lot to
be said for putting new money into what is described as a self-administered
personal pension. This is written under trust and a bank has to be accepted
by the Inland Revenue as a provider. You can then choose whichever unit
funds or direct investments in shares you want and instruct your trustee to
sell the ones that are doing badly and invest the money elsewhere.
This has only been possible during the last few years and only a few
organisations are offering it. In due course we see this solution replacing
standard insurance policies for the majority of discriminating investors. It
has the further advantage of cutting out the high insurance company mark-up,
including commissions, so not many people are trying to sell such plans.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920328

