FT924-6575

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: Daimler-Benz rules out share
stake in Daf


   By KEVIN DONE


MR Gerhard Liener, finance director of Daimler-Benz yesterday ruled out any
move by the German group to take an equity stake in Daf, the struggling
Dutch truck maker.
Mercedes-Benz, the automotive subsidiary of the German engineering and
aerospace group, has been in negotiations with Daf for more than three
months, but Mr Liener appeared yesterday to squash Daf's hopes of gaining
financial support from the German truck maker.
'We do not have any intention of becoming a shareholder,' he said. 'They
would be very happy, if we would buy ourselves into the equity, but we are
not going to do that.'
The tough stance by Daimler-Benz is a considerable setback for Daf, which
announced in August it had been forced to enter discussions on a strategic
alliance.
The Dutch truck maker, in which British Aerospace holds an 11 per cent stake
and which is now in its third year of heavy losses, said it was seeking an
alliance, where the new partner would provide fresh equity, as well as
collaboration to allow it to share products, new product development costs
and plant capacities.
Mr Liener insisted that Mercedes-Benz was only discussing a collaboration in
which the two companies could exchange some components.
Mr Liener said that it would have to be a two-way exchange. Daf has launched
a new medium-heavy truck range, the Daf 75/85, this year, and Mr Liener said
that the German group was considering taking cabs from Daf in a possible
collaboration deal.
Mr Liener insisted that Mercedes-Benz was 'already big enough in trucks in
Europe', where its share in the European Community had jumped to 32 per cent
from only 25 per cent in 1990.
'The more market share grows the more we are exposed to risks. We don't want
more than 32 per cent, that is a peak. We don't want to defend that. That
would be too costly.'
Mr Liener forecast that, as the German market contracts, Mercedes-Benz's
share of the west European truck market (over six tonnes gross vehicle
weight) would fall to 27 per cent to 28 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921120

