FT921-14220

FT  17 JAN 92 / Serbs mourn passing of Yugoslavia


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


'I AM not sure what passport I will carry or what country I live in,' said
Jovana, a student at Belgrade University, the day after the European
Community recognised Croatia and Slovenia.
In spite of Serbia's propaganda that Yugoslavia still exists, many Serbs
yesterday expressed a mixture of sadness, confusion and relief at the formal
break-up of the Yugoslav federation.
Mr Petar Lukovic, a journalist at Vreme, a liberal news weekly, said:
'Yugoslavia actually ceased to exist some time ago. It is not the same
country if I cannot call my friends in Zagreb and Ljubljana. It takes 24
hours to reach Zagreb from Belgrade, because you have to go via Budapest.
But no one should be surprised. It's not as if people were asleep and
suddenly awoke to discover that Yugoslavia no longer exists.'
Mr Dusan Simic, a Belgrade journalist, said: 'We have lost the most
beautiful parts of the country. What remains is the rump.'
Mr Srdjan Saper, a film maker, commented: 'The break-up is painful. It
represents the victory of provincialism over something that was a fairy
tale,' referring to the multinational country of 24m people. He added: 'But
at the same time now there is the chance to create something new which has
all possibilities.'
Mr Budimir Loncar, the former federal foreign minister, said: 'The most
tragic events are in the past. Sooner or later there will be six independent
republics and we can set up finding some sort of common existence.'
The international recognition of Croatian and Slovene independence appears
to offer the chance for the war to end, and the possibility that people will
reject the policies of Mr Slobodan Milosevic, the president of Serbia, which
forced the break-up of Yugoslavia. But public opposition in Serbia to the
war is mostly confined to a minority in Belgrade, where it is still possible
to summon a crowd for a nationalist rally.
'Milosevic many times rejected the chance for a confederation with Croatia
and Slovenia, a community with loose economic and political ties, but now we
have lost that chance,' said Mr Lukovic.
He added: 'People will only rise up against Milosevic when instead of the
idea of a Greater Serbia or a smaller Yugoslavia, they ask not where they
live but how.'
Mr Milosevic has excelled in deflecting criticism and controlling Serbia's
political agenda.
'Serbia broke up this country. Milosevic lost the war, and people are living
worse than ever before,' said a Belgrade lawyer, who asked not to be
identified.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920117

