FT921-447

FT  28 MAR 92 / Lautro pins hopes on training to cure life industry ills:
Why 500 sales agents have been barred from touting for customers


   By NORMA COHEN


TRAINING has become the battle cry of the life industry's regulators. In the
past two months, about 500 sales agents at two firms have been barred from
soliciting customers because regulators have decided they are simply not
competent to do so.
Regulators are increasingly taking the view that inadequately trained sales
agents cannot offer customers the 'best advice' required under the 1986
Financial Services Act, or even 'suitable advice'.
Consider the case, cited by the insurance ombudsman earlier this week, of
the 18-year-old with no dependants who was sold a life assurance policy with
no savings component. In his defence the sales agent said he made the
recommendation after receiving one week of training in which he was not told
about endowments and other savings-type products. Not until five months
later, during further training, did he hear of the alternatives.
Mr Kit Jebbens, chief executive of Lautro, the self-regulating body for the
life industry, said: 'It is the oral presentation and the discussion that is
the most powerful means of persuading someone about the advantages of a
product.
'We believe that there is a strong correlation between the standard of
training and the behaviour of sales representatives in the oral
presentation.'
The stiffest regulatory action by Lautro in its three-year life have focused
on training. 'I believe this will have more effect than any other thing we
could do,' Mr Jebbens said.
The matter of training goes to the heart of the most troubling consumer
complaint in life assurance. Far more common than outright fraud are
instances of 'mis-selling' - the purchase of products unsuitable for the
client. Unsuitable policies are more likely to be cancelled within the first
few years - an act that can cost consumers a large portion of premiums paid.
Within the past two months Lautro has formally suspended the 140-strong
sales force of Oaklife Insurance and asked Windsor Life to 'voluntarily
suspend' its 350-strong sales force until they can be properly retrained.
Lautro declines to comment publicly in detail what the sales agents were
doing. However, in the case of Windsor, where shortcomings were uncovered
during a routine compliance visit last December, it is believed that sales
agents were unable to answer questions about such basic matters as the
charges on the unit-linked policies they were selling. Windsor's sales
agents are paid no salary and earn a commission on each policy sold.
Also, at both companies, compliance reviews were said to have shown the
inadequacy of training when the so-called 'fact finds' were examined. Those
are records, required to be kept on each client, which contain personal
details of the individual's financial and tax circumstances and an
explanation of why a particular product was recommended as the most
suitable.
In the case of the 'fact finds', information was either found to be too
limited for the sales agent to have been able to assess the client's actual
financial needs, or else the information contradicted the recommendation of
the most suitable product.
Of course, regulators acknowledge that the best training is not going to
deter an unscrupulous sales agent from closing a deal, particularly if a
commission is at stake. Mr Jebbens acknowledges that 'integrity' is as
critical to the tendency to offer best advice as training. For many
companies, moreover, much of what has traditionally been described as
training is little more than instruction in sales technique.
Lautro rules simply require that sales agents be 'competent and suitable'.
But after publication in May 1990 of the McDonald report which examined
standards of competency in the sale of financial services products, Lautro
and the other self-regulating bodies were ordered to set training standards.
The rules are not due to take effect until April next year, but Mr Jebbens
says companies are already revising their training programmes to take
account of the new framework.
Meanwhile, life houses, responding to recent rules requiring them to
disclose expenses, point out that the new training requirements set out by
the Financial Services Act have sharply increased sales costs.
Mr Tony Jackson, assistant director of sales and training at Allied Dunbar,
said the company spends about Pounds 11m a year on training, nearly double
the total of five years ago.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920328

