FT924-6337

FT  21 NOV 92 / The Long View: Victim of M4 slowdown


   By BARRY RILEY


ONE OF the most dramatic economic changes during the past few years has been
the slowdown in the growth of the money supply. For 20 years until 1991 the
broadly-defined version of money, M4, which includes all bank and building
society deposits, had grown by an average of 14 1/2 per cent a year,
reaching a peak expansion rate of 19 per cent at the beginning of 1990. Now,
that growth has collapsed to a mere 5 per cent over the past 12 months.
It is a sign that, whatever happens to the British economy in the immediate
future, we would be unwise to look for any clues from what has happened
during the years since monetary growth first accelerated into double digits
back in 1971.
Since M4 represents, largely, the liability (or deposit) side of bank and
building society balance sheets, the slowdown simply reflects the crisis of
the banking system. Proud Barclays may now be heading for a trading loss in
1992 and, as its gleaming new building emerges above Lombard Street, we are
reminded of the time-honoured investment rule, sell the shares when a
company builds itself a new head office. Barclays is not the only one of the
big clearers to face tough decisions over dividends. The bankers will
remember that Midland, which fell from grace and cut its dividend earlier,
has this year lost its independence.
The axe hangs over thousands of employees. The English Big Four raised staff
numbers from 229,000 to 280,000 during the 1980s but they are now tumbling.
This week's news on the labour-shedding front came from the Royal Bank of
Scotland which is to cut 3,500 jobs over five years.
The banking contraction could go much further. The great expansion went
hand-in-hand with the creation of the financial bubble in housing and, to
some extent, a lesser bubble in the small business sector. There was a huge
lending boom on the basis that customers need never repay their debts,
except to the extent that they would eventually be liquidated painlessly out
of the sale of the assets (to buyers who would, of course, be financed by
more loans).
How different it is now, when prices are falling; home owners feel under
pressure to reduce their debts, and when the houses are eventually sold the
new owners may be able to buy them on smaller loans and at much lower
interest rates. For them, at least, all this is thoroughly good news.
During the 1980s it worked like this. Borrowing was strong, largely because
of demand for homes which were rapidly rising in price all the time. The
authorities kept interest rates high, often between 12 and 14 per cent, in
order to keep some sort of lid on monetary growth. But these high interest
charges themselves tended to be rolled up as higher and higher debt.
By 1989 the housing bubble started to burst and small businesses began to
collapse. Within the ERM interest rates could not be brought down quickly
and the debt interest roll-up has continued. Now, at last, rates are lower.
But this has exposed other distortions at the banks. High interest rates
generated all sorts of opportunities for cross-subsidising customers and
services, but these opportunities are now disappearing.
There was scope for offering interest on current accounts, but this is now
being squeezed out. All sorts of charges are being slapped on to fill the
revenue gap. More importantly, the banks and building societies are being
forced to widen the margins between their borrowing and lending rates in
order to pay for their bad debts. The good customers pay for the defaulters,
something which the politicians find embarrassing in public but no doubt in
private regard as an entirely satisfactory way in which the financial system
can recover from the mess: better, certainly, than bailouts by the taxpayer.
Extreme conditions provide grand opportunities for niche players, but the
stories do not always have a happy ending. In the later 1980s there were
great openings for the so-called centralised mortgage lenders, which raised
money market funds to finance mortgage propositions brought to them by
brokers - often for large and risky loans. Many of these centralised lenders
are now in financial trouble and are closed for new business.
However, they have on their books thousands of existing borrowers who are
mostly trapped by the fall in value of their property: according to the Bank
of England this week as many as one in five mortgaged home owners in London
and south-east England now has 'negative equity'. Sitting ducks, they are
often being charged the high mortgage rates of a year ago.
On the other side of the banking system's balance sheet, there is now scope
for money market funds and cash unit trusts to cream off the liquid
investments of investors. Banks and building societies are announcing
'revised' or 'adjusted' savings rates (they are never reduced, a word
apparently only applied by marketing men to lending rates). Word from the
Building Societies Association is that the societies have a difficult task
in balancing the interests of borrowers and savers, to which you might
reply, why not simply bring both savers' and borrowers' rates down in line
with money market rates?
In fact the average pre-tax retail deposit rate being paid by building
societies was much in line with bank base rates until about two years ago
but is now more than a percentage point below. The deal has become worse for
savers because the societies are not lending much, so do not need new money,
and in any case are trying to widen their margins in order to pay for bad
debts.
The answer, as far as the saver is concerned, is not to complain at the
injustice of this but to switch to money market funds if substantial sums
are involved. Do not be a victim of the M4 slowdown.

The Financial Times


London Page I

921121

