FT924-6096

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (8): Talented lobbyist -
Strasbourg's mayor has a twin-track career


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


THE vivacious Mrs Catherine Trautmann, the 41-year-old mayor of Strasbourg,
is in the forefront of the young generation of leaders to have seized the
initiative from Paris in defending Alsace's interests, writes William
Dawkins.
Mrs Trautmann's unexpected victory in the municipal elections three years
ago gave the traditionally centre-right Strasbourg its first Socialist mayor
since the 1920s. She wasted no time in exercising her talent for lobbying
the Paris bureaucracy by leading a Franco-German campaign to put pressure on
a reluctant SNCF rail board to build a new Train a Grande Vitesse line east
from Paris to Strasbourg.
When the SNCF complained that the French section of the line would not be
profitable enough to be built without heavy financial help from local
government, Mrs Trautmann promptly formed an association of the French and
German cities concerned to prove to the Paris government that the line would
be highly profitable if linked to the German high speed rail network.
'It is an axis of integration to link the European Community to its new
members in the east,' argues Mrs Trautmann, who accuses the SNCF of viewing
the project on a narrowly French perspective. The line is expected to come
into service in 1999 or 2000, depending on the outcome of the dispute
between the SNCF and the regions over financing.
This European reflex is typical of Mrs Trautmann's style; she is also an
active member of the European parliament. 'Strasbourg is a laboratory for
Europe and we want it to stay that way,' she says. Like an increasing number
of French politicians, Mrs Trautmann, a one-time junior minister under the
former government of Mr Michel Rocard, attaches great importance to building
her local power base. Earlier this year, she refused the offer of another
ministerial job on the grounds that she wanted to keep her twin mandate as
mayor and European MP.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921123

