FT921-14120

FT  17 JAN 92 / International Bonds: Further Ecu issues reflect investors'
shift to Europe


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


TWO NEW bond offerings in Ecu emerged yesterday, reflecting the shift of
investor interest from the US to European markets.
Dealers said medium-term bonds in D-Marks, French francs and the Ecu had
been the main beneficiaries of disinvestment from the US Treasury market, on
expectations that interest rates in European markets will move down rather
than up.
There has also been substantial selling of Eurodollar bonds in the secondary
market - as investors tried to take profits - as the surplus of dollar paper
now in the primary market forced spreads to widen.
With substantial amounts of unsold Eurodollar bonds weighing down
underwriters' books, spreads on many recent issues widened by about 10 basis
points yesterday.
ABB International, the Swiss-Swedish engineering group, and Heleba
International Finance, the German bank arm, both launched four-year deals on
Wednesday, which widened from 50 to 62 basis points and from 38 to 52 basis
points respectively. A three-year offering for Finnish Export Credit,
meanwhile, widened from 43 to 53 basis points above the US Treasury yield
curve.
In the Ecu sector, General Electric Capital and Credit Local launched
five-year offerings totalling Ecu750m.
The Ecu500m Credit Local deal was considered reasonably, but not generously,
priced to yield 8.62 per cent, and met firm demand. But General Electric's 8
3/8 per cent deal yielding 8.41 was considered over-aggressive.
Dealers said that, although demand for the Ecu was firm, investors are
looking for fair value and are still relatively cautious, given the recent
volatility of market conditions.
However, Swiss Bank Corporation, the lead underwriter of the transaction,
said the GEC name would attract Swiss retail investors.
Elsewhere, Pubco, a UK brewing joint venture, raised a further 32.5m of 11
1/4 per cent debentures due 2006 via Kleinwort Benson. The stock is
fungible, bringing the total size of the debenture issue to Pounds 87.5.
The deal uses a joint-venture structure devised by Kleinwort to cut
borrowing costs for small companies: the structure is open-ended so that
more bonds can be issued via the joint venture and more companies can join
the group with the consent of the existing partners.
Boddington was admitted to the group for this transaction, which now
consists of five brewers - the others are Daniel Thwaites, Morland, Greene
King, and Shepherd Neame. Of the new stock, Pounds 25m of the proceeds will
be lent on to Boddington, and Pounds 7.5m to Morland.
An earlier transaction for a group of five investment trust companies raised
Pounds 55m, and the technique could be extended to other areas where a group
of companies with broadly similar credit quality and financing requirements
can be assembled.
In the dollar sector, Eurofima issued Dollars 153.5m of underwritten
one-year notes under its Dollars 500m medium-term note programme. The
underwritten structure, creating a hybrid between medium-term note and
Eurobond, was used under an MTN programme by Swedish Export Credit last
year.
Hydro-Quebec is issuing Dollars 1bn of 30-year debentures in the US Yankee
bond market, via First Boston.

The Financial Times


London Page 25 Table (Omitted).

920117

