FT922-13448

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Cleaning up after the party - Serious
Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


IF YOU recently sent all your money in a brown envelope to a Panamanian
bank, you can ask for it back now.
After all the panics, after all the marketing hype from financial services
companies, Labour failed to win the election. The 50 per cent tax rate and
the abolition of the National Insurance ceiling are proposals now consigned
to the dustbin of history.
It all goes to show how dangerous it is to plan your finances on the basis
of hypothetical situations. I only hope that readers did not race to invest
their capital in ill-thought out Business Expansion Schemes or high-charging
Personal Equity Plans through fear of Labour. Such haste may prove to have
been expensive.
The investments we were highlighting in the event of the Labour government -
Tessas, National Savings, index-linked gilts  - will still be highly
attractive under a re-elected Conservative administration.
It also seems likely that investors can afford to be more confident about
equities than they would have been under Labour. However, the normal caveat
applies: you have to invest for the long term. While the markets may have
been in euphoric mood yesterday, there are still problems in the economy
which have not gone away.
It is far from clear that the recession is over, and the eventual recovery
may be sluggish. Profit and dividend increases from the UK corporate sector
may be limited. Even those companies with overseas businesses may find their
progress limited by the unhealthy state of many world economies.
The recent problems of the Japanese stock market may also have repercussions
on UK equities - and there are also doubts about whether the recent highs on
Wall Street can be sustained.
Having said all that, UK equities still look reasonably valued in historical
terms. Even after yesterday's rise in the market, the yield on the All-Share
Index is still close to the long term average of 5 per cent. That yield is
higher than the current inflation rate of 4 per cent - a relationship which
has been rare during the past 20 years. The ratio of gilt to equity yields
(around 2) also makes shares look good value in historical terms.
Judging by yesterday's activity, private investors were enthusiastically
buying shares on the back of the election result. But those who feel they
have missed out by not joining the post-election rush may still find, if
they are prepared to put money away for five years or more, that it is a
good time to buy equities.
Doing so via a Pep may be attractive, but make sure that the charges do not
outweigh the tax benefits. If equities yield 5 per cent, then a basic rate
taxpayer who buys into a PEP with a 5 per cent front end charge will have to
wait four years to recover the charges in tax savings. Unit and investment
trust Peps, of course, now qualify for the full Pounds 6,000 allowance (see
Page V).
The more cautious may be attracted to gilt yields of 9.6 per cent to 9.7 per
cent. For basic rate taxpayers, that represents a net real yield of around
3.2 per cent. If interest rates fall under a Conservative government, then
this may be an attractive time to lock in these rates. However, there is a
risk that gilt prices may fall if the government's borrowing requirement -
which is already high  - rises further.
It is also worth remembering what happened in Norman Lamont's Budget, which
now seems a long time ago.
Some changes did not get through Parliament before the election, and can now
be resurrected. Farmers and owners of small businesses can now look forward
to exemption from inheritance tax, and the general IHT threshold can now
rise to Pounds 150,000. Future, more sweeping, changes to inheritance tax
may follow in later Budgets, now that John Major has a mandate.
The new 20 per cent income tax rate on the first Pounds 2,000 of taxable
income will now apply, and there are increases in many of the personal
allowances (although not the married couple's allowance).
Tax efficiency will still be important after the election, even though wives
will not be entitled to claim all or half the married couple's allowance
until 1993-94. But couples where one partner is taxed at 40 per cent, and
the other at zero, 20 or 25 per cent, can still profit from a suitable
redistribution of savings.
However, it seems likely that the scope for radical shake-ups in the tax
regime will be limited, at least in the early years of the new government.
The chancellor is unlikely to want to encourage new forms of saving in the
short term - he wants consumers to spend their way out of the recession.
Tax cuts may arrive but readers should not get too excited at the prospect.
Some expect a Pounds 40bn borrowing requirement in the 1993-94 budget
deficit, which makes the chancellor's leeway very limited. And no doubt the
government will want to handle the electoral cycle a little more expertly
this time - and, unlike Nigel Lawson, keep any cuts up its sleeve until
nearer the next election.
In short, higher earning readers may be relieved at John Major's re-election
 -but they should not assume that everything will be coming up roses for the
next five years.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920411

