FT922-4116

FT  06 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Heavy selling of Midland


   By PETER JOHN, JOEL KIBAZO and COLIN MILLHAM


ONCE AGAIN, Midland Bank dominated trading as prospective bidder Lloyds
decided the price it would have to offer was too high and withdrew from the
contest, leaving the field open to Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation
(HSBC).
Midland, which had been firm earlier, fell sharply on the news as
arbitrageurs bailed out of the stock. The shares closed 21 off at 446p with
33m traded. The closing price was well below the current HSBC offer price,
worth around 474p. However, Hong Kong was closed for a public holiday
yesterday and, in unofficial trading in London, HSBC shares fell HKDollars
1.
There was widespread disappointment at Lloyds' decision. The market thought
that, at the very least, Lloyds would await a decision by the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission before pulling out, and would at best produce a firm
offer, well in excess of 500p for each Midland share. The shock was even
greater among the arbitrageurs, who are believed to have taken a big
position in Midland when the Kuwait Investment Office sold its 10.5 per cent
stake (60m shares) in April, and were keen to get rid of it yesterday.
Sellers were shifting into TSB and Royal Bank of Scotland in the hope that
they would now attract Lloyds' attention. However, one analyst said that,
after trying for both Standard Chartered and Midland, Lloyds was unlikely to
attempt a third hostile bid for some time. TSB rose 4 to 151p, Royal Bank of
Scotland reversed an earlier loss to close a penny better at 202p. Lloyds
recovered from being 17 off to close a penny better at 436p.
Generators busy
Power generators showed some muscle after Prof Stephen Littlechild,
director-general of electricity supply, published the long-delayed licence
conditions for the industry. National Power gained 2 1/2 to 245p and
PowerGen put on 2 to 254p, following licence changes that will make little
difference and, according to Ms Rachel Lucas at County NatWest, should be
greeted by the generators with delight.
Under the changes, the companies must announce criteria for planning plant
availability, closing power stations or reducing their capacity, as well as
to forecast output.
PowerGen said the moves will improve transparency in the trading pool and
add to customer confidence.
Ms Lucas said that the outcome was benign, but not unexpected. She also
believed that a forthcoming deal with British Coal is likely to be
favourable for the power industry. At the same time, it was suggested in the
market that the government is putting pressure on the regional electricity
companies to sign supply agreements with the generators.
Rank upset
Leisure group Rank Organisation suffered a double hit of downgradings
yesterday which sent the shares into retreat and turnover climbing.
The shares gave up 11 to 746p after Smith New Court weighed in with a
profits downgrading. Joining securities houses that recently reduced
forecasts, Smith cut the current-year figure by Pounds 15m to Pounds 260m
and the following year's figure by the same amount to Pounds 330m. The
broker blamed continued weakness in consumer spending for the reduction, and
has now moved the stock from a hold to a trading sell.
Sentiment was further weakened by news from the US that securities house
Dean Whitter had reduced its earnings estimate for Xerox Corp, the company
with whom Rank jointly owns Rank Xerox, a substantial profits contributor to
the UK company. Turnover had risen to 3.6m by the close.
Euro Disney fall
Euro Disney tumbled 60 to 1103p after the company said in a letter to share
holders on Thursday that it could not guarantee it would show a profit in
the 12 months to September 1992. The company also said it had yet to gain
approval from its partners on the second phase of the resort.
Oils bucked a weak market to push ahead in line with higher oil prices a
stronger US oil market, raised demand forecasts and broker enthusiasm.
Carr Kitcat & Aitken was a buyer of BP, highlighting a report from the
International Energy Agency which raised its forecast for oil demand growth
in 1992. BP improved 4 1/2 to 275 1/2 p in heavy turnover of 16m shares.
Shell Transport was helped by Smith New Court which featured it at its
morning conference. The shares lifted 7 to 519p.
Wellcome fell 13 to 945p in response to a US press report which raised
doubts about the forthcoming share flotation, arguing that the shares were
at a premium which could deter buyers.
The world's largest mining group, RTZ, gained 7 to 627p on hopes of economic
recovery and in line with copper price rises.
Currency factors and news that Reuters had made an ADollars 59m (Pounds
24.7m) out of court payment to settle a tax case did nothing to help the
shares which fell 21 to 1158p.
Troubled discount house, Union Discount, lost 10 to 143p on nervousness
about interest rate trends.
Vodafone fell 7 to 371p on selling ahead of the company's annual results on
Tuesday. There was talk that James Capel had gone increasingly bearish but
the agency broker said it had not changed its long-held recommendation to
switch out of Vodafone and into Cable and Wireless (off 2 at 553p).
The threat of an anti-smoking verdict by the US Supreme Court continued to
weigh on tobacco shares. BAT Industries slid 14 to 781p and Rothmans 'B'
were 17 down at 1063p. Regional brewer Devenish gained 7 to 285p on
speculation about a possible bid. Boddington, believed by some to be about
to make another offer for Devenish, after failing to gain control of the
company a year ago, was unchanged at 185p.
Two large food manufacturers announce results next week, but showed rather
different performances yesterday, with Unigate, reporting Tuesday rising 6
to 347p and Northern Foods, with figures due Wednesday, falling 11 to 604p.
Unigate is expected to announce profits of Pounds 85m to Pounds 91m, against
Pounds 75.5m, while analysts are looking for Northern Foods to produce
Pounds 123m to Pounds 126m compared with Pounds 105.4m.
Price discounting hit the holding companies of the large DIY chains. Boots,
part owner of Do It All, slipped 8 to 459p., The 'A' shares of its partner
in the DIY venture, WH Smith, lost 10 to 450p. Kingfisher, B&Q's parent,
also fell 10 to 525p.
A nervous week for property group MEPC, with its long term debt downgraded
by Moody's and rumours about the possible loss of the company's Footsie
status, saw the shares lose another 4 to 311p.
Blue Circle, declined 8 to 239p after Thursday's announcement of a Pounds
241.6m rights issue. Other building materials suppliers also weakened, with
RMC sliding 16 to 579p and Tarmac losing 5 to 124p.
In transports, P&O gave up 11 to 491p after Kleinwort Benson turned negative
on the stock. BAA hardened 6 to 665p ahead of Monday's results.
Among engineering stocks, Vickers jumped 7 to 170p after two sizeable buying
orders that followed a lunch at BZW with investors on Thursday.
Glynwed International fell 9 to 255p after its broker reduced its current
year profits estimate by Pounds 5m to Pounds 45m.
NEW HIGHS AND LOWS FOR 1992
NEW HIGHS (75).
BRITISH FUNDS (2) Tr 3pc '92, Fd 6pc '93, AMERICANS (2) Chrysler, Ford
Motor, CANADIANS (1) Imperial Oil, BANKS (2) Midland, TSB Channel Islands,
BREWERS (4) Devenish, Do 4 1/2 pc Pf, Marston Thompson, Matthew Clark, BLDG
MATLS (2) Grafton, Manders, BUSINESS SERVS (3) Brit Data Mangemt, Rolfe &
Nolan, Warner Howard, CHEMS (1) Croda, CONTG & CONSTRCN (1) CALA,
ELECTRICALS (2) Jones Stroud, Philips Finance 5 3/4 pc Cv '81-94,
ELECTRONICS (10) Acorn Cmptr, Bowthorpe, Brit Thornton, Eurotherm, Forward
Tech, Gresham, MTL Instrs, Star Cmptr, Telemetrix, Tunstall, ENG GEN (9)
Beauford, Do 7p Cv Pf, Clayton Son, Dickie, FKI, Mayflower, Senior Eng,
Syltone, Vosper, FOOD RETAILING (3) Appleby Westward, Greggs, Morrison Wm,
HEALTH & HSEHOLD (2) IWP, UniChem, INSCE LIFE (1) Utd Friendly B, INV TRUSTS
(5) Abtrust Prfd Zero Pf, EFM Dragon Wts, Flmg Enterprise, Lowland Inv,
Melvillle St, MEDIA (5) BBB Design, Home Counties, Johnston Press, Ports &
Sunderland, Watmoughs, MERCHANT BANKS (2) Kleinwort Benson, Schroders, MTL &
MTL FORMING (1) Castings, MISC (3) Danka, Faber Prest, LGW, MOTORS (1)
Central Mtr, OTHER INDL MATLS (3) Harris, Servomex, Vinten, STORES (3) Essex
Furn, Oriflame, Storehouse, TEXTS (3) Drummond, Jerome, Stoddard, TRANSPORT
(3) BAA, CSX, P & O 5 1/2 pc Prfd, MINES (3) Antofagasta, Melinga Res,
Renison.
NEW LOWS (46).
AMERICANS (2) Gillette, Rockwell, CANADIANS (1) Can. Imperial Bk, BREWERS
(1) Seagram, BLDG MATLS (3) Explaura, Plastiseal, Quiligotti, BUSINESS SERVS
(1) Proudfoot, CHEMS (1) Cambridge Isotope, CONTG & CONSTRCN (2) Cussins
Prop, Taylor Woodrow, FOOD MANUF (3) Carr's Milling, Perkins, Utd Biscuits,
HEALTH & HSEHOLD (2), Hospital Corp, Wellcome, HOTELS & LEIS (2) Euro
Disney, Fairline Boats, INV TRUSTS (6) Drayton Korea, Exmoor Dual Inc,
Fulcrum Inc, Selective Assets, Siam Select Gwth, Turkey Tst, MEDIA (1) Novo,
MISC (1) Lionheart, MOTORS (1) Jacks, OTHER FINCL (1) Mitsubishi, PROP (2)
Chesterfield, Ests & General, STORES (1) Alexon, TRANSPORT (2) Davies &
Newman, Ocean, MINES (13) Blyvoor, Durban Deep, ERGO, East Dagga, Elsburg,
Indonesian Diamond, Kells Mnrls, Kidston Gold, PosGold, Sth African Land,
Unisel, Waverley Finance, Western Areas.
Other market statistics, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920606

