FT923-10832

FT  28 JUL 92 / Leading Article: No-confidence vote in Tokyo


THE GLUM reaction in the Tokyo markets to the half-point cut in the official
discount rate is becoming something of a habit. Stocks have fallen sharply
after each of the five rate cuts made since July 1 last year. Such
consistent refusal to be cheered by monetary easing suggests a verdict: the
market now seems to believe that the Japanese malaise is beyond purely
monetary cure.
This looks plausible. Decades of rapid growth have left Japanese domestic
demand heavily dependent on industrial investment. It is difficult at the
best of times for such an economy to slow down in an orderly way, since
investment responds sharply to quite mild disappointments about domestic
growth. The official reliance on consumer demand to fill the hole this time
always did look like wishful thinking, even before consumer confidence was
undermined by the property and stock market collapses; it now looks absurd.
Although the consensus forecasts still speak of some growth in the Japanese
economy this year, there is now a clear danger that the consensus is as far
behind events as it has proved in the UK. The recent news is forbidding. In
May, Japan's seasonally adjusted industrial production (the most recent
figure) fell 1.9 per cent from April; yet inventories rose 0.4 per cent.
Retail sales in June fell 4.3 per cent from a year earlier - the third drop
in four months. The money supply grew by only 0.9 per cent in the year to
June. As a government spokesman modestly admitted, it is hard to see any
promising stimulus anywhere.
It is not hard to suggest a possible remedy. In an economy where private
investment is undermined by poor growth prospects, and consumer confidence
by financial losses and doubtful job prospects, a really large programme of
public sector investment virtually suggests itself. This is what the US has
been demanding, and what the market may have been hoping to hear announced
last Friday. In the event, they found a government still dithering over a
package whose details are still obscure, but which appears to contain more
window-dressing than substance. As one Tokyo broker sourly commented
yesterday: 'The market does not need more details, it needs the kind of
government that would have made the hard decisions on Friday.'
Some hesitation is understandable. The policies which the Japanese
authorities are now being asked to adopt - a combination of easy monetary
policy and a strong fiscal stimulus - are precisely those adopted, again
under US pressure, in 1986, and which led to the bubble economy.
However, that history is very unlikely to repeat itself, for two reasons.
First, the Japanese authorities allowed the boom to persist, against their
better judgment, in order to help Mr George Bush in his 1988 election
campaign. This time, there is no such reason to inhibit timely monetary
tightening. But above all, confidence is now so low that the dangers are on
the downside. Dithering is the most dangerous policy.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920728

