FT923-6518

FT  24 AUG 92 / Arts: Bauhaus changes its contours - The institution embarks
on an environmental rethink / Architecture


   By GUNTER KOWA


WITH his dark, bushy beard, Rolf Kuhn, director of the Bauhaus, looks an
unlikely successor to Walter Gropius and Mies van der Rohe. He has inherited
the fame and the burden of an institution that revolutionised 20th century
architecture and design; today it is based in what appears, after 40 years
of neglect, a nondescript, dilapidated town in former East Germany.
The Bauhaus, however, remains Dessau's most famous building, capable of
overawing the visitor by the serene proportions of its interlocking glass
and steel structures, seemingly untouched since it opened in 1924.
The perfect exterior conceals a history that Bauhaus admirers in the west
are only now learning about. The institution is setting out on a course
which, according to Kuhn, redefines its original purpose in the social and
architectural context of the present day Germany.
Kuhn has some explaining to do, since he was appointed under the old regime
in 1988. Although a communist party member, he played a significant part in
the mass protest that swept through Dessau in November 1989. When he came to
office, the Bauhaus was still paraded as a showpiece of the heritage
preservation of which the regime boasted to the world. The further education
seminars for architects conducted at the Bauhaus for many years had had
little impact on the stifling monotony of the housing estates and new towns
built during the 1970's and 1980's in East Germany.
The regime had discovered a grudging love for the institution late in the
day - at the end of the 1960s, when Soviet scholars began to take an
interest in the left-wing traditions that enlightened the Bauhaus of the
1920s. By the time a faithful restoration of the building was under way in
1970, East Germany had begun to claim separate nationhood from West Germany.
It looked upon certain monuments and historical figures as a part of its
working class heritage, and the Bauhaus was given 'progressive' status.
During the 1950s and 1960s, the regime had taken a very different line,
calling the Bauhaus 'anti-German' (in blatant Nazi tradition) and
anti-working class to boot, while the buildings continued to languish in
their disfigured post-1933 condition.
But there are some who say that the Bauhaus after its re-opening developed
into an institution which the state failed to bring under complete control.
This view is shared by Rolf Kuhn, who set up so-called 'Walter Gropius
Seminars' two years before the collapse of the East German state. These
seminars were designed to question the validity of monotonous town planning
and repetitive building techniques.
By extension, the new Bauhaus, while retaining a museum function, has
developed the idea of an 'experimental academy' intent on the solution of
the urban problems of the region, while providing a model on a far wider
scale. Utopian ideals mix with hopes of a partial revival of the historical
Bauhaus tradition. Environmental re-thinking is now the order of the day.
Project-oriented classes, among them the first architectural design class
since the enforced closure of the Bauhaus in 1933, as well as a drama class
and an environmental class, have begun to devise schemes to restore and
revitalise old quarters of Dessau which have suffered from 50 years of
neglect. Ideas to liven up the drabness of east German tower blocks are
still being explored. No academic qualifications can be obtained, but the
Bauhaus experience is seen as an enrichment of an individual's curriculum
vitae.
Kuhn is optimistic. He points to the uncertainties of direction which
characterised the Bauhaus during the early years at Weimar. He sees the new
Bauhaus as an experiment, in which different disciplines come together to
find solutions. Kuhn and others have been remarkably successful in securing
government research grants.
The biggest windfall for Bauhaus may come if Kuhn's ambitious plans for a
co-operation with the planned Expo 2000 in Hanover are realised. Kuhn has
been canvassing a model redevelopment of the Dessau-Bitterfeld region. The
Expo organisers have shown interest in including some of his plans.
The Bauhaus wants to revitalise the region, among the most heavily polluted
in Europe (blighted by a moribund carbo-chemical industry, open-cast coal
mining and record levels of unemployment with resulting widespread social
deprivation) along environmentally conscious lines. Architecture and urban
renewal, not least the restoration of many historical working-class housing
estates, are seen as a part of this process, together with the development
of 'soft tourism' which is to reawaken interest in the very considerable
landscape assets of the region.
Kuhn has named this project the 'industrial garden dominion'. To him, this
is not a paradox, because Dessau was the centre of landscape improvement as
pioneered by the enlightened 18th century Dessau court and of the German
industrial revolution at its peak around 1900.
If the Bauhaus of the 1920s served the latter, the new Bauhaus, says Kuhn,
has the task of wedding industrial progress and environmental consciousness.
It remains to be seen if 'Bauhaus' can be a meaningful label attached to an
institution which has gone through so much fundamental change.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920824

