FT922-4039

FT  08 JUN 92 / Michael Prowse on America: Oregon blazes an electronic trail


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


Atop the Art Deco Capitol building in Salem, Oregon, a golden statue of a
rugged settler symbolises the state's pioneering spirit. The old frontier is
closed, but the state's leaders are still finding new trails to blaze.
The hottest idea in American politics is Mr Ross Perot's proposed
'electronic townhall'. The Texas billionaire and likely presidential
candidate believes the US can solve its economic and social problems only if
politicians use electronic technology to consult regularly with the people.
Barbara Roberts, the governor of Oregon, has already conducted just such an
exercise, known as 'The Conversation'.
When Oregonians elected Ms Roberts, a liberal Democrat, to the governorship
18 months ago, they simultaneously passed Measure 5, a tax initiative that
sharply cut local property taxes and shifted responsibility for financing
education to the state government. Ms Roberts had ambitious plans for
improving state services, but was faced with a prospective budget deficit in
the biennium beginning next year of about Dollars 1bn, or nearly 20 per cent
of revenue. She says she undertook state-wide electronic consultations for
two reasons. She sensed unprecedented voter unease. 'People felt left out .
. . we needed to build trust.' At the same time, she believed public
opposition to taxes reflected a lack of understanding of the issues. 'I felt
if they had my information, they would reach my conclusions.'
The Conversation took place last winter and worked as follows. On a given
evening, 20-30 small groups of citizens were assembled at different
locations across the state. They were in two-way audio contact with each
other and with the governor. There was also a one-way video link: all the
groups could see the governor but she could not see them. Ms Roberts would
raise an issue. The groups would discuss it. Then each group would be asked
to outline its conclusions. At the end of the process, the participants
filled out a detailed questionnaire.
Through such electronic meetings, the governor was able to consult directly
with 10,000 Oregonians. She stresses that participants were randomly
selected from voter registration lists, thus forestalling one of the
objections to Mr Perot's plans - that political activists might dominate
electronic meetings. She says the exercise was far more effective than
ordinary polling because participants had to think about the issues rather
than merely offer an instant, uninformed judgment.
The governor claims The Conversation reached a clear conclusion. The people
voiced willingness to pay for essential services, but only if the state
government first demonstrated greater efficiency. To fulfil her side of the
compact, Ms Roberts is enthusiastically streamlining the public sector. She
has announced that some 4,000 state jobs (about 10 per cent of the total)
will disappear and plans to close dozens of state boards and commissions.
But improvements in efficiency can reduce spending by at most Dollars 200m,
about a fifth of the savings needed to balance the books. She has thus just
embarked on stage two of her programme, which is to seek support for a
radical restructuring of taxes to make up the remaining revenue.
Many Oregonians are dubious about the benefits of The Conversation: the
governor recently survived a drive to 'recall' her - in other words, turf
her out early. Ms Ellen Lowe, a church leader and advocate for the poor,
sympathises with the governor's aims but says the electronic meetings failed
to discuss the main issue, which is the need to bring Oregon into line with
other states by introducing a sales tax. Instead, they degenerated into an
exercise in bashing government.
Mr Bill Wyatt, president of the Oregon Business Council, which represents
chief executives, says Ms Roberts has not persuaded most business leaders of
the need for higher taxes. But he claims The Conversation was an
'outstanding idea' which was less effective than it might have been because
of lack of resources. He contrasts her unconventional approach favourably
with that of Governor Lowell Weicker in Connecticut. Facing a similar fiscal
crisis, Mr Weicker forced through legislation for an income tax by 'putting
a gun to the head of the legislature'. The public reaction was an explosion
of rage.
Mr Wyatt believes electronic conversations that try to educate voters while
providing direct feedback for politicians represent the future of American
politics. 'The technology is there. The question is only the role that it
will play.'
Is it a coincidence that the first large-scale attempt to consult
electronically with the people was conducted by a woman? Governor Roberts,
whose trim appearance and no-nonsense style remind one of the younger
Margaret Thatcher, says not. 'I think women lead differently. They are
consensus builders. They don't need to find scalps.'
With a female governor, and with women instrumental in pushing through
radical reforms of both health care and education, Oregon is at the
forefront of another national trend: a drive by women to play a bigger role
in state and national politics. The combination of female politicians and
electronic townhalls could prove potent. You never know, President George
Bush's hopes for a 'kinder, gentler America' might even be realised.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920608

