FT921-12072

FT  29 JAN 92 / Western Isles chief fuels poll tax row


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


WESTERN Isles council, which lost Pounds 23m with the closure of Bank of
Credit and Commerce International, was in disarray yesterday after Mr Donald
Macleod, the convener (chairman), appeared to suggest that islanders should
not pay the poll tax which the council has been increased by 470 per cent.
Mr Macleod told BBC Radio yesterday that he had not favoured imposing the
losses from BCCI on poll-tax payers. Asked if he thought people ought to pay
the increased tax, he replied: 'I don't think so.'
Later he stated that he did not support non-payment and blamed his earlier
statement on confusion caused by a bad telephone line.
Mr Angus Graham, another councillor, said Mr Macleod should resign because
of his statements. 'We are now once again into the Hebridean farce
situation,' Mr Graham said. 'He doesn't know what he's saying. I just think
that the best thing that could happen now would be for Councillor Macleod to
step down.'
The council voted late on Monday night to raise its poll tax Pounds 26 to
Pounds 122. Of that increase Pounds 35 is to cover the cost of extra
borrowing to replace the loss on BCCI. The rest of the rise has been caused
by other cost increases.
Adding the council's water charge of Pounds 58, which went up from Pounds
51, Western Isles residents face bills totalling Pounds 180. This is less
than the Pounds 217 they had faced last year before the government cut all
poll tax bills in Britain by Pounds 140.
The council is also deciding how to cut about Pounds 2.6m from current
spending, which this financial year will total Pounds 56m.
The council had postponed setting its poll tax until almost the last
possible legal date after a final campaign to win help from the government.
Last week council meetings were postponed as a delegation went to London to
plead for assistance but failed to see Mr John Major, the prime minister.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920129

