FT922-427

FT  27 JUN 92 / Private View: Mahler and money - the double life of Gilbert
Kaplan


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


LIKE EVERY amateur musician, Gilbert Kaplan has his party piece. But this
lanky Wall Street millionaire, founder and editor-in-chief of the financial
monthly Institutional Investor, is no musical mouse. His showpiece is to
conduct Mahler's 'Resurrection' Symphony, a vast, difficult work scored for
outsize orchestra, choir, soprano, alto, organ, bells and offstage brass.
Kaplan fell in love with the symphony when he was 23. Or was it infatuation?
'No,' he said, 'I think that is too weak a word. It's a torrid love-affair,
one that's gone on for a long time and to which I've been quite faithful . .
. and one which my wife Lena fully understands,' he added, laughing.
In 1981, already rich, he decided he must conduct the 'Resurrection'. It was
a Herculean task for someone whose musical education consisted of three
years' piano lessons between the ages of seven and 10. He hid himself away,
studying for up to nine hours a day to learn the score by heart. He took
lessons in conducting, advice from Sir George Solti and hired the American
Symphony Orchestra to practise with.
'One of the lessons I learned from this whole experience is that very
large-scale projects are often avoided because they seem daunting. What
enabled me to get started was to disaggregate it: I discovered one day I'd
learned a page of the score. So I said '209 days from now I will have
learned the whole symphony'.'
He emerged nearly a year later, mounted the podium at the Lincoln Centre,
New York, in front of an invited audience of 2,700 friends and clients, and
conducted for 90 minutes without the score. It was his party piece for the
15th birthday of Institutional Investor, a little surprise for his friends .
. . and an experience he had no intention of repeating.
But critics and players were so impressed that he was invited to do it again
in public. He has been conducting the second symphony, all over the world,
ever since. His 1988 recording of it with the London Symphony Orchestra has
sold 125,000 copies and reached the top of the British classical hit parade.
Gilbert Kaplan never wanted to be a conductor. He still doesn't. But he does
want to be regarded as a serious Mahlerian.
On Monday he publishes his second facsimile edition of Mahler's music (the
first, of course, was of the 'Resurrection', whose original he now owns). It
is a lavish boxed set containing a monograph and his recording of the
Adagietto, the miniature slow movement of the Fifth Symphony used in the
film Death in Venice and probably Mahler's best known melody.
Kaplan's research has convinced him that the Adagietto, usually played as a
12-minute dirge, is about love, not death. Mahler sent it as a love letter
to his wife Alma and meant it to last no longer than about eight minutes.
Kaplan's version, subtitled 'From Mahler with love' is to be issued as a CD
single - and could be another best-seller.
The infatuated publisher does not look like a man obsessed. He is languid,
polished and preppily dressed with his gold seahorse cufflinks, self-assured
but not overweening.
Had he been trying to prove something, or to show off? He replied in terms
of the lover who seeks physical consummation.
'I am not someone who seeks challenges for their own sake. I don't think
'Wouldn't it be nice to climb Mount Everest'. I fell in love with this music
and the idea of conducting it was a way of becoming more intimate, a way of
trying to get inside the music and understand what it was that compelled me
so much.
'I make no apologies for excessive behaviour, but it was personal excessive
behaviour, not directed to proving anything.'
Are you an exhibitionist?
'I don't believe I am. I may have achieved a few things in my life but they
have been done in rather traditional, normal ways. I'm not an extrovert in
general. I'm not someone who is terribly emotional in public. But when
you're on the podium you really do stand there naked and you have no choice.
You cannot put any limitations on yourself.'
So you would resent being described as a dilettante?
'Absolutely. I may be any number of things but I'm certainly not a
dilettante.
'In some ways I don't approve of what I do; I don't in general approve of
amateurs meddling in a professional world. But for me what I'm doing is a
matter of life and death.'
It would be wrong to see Kaplan as a musical monomaniac. He listens to
Wagner and Beethoven (Mahler's main influences) Prokoviev and baroque. He
can play bits of Rachmaninov, Gershwin and jazz on the piano; and he does
not like Mahler's Eighth Symphony much.
Nor does he especially identify with Mahler the man. He condemns the
composer's self-centredness and domineering treatment of his wife and
colleagues. If there was a similarity, he said, it was their shared
perfectionism. 'Mahler's motto was: Whatever you do, try and do it as well
as you can. I certainly feel that way.'
Kaplan has a middle-class Jewish background. His father was comfortably off,
having sold the family shirt-making business, but his parents were divorced
when he was five. I asked if Mahler's Jewishness struck a chord with him.
'Well, I think anyone who is Jewish and who reads what he had to go through
cannot fail to feel some affinity. It had a profound effect on him and I
have sympathy with his plight. In fact, it makes my blood boil. But no, I
don't find his being Jewish has anything to do with my attraction to his
music.'
Kaplan's love affair has not distracted him from life. In 1967, two years
after the coup de foudre and anxious to be self-employed, he started the
magazine with borrowed money. In 1984 he sold the business to Capital
Communications for a sum estimated by Wall Street at between Dollars 50m and
Dollars 70m. He continued as editor because, he said, he prefers journalism
to business: his strengths are his news sense and his ability to discover
good writers. Occasionally he goes out to interview people, like John
Gutfreund of Salomon Brothers and the late presidents Sadat and Marcos.
For someone who's job is finding out how others dispose of their wealth,
Kaplan is rather reticent about his own. However, he did offer one tip for
would-be millionaires.
'People trying to make money go about it completely the wrong way. If you
pick something you really love (and it's a business activity) you will do
extremely well. If you pick something where you think you'll make a lot of
money you probably won't do well because you'll be competing against people
who love what they do.'
He said there was 'no question' but that he could earn a living from music
now if he chose. But he wants to remain an amateur. Any profit he does show
goes to the foundation he has set up for musicological projects.
When I suggested his latest presentation box was a bit over the top for such
a little piece of music - that it was a rich man's foible - he looked as
wounded as a new mother whose baby has been called ugly.
'I don't tend to do things in moderation. I tried to create the most
wonderful publication I could for - my wife and I joke about it - for the 32
people who care.' He paused. 'Anyway,I don't do it for them, I do it for
me.'
After another pause: 'I wonder if after ten years I don't have some
Mahlerian credentials. While I would agree that as a conductor I would not
expect to hold my own, I'm not sure that Mahlerian scholars would think of
this as a rich man's toy.'
He said he would do anything to make Mahler's music better known. 'A Swedish
finance minister said back in the 1930s poverty shared by all is not
poverty. My equivalent of that is: extravagance on behalf of Mahler is not
extravagance.
Yet money had become a hindrance, he said. At the start it helped him to
learn his symphony - and that cost less than people imagined. Now it just
gets in the way, he said, because nobody can believe that today it is not he
who hires orchestras but they who engage him.
Kaplan's other extravagance is Surrealist pictures. He loves Salvador Dalis
(most of them), has lent some Magrittes to the present London exhibition and
is joint author of a catalogue of Magritte's lithographs and etchings. He
claims Mahler's music, in its use of clashing moods and sounds, foreshadows
Surrealism.
Why do you like Surrealism?
'I could say I like the idea of finding a reality by seeing real and unreal
things side by side. But that's probably nonsense. I like the paintings.
When I walk into the Museum of Modern Art where there's a room of
Surrealists, I come alive. I don't have to explain it.'
He thinks there is a touch of the surreal in his own life: the
self-controlled Wall Street analyst who at night dons the cape of the
maestro and lets fly with his emotions.
But Kaplan does not see his two lives as at all incongruous, even if his
love of Mahler is extreme. He thinks he is 'integrated'. After all, he
didn't choose to fall wildly in love with Mahler's 'Resurrection.'
'And there's something else. It's a mistake to think people have to lead
their lives sequentially. Most people talk about one career then the next,
then having time for their pleasures. I've never believed that's a healthy
way to live.
'If that triggers a reaction such as yours - that this is a rich man's
foible - so be it. But where is it ordained that only the people who do one
sort of work exclusively should be allowed to do it?
'I'll put it this way to you. I think there are always risks associated with
making an attempt to go outside your field, or making an attempt to try some
things that may fail or that some people may find odd. But I ask you this
question. What is really the greater risk, the possibility of making a fool
out of yourself, the possibility of failing, or to live your whole life
wondering what would it have been like if you'd tried, wondering what you
have given up?
'It takes a very compelling reason to go down the road I've gone. But I
don't think I had too much choice in the matter. I found myself on a one-way
conveyor belt into Mahler-land and, without any clear understanding of why I
was so driven, I had to do it.'
Do you think you'll grow out of it?
'I hope I don't. I may grow out of conducting; the moment it becomes a
routine, it'll be time to stop. I'll never grow out of Mahler.'

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920627

