FT924-1009

FT  21 DEC 92 / BA sends lobbyists into a spin: A controversial airline deal


   By NIKKI TAIT and DANIEL GREEN


PITY the ladies who run the public records room at the US Department of
Transportation. For them the decision - expected either today or early this
week - on whether British Airways should be allowed to go ahead with its
controversial Dollars 750m (Pounds 493.4m) investment in Arlington-based
USAir cannot come a moment too soon.
Since Mr Andrew Card, the US transport secretary, bowed to pressure from the
'big three' US carriers opposing the deal and agreed to create a public file
on the subject, letters and submissions have flooded in. The result
illustrates the intensity with which the lobbying game is played in the US.
Canvassers have pitched their efforts at the highest level. At the latest
count USAir has secured support from 22 senators and more than 100
representatives - an eclectic group ranging on the Democrat side from
Barbara Mikulski to elder statesmen like Howard Metzenbaum, and such
prominent Republicans as Arlen Specter and John Danforth.
Not to be outdone, American Airlines - one of the deal's most vociferous
opponents - claims to have 23 senators on board, along with President-elect
Bill Clinton and another 95 congressmen.
This is just the beginning. A trawl by the carriers of their respective
regional bases has yielded a mountain of mail from chambers of commerce,
municipal and state organisations, and governors' offices.
The weary souls at the DoT have not even bothered to file the mountain of
public correspondence on the subject. 'You want to look at the letters?'
asks an incredulous assistant, pointing to the nether reaches of the
docket-room, where a dozen bulging boxes are stacked.
All this, of course, is an impressive adjunct to the formal filings and
responses from various interested parties, invariably employing law firms
and using any number of inventive arguments to support their cases.
BA's propaganda effort in the US has seemed restrained, even tranquil, by
comparison.
It had little choice. The carrier was frightened of giving the impression it
was a senior partner telling USAir what to do. That could have opened it to
more charges of wanting to run USAir, rather than merely finding a team
mate.
Behind the scenes things were busy nevertheless. Even before the
announcement of the deal in July, negotiators from both companies discussed
how the propaganda war would be waged. After the announcement there was a
rapid frontal assault on government and its officials in London. Top board
directors, including chief executive Sir Colin Marshall, regularly briefed
both the UK Department of Transport and the prime minister's office.
Staff were drafted in from corporate affairs, government strategy, public
relations, public affairs and investor relations. With BA board members, and
through their USAir opposite numbers, they lobbied congressmen and
shareholders. A lobbyist was hired in Washington and public relations giant
Daniel J. Edelman was engaged.
Today the British airline complains it was outgunned in Washington. 'They
(American, United and Delta) swamped the market completely. They bought up
almost every lobbyist around.' Still, this did not deter BA and USAir
executives from touring the country to talk to editorial boards of
newspapers.
Their targets were the New York Times, Washington Post, USA Today and the
Wall Street Journal as well as newspapers in Chicago, Dallas and Atlanta,
the home cities of United, American and Delta airlines.
'The majority were sympathetic,' said one senior BA adviser. 'But you don't
win them all.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921221

