FT924-6555

FT  20 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Venezuela invites operators to
tender for 'marginal' fields


   By JOSEPH MANN


   CARACAS


THE VENEZUELAN government announced that it is seeking international tenders
covering the operation of 73 so-called 'marginal' oil fields with total
proven reserves of 1.2bn barrels.
This is the second time the government of President Carlos Andres Perez has
asked private companies to bid for the rights to produce crude oil. Until
earlier this year, this sector had been closed to private investment ever
since the Venezuelan petroleum industry was nationalised in 1976.
The minister of energy and mines, Mr Alirio Parra, said that the fields,
grouped into 13 production units according to location, contain light and
medium gravity crude. Once the marginal fields are fully operational they
should be able to produce a total of about 260,000 barrels a day, or about
10 per cent of Venezuela's current crude oil production.
Mr Parra added that the new operating contracts would be more flexible than
agreements signed earlier this year, and would allow contractors to explore
for additional deposits of oil and gas within their assigned areas.
The fields, some of which are at present being operated by the national oil
company, PDVSA, have not received any significant investments for about 15
years. They are considered marginal fields as they do not form part of
PDVSA's mainstream plans for developing new oil production capacity.
The winning bidders will finance any production investments out of their own
pockets and will be paid fees by PDVSA according to the volume of oil they
produce. The operating companies will not own the oil they produce, and will
be obliged to sell all oil and gas output to PDVSA. Mr Parra said he
expected that companies interested in bidding on the fields would obtain all
necessary technical data by March 31, 1993, and that tenders should be
received by June 30 next year.
Earlier this year four investor groups made up of Venezuelan and
international partners won contracts to operate a series of inactive and
marginal oil fields. Two groups, Japan's Teikoku Oil Company and a
consortium made up of Benton Oil (US) and Vinccler (Venezuela) agreed to
invest a total of USDollars 280m over the next decade to develop and operate
specific oil fields.
However, the other two winners - Shell and Lingoteras de Venezuela (a
Venezuelan group) - did not sign operating contracts. According to the
ministry, Shell wanted any legal disputes to be settled in New York state, a
position the Venezuelan government did not accept.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921120

