FT923-15628

FT  01 JUL 92 / Markets fearful about Spanish economy: Speculation grows
that Gonzalez may be tempted to call early general election


   By PETER BRUCE


   MADRID


A SHARP fall in employment in Spain, along with a widening of the country's
public sector deficit, is adding to speculation about an early general
election and causing heavy selling by foreign investors on the Madrid stock
exchange.
The Madrid bolsa, which lost more than four points on Monday, reached 1992
lows yesterday. The government, its optimistic job creation and
deficit-cutting targets for the year well out of reach, is struggling to
decide how to improve its deteriorating finances.
The first signs of concern in the markets emerged after Denmark voted
against ratifying the Maastricht treaty The Danish rejection prompted heavy
selling of long-term Spanish bonds, threatening to force Madrid into
expensive short-term financing of its debt.
Ireland's 'yes' vote only briefly lifted the gloom, but official figures
published in the last week have shown that Spain is now operating very wide
of the mark on almost all its main economic indicators.
For the first time since the country joined the EC in 1986, Spain is
suffering a net reduction in jobs, with 110,000 jobs - 1,200 a day - being
lost in the first quarter of 1992. In December, the government was
predicting net job creation of 200,000 this year and the reduction in
employment is likely to aggravate already strained relations with the
unions.
Madrid has badly miscalculated its income for the year, with official
receipts rising just 2.8 per cent by May as the economy cools, while public
spending has risen more than 10 per cent. If Madrid was not delaying
payments, spending would be up by around 20 per cent. At the same time the
trade deficit has risen 15 per cent to Dollars 16bn following a slowdown in
exports.
For a government that has trumpeted its intention to cut the public sector
deficit from 4.4 per cent of gross domestic product to just 1 per cent of
GDP by the end of 1996, its inability to control spending is a serious
setback. Some economists believe that unless measures are quickly taken the
1992 public deficit could widen to 5 per cent of GDP.
Madrid is scaling down 1992 growth forecasts from 3 per cent to around 2 per
cent, but independent projections suggest growth will fall well under that.
Some analysts are forecasting 1992 inflation of nearly 8 per cent, a 2.5
point rise on 1991.
Mr Carlos Solchaga, the finance minister, is studying two emergency measures
to boost income - to increase the tax witheld on personal incomes and an
immediate increase in VAT from 13 per cent to 15 per cent before the higher
figure becomes obligatory next January.
He may also try to persuade Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez to freeze current
spending and is likely to try to impose an extremely restrictive 1993 budget
on the cabinet in the autumn. His problem is that campaigning for the next
general election - which must be held by October 1993 - is already underway.
Mr Solchaga is believed to be urging Mr Gonzalez to go to the polls early,
or at least before further economic belt-tightening measures become
inevitable.
Spain has already been stung by the European Community's refusal to make
so-called cohesion funds available to it this year and was unable to secure
agreement on how much these would be worth at the EC summit in Lisbon last
week.
The Spanish government is to appoint Mr Luis Angel Rojo, the 58-year old
deputy governor of the Bank of Spain, as governor when the current two-term
incumbent, Mr Mariano Rubio, retires at the end of July.
The appointment ends months of speculation after Mr Rubio's involvement in a
financial scandal earlier this year made it unlikely he would be reappointed
for a third term. Mr Rojo is a highly respected academic who studied at the
LSE.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920701

