FT924-11940

FT  23 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Compass revises Gardner bid


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER and NORMA COHEN


THE COMPASS Group, which last July failed in its bid to buy Gardner
Merchant, Forte's contract catering company, is preparing an offer for the
non-UK parts of the business.
The contract caterer and private hospital operator has not yet approached
Forte to discuss buying Gardner Merchant's foreign operations, but it is
thought it will do so next week.
After the collapse of negotiations last summer, Forte ruled out Compass as a
possible future buyer of Gardner Merchant. It is likely, however, that Forte
will examine any approach to buy Gardner Merchant's foreign business with an
open mind.
Forte is believed to be negotiating to sell the business to the Gardner
Merchant management, although it has rejected reports that it will sell it
for less than the Pounds 400m it has laid down as the minimum price. A
management buy-out would be backed by CinVen, the UK's second largest
venture capital investor.
Forte said yesterday that Gardner Merchant would not be sold unless three
conditions were satisfied. The first is that the minimum price would have to
be achieved. The second is that Gardner Merchant would not be broken up and
the third that the Gardner Merchant senior management team would remain in
place.
If the subsidiary's management could raise the Pounds 400m, it would have
little difficulty in satisfying the remaining two conditions.
A bid from Compass to buy Gardner Merchant's foreign business could make it
easier for the management to buy the UK operation.
Gardner Merchant is particularly strong in the Netherlands, where it is the
market leader. It also has operations in France and Germany, which are
believed to be of particular Interest to Compass.
Compass is thought to be less interested in Gardner Merchant's US operation.
It is possible, however, that this could be sold to ARA Services, the US
company which joined Compass in its original bid for Gardner Merchant.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921023

