FT923-6380

FT  25 AUG 92 / Present pain for future gain: European economists say the UK
has little choice but to hold its ground within the ERM


   By DAVID MARSH


The British government, facing the most serious sterling pressure since
joining the European exchange rate mechanism in October 1990, was yesterday
battening down the currency hatches. Concerted central bank intervention to
limit the D-Mark's rise against the weak dollar staved off the immediate
risk of higher British interest rates. But, with the dollar closing in
London at just above DM1.40, the threat of a serious monetary crisis may
grow.
The message from Germany is uncompromising: Britain should stand firm. 'We
are seeing exaggerated speculative movements where everyone is moving into
the D-Mark,' Mr Axel Siedenberg, senior economist at Deutsche Bank in
Frankfurt, said yesterday. To show currency markets that it is serious about
combating inflation through the ERM discipline, he says the British
government will probably need to send a 'firm signal' by raising UK banks'
base rates from their current level of 10 per cent.
Whatever the outcome of the next few days, Britain will remain caught in the
crosswinds of an international currency storm whose causes, in both the US
and Europe, are largely beyond the UK's control. The US has been easing
monetary policy to try to end recession. On the other hand, the Bundesbank
 -which effectively sets the interest rate floor for the whole ERM area  -
is keeping interest rates high to counter the reunification-induced rise in
German inflation.
The foreign exchanges are also being buffeted by the latest opinion polls
showing increasing French opposition to the Maastricht treaty on European
political and monetary union. The currency markets believe a 'no' vote in
the French referendum next month would increase demand for the D-Mark  - and
thus heighten disruption in the ERM, the EC's exchange rate stabilisation
scheme which has functioned without a full-scale realignment since January
1987.
The political complications over ratifying the Maastricht treaty have
compounded Britain's economic predicament. Having described the ERM in
September 1990, a fortnight before Britain joined, as 'a modern day gold
standard with the D-Mark as the anchor', Mr John Major is presiding over
Britain's longest peacetime recession since 1930-31. Yet the UK government's
ability to cut interest rates to revive the economy is constrained by the
tight credit policies of the Bundesbank. Since interest rates have fallen
more slowly than inflation since autumn 1990, UK real interest rates have
risen to an annual 6 per cent from 4 per cent since October 1990 (see
chart).
Calls from some UK politicians and economists for Britain to devalue
sterling against the D-Mark have been heightened by Britain's current
account deficit, underlined by a further widening in the shortfall for July
to Pounds 934m. In spite of economic decline, Britain will record a current
account deficit of between 1.5 and 2 per cent of gross domestic product this
year. The UK's ERM experience so far has been in sharp contrast to France,
which managed to improve industrial competitiveness after adopting an
austerity policy which stabilised the franc against the D-Mark during the
1980s.
The pain caused by Britain's transition to a low inflation economy has
prompted debate around Europe about whether the UK should change policies.
Most leading European economists, however, say that Britain has no choice
but to keep taking the D-Mark medicine  - even though this may, in the short
term, force a highly unpopular increase in the cost of credit.
'After the UK failed during the 1980s to bring down inflation with its own
efforts, improving anti-inflation performance through an external constraint
represents Britain's last hope,' says Mr Hans-Peter Frohlich, international
economist at the Cologne-based Institut der deutschen Wirtschaft, the
industry-backed economic research body. 'Britain has to grit its teeth and
press on.'
The option of devaluation within the ERM would not allow British interest
rates to fall below German levels. Such a step might even send sterling
interest rates higher if the markets believed Britain's anti-inflation
resolve were flagging, according to Mr Andre Szasz, executive director of
the Nederlandsche Bank, the Dutch central bank.
He says experience shows that 'devaluation ends up increasing interest rates
rather than lowering them'. When the Dutch government  - against the advice
of the Nederlandsche Bank  - devalued the guilder by 2 per cent against the
D-Mark in 1983, Mr Szasz says this had a negative impact on financial market
sentiment. 'The government caused Dutch interest rates for years to be
higher than would otherwise have been the case.'
Another experienced continental central banker, speaking anonymously,
advised Britain to 'stick it out' because 'all the alternatives are awful'.
Having decided much later than France to bind itself to ERM discipline,
Britain is only halfway through a four-year battle to convince foreign
exchange markets that it is serious in trying to defeat inflation, he says.
If the UK took the drastic step of leaving the ERM, cutting interest rates
and allowing the pound to float, it would take 10 years to restore
confidence on the financial markets, he adds.
Even if Britain departed from the ERM, it could not wholly insulate itself
from the influence of high German interest rates, owing to the UK's strong
trade and investment links with the rest of the continent, according to Mr
Jean-Paul Betbeze, chief economist at Credit Lyonnais in Paris. 'Even if you
are not in the ERM, you are not outside the German monetary area, and this
is a zone of high interest rates. There is no hiding place.'
Mr Eric Taze-Bernard, chief economist at Banque Indosuez in Paris, advises
central banks around the continent to defend present ERM parities with all
means available during the nervous period up to the French referendum on
September 20. In view of the large credit facilities available to central
banks whose currencies fall to their ERM floors, countries may be able to
maintain present currency rates without having to raise interest rates, he
believes.
Mr Peter vanden Houte, international economist at Banque Bruxelles-Lambert
in Brussels, also favours a tough line. 'The British are being very
masochistic in pegging the pound to the D-Mark. But there is nothing else
they can do.'
He says that organising a moderate sterling devaluation of about 5 to 6 per
cent within the ERM would have little significant impact on the
competitiveness of UK industry. Leaving the mechanism altogether, allowing
sterling to float down to perhaps DM2.20 to DM2.40 from its present level of
about DM2.80, would be politically impossible during Britain's current six
months as president of the EC.
Britain's ERM difficulties represent the latest example of the system's
external constraints colliding with a member government's domestic policy
priorities. For several reasons, however, Britain's problems appear
exceptionally dire. After a 2.4 per cent decline in GDP in 1991, City
economists forecast a further 0.5 per cent contraction in 1992  - the worst
two-year performance of any ERM member since the European Monetary System
started in 1979.
Because EMS members have become increasingly reluctant to devalue, countries
which run into exchange rate difficulties can no longer expect to be bailed
out through agreement on a general currency realignment, as was the case in
the early EMS years.
Mr Ernst-Moritz Lipp, chief economist at Dresdner Bank, illustrates this
point by pointing to France's refusal to devalue the franc during the past
few years. This upset chances for currency realignment based on a
revaluation of the D-Mark at the time of German unification in 1990-91  -
when it would have been economically beneficial for Europe.
In spite of governments' antipathy to devaluation, Mr Lipp believes
pressures are building for an ERM realignment this autumn. The strains are
focused not simply on Britain, but also on the lira, which has also slid
close to its D-Mark floor.
Mr Lipp suggests that Britain should join forces with France to persuade
Germany to revalue the D-Mark. If this fails, Britain should devalue
unilaterally in order to 'decouple' from the D-Mark  - a move, he says,
which could be presented as a legitimate reaction to the extreme monetary
pressures caused by German unification.
A powerful reason behind France's commitment to a firm franc has been its
desire to put into place the conditions for European economic and monetary
union. The French government sees the establishment of a single European
currency, to be run by a European central bank, as the best way to end the
present dominance of the D-Mark. This justifies the heavy economic and
political capital France has invested in the Maastricht process  - and also
underlines the high stakes in next month's French referendum.
Yesterday's international intervention to support the dollar suggests that
central banks have adopted the policy of doing everything possible to steady
the foreign exchanges before the French vote. Their inability, however, to
stop the US currency's slide indicates, however, how ineffective that effort
may be.
According to Mr Brendan Brown, international economist at Mitsubishi Finance
in London, the Bank of England may allow the pound to fall within the next
few days to its lowest possible ERM limit against the D-Mark. Under the
rules of the EMS, this would oblige the Bundesbank to intervene to sell
D-Marks, inflating domestic German liquidity and threatening further
unwelcome expansion of the German money supply. This, Mr Brown suggests,
might force the German government to abandon its present reluctance to
revalue the D-Mark.
Britain's dilemma is a cruel one. The measure most needed to convince the
foreign exchange markets of the government's anti-inflation commitment  - a
rise in interest rates  - is precisely the step which could risk turning the
UK's recession into a full-scale slump. Mr Major must hope for a French
'yes' next month, followed by an earlier-than-expected easing of Bundesbank
policies. If these hopes are not realised, and the dollar's slide continues,
the pressures to break free from the ERM may intensify.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920825

