FT924-8244

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Company News: US groups to set up pilot
multi-media news service


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


A PILOT market test of 'news on demand' services, beaming news reports via
satellite to personal computers is to be conducted jointly by US groups.
The companies in the venture, IBM, the computer giant, NBC, the television
network subsidiary of General Electric, and NuMedia, a privately held
multimedia software and equipment developer, will target corporate
customers.
The proposed multimedia information service, to be called NBC Desktop News,
integrates text, graphics, video and sound clips into customised news
reports that can be viewed on a PC.
The venture is the latest example of how the integration of computer,
communications and consumer electronics technologies may spawn new products
and services.
NBC Desktop News is designed for corporate users who need access to the
latest news on a specific subject, but do not have time to comb through the
diverse range of news and information sources available to businesses today,
the companies said.
'The bombardment of news and information available each day is staggering,'
said Mr Tom Rogers, president, NBC Cable and Business Development.
He added that the pilot test marked 'a key step in our ability to cut
through the clutter and deliver news and information to corporate and
government offices, an area traditionally under-served by broadcast
television and cable.
'Being able to recall information on demand is an important feature in this
pilot test,' he added. Corporations in pharmaceutical, computer, and
financial industries are seen as likely candidates for the proposed
industry-specific news services.
Initially, the customised multimedia news reports will be distributed via
satellite to the customer sites. Broadcast, fibre optic and cable delivery
systems may also be tested in the future, the companies said.
NuMedia will provide PC software used to access the news services with
options to customise further the content through the network server for
individual PC users.
The market test will be conducted in New York and is scheduled to begin next
month.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921112

