FT921-3801

FT  12 MAR 92 / Treasury and Civil Service Committee Report: Sedgemore
attacks Bank over BCCI affair


   By RICHARD DONKIN


THE Commons Treasury and Civil Service committee examining the collapse of
Bank of Credit and Commerce International was sharply divided down party
lines yesterday over the severity of its criticism of the Bank of England.
The most damning remarks were confined to a lengthy amendment supported only
by Labour MPs which the Tory members refused to accept.
While no criticism is aimed at Mr John Major, the prime minister, in the
main report, he is accused in the amendment by Mr Brian Sedgemore, Labour MP
for Hackney south and Shoreditch, of negligence and dereliction of duty when
he was chancellor for failing to respond to warning signs.
The Sedgemore amendment singles out the Bank of England's decision in 1985
to transfer BCCI's London-based treasury division to Abu Dhabi. The
decision, it says, was 'incomprehensible and one which bordered on the
criminally negligent'.
The Labour members say the Bank of England's view seems to have been 'out of
sight, out of mind', and adds: 'This decision guaranteed that there could
not be proper supervision or regulation'.
The report confines its criticism of the Bank mainly to an observation that
the 'climate of opinion in the Bank of England . . . favoured reconstruction
and reform rather than restrictions and closure'. The Bank's aim to
'preserve rather than terminate', it says, lasted well into 1991.
It adds that this led to a Bank of England decision that a change of
management and an injection of capital justified keeping BCCI open. The
committee says: 'The promise of additional funds from a major shareholder to
make good any deficiencies does not exonerate a regulator from ensuring that
the criteria for authorisation are met. We believe that in future a clear
distinction should be made between solvency and probity, and that the
'minimum criteria for authorisation' should be strictly interpreted.'
The main report seems more notable for what it does not say. The committee
accepts the argument from Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton, the Bank's governor,
that 'it is asking a lot of (auditors) or of supervisors necessarily to
uncover deliberate and well-designed fraud'.
But the report notes that 'the fact that BCCI had two auditors until 1987
must have made the deception easier and helped BCCI conceal the true facts'.
It also criticises the decision by Price Waterhouse not to qualify the 1989
accounts. The integrity of the audit statement, it says, rested only on a
short note to the accounts.
Mr Sedgemore's amendment lists 33 warning signs on BCCI up to the date of
its closure. Even the main body of the report concedes that 'the Bank of
England was well aware that there were problems at BCCI even as far back as
the 1970s'. The committee refers to a Financial Times article in 1978 that
said Mr Agha Hasan Abedi, the bank's former chief executive, had been viewed
with suspicion by the financial establishment.
'We believe that warning signs were always there,' the MPs say. 'The rapid
expansion across the world of an unorthodox and opaque banking group had
concerned international regulators as early as 1976. BCCI's existence in the
UK was never challenged, but its structure and methods were constantly
criticised and periodically examined.'
Mr Sedgemore focuses on several points that he believes would have indicated
fraud earlier if they had been properly investigated.
He says the Bank was negligent in not knowing that CAPCOM Financial
Services, a company which had Pounds 200m of BCCI money channelled
fraudulently into it, was an associated company of BCCI through ownership
and management links.
Mr Sedgemore says the Securities and Investments Board, chaired by Sir David
Walker, a director of the Bank of England, had reason to know of CAPCOM's
criminal activities with BCCI from 1989. 'Here was another startling warning
of the need to close down BCCI years before the event,' he adds. 'In short,
the Bank of England had every reason to investigate this company but did
not.'
Another crucial indicator, over which the Labour MPs say the Bank of England
was negligent, was a qualification by Price Waterhouse, the BCCI auditors,
of the accounts of ICIC Foundation. The accountants made their qualification
because they had been unable to value the foundation's part-ownership of the
BCCI holding company.
'We believe that had the Bank of England known this, as most of the
cognoscenti in the financial world did, then they would have been forced to
ask questions about how it was possible to pass the accounts of BCCI
(Holdings) SA without qualification,' says the amendment.
Mr Sedgemore includes a suggestion in his amendment that the Bank might have
been more concerned about Middle East relations than protecting depositors.
It says: 'We believe the Bank was not anxious to expose corruption in Abu
Dhabi or the part that Saudi Arabia's biggest bank, the National Commercial
Bank, owned by Sheikh Khaled bin Mahfouz, played, according to the
uncensored Section 41 report which we have just seen, in hiding huge frauds
in BCCI. If this did happen, then it constitutes a clear fraud on the
depositors by the Bank of England.'
The Labour MPs spell out five points which they said the Bank of England was
aware of before March 1990:
Weaknesses in BCCI's accounting controls.
Bad management.
The resignation of Ernst & Whinney from auditing one arm of the bank.
Laundering of drug money by BCCI.
The existence of BCCI accounts held by terrorists.
With this knowledge, says Mr Sedgemore, Mr Major was 'in dereliction of his
duty as chancellor in failing to suggest to the governor the closure' of
BCCI.
Mr Major, he adds, 'must take his share of the blame in allowing the
greatest financial fraud in political history to continue.'
Treasury and Civil Service Committee, Fourth Report; Banking Supervision and
BCCI: International and National Regulation. HMSO. Pounds 22.20.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920312

