FT924-6529

FT  20 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Co-ordination within Europe


ECONOMIC GROWTH, or more precisely the lack of it, has replaced inflation as
the pressing concern of most European governments. The UK government has
already shifted to a pro-growth strategy by partly turning its back on
European co-operation. Is this the only alternative for governments that are
worried about slow growth and rising unemployment? Or would a change in
policies, either co-ordinated between governments or conducted at the
European level, be a better way to revive their stagnating economies?
European countries have shared economic problems, which are getting worse.
The OECD, in September, forecast European growth of 1 per cent this year and
1.5 per cent next, not low enough to be a recession but too little to
prevent the unemployment rate from rising above 10 per cent. The resulting
protectionism and anti-immigrant right-wing populism could not have come at
a worse time.
Understandably, the Commission wants a co-ordinated response. Yet the EC
already has a shared macroeconomic policy which is largely to blame for its
current economic difficulties. The European exchange rate mechansim, once a
force for disinflationary good, has become an engine of deflation. It has
imposed a tight monetary policy which, however appropriate for Germany, has
proved increasingly inappropriate for the rest of the ERM, as the Bank of
England pointed out in yesterday's Bulletin. Both the UK and Italy,
countries with serious internal problems, found the pressure too great and
were forced to depart from the ERM. Yesterday, Sweden was forced to retreat
from its ERM link.
Monetary response
A co-ordinated loosening of monetary policy is the obvious remedy for this
co-ordinated deflation. Yet the persistence of inflationary pressures in
Germany, and the unwillingness of France to contemplate a general
realignment, look likely to prevent German and thus ERM interest rates from
falling more than modestly for months rather than weeks.
Does fiscal policy offer an alternative? Loose fiscal policy is, in fact,
the route that most slow growing countries have already been forced to take.
The Commission estimates that the EC budget deficit has risen from 2.8 per
cent of EC output in 1989 to 5 per cent this year, larger than the fabled US
deficit. If the Maastricht fiscal rules were suspended, then there would be
room for more fiscal pump-priming. The large European economies, including
the UK, are still sufficiently closed that unilateral expansion would have
some positive effect. A co-ordinated expansion could, in theory, have
beneficial spill-over effects across the community and beyond.
Multilateral solution
Yet it is doubtful whether fiscal policy can do the trick and may well be
counter-productive in the face of a persisently tight monetary policy. The
spill-over effects of Germany's sizeable fiscal expansion following
unification were short-lived and, for most countries, more than outweighed
by high interest rates. In any case, Italy, Germany, the UK and Spain are
already in serious fiscal difficulties. The markets might expect a further
boost in these countries to be permanent and force long-term interest rates
higher.
Nor are Mr Delors' proposals for more spending at an EC level anything more
than a frustrated gesture. He may be right to push for more infrastucture
spending in poorer countries for 'cohesion' purposes, and if this is his
intention he should say so. But an Ecu 5bn increase in spending, just 0.09
per cent of EC GDP, is too small and would arrive far too late to have any
effect on overall economic growth.
The EC's situation looks increasingly perverse. Calls for a co-ordinated
fiscal policy, which would in effect mean little more than a rise in the
French budget deficit, have arisen because the EC already has too much of
the wrong kind of co-ordination. The stranglehold of high German interest
rates must be loosened.
Without a deal that allows European interest rates to fall soon, the markets
may yet impose further British or Swedish-style unilateral solutions. But a
fiscal boost in France might work if it were combined with an offsetting
tightening of German fiscal policy, to allow the Bundesbank to cut German
interest rates. This would be co-ordination worth having.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921120

