FT922-13442

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: The Week ahead


THE outlook for UK construction stocks should become clearer next week with
several major companies announcing final results for last year.
Recession in the housing and construction sectors is expected to take a
toll, with losses, provisions for property write-downs and dividend cuts
expected. But the market will also be looking for signs of improvement.
John Mowlem, the construction group which also owns 90 per cent of London
City Airport, is expected to announce on Monday pre-tax profits of Pounds
10m, down by more than two-thirds. The company's scaffolding subsidiary had
a poor first half. A dividend cut is expected.
Taylor Woodrow, which has suffered badly in both property and construction,
is expected to do no better than break even (against Pounds 83.4m pre-tax
profits a year earlier) on Tuesday. Heavy provisions and possible write
downs on its property portfolio, are expected, although the dividend is
probably safe.
RMC, the world's biggest cement maker which reports on the same day, is
unlikely to surprise with pre-tax profits down one quarter to Pounds 160m.
Strong performance in Germany is likely to buffer the company from a weak
UK.
Tarmac, the UK's largest housebuilder, looks likely to cut its dividend when
it reports a plunge in profits on Wednesday to around Pounds 35m (Pounds
190.7m). The company is expected to make a Pounds 12m provision on the
Channel Tunnel, and a possible land write down.
Blue Circle Industries, the building materials group, announcing the same
day, is expected to be in much better shape and to limit profits fall to
Pounds 126m (Pounds 195m). The dividend should be maintained.
Smiths Industries, the aerospace and medical equipment maker, is expected to
turn in interim pre-tax profits of around Pounds 45m (Pounds 50.7m) and an
unchanged interim dividend of 3.9p on Wednesday.
Investors will be keen to hear whether Smiths is closer to sewing up a
partnership agreement with Collins Avionics, a division of Rockwell
International of the US.
The UK's struggling hotels will take the limelight on Wednesday when both
Forte and the Savoy Group report full-year results. Forte is expected to
announce pre-tax profits sharply down from 1990's Pounds 190m, with
estimates ranging from Pounds 73m to Pounds 78m. The Savoy could drop from
last year's Pounds 10.3m to Pounds 2m. The coming year should be much
better, particularly with the prospect of an upturn in business travel after
the UK election outcome.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920411

