FT921-11744

FT  30 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Securities industry capital
rules move closer


   By RICHARD WATERS


INTERNATIONAL capital rules for the securities industry were agreed in
principle yesterday as bank and securities regulators met for the first time
to seek a common worldwide framework.
If adopted, the rules would mirror the Basle risk-weighted capital standards
for banks, which were agreed in 1988 and come into force this year.
After a meeting in Geneva, the regulators agreed a common approach to the
issue, although differences remain about the precise level of capital
securities businesses - if those owned by banks, or non-bank firms - would
have to provide to support their market exposures.
In a joint statement, Mr Richard Breeden, chairman of the technical
committee of the International Organisation of Securities Commissions
(Iosco) and Mr Gerald Corrigan, chairman of the Basle Committee on Banking
Supervision, said differences between current capital rules applied to the
securities and banking industries 'create the risk of distortion of trading
patterns and significantly varying levels of protection. . .for firms from
different countries against both local and global market volatility.'
Regulators failed to reach full agreement on the two most important
outstanding issues - the ratio of subordinated debt to equity that can be
applied for regulatory purposes and the amount of capital needed to back
equity risks.
On the first, there was general agreement to a ratio of 2.5:1 - a level
sought by securities commissioners in the UK, US and elsewhere. Some banking
supervisors continued to express concern at this level. There was also
'general consensus' on the equity risk question, though without disclosing
figures. It is understood the agreement was for firms to provide capital
equal to 8 per cent of their net positions and 4 per cent of their gross
positions - against the wishes of securities regulators, who had pushed for
a lower percentage of gross positions.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920130

