FT924-6081

FT  23 NOV 92 / (CORRECTED) Survey of Eastern France (12): Champagne sales
hit hard - Cutbacks and job losses in third bad year for producers


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


Correction (published 10th December 1992) appended to this article.
ONE chilly March day this spring, the streets of Reims were packed with
thousands of stony-faced workers, shouting angry slogans and brandishing
placards, in protest against the cutbacks and job losses at the champagne
houses where they work.
The mood of their employers was little different. The champagne industry is
in the throes of its worst crisis since the oil shock of the mid-1970s. The
champagne houses of Reims and Epernay, which flourished in the bullish mood
of the 1980s, have been floundering in the chillier climate of the 1990s.
Champagne sales have been hit by everything from the global economic
slowdown, to the strength of the franc against key export currencies and
fiercer competition from other products, notably sparkling wines. The
champagne houses, now in their third successive year of falling sales, are
struggling for survival against a backdrop of mounting debts and
frighteningly high stocks.
It is easy to paint a picture of the champagne sector as yet another
industry that has fallen victim to the economic woes of the early 1990s. But
even after the economy recovers, the champagne houses will still face the
challenge of getting to grips with the longer term issues of the backlash
against alcohol consumption and adjusting to life in the increasingly
competitive international drinks industry.
Champagne is one of France's oldest and most prestigious products. It is an
important source of employment in the Champagne region to the east of Paris,
with 6,500 people employed directly by the champagne houses and thousands of
others who are indirect employees.
The industry is dominated by LVMH, the giant luxury goods group which owns a
series of champagnes, including Moet et Chandon, Mercier, Pommery and Veuve
Cliquot, as well as a string of cognacs, fashion houses, luxury luggage
makers and perfumes. LVMH towers over the other companies with champagne
sales of FFr4.82bn last year alone.
Other leading players include Seagram and Remy Cointreau, which also have
interests in other areas of the international drinks industry. These large
groups have gobbled up many of the independent houses over the years but
three of the six biggest champagne companies are still in family hands.
Marne et Champagne is majority-owned by the Burtin-Mora family as is
Champagne Taittinger by its founding family. Laurent Perrier belongs to the
Burtin-Mora family, with Banexi and Credit Commercial de France as its other
major shareholders.
These companies, like the rest of the industry, thrived in the 1980s. The
market reached its peak in 1989 when 248m bottles of champagne were sold,
compared with 188m five years before. But as sales rose, so did prices. The
champagne producers had taken advantage of their buoyant market to hike the
price of their product.
By 1990, when the recession really began to bite in the US and western
Europe, champagne sales were hit not only by the fall in consumer purchasing
power, but also by the backlash against high prices. It took time for the
industry to get to grips with the pricing problem. When sales started to
fall, the producers' first response was to try to compensate for depressed
demand by raising prices.
Sales fell by 6.6 per cent to 232m bottles in 1990, according to the Comite
Interprofessionale du Vin de Champagne (CIVC), only to fall again, by 10 per
cent to 214m bottles, in 1991. The worst affected area of the market was
exports. The French market, still the biggest single source of champagne
sales, slipped by 8.1 per cent to 135m bottles last year. But export sales
fell further, by 11 per cent to 75m bottles.
Some export markets declined dramatically. The UK, which had become one of
the industry's most buoyant markets in the 1980s, fell by 34 per cent and
Australia, also reeling from recession, by 33 per cent. In the US, where
sales fell by 13 per cent, champagne was affected both by the economic
crunch and also by competition from Californian sparkling wines, which have
made great strides in quality over recent years.
This year has been little better. Exports have fallen further, as have sales
in France. The CIVC anticipates an overall reduction in sales of champagne
to between 200m and 210m bottles by the end of the year. There have been
reports in the French press of some small houses facing falls in sales of up
to 70 per cent since the start of the year.
The problems posed by this decline in sales are aggravated by the
deterioration in the industry's financial state. Stocks have risen as sales
have fallen. Many champagne houses are now crippled by serious cashflow
problems because of the financial cost of carrying heavy stocks.
Since this spring the market has been flooded by 'fire-sale' champagne as
producers have desperately off-loaded their surplus stocks. Some houses have
been selling champagne for as little as FFr38 a bottle, well below the
production cost of around FFr55. They have chosen to swallow the losses,
rather than face the financial blow of another increase in servicing costs
on their stock.
The champagne houses have also been forced to cut costs. There have been
lay-offs across the industry, even at the largest houses, triggering a spate
of industrial action including strikes at Mumm and Piper-Heidsieck this
spring.
However the industry has also taken tactical steps to try to improve its
position by tightening up the specification for the composition and
production of champagne in an attempt to reduce output. The quantity of
grapes required to make champagne is being increased from 150 kilos a
hectolitre to 160 kilos. Meanwhile the amount of grapes that the vineyards
are allowed to harvest has been reduced from a maximum of 12,000 kilos a
hectare to 10,400 kilos.
These measures should, or so the CIVC hopes, ensure that champagne is
produced in smaller quantities, but at higher quality, thereby enabling the
producers to charge more for its new improved product when it comes on to
the market in 1994 and, hopefully, alleviating the present pressure on
prices.
After all, as Mr Jean-Michel Ducellier, president of the Champagne Houses'
Union, said: 'Champagne is about one thing - quality.'
CORRECTION
An article in the Eastern France survey on November 23 incorrectly stated
that Laurent-Perrier champagne is majority-owned by the Burtin-Mora family.
The company is controlled by the de Nonacourt family, which holds more than
70 per cent of the equity.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921123

