FT921-11915

FT  29 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Major panicked into concession,
Labour claims - Value Added Tax


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


LABOUR claimed last night it had succeeded in 'panicking' Mr John Major into
ruling out any future increase in value added tax after charging that the
government would lift the tax to 22 per cent to fund income tax cuts.
Party officials said that the prime minister was forced to abandon a
well-used formula of saying that there were 'no plans' to raise the tax
after close questioning from Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, at question
time.
While other senior ministers had stuck closely to the agreed wording
throughout the day, Mr Major was compelled to say 'there will be no VAT
increase', Labour claimed.
Mr Jack Cunningham, Labour's campaigns co-ordinator, cited a later BBC
interview with Mr Douglas Hurd as evidence that Mr Major had blundered. He
pointed out that the foreign secretary had qualified the prime minister's
comments by saying they did not mean there would be no change in VAT 'until
kingdom come'.
Mr Cunningham said: 'The confusion reveals the dishonesty at the core of the
government's policy on VAT.'
The exchanges came after Labour had launched an 11-page dossier detailing
past Tory VAT increases and a billboard campaign depicting Mr Norman Lamont,
the chancellor, in a mask as 'Vatman'.
In an effort to have the last word in current skirmishing on taxes and
spending, Labour is also expected to use a party political broadcast
tomorrow to level its VAT claim in reply to last week's Tory broadcast on
alleged Opposition plans for large tax rises.
Labour's broadside met with a swift rebuttal when Mr Chris Patten,
Conservative party chairman, dismissed it as a 'smear' and a 'scare story'.
But evidence that the Labour leader's demands for a definitive statement on
VAT from the prime minister had drawn blood came when Downing Street sought
to expand on Mr John Major's denial at question time in the Commons of any
'plans', either before or after a general election, for tax increases.
Earlier, Mr John Smith, shadow chancellor, used a press conference to charge
that past Tory pledges not to tamper with child benefit or to 'double' VAT
had rested on carefully worded texts.
To emphasise the point, he circulated a Conservative press statement from
April 1979 when Sir Geoffrey Howe, then shadow chancellor, had claimed the
Tories had 'absolutely no intention' of doubling VAT, then 8 per cent.
However, within two months the new Conservative government had increased the
tax by just under double to 15 per cent. Pointing out that indirect taxation
falls most heavily on the poor, Mr Smith said that while 25m people pay
income tax, 45m pay VAT.
The Liberal Democrats yesterday endorsed Labour's charges against the
Tories, but pointed out that Mr Smith had not opposed the 2.5 per cent VAT
increase introduced last year to reduce poll tax bills.

The Financial Times


London Page 10 Photograph Joker in Labour's pack, a poster of Norman Lamont
as 'Vatman' flanks shadow chancellor John Smith yesterday (Omitted).

920129

