FT922-4074

FT  08 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Public policy and the banks


FOR THOSE who were worried at the prospect of further shrinkage in the
already thin ranks of the British clearing banks, the withdrawal of Lloyds
from the battle for Midland will be a cause for rejoicing. Yet the crude
numbers remain an exceptionally poor indicator of the public policy fallout
in this tightly argued battle.
In terms of the public interest, the respective merits of Lloyds and
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation as owners of Midland always
depended heavily on how the problems of the British banking system were
defined. If the problem was a lack of competition, a victory for Lloyds was
likely to be a mixed blessing, and not necessarily because of the impact on
hard-hit small businesses. For it could be argued that banks simply do not
behave competitively in this sector in a recession, tout court, and that a
reduction in clearing bank numbers might not have affected the issue much
one way or another. But the Monopolies Commission would probably have raised
concerns about other areas of the two banks' businesses.
If, on the other hand, the more pressing problem is surplus capacity, the
Lloyds' proposals for pruning branches and employees provided a more
efficient solution than anything the Hongkong Bank could offer. The building
societies are banks in all but name and competition in retail banking is
fierce. In wholesale banking, the barriers to entry have been substantially
dismantled, to the delight of the large contingent of foreign bankers in
London.
Huge profits
Hongkong Bank raises an altogether different set of issues. With its strong
balance sheet and huge profits in Asia, it will undoubtedly lend muscle to a
British clearer that has been forced to curb its ambitions because of a
conspicuous shortage of profits. While the need to look after sensitivities
in Beijing may militate against big injections of capital into Midland,
everything nonetheless points in the direction of greater competition, not
less, assuming the takeover is completed. The addition of external capital
to British banking would also have the beneficial effect of reducing any
financial constraint on economic recovery.
Yet increased competition is not an unequivocal boon in banking. Over the
past decade, deregulation has done more to destabilise banking systems than
to generate beneficial increases in efficiency. Bringing external capital to
an already fragile banking market could thus make it even more unstable.
Looked at from another perspective, Hongkong Bank's earlier expansionary
moves, especially into the US, have not been well managed. Nothing in the
past record points to increased efficiency at Midland coming from a powerful
new ownership discipline.
Difficult issues
These issues of competition and excess capacity are exceptionally difficult
ones. A notable disadvantage of Lloyds' departure from the fray is that they
are less likely to be aired at length in public. Yet they need to be. For
the huge losses that have been incurred in banking across the world over the
past decade call for both radical analysis and novel policy proposals.
It has been fashionable for some time to draw a distinction in banking
between so-called niche players and those banks that offer a full range of
services. Yet it could be argued that the full-service bank, of which
Hongkong-Midland will be an example, is really no more than a collection of
loosely- knit businesses whose shape owes more to historical circumstance
than any overwhelming synergy or customer need. Were it not for the central
bankers' continuing desire to rule out takeovers by non-banks, the aspiring
full-service banks would long since have been recognised for what they are:
conglomerates. The so-called full range of services would have been
unceremoniously unbundled - not least at Midland and Hongkong and Shanghai.
In the absence of a more open market in corporate control, these giants
lumber on, their behaviour dictated as much by the quest for size as profit.
In the meantime, the casualties - mainly in the US and Scandinavia in the
present economic cycle - make bigger and bigger demands on the public
finances. It is not a sustainable situation. And it is bizarre that it has
yet to find its way on to the policy agenda.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920608

