FT923-10677

FT  29 JUL 92 / US on collision course with Iraq: Congressional leaders give
Bush their backing


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


FUTURE confrontations with Iraq's President Saddam Hussein are almost
certain, US administration and congressional leaders said yesterday, even
though immediate military action is unlikely after the return of a United
Nations inspection team to Baghdad.
Senator Robert Dole, Republican leader in the Senate, said after a meeting
with President George Bush: 'I think it's pretty predictable that it's going
to happen. We just don't know when it's going to happen.'
Democratic congressional leaders, who were also at the White House meeting,
pledged full support for the president in any future confrontation.
The US has been preparing for a showdown by shifting its focus away from the
latest dispute, over UN access to the Baghdad agriculture ministry, and
towards the issue of President Saddam's attacks on the Shia population in
southern Iraq.
US officials are reported to have urged the UN Security Council to test the
degree to which Mr Saddam is now willing to offer full access to UN
inspectors by speeding up planned checks. Meanwhile, Mr James Baker,
secretary of state, is due to meet Iraqi opposition leaders in Washington
this week in the administration's most overt show of support for anti-Saddam
groups.
White House officials have also emphasised the plight of the Iraqi
population, especially in the southern marshes. They say Mr Saddam's forces
have been razing villages, damming up waterways which feed the marshes, and
may have used biological and chemical toxins to poison water.
State Department spokesmen have warned that Iraqi aircraft attacking Shias
are violating terms of the Gulf war ceasefire. These aircraft would offer a
tempting target for military action against the Baghdad regime, as the US
could claim concrete results by stopping bombardment of the Shias.
While other air strikes might hit their immediate targets, such as weapons
factories or electrical plants, the odds would remain high that Mr Saddam
could shrug off their impact and continue, in effect, to thumb his nose at
the allies.
The threat of force was amplified on Monday by reports that the Pentagon had
sent an additional battery of Patriot anti-missile defences to Kuwait and
ordered an extra aircraft carrier to be ready to sail to the Mediterranean.
But the US yesterday played down the military threat. Defence officials said
the extra carrier now was conducting 'normal exercises' in the western
Atlantic and would not go to the Mediterranean as US-Iraqi tension had
eased.
Mr Dick Cheney, US defence secretary, said: 'I sense people are ratcheting
this up more than it deserves. I think we'll have to wait and see.'
For Mr Bush, his policy towards Iraq carries risks on both sides: he remains
vulnerable to charges that his administration was unnecessarily cosy with Mr
Saddam before the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, and also to popular, if
arguably unjust perceptions, that he failed to finish the job by following
up Desert Storm with a march on Baghdad.
Failure to act carries the risk of appearing impotent in the face of the man
Mr Bush calls 'the Baghdad bully'.
The support pledged by congressional leaders yesterday will not immunise Mr
Bush from criticism if Mr Saddam is as successful in future showdowns as he
was in the latest crisis over the agriculture ministry inspection.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920729

