FT923-10760

FT  29 JUL 92 / Personal View: From debt to deficit


   By WALTER ELTIS


The UK's current account was in deficit by Pounds 16bn in 1990, Pounds 5.2bn
in 1991 and Pounds 2.6bn in the first quarter of 1992. It has been argued
that, with deficits such as these during a recession, serious problems will
arise after the economy recovers, because imports will rise sharply. A
surprising number of economic commentators have suggested that the
persistent deficits indicate that Britain is in underlying structural
deficit which only a large devaluation can cure.
The idea that devaluation can correct Britain's payments deficit is, on the
face of it, odd. British wage costs are now below those of east Germany.
According to the German Auto Industry Federation, hourly labour costs in
west Germany exceed those in the British car industry by 70 per cent, and
workers in east Germany receive two-thirds as much as west Germans. A
devaluation would cut Britain's employment costs still further and make
British labour still cheaper relative to workers in eastern Germany. Is that
what we need?
In the first half of 1992, the volume of British non-oil exports grew by 3.5
per cent compared with the same period of 1991. OECD exports of manufactured
goods grew less than this in 1991, so the UK's share may be rising slightly.
That hardly suggests that sterling is overvalued. If our exports can grow
3.5 per cent when world growth is depressed, we should do far better when
the world economy picks up.
But our trade is likely to remain in substantial deficit for reasons
entirely unconnected with the competitiveness of British manufacturers. If
any economy has an excess of investment over savings, its trade will be in
automatic deficit. Investment that it is unable to finance with domestic
savings will be financed by foreign savings, and such a country will
inevitably borrow from overseas and have a corresponding current account
deficit.
Britain has been in this position for several years. We used to have one of
the lowest personal savings ratios of any leading economy. This year
personal savings have grown to 11 1/2 per cent of GDP, but the budget is
moving sharply into deficit. On balance when taken together, there is net
borrowing by the personal sector, companies and government, which is why our
trade is in deficit. As the economy recovers, companies will raise
investment and personal savings will fall.
The savings rate was as little as 4 per cent at the height of the Lawson
boom. It will not fall to 4 per cent again, but neither is it likely to
remain as high as 11 per cent. If economic recovery is accompanied by
increased borrowing by companies and families, while government continues to
borrow as much as it does today, the UK's aggregate borrowing is bound to
grow and our balance of payments deteriorate, whatever happens in industry.
A devaluation would be irrelevant to curing that deficit - indeed, it might
lead to increased borrowing as families and companies try to spend before
prices rise.
Current account deficits can be due essentially to excessive macroeconomic
borrowing or to a lack of microeconomic competitiveness.
A propensity to borrow has been at the root of Britain's deficits. First, it
was the Lawson boom and its aftermath, with heavy borrowing by companies.
Now it is the increasing willingness of government to borrow, to which Mr
Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the Treasury, is attending. The
devaluers appear oblivious of the possibility that a persistent trade
deficit can be macroeconomic in origin, so that only reductions in net
borrowing by the private sector or government can cure it.
Improvements in the competitiveness of individual industries should be
constantly sought. Any company that improves competitiveness and
consequently raises exports or cuts imports creates extra profits or
employment, and probably both.
The National Economic Development Council's industrial sector groups brought
together 80 chairmen and chief executives, 300 directors and senior
executives of UK companies, as well as senior trade unionists. One of their
tasks was to make the weaker companies in an industry aware of what the best
ones were doing, and aware that what was being imported could readily be
produced in Britain.
The competitiveness of several UK industries is being transformed by the
presence of Japanese, German and French companies in the UK. They are
showing the smaller UK manufacturers how their own operations need to be
transformed.
Our export growth rate of 3.5 per cent reflects such developments. But trade
is bound to remain in deficit as long as the UK remains a net borrower in
the world's capital markets.
The author is chief economic adviser to the president of the Board of Trade,
and director-general of the National Economic Development Office

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920729

