FT924-6303

FT  21 NOV 92 / Books: Travels with the literati


   By JDF JONES


LONELINESS AND TIME by Mark Cocker Secker & Warburg Pounds 17.99, 294 pages
MARK COCKER has come up with what sounds like a good subject after his
workmanlike tyro biography of Richard Meinertzhagen. Loneliness and Time
sets out to be a study of - a meditation on the function of - British
'travel writing' in this century. He has spun a book around, principally,
St. John Philby, Wilfred Thesiger, Robert Byron, Laurens van der Post,
Patrick Leigh-Fermor, Lawrence Durrell and (a throw-back for reasons of
comparison), the near-forgotten Central Asian explorer Eric Bailey.
After that list, who can be surprised that he has bitten off more than he
can chew? He is interesting enough about most of them, which does not mean
that he always convinces. On Gavin Maxwell, for instance, he gets into a
terrible tangle; the otter man's inclusion is surely a mistake. He is good
on Jack Philby, in the steps of Elizabeth Monroe's biography - but was this
most famous of fathers flogging Fords to the Saudis really a figure 'of
almost Faustian proportions . . . in revolt against the limitations of life
itself'? On Thesiger, Cocker, unsurprisingly, is discreet. On Tibet, with
his description of the 'Pundits', the Asian spies who ventured beyond the
Himalayas, he seems to be working on a sketch of a separate book. He is best
on his Phil-Helknes-Byron (Robert), Durrell and Paddy Leigh-Fermor.
But by this time we are irritated by the arbitrariness of his cast of
characters: where, apart from throwaway references, are Freya Stark, Norman
Lewis, VS Naipaul (not a Brit?), Waugh, Greene, Raban, DH Lawrence, Colin
Thubron, etc, most of what would merit quite as much attention as the bunch
we get?
The most interesting pages are on van der Post, that increasingly mysterious
personality of our age. Cocker begins to probe at the deeper levels of the
'carefully-guarded life' when he tackles that surprising and long-term
best-seller, Venture to the Interior, with the central significance of the
drowning of the young forestry officer, but he is soon out of his depth when
he tries to explain van der Post's deliberate and mannered 'blend of
autobiography and invention', the matching of his 'mysticism' with what
Cocker can only describe as 'the plain facts'.
This is inevitably a curate's egg of a book: it will engage and infuriate in
successive chapters. Was the source of the Nile a search for a Grail? Is it
so significant that most of these travellers had no father figure in their
lives? Did the Victorian traveller really need to escape from British
inhibition into 'the metaphysical blank sheet'?
Mr. Cocker works his material to death and gets into a great state about the
'nature' of travel writing. Surely it cannot be such a terrible puzzle. We
all know that the 'travel writer' is not the same beast as the wretched
compiler of tourist guidebooks, and we also know that the genre contains a
menagerie of skills and interests. In these very pages my colleagues Michael
Thompson-Noel and Nicholas Woodsworth, to take the immediate example, are
manifestly different in their style, their tone of voice and, no doubt,
their philosophies, yet they are both 'travel writers' and no more need be
said, we accept them as inmates of the zoo.
Paul Fussell in a recent book, put the matter simply and Cocker has the
grace to quote him: 'Travel books are a sub-species of memoir in which the
autobiographical narrative arises from the speaker's encounter with distant
or unfamiliar data . . .'
Simple as that.

The Financial Times


London Page X

921121

