FT924-8069

FT  13 NOV 92 / Balkan states' pledge on Macedonian borders


   By KERIN HOPE and JUDY DEMPSEY


   ATHENS, BONN


GREECE has sought to allay international concern about its intentions
towards Macedonia by winning support from other Balkan countries for a
declaration that the former Yugoslav republic's borders are inviolable.
Separately worded announcements by Serbia, Bulgaria and Albania backed a
declaration by Greece designed to rebuff Macedonia's claims that its
territory is under threat from its neighbours.
Athens is refusing to recognise Macedonia under that name, but it has
distanced itself from its traditional ally, Serbia, since Mr Constantine
Mitsotakis, the Greek prime minister, rejected a proposal last spring from
President Slobodan Milosevic that their countries divide Macedonia.
Mr Mitsotakis stresses that once the problem of the name is resolved, Greece
will promote investment and economic co-operation with the republic.
Greece appears torn between wanting to live up to its responsibilities as
the only member of the EC and Nato in the Balkans, by playing a
peacekeeper's role, and its fears of being out-manoeuvred by one of its
neighbours.
The government is well aware that any Greek military initiative in the
region would open the way for Turkey to intervene on behalf of the ethnic
Turkish minority living in northeastern Greece.
The most persistent Greek worry is that if conflict broke out in Kosovo or
Macedonia, it would be impossible to prevent several hundred thousand
refugees flooding across the border into northern Greece.
However, the government shows no sign of yielding to pressure from other EC
members to drop its objections to recognising Macedonia. Mr Mitsotakis
appears ready to compromise but is under pressure from both his conservative
New Democracy party and the opposition Socialists.
Germany and Britain are trying to seek a compromise between Skopje, the
Macedonian capital, and Athens in the run-up to the EC's Edinburgh summit
next month. Government officials in Bonn said yesterday that Skopje should
amend its constitution to stress that it had no territorial ambitions:
Greece has consistently argued that Macedonia has claims on parts of its
northern territory where a Slav-speaking minority lives. The Bonn officials
said Athens should accept that the word Macedonia should be used in the new
name, but as an adjective not a noun.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921113

