FT921-3923

FT  12 MAR 92 / UK News (Employment): BT wins test case on strike


   By DIANE SUMMERS, Labour Staff


BT, the telecommunications group, won a test-case ruling yesterday that it
was within its rights to send home two managers without pay after they
returned from strike action during a continuing wages dispute. That was
because the two refused to sign a pledge when they returned not to take part
in further industrial action.
The Court of Appeal allowed BT's appeal against county-court compensation to
the two managers for wages lost as a result of not being allowed to work
during the 1989-1990 dispute. The ruling will be applicable to more than 100
other people who took similar action.
Three judges unanimously ruled yesterday that BT acted lawfully in refusing
to let Mrs Alison Ticehurst and Mr Michael Thompson return to work after
strike action unless they signed undertakings to work normally under their
employment contracts and not to take part in further action during the
dispute.
The court accepted BT's argument that Mr Thompson and Mrs Ticehurst had
failed to show they were willing to perform their contract obligations in
full.
They had plainly shown the intention to continue the industrial action in
accordance with union instructions - by working to rule and withdrawing
goodwill - which amounted to a breach of the implied term of their contracts
to serve their employers faithfully.
Leave to appeal to the House of Lords was refused, al-though the law lords
can be petitioned directly for leave. Asda, the Leeds-based grocery chain,
is freezing pay for a year for all of its 65,000 employees, it said
yesterday.
The move reflects the decline in Asda's profitability and efforts by a new
senior management team to restructure the business and tighten costs. The
company is thought to be alone among big food retailers in freezing pay.
A small number of the lowest-paid employees covered by the Food Wages
Council will receive a 4.2 per cent rise from April. Other pay awards will
be reviewed in June next year.
The GMB general union, which has sole negotiating rights at Asda, said it
would seek to reopen negotiations with the aim of 'limiting the effects of a
pay standstill'.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920312

