FT922-709

FT  26 JUN 92 / Arts: Panufnik memorial concert


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


The programme opened with the first British performance of the Tenth
Symphony. About 20 minutes long, this presents a businesslike profile -
ideas well organised, orchestral textures clear-headed, the piece as a whole
firmly decided not to outstay its welcome. There is an articulate air about
its style of composition which might be taken as a feature of Andrzej
Panufnik's work.
Since the composer's death in the autumn last year, his music has been left
to speak for itself. Panufnik was born and educated in Poland, where he
spent his early years deeply engaged in all aspects of that country's
musical life. In 1954, however, he moved to England and it was here that he
spent his mature years, first as a conductor (with the City of Birmingham
Symphony Orchestra), then as composer, becoming knighted in 1991.
For this memorial concert, given at the Barbican Hall on Wednesday, there
were two major works new to London audiences still to be heard. The Tenth
Symphony, played with that swaggering virtuosity that the London Symphony
Orchestra can always bring to 20th-century music, made a splendid opener - a
little more than an orchestral showpiece too at the end, where it dies away
in pages of some spiritual beauty.
Then we had the first performance of the Cello Concerto, commissioned by the
LSO and performed by Mstislav Rostropovich. On an occasion like this one
dearly wants to enjoy and admire an important new piece, but for all
Rostropovich's characteristically involved playing and what seemed a fine
account of the orchestral part under Hugh Wolff, this score simply did not
put forward the same individual personality afforded by the symphony.
The concerto is in two movements. With Panufnik's love for geometric forms,
they are reflections of each other and each palindromic within themselves.
The first is an adagio, which stirs promisingly into life, but then meanders
inconsequentially. The second movement is a spiky scherzo and this just
seems poised to engage weightier matters in the cadenza, when the orchestra
signs off abruptly and it is all over.
There is a limited amount of expressive potential in the concerto, but what
there was Rostropovich delivered with his customary, whole-hearted abandon.
Even in Dvorak's Cello Concerto, which followed after the interval, there
was not a sign of staleness creeping in, however many times the cellist must
have played this music in his lifetime. His spontaneity has never deserted
him.
Sponsored by Technics Hi-Fi

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920626

