FT924-12044

FT  22 OCT 92 / Survey of Leman Region (5): Serious economic problem - The
Wine Industry


   By IAN RODGER


AGRICULTURE and food industries are among the most important contributors to
the economy of the Leman region.
In the French deparment of Ain, the 250 companies in the sector have
combined sales of FFr11bn and employ 4.2 per cent of the workforce. In the
Swiss canton of Vaud, home to Nestle, the world's largest foods group,
10,000 people work in agriculture and food industries.
Cheeses are the most important agricultural products of the region, with
output concentrated mainly in Haute Savoie, famous for its reblochon, and in
Vaud, the source of gruyere.
The region is also known for its mineral waters, especially Evian which
bubbles up from a spring on the south shore of Lac Leman, and for chocolate.
Oddly, of the 15 Swiss companies that make chocolate, only Nestle is based
in the Leman region.
The region's second-largest agricultural product is wine - and it is also
the one that these days is the most troubled, at least on the Swiss side.
It is distressing to think that an area as beautiful as the steep north
slopes rising from Lac Leman between Lausanne and Vevey could be the source
of a serious economic problem. But groves of grapes basking in the warm
autumn sun have helped to create Switzerland's very own wine lake and early
reports of another excellent harvest this year indicate that things are
going to get worse before they get better.
The Leman region is Switzerland's main wine-producing area, responsible for
about 80 per cent of national output. Most of it is in the form of white
wines made from the Chasselas grape that are pleasant but not memorable.
Until recently, viticulture has been a remarkably successful business in
Switzerland - indeed, it is the only sector of Swiss agriculture that has
been consistently profitable.
This success was no great tribute to the growers. They have benefited from
an extraordinarily high level of protection from foreign competition,
enabling them to sell virtually all of their output on the domestic market
at unrealistically high prices.
Domestic wines accounted for 45 per cent of consumption last year.
With a captive home market, growers have spent little effort trying to build
up exports or an international reputation. Exports are a pathetic 1 per cent
of output; less than 2m bottles a year.
However, change is in the wind. At the beginning of this year, the
government lifted quotas on bulk red wine imports and, in the context of the
Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations, is likely to lift all
remaining quotas by 1995.
The government has also imposed yield restrictions on growers for the first
time, in an attempt to prevent further substantial additions to existing
surpluses.
The source of the industry's troubles was a period of shortages in the late
1970s which led to very high prices. Many growers responded by expanding
production in the early 1980s. This led inevitably to excessive yields in
good years, the latest instance being in 1989 when some 170m litres were
produced, 27 per cent more than normal annual consumption.
As of last June 30, stocks of white wine - which accounts for about 60 per
cent of total production - stood at 105m litres. And this year's output will
probably add another 80m litres to the lake.
All this is made worse by the fact that domestic consumption is falling.
Last year, the Swiss drank 303.8m litres of wine, 4.25 per cent less than in
1990 and the lowest level in a decade. Demand for domestic wines fell less
than for imported ones, but only as a result of severe price cutting.
The growers are attracting little sympathy among the Swiss public.
Comfortable in their protected market for a long time, they made little
effort to boost the quality or prestige of their products, even though
consumers were becoming more discriminating. The first AOC (controlled
origin label) Swiss wines date from only five years ago.
Several growers have already given up, others are in deep trouble. Cave de
Geneve, one of the largest co-operatives with 244 grower-members, has been
unable to pay its members for their crops as a result of the slump in prices
this summer, and is straining with a stock of 5m litres and debts of SFr40m.
Ironically, Vin-Union-Geneve, the federation of Geneva growers, was among
the first to recognise that the market was changing. They have urged members
to shift their emphasis in the past few years from quantity to quality.
Last month, the Federations Romande des Vignerons called for help from the
federal government to get rid of the surpluses.
The government has a 'fonds viticole' to which growers contribute for
providing emergency aid to the industry, but officials say any action would
have to be approved by parliament and could not be taken until next summer.
Opposition from the big German-speaking cantons for more aid for the Romandy
vineyards is likely to be substantial.
'It will be very difficult,' an official in the federal agriculture office
predicts.
Even if aid is agreed, it is not clear what would be done with the
surpluses. Some suggest distilling it, others would use it for food
processing. The simplest method would be to pour it down the drain, but
industry leaders agree that would be a marketing disaster.
Another problem is that growers who have voluntarily limited their
production in recent years are not too happy about the idea of emergency
fund money going to those who have produced too much.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

921022

