FT924-6470

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment 4: Two new formats prepare for
battle - Audio


   By PAUL TAYLOR


THE introduction of two new digital audio formats in Europe this autumn has
set the stage for another classic consumer electronics battle - this time in
the portable audio market.
Since the introduction of the Sony Walkman 13 years ago, the portable audio
market has been dominated by the analogue cassette tape. But while
Walkman-style personal stereos and other portable cassette players have
conditioned consumers to expect go-anywhere, mostly trouble-free music, the
digital Compact Disc player has raised sound quality expectations
significantly.
In an attempt to provide portability with high definition digital sound
quality, new formats such as Sony's Digital Audio Tape (DAT) have been
introduced, but have not proved a great commercial success, and standard CD
players have been shrunk in size but have mostly proved too sensitive to
movement.
So far none of these options has seriously challenged the conventional
cassette tape which remains the most popular format for pre-recorded music.
Recently, however, there have been some signs that dissatisfaction with the
sound quality, durability and appearance of cassette tapes may be growing.
Sales of pre-recorded cassette tapes peaked in 1989 but fell by 11.5 per
cent in 1990 and slipped again last year when 1.3bn pre-recorded cassettes
were sold worldwide compared to 1.1bn compact discs, according to the
London-based International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. This
year the IFPI is predicting that compact disc sales will overtake cassette
tape sales.
Consumer electronics companies believe that with pre-recorded cassette tape
sales slipping, the market for portable audio equipment built around
conventional tape players, estimated to be worth nearly Dollars 10bn in the
leading industrialised nations alone, could be at risk. This helps to
explain the determined effort which is now underway to define a new digital
standard for the portable audio market.
Leading the assault are Philips, the Dutch consumer electronics group, and
Japan's Matsushita, with the Digital Compact Cassette (DCC), and Sony with
the rival 2.5-inch MiniDisc (MD) - a scaled-down and re-engineered version
of the conventional compact disc.
The two new formats have many similarities and technically are fairly well
matched. However there are also some significant differences. Both the DCC
and the MiniDisc promise to deliver crisp, clear CD-quality portable digital
sound, without annoying 'sound skipping', the jogs and jumps that can occur
with conventional portable CD players.
Both formats can also be used to record CD-quality sound, although
sophisticated electronics have been built into the players to ensure that
only one copy of digital source, such as a CD, can be made. An extra track
on a DCC tape holds pages of text in a teletext-style form. This can be used
to provide a biography of the composer, album title, song title and artist -
or even display Karaoke-style synchronised lyrics on a TV screen, or on the
LCD display of a remote control.
The DCC tape and the MD are both enclosed in protective cases for easier
portability, and both players achieve miniaturisation by using new
technology to compress digital data.
Probably the main advantage of DCC equipment is that it can also play a
traditional cassette tape, which means the music enthusiast will not have to
abandon old cassette tapes. Philips sees DCC as eventually replacing the
conventional cassette tape. However, this also means DCC players will never
be smaller than the smallest Walkman-style machine.
Sony's MiniDisc player is smaller, giving it an edge in terms of
portability, and has the ability to skip from any one track to another very
rapidly, like an ordinary CD. Sony believe this random access feature is
something customers want more than backwards compatibility with earlier
portable formats - the Japanese group points out that standard CDs have
largely replaced the vinyl LP even though the two formats are wholly
incompatible.
Initially prices for equipment capable of playing the new formats are likely
to be considerably higher than those for conventional audio cassette
players. But the basic digital technology has been proven and tested in
earlier CD players and prices should fall quickly as volumes rise.
Similarly, the new digital tapes and MiniDiscs will retail at prices similar
to existing CDs - prices which are themselves coming under increasing
scrutiny in Britain.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, the new director-general of Fair Trading, has ordered a
fresh investigation into why CD prices in the UK are so high even though an
earlier 15-month study undertaken by Sir Bryan's predecessor found no
evidence that record companies were breaching competition law.
Some analysts believe the two new digital formats will both be able to
coexist, but most within the industry believe that, as with most other
consumer electronic devices such as video, there is likely to be only one
winner.
Which of the two formats does emerge as the most successful probably depends
as much on marketing as anything else. Both DCC and MD offer significant
technical advantages over earlier formats but, as Sony's Betamax video
format proved a decade ago, technical superiority does not itself guarantee
success.
The early availability of 'software' in the form of pre-recorded music could
also prove critical in the battle for supremacy, and in theory the DCC camp
should have had a key advantage because the format was formally launched
last month, well ahead of Sony's MD players.
Philips had said there would be about 500 titles ready for the October
launch in the UK, but in the event delays meant that, as in Japan, the
hardware went on sale before the tapes. Nevertheless, Philips, which is
spending Pounds 2m in Britain alone on a pre-Christmas advertising blitz to
promote DCC, has forecast that despite the initial hiccup, more than 1,000
titles from most of the big international record companies supporting DCC
will be on sale by the end of the year.
For both Philips and Sony, the stakes in the portable digital audio battle
have been raised even higher by the business difficulties they currently
face. Philips is in the middle of a group-wide restructuring programme aimed
at slimming operations and raising efficiency and profitability while
operating profits from Sony's worldwide consumer electronics business fell
sharply last year.
Both companies are therefore in dire need of a new hit product. But while
the hardware battle between DCC and MC digital formats is likely to dominate
the portable consumer electronics industry in the immediate future, other
methods of delivering digital-quality sound could herald an even bigger
shake-up in the delivery of high-quality digital music by the late 1990s.
The arrival of digital audio broadcasts (DAB), which is being pioneered in
Europe, could enable consumers equipped with suitable receiving equipment
and a digital recording device like DCC or MD equipment to make their own
CD-quality recordings direct from the airwaves.
DAB has several key advantages over conventional analogue broadcasting such
as FM radio. The main benefit is that the high quality sound of DAB, unlike
conventional FM radio, is effectively free from interference and provides
excellent reception even when the receiver is mobile. DAB also eliminates
the problem of having to re-tune car radios because, unlike conventional
radio, separate transmitters can broadcast on the same frequency.
A further important advantage of DAB is that it occupies relatively little
space on the radio spectrum. By packing broadcast information tightly
together DAB can provide a six-fold improvement in spectrum efficiency over
FM. That means it is possible to increase the number of radio stations
without congesting the radio waves. While each FM network needs 2.2
megahertz of spectrum to provide coverage to 98 per cent of the UK
population, a DAB service could pack five national stereo channels in 1.75
MHz.
To use DAB, consumers will need to buy a new type of programmable digital
radio built on computer chip technology. Although the cost of these new
digital radios will initially be higher than conventional receivers, there
are an estimated 2bn radios currently in use around the world and
manufacturers could therefore look forward to a huge replacement market, and
very significant economies of scale.
In Europe, digital radio systems are being tested in France, Germany and
Britain where the UK government has signalled its support for DAB and urged
UK manufacturers to be first into the market. NHK, the Japanese public
broadcaster, has also hailed the European DAB system. The prospects seem
less rosy in the US, however, where small regional radio stations are
resisting the introduction of expensive new technology.
In Europe it is likely that frequency bands generally used by television
will be opened up as temporary 'parking' bands for terrestrial DAB services
to be run in parallel with FM until sufficient receivers have been installed
to make the full switch from FM to digital services. In the UK, the first
DAB car radios are expected to be introduced as early as 1995, with other
sets likely two years later.
However, as with the fierce debate which preceded the launch of the new
digital recording formats, the thorny issue of copyright protection for
music distributed over DAB or cable systems, and then copied on to tape or
disc by subscribers, has yet to be addressed.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921120

