FT922-13400

FT  11 APR 92 / Books: The old softy - Fiction


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


THE RUSSIAN GIRL by Kingsley Amis Hutchinson, Pounds 14.99, 296 pages
ANNA DANILOVA is a Russian poet, arrived in Britain to campaign for the
release of her brother, imprisoned during the last days of the Soviet Union.
She encounters Richard Vaizey, professor of Russian at the London 'School of
Slavonic Studies', and they fall in love. There are complications: Vaizey is
married, to the beautiful, rich but impossible Cordelia; Anna is not a
particularly distinguished poet, in fact she is a very bad one, and it turns
out that her brother is behind bars probably because he deserves to be. When
Vaizey finally signs the petition for his release, he does so in the
knowledge that his academic reputation will be damaged.
The Russian Girl is a thin affair, with its clutch of interwoven themes
buried in prose that is too often clotted and uneven. One wades through
pages of opaque narrative, tripping over the sentence construction, in the
hope of the odd jewelled one-liner, an attack on a familiar Amis target
(overbearing women, vulgar pretension, ill-educated youth) or the occasional
more extended passage when the writing comes into sharp focus.
Those moments of lucidity underline the uncertainty of the rest. Just before
all the loose ends are tied up, before Cordelia is allowed her petty revenge
and Anna and Richard, poorer but happy, can go off into the sunset together,
there is a short exchange between Vaizey and Cordelia's first husband,
Godfrey. He did not leave her, he tells Richard, 'Until I was satisfied as I
was ever going to be that I had a substantial right to bring about the
tremendous emotional upheaval of breaking up my marriage by walking out on
my wife . . . You need the thought of a proper right. Rage and hate and fear
get you through at the time. But they don't last for ever. Nothing can.
Except remorse. Just now and then.'
At such moments the cynicism and detachment fall away, and Amis reveals how
much he cares about his characters, about the pain they inflict upon each
other, the hopeless messes they make out of their conflicting loyalties;
cares about them in ways that the brittle, jokey surfaces mask all too
effectively. At heart he is an old softy. Even the monstrous, wretched
Cordelia, whose affected accent Amis parodies in cruel streams of phonetic
dialogue, gets her moments of compassion, the hints that beneath the
manipulations and the snobbery is someone far more vulnerable than her
husband ever realises.
The odd crude caricature aside, it is not particularly a misogynist tract -
far less paranoid about women's power and men's powerlessness than, for
instance, Stanley and the Women - though Amis generally maintains his wary
distance. The Russian girl herself comes over as not much more than a
cypher, merely the passport to a new life for Vaizey, and freedom from his
academic obligations and domestic snares. Anna is attractive enough, good in
bed; there are enough samples of her verse for its awfulness to be credible.
But she just materialises out of nowhere with her story of Communist
injustice, the answer to a trapped man's prayers.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920411

