FT924-12150

FT  22 OCT 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Follow your nose to
the new world - A change in wine drinking habits


   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE


Britain's wine market seems to have been affected by a touch of
Euro-scepticism. Demand for French, German and Italian wines is falling and
consumers are developing a marked taste for the 'new world' wines of
Australia and New Zealand, South Africa and California.
The EC's big three wine producers still supply the bulk of the UK's light
wines; but their combined volume share of the market has declined from 86
per cent in 1989 to 76 per cent in 1991.
While UK wine imports fell 2.2 per cent overall last year, volumes from
France were 7.4 per cent down, supplies from Italy dropped nearly 6 per
cent, and 4.4 per cent fewer bottles came from Germany. In contrast, there
has been a surge in imports of new world wines as consumers discovered such
names to savour as Jacob's Creek and Hawkes Bay, Pearl Springs and
Inglenook.
New Zealand's wine makers established an office in London last year with a
12-month sales target of 1.8m litres. They sold double that volume. In July
and August this year, shipments increased 76 per cent in volume and 117 per
cent in value over the same months last year.
Australian exports to the UK have grown from 800,000 litres in 1985 to 18.2m
litres in 1991. Volumes for July and August this year were 88 per cent ahead
of the same period last year. US wineries sent 10.5m litres to Britain in
the first half of this year - an increase of 25.5 per cent on the first half
of 1991.
Since the lifting of economic sanctions, South Africa has rapidly
re-established a foothold in the market. Exports rose 61 per cent from 1.7m
litres in 1990 to 2.8m litres in 1991. The tide is running even stronger
this year. Total volumes for the first six months were 156 per cent higher,
and shipments of white wine increased 256 per cent.
These shifts in the pattern of Britain's Pounds 900m-a-year wine trade
reflect a number of influences, not least some shrewd marketing by the new
world producers.
The British are still modest wine consumers - pouring themselves on average
no more than a couple of glasses a week. Though recession at present
encourages restraint, the market's potential for growth is considerable.
Yet many French wines have become over-priced and German wines have suffered
from meagrely-funded promotion. The new world wine producers have seized the
opportunity to appeal to off-licence and supermarket shoppers with
value-for-money products.
Australia and South Africa have focused from the outset on the mid-price
range. California, which first entered the market at the cheaper end and
suffered as a result from a poor quality image, has now climbed into the
same bracket.
Just as much care has been taken over the appeal to consumers' palates as
their pockets. The Victoria Wine chain has trebled sales of Californian wine
and increased sales of New Zealand wine by more than 500 per cent this year.
South African producers, who used the years in which they were barred from
many world markets to improve their viticulture and wine-making techniques,
also put a lot of research into discovering what consumers wanted.
What many UK consumers did not want, it emerged, was the acidity of a
Muscadet or the leathery taste of a Burgundy.
The new world wines have been promoted in the UK with a single-minded
dedication to put as many glasses in the hands of as many people as
possible.
Such marketing has been reinforced by the success of the new world producers
in dispelling much of the mystique in which the European wine industry seems
to be wrapped.
Just decoding a German wine label, cluttered with Gothic script, or
identifying yet another French chateau inhibits many potential consumers.
One factor which has probably contributed much to the increasingly catholic
tastes of the UK consumer has been the labelling of wines with the variety
of grape, such as Chardonnay or Cabernet Sauvignon, from which they were
made, says the Wine and Spirit Association.
There are enough similarities between a Cabernet Sauvignon from California
and one from Australia to reassure the drinker that if he has enjoyed one,
he will enjoy the other.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921022

