FT923-6436

FT  25 AUG 92 / Senior lawyer to initiate impeachment: Inquiry says
president must have known of 'illicit acts'


   By BILL HINCHBERGER


A SENIOR Brazilian lawyer said yesterday he would start impeachment
proceedings against President Fernando Collor after a congressional inquiry
linked the president to a corruption scheme organised by a close friend.
The investigative committee's draft report, read out by Senator Amir Lando
to a crowded Senate committee room in Braslia yesterday, said it had
uncovered an operation which Mr Collor must have known about and which
produced 'undue financial benefits' for him.
Even before the report's reading was concluded, Mr Marcelo Levenere,
president of the Brazilian Attorneys Association, said he would sign a
request to launch the impeachment process. 'Information that has already
been made public is sufficient for the process to be opened,' he said.
Any Brazilian citizen can launch the process, but Mr Collor's opponents were
expected to seek a leading figure from a respected civilian organisation.
Senator Lando said in the televised reading that the committee had evidence
of a multi-million-dollar corruption operation established by Mr Paulo Cesar
Farias, Mr Collor's election campaign treasurer, who is accused of graft,
influence peddling and tax evasion.
Witnesses' testimony, he said, 'allowed the conclusion that illicit acts
were committed by Farias of which the president must necessarily have
known.' It could not be hidden from the public that the president
permanently, and over the course of two years, 'received undue financial
benefits'.
The document also charged that the president failed in his constitutional
duty as head of state by not impeding the use of his name by third persons
'for practices not in line' with high moral standards.
The committee's document will be debated today and the vote for approval
will take place tomorrow.
The opposition, originally expected to request the beginning of impeachment
proceedings later this week, now says it will wait until at least next week.
Analysts believe the opposition wants time to make contact with Mr Collor.
Many opposition politicians have said they would rather have him resign than
initiate a 16-step impeachment process that could last months. The president
has repeated on several occasions that he will not quit.
Pro-government members of parliament are expected to challenge the report.
Mr Benito Gama, president of the inquiry commission, has said that
amendments to the document will not be allowed but Mr Odacir Soares, a
senator from the pro-government Liberal Front party (PFL), is expected to
offer an alternative report. Mr Soares said in a televised interview: 'The
political situation remains the same. The president has a solid base of
support.'
But there are cracks appearing in the PFL's support for Mr Collor. The party
was forced to replace Federal Deputy Jose Mucio, one of its representatives
on the inquiry commission who is in favour of impeachment. With the change
the opposition's advantage in the commission drops from 13-8 to 12-9.
Financial markets were paralysed yesterday, with the Sao Paulo stock
exchange registering minimal trading volume.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920825

