FT921-448

FT  28 MAR 92 / CBI reports 'patchy' rise in demand


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


DEMAND for goods manufactured in the UK has increased slightly this month,
indicating that recent falls in production are beginning to flatten out.
The March monthly industrial trends survey from the Confederation of British
Industry said UK manufacturers reported a small rise in home and export
orders while total order books remained depressed.
The survey, one of the last significant economic indicators before the
election, found that only 8 per cent of the 1,439 companies surveyed said
their orders were above normal while 55 per cent said they were below.
The difference between the two figures - which measures the overall state of
order books - was -47, the smallest negative result since January 1991.
Balances were -60 in January this year and -52 in February.
Mr David Wigglesworth, chairman of the CBI's economic situation committee,
said: 'Total order books are at their best levels since January last year,
although improvements in demand are patchy.'
Mr Peter Lilley, the trade and industry secretary, said the improvement in
home and export order books was an encouraging confirmation that the economy
was set to grow again.
Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade and industry secretary, said the high
proportion of companies reporting orders below normal confirmed that Britain
remained in recession.
Stocks of finished goods have been further depleted this month. More than
three in five companies - 63 per cent - said their stocks were adequate,
while 21 per cent said they were more than adequate. Only 5 per cent said
their stocks were inadequate.
Textiles, aerospace and mechanical engineering were particularly affected by
high stock levels, which continued to hold back output.
The CBI said output was expected to flatten out over the next four months.
In that period only 20 per cent of companies expect an improvement against
22 per cent predicting a decline.
The CBI said the March expectations were consistent with the results of the
previous six months, some of which pointed to a marginal increase in output
while others suggested a small decline. A year ago, output was expected to
decline significantly.
The survey, which covers roughly half of UK manufacturing employment and
exports, found that fewer than one manufacturer in five expected to be able
to raise prices in the next four months. The CBI said these were the weakest
price expectations in a March survey since 1975.
'Intense competition is continuing to constrain price increases,' Mr
Wigglesworth said. 'This is clearly good news in the fight against
inflation.'
Export order books also improved in spite of slower growth elsewhere in
Europe, but remained below a high reached last November. Many British
manufacturers have concentrated on improving exports as long as the British
economy remains depressed. Thirteen per cent of companies said their export
order books were above normal, against 45 per cent saying they were below.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920328

