FT922-669

FT  26 JUN 92 / International Company News: BHP results expected to reflect
Australia's depressed economy


   By BRUCE JACQUES


   SYDNEY


THE Australian financial markets are likely to be presented with a microcosm
of their depressed economy later today when the country's biggest company,
BHP, reports its results for the year to May.
Analysts expect the company, with interests extending through the
fundamental economic sectors of steel, minerals and petroleum, will report
its lowest earnings since 1987.
Earnings estimates range widely, but are generally between ADollars 800m
(USDollars 600m) and ADollars 900m, a big fall on the previous year's record
ADollars 1.4bn net profits.
BZW Australia analysts are at the lower end of the scale, forecasting a
bottom line of ADollars 812m, while SBC Dominguez Barry is forecasting
ADollars 882m. Any result in this range would bring to an end a run which
has seen BHP's earnings almost double since 1987.
Many believe that growth was hit by the shock to management of an attempt by
the late Australian entrepreneur, Mr Robert Holmes a Court, to wrest control
of the company.
The attempt was only beaten off by a marriage of convenience between BHP and
the Foster's Brewing group, then Elders IXL, and headed by another
Australian in the entrepreneur class, Mr John Elliott.
Ironically, as it announces its results, BHP is negotiating to take virtual
control over Foster's, having placed the brewing group's leading
shareholder, Mr Elliott's International Brewing Investments (IBI), in
receivership.
BHP is still negotiating to buy out a syndicate of banks which has
prior-ranking security over ADollars 1.2bn owed by IBI, and there were
suggestions last night of a significant development today.
BHP's minerals division is expected to be its 1991-92 earnings mainstay,
having contributed ADollars 505.6m of the ADollars 686m profit the company
reported for the nine months to February.
The overall nine-month result reflected a dip of nearly 40 per cent, with
the steel division reporting a 43 per cent earnings fall to ADollars 134m
and petroleum off 41 per cent at ADollars 305m. The minerals division
restricted its earnings fall to 23 per cent.
The depressed Australian economy has forced BHP to sell its growing steel
output into lower yield export markets. Steel exports rose almost 23 per
cent to 2.42m tonnes in the latest year, with domestic despatches falling 8
per cent to 3.17m tonnes.
But BHP's coal and iron ore output ran at near record levels, although
prices for these commodities have fallen. Petroleum products production was
mixed and affected by lower prices.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920626

