FT923-6474

FT  24 AUG 92 / International Capital Markets: Market may carry seeds of its
own destruction - Floating Rate Notes


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THERE are signs of a revival of interest in the floating rate note market,
once the most liquid of the Eurobond market. But some traders who lived
through the market's collapse in 1986 believe it may carry the seeds of its
own destruction.
For the first time since 1986, more floating-rate than fixed-rate debt has
been issued in the Eurodollar bond market so far this month. BankAmerica's
Dollars 500m issue of floating rate notes last week was the largest since
the market's heyday in the mid-1980s.
Throughout this year, traders have reported demand from an increasingly
broad investor base for paper in the secondary market. Although the market
remains dominated by banks, recently fund managers, particularly in the US,
and some retail investors have become more active. With dollar interest
rates at historic lows, many fund managers believe that interest rates will
soon be on their way up.
The credit quality of US banks, which make up a large portion of the issuer
base, has started to pick up again, as the US economy emerges from
recession. The sector has rallied strongly.
There are some technical reasons for the market's improvement. Swap spreads
 -the margin which determines at what level a borrower can swap the proceeds
of an issue from fixed to floating-rate - have tightened to such an extent,
that for some potential borrowers (mainly banks) it is cheaper to issue
floating-rate notes than to issue fixed-rate bonds and swap the proceeds.
Some dealers argue that the increase in demand could easily collapse. Most
of the recent surge of new issues has consisted of 'collared' floaters -
floating rate notes with minimum and maximum coupon levels. The buyers of
these notes have been Swiss investors, keen to lock in coupons of about 5
per cent, at a time when current money market rates are about 1 1/2 points
lower. But, to some dealers, the structure is fatally flawed: as soon as
money market rates rise above 5 per cent, much of the value of the paper
will be instantly eroded, and investors may face large capital losses.
In the secondary market, consisting mainly of deals issued in or before
1986, the key US bank sector has made the best gains. Some traders argue
that the rally can only be partly attributed to credit considerations. Much
of the paper in that sector of the market is 'floored' - has a minimum
coupon level. Investors started buying the paper when money market rates
fell below the floor levels on these deals.
If the market is set for a shake-up further down the road, it will not be
the first time. In 1986, the market boasted impressive liquidity, with
prices for a Dollars 50m trade quoted at a three basis point spread.
The ability to raise cheap funds in large size attracted not just banks but
sovereign borrowers. The largest outstanding deal is a Dollars 4bn floater
issued by the UK in 1986, which pays  1/8 point below Libid (the London
interbank bid rate) and matures in 1996.
Then, the structure of the market changed suddenly. The investor base was
made up largely of banks, which frequently held large portions of each
others' capital in the form of subordinated floaters. In 1986, new capital
guidelines were mooted by the Basle committee, under which banks holding
capital issued by other banks would have it deducted from their capital base
.
The perpetual FRN sector collapsed, dragging down prices in the rest of the
market with it. 'The perp market was predicated on liquidity, and when it
dried up, the market went into free-fall,' one trader recalled.
At the end of the 1980s, the sharp deterioration of the credit quality of
many banks killed off any remaining interest in dated bank paper.
While the US bank sector has improved sharply this year,the rest of the
market is a mixed bag. The perpetual FRN market has not recovered.
European bank floaters have underperformed US bank paper. Demand for Italian
and Scandinavian bank deals is still flagging, due to the increasing credit
concerns about both banking industries, and Japanese bank paper is under
pressure. Prices in senior (unsubordinated) paper have been steadier. Last
week's BankAmerica deal, which some traders felt was too large at Dollars
500m, has tested demand.
Part of the problem for new issues is that they may not mirror secondary
market performance. Demand for secondary market paper has been particularly
strong from US fund managers, who cannot buy issues until they are seasoned.
However, on the supply side, there are reasons to expect further activity.
Banks are keen to take advantage of one of the few markets which gives them
access to subordinated debt, as they struggle to meet the Basle capital
guidelines which come into force next year. The deluge of collared deals
this month bears witness to their enthusiasm.
After half a dozen years of famine, the market may not be able to digest a
feast. But investors' appetites, for the moment, are not sated.
Landeskreditbank Baden-Wurttemberg, the German bank, is planning to launch a
Dollars 500m fixed-rate Eurobond, with a maturity of five to 10 years, in
early September. JP Morgan has been mandated to arrange the issue.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920824

