FT924-12055

FT  22 OCT 92 / International Bonds: Dollars 300m Danish offer struggles
against soft US market


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


WIDER dollar swap spreads temporarily shifted attention to the Eurodollar
bond market yesterday.
The Kingdom of Denmark braved unfavourable market conditions to launch a
Dollars 300m three-year deal, taking advantage of a rare swap opportunity.
However, investor demand remains firmly focused on the D-Mark bond market.
A batch of sovereign borrowers is still eyeing that sector in the wake of
the UK's DM5.5bn five-year deal, priced yesterday.
The coupon was set at 7 1/8 per cent, with a fixed re-offer price of 99.96,
to yield 10 basis points above the five-year German government paper.
In a bout of euphoria after the deal was freed to trade, the spread
tightened to seven basis points over the curve, but profit-taking soon
pushed the spread back to 10 basis points.
Meanwhile, Denmark's Dollars 300m three-year issue, arranged by Goldman
Sachs, struggled against a soft US bond market.
A change in sentiment on US interest rates has both improved swap market
conditions and weakened the bond market. Expectations that interest rates
may have reached their cyclical low and could start rising soon, fuelled by
worries ahead of next month's elections, have encouraged more companies to
lock in fixed-rate funds while absolute rates are at their low point.
Consequently, a spate of fixed-rate payers has appeared in the swaps market,
causing three- and four-year swap spreads to widen to about 60 basis points.
The same expectations, meanwhile, are discouraging investors from buying
short-dated bonds.
Denmark's three-year deal was considered a touch aggressive, offering 41
basis points over the comparable Treasury yield.
However, Denmark, with a strong credit rating of AA1 from Moody's and
AA-plus from Standard & Poor's, appears to be emerging unscathed from the
financial crisis besetting the rest of Scandinavia, and has less borrowing
to complete.
In addition, some investors were attracted to the deal by a positive view on
the currency.
The spread widened by one basis point to 42 basis points over the curve. The
proceeds of the issue are believed to have been swapped into dollars at
around 15 basis points under Libor.
Elsewhere, Cheltenham & Gloucester joined the list of UK building societies
to raise Tier One capital through an issue of permanent interest bearing
shares (Pibs).
The Pounds 100m issue of irredeemable notes, arranged by Salomon Brothers,
was priced to yield 270 basis points over the yield of the 9 per cent gilt
due 2008, and was placed solely with UK institutions.
The deal met strong demand from UK insurance companies, which need to hold
this type of paper in order to fund endowment policies, according to the
issue's lead manager. There is a lack of paper at the long-end of the
sterling bond market.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921022

