FT924-8015

FT  13 NOV 92 / Leading Article: France dreams of Emu


BRUISED but not beaten, the French franc has survived the currency
turbulence of recent weeks. Yet while French authorities' commitment to
maintaining the franc's parity with the D-Mark may be strengthened, it is
still far from secure. With luck and co-operation from its partners, France
can avoid a devaluation and progress towards its favoured goal of a European
monetary union. But getting from here to there will be a hazardous trip.
The franc looks to be out of the woods, at least for the moment. Having
depreciated to a low of DM3.426 in the week after the French referendum, the
recent weakness of the D-Mark has allowed the franc to climb back towards
the centre of its band while the Bank of France has recovered the reserves
it sold to defend the parity.
Yesterday's decision by the Bank of France to cut its intervention rates by
a further quarter of a percentage point reflects this recovery. Short-term
money market interest rates have already fallen by more than 5 percentage
points since their September high, easing the pressure on the French banking
sector. Long-term interest rates have also fallen sharply, reducing the
yield difference with Germany back to the levels before the Danish
referendum.
Yet the French economy still has the growth cards stacked against it. At 9.4
per cent, French short-term interest rates remain painfully high. Low French
consumer price inflation means that in real terms these interest rates
represent a vice-like grip for consumers and industrialists. Moreover, this
fall in short-term interest rates - by more than a percentage point since
the summer - masks the tightening in the overall monetary stance that has
occurred as a result of the depreciation of the lira and sterling. The
franc, despite the dollar's recent strength, has still appreciated on a
trade weighted basis by 5 per cent since the first half of the year.
German interest rates still hold the key to French monetary policy. The
likely tardy easing from the Bundesbank, in the face of persistent German
government inertia, will hold French interest rates high, while deepening
Germany's impending recession. The resulting slow growth, rising
unemployment and political discontent in France remain the biggest threat to
the franc fort policy. Consumer and business confidence have sunk over the
summer as growth has dwindled. Finance minister Mr Michel Sapin remains
emphatically committed to the policy. But as next spring's election looms,
the pressure for lower French interest rates will grow.
Little wonder that Mr Francois Mitterrand is annoyed at Britain's go-slow
policy on Maastricht. A shift to narrower currency bands within ERM might
reduce French room for manoeuvre, as would confirmation of the independence
of the Bank of France. But neither is likely to allow French interest rates
to fall below Germany's. A single currency is the best answer to France's
current monetary powerlessness. A northern currency area, including the Efta
countries but without southern Europe, looks the likeliest route. Britain
may well choose to exercise its opt-out on Emu. But first, the UK must opt
in to Maastricht.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921113

