FT922-7216

FT  20 MAY 92 / Japan shows 'clear interest' in Community's energy tax plans


   By DAVID GARDNER and TIM COONE


   BRUSSELS, DUBLIN


JAPAN has expressed 'clear interest' in the EC's proposed tax on energy to
combat global warming, while the US continues to rule out fiscal means to
reduce carbon dioxide emissions, according to Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, EC
environment commissioner.
Mr Ripa di Meana said that at last weekend's informal meeting in Bonn of
environment ministers of the Group of 7 most industrialised nations, 'there
was clear interest from the Japanese side. It is not yet an agreement, but
not a refusal. They are studying (the tax) carefully without discarding it.'
The Commission proposal, for a Dollars 10 per barrel of oil equivalent tax
by 2000, levied half on energy value and half on carbon content, depends on
the EC's main industrial partners following suit. Environment ministers of
the 12 are expected to endorse the thrust of this conditional plan on May
26.
At the Bonn meeting the US expressed 'a drastic refusal', Mr Ripa di Meana
said. However, he stressed the 'very powerful boost' to the plan in the
'unprecedented and unexpected support from the World Bank', contained in its
latest development report.
The commissioner believes concerted political pressure could lead Washington
to move further, now that in the run-up to the Rio de Janeiro earth summit
next month, the US has 'accepted the logic of stabilising' CO emissions for
the first time.
The EC's proposed carbon tax would have to be Dollars 36 rather than Dollars
10 per barrel of oil equivalent if carbon dioxide emissions were to be
stabilised in line with international recommendations, according to an
economic report published today by Ireland's Economic and Social Research
Institute (ESRI), Tim Coone adds from Dublin.
ESRI estimates that the costs of such a tax would be unevenly spread,
reducing real gross domestic product in the US and Europe by only 1 per
cent, but by over 7 per cent in many energy-exporting less-developed
countries.
If the industrialised countries were to act unilaterally to curb emissions,
'the costs to their economies would be virtually unchanged from what it
would have been under a global agreement. But global CO emissions would
continue to grow at around 1.5 per cent per year'.
It recommends that emission quotas be made internationally tradeable.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920520

