FT923-10941

FT  28 JUL 92 / Taking a leaf out of book-building: Sale's success owed much
to method of judging demand


   By MAGGIE URRY


The global sale of shares in Wellcome must be considered a success, even a
remarkable one.
For Wellcome Trust to raise Pounds 2.1bn when the London market has fallen
13 per cent and the Japanese market 18 per cent over the past three months,
is a notable achievement. The value of the Wellcome shares sold to the US
alone exceeds Dollars 1bn (Pounds 520m) putting it among the top 10 share
offerings recorded there.
It is undoubtedly the case that a Pounds 2bn-plus issue - the largest
non-privatisation share sale ever - could not have been done using a
traditional UK format. Three weeks ago a Pounds 2bn deal could not have been
underwritten, or at least not at a price approaching the 800p finally set.
Institutions will never forget the disaster of the Pounds 7.2bn BP sale in
1987, where the price was fixed and sub-underwriters signed up two working
days before the stock market crash.
The Wellcome sale is thus also a triumph for the book-building method used
to determine the level of demand for the shares at various prices.
Formal book-building has been in common use outside the UK and practised
informally in London, but it only made its UK debut in the Pounds 5.4bn BT
sale last December when the government sold its remaining 49 per cent stake
in the company.
Mr Lawrence Banks, head of corporate finance at Robert Fleming, the bank
which ran the global tender offer, said the success of the book-building
method was not limited to a bull market - it proved an even better tool in a
poor market.
Every day the bank could see how the selling efforts were proceeding and act
accordingly. For example, on Thursday last week, the day before the tender
closed, the deal was under great pressure. The trust announced it would not
sell shares below 800p, a move which focused investors' minds on where to
pitch their bids.
In the end Fleming's computer could draw a price/demand curve showing how
many shares could be sold at various levels. That enabled the trust to
decide whether to sell fewer shares at a higher price or more at a lower
one.
The sale took book-building on from the BT sale. In that issue, two-thirds
of the shares were sold to retail investors through a relatively normal
offer for sale, although the price was set by the institutional tender.
Fleming prepared a level playing field across the world, with near total
flexibility on how shares could be allocated to different syndicates.
While the UK and US syndicates found more than enough demand to reach their
provisional allotments, interest in some areas was weak. In the end less
than 1m shares were sold into Canada, while Germany and France also produced
a lower than expected response.
Critics may carp that the trust had originally hoped to raise Pounds 4bn or
more by reducing its stake in the pharmaceutical company to 25 per cent and
that the outcome therefore represents a flop.
However, Mr Roger Gibbs, chairman of the trust, said the trust never said it
would sell the full amount possible, only that it wanted to cut its stake to
below 50 per cent. It has achieved that, reducing its holding to 42 per
cent.
In June the size of the sale was indicated at 330m. To the extent that only
270m shares have been sold, the outcome is worse than hoped. There were bids
for 360m shares, even though the possibility at lunchtime on Friday of
hostilities breaking out in Iraq put a damper on the final day, Mr Gibbs
believes.
The price of 800p is a disappointment. 'Of course we would have liked to
have got a higher price. But in these markets it was not practicable,' said
Mr Gibbs.
And, he points out, since the trust sold its first 25 per cent tranche in
1986 at 120p the company's share price has exceeded 800p for only the past
eight months. When the share price reached its high early this year the
historic p/e ratio was approaching an exaggerated 40. On these measures, the
sale price is still a good one.
But for the market's fall over the last week of the tender period, Mr Gibbs
reckons the issue price could have been 30p higher. And without the
activities of short sellers - who drove the price down and profited by
buying back at lower levels - another 30p could have been added.
Mr Gibbs is generous in his praise of the banks and brokers who worked on
the sale. Eyebrows were raised when Fleming was first appointed to run the
sale. 'Fleming was considered to be a most extraordinary choice,' admitted
Mr Gibbs. He said Fleming handled the Wellcome flotation in 1986 well, and
had con-tinued to advise the trust thereafter.
When it decided to sell another tranche of shares, Mr Gibbs said, the trust
drew up a list of 15 to 20 possibles. The trustees decided it would appoint
Fleming when the bank convinced them it could handle the book-building
exercise.
Fleming, which in terms of its profits is one of the top UK merchant banks,
believes its lack of a high profile in international equity issues turned
out to be a strength. It could bring banks into the nine regional syndicates
without the usual jealousies.
Mr Ian Hannam, the man who Fleming appointed to head the book-building team,
said Fleming could take a tough line with syndicate members where necessary
because it was not looking for repeat business. But after the success of the
Wellcome issue it may find it gets more to do anyway.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920728

