FT921-3925

FT  12 MAR 92 / Lloyd's rejects S&P allegations


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S of London yesterday rejected claims by Standard & Poor's, the US
credit-rating agency, that the insurance market faces a liquidity crisis.
S&P, which began analysing Lloyd's syndicates last year, said that it had
identified a 'negative balance' of liabilities against assets of Pounds
1.2bn last autumn.
The combination of new legal actions and the apparent reluctance of
commercial banks to lend to either Names or agents was leading to a possible
liquidity crunch, S&P said.
More than 700 Names - the individuals whose assets back underwriting at
Lloyd's - are seeking to prevent their deposits held by the market being
drawn on.
S&P said commercial banks were reluctant to extend credit. Its figures,
which were based on reports to the Department of Trade and Industry, show
that bank guarantees represented 50 per cent of all personal deposits at
Lloyd's compared with 11 per cent in 1977.
It is concerned over Lloyd's 'near-term capital adequacy and liquidity'. Mr
Alan Levin of S&P in New York said: 'We are quite worried.'
In a prompt rebuttal, Mr David Coleridge, Lloyd's chairman, deplored the S&P
assertions as 'misleading and potentially damaging'.
Lloyd's said that on December 31 1990 the market's total declared resources
amounted to more than Pounds 18bn. This was more than Pounds 6.5bn in excess
of all estimated future liabilities.
It added that S&P was only taking into account 'readily realisable' assets
held in premium trust funds. These are ongoing funds made up of insurance
premiums earned by Lloyd's syndicates.
The agency's figures for liabilities included substantial amounts 'which
will not fall due for payment until the end of this century and, in many
cases, into the next century'.
Lloyd's also argued that over the past year the size of its American Trust
Fund had increased by Dollars 1bn and that its central fund now stood at
Pounds 500m.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920312

