FT924-8175

FT  12 NOV 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): An escape from
Chateau Chunder - Australian vintners are poised to compete with Europe at
the premium end of the market


   By KEVIN BROWN


Australia's winemakers have enjoyed phenomenal export success over the last
decade, mainly by producing good-quality wines at prices which often make
competing French, German and Italian wines look like poor value for money.
Export sales are up by nearly 800 per cent to 77.5m litres since 1984, and
the Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation (AWBC) is forecasting overseas
sales of 400m litres by 2000.
Growth on that scale would increase Australia's share of the world export
market from about 1.5 per cent to 5 per cent, worth about ADollars 1bn
(Pounds 400m) in export revenue at current prices. But while there is almost
unanimous agreement among winemakers that Australia is producing the
products required to achieve these targets, some disagreement is emerging
about the marketing strategy required.
The wine houses do not put it this way, but much of the 1980s' growth was
almost accidental. Large-scale exporting began for the most part as a way of
disposing of a surplus which was depressing prices in the domestic market.
It was only when the trade was well under way that the bigger companies
began to realise the opportunities it offered. 'Twenty years ago, no one in
Australia thought that we could compete with the French in Europe on quality
and price,' says Perry Gunner, chief executive of Adelaide-based wine
company Orlando Wyndham.
'But when we started looking closely at the market, we were astonished at
the prices that people were prepared to pay for mediocre French wines, and
we quickly realised that quality was not a problem.'
Nevertheless, Australian producers had to start at the bottom of the market,
and have had to work hard to overcome what Brenton Roneberg, AWBC marketing
manager, describes as the 'Chateau Chunder' image.
The perception has changed over the last five years, mainly as a result of
glowing reviews by wine writers. According to the AWBC, about 80 per cent of
the wine exported to the UK now sells for more than Pounds 3, accounting for
about 12 per cent of sales above that price. Some wines, notably Orlando
Wyndham's Jacob's Creek range, have higher sales overseas than at home.
But success is rarely problem free, and alarm bells are beginning to ring in
some wineries as winemakers wonder how long the industry can sustain growth
rates of more than 70 per cent a year.
Ray King, chief executive of Mildara Blass, points out that Australia would
have to double its share of the UK mid-price market to achieve the
industry's targets for the next eight years. That is unlikely to be an easy
task, given that the overall UK market is unlikely to grow much because of
lifestyle pressures on alcohol products, which are common to most western
markets.
King also claims that many Australian companies are earning a return on
investment which is less than a third of the average for other industries,
mainly because prices have been set too low in the pursuit of volume sales.
'There are too many people who are waxing lyrical about the marvellous
success of the Australian wine industry overseas,' he says. 'There is no way
that the guys who are selling their stuff at these prices are going to come
out in front. 'There is no question that Australia produces the best value
for money wine in the world. But we could do almost as well in volume terms
and be profitable at the same time by raising our prices.'
Ross Wilson, chief executive of SA Brewing, which owns the big-selling
Penfolds label, says a unilateral price rise is impossible because Australia
does not have the marketing clout to dictate prices in international
markets. But, like most winemakers, he agrees with King that Australian
producers 'have got to be there in that higher price sector of the market,
or they are not going to survive'.
According to Robin Day, technical director of Orlando Wyndham, the solution
is likely to be a growing emphasis on premium products, sold through hotels
and restaurants, as well as the off-licences and supermarket chains which
have been the main growth areas in the past.
Penfolds and Orlando, the two biggest companies, are both putting increasing
effort into producing high-quality brands capable of competing with
higher-priced continental European wines.
'In general, the Australian wine industry is a price taker in the overseas
market because we are largely in the commercial (down-market) category. The
challenge for us is to build products that will take us into the premium end
of the market,' says Gunner.
That means a much higher profile for higher-priced wines such as Orlando's
new Saint range, its fruity Montrose wines from western New South Wales, and
the Hunter Valley chardonnays produced under the Wyndham label.
But moving up-market is a long-term project which depends on the slow
business of winning credibility and changing market perceptions. In the
meantime, the industry has to protect the market for its existing products.
'There are still a lot of shelves around the world without any Jacob's Creek
on them. We know we can sell more, and we would be silly to take our eye off
that ball before we have really rammed it home,' says Gunner.
 ----------------------------------------------
          AUSTRALIAN WINE EXPORTS
 ----------------------------------------------
                     Million
                     litres
 ----------------------------------------------
1984/85                 8.7
1985/86                10.8
1986/87                21.2
1987/88                39.1
1988/89                40.4
1989/90                41.7
1990/91                57.0
1991/92                11.5
1999/2000             400.0*
 ----------------------------------------------
                                     Forecast*
Source: Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation
 ----------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921112

