FT924-8180

FT  12 NOV 92 / Arts: A Christmas Carol - Dance


   By CLEMENT CRISP


Christopher Gable has, with considerable acumen, studied the balletic
market, and identified an audience need. That need is for lively drama,
well-known themes, dance as an undemanding aspect of entertainment, and a
denial of the supposedly forbidding aspects of ballet. And this is what he
has very astutely set his company, Northern Ballet Theatre, to provide.
There is no call for critical sniffiness when faced with such populist
tactics. Mr and Mrs Smith enjoy Eldorado, Richard Clayderman, Jeffrey
Archer's writings and the umpteenth revival of Sound of Music, and their
lives are made happier thereby. Why not, then, ballets whose appeal is as
immediate? That, in the process, an art can be reduced to its lowest common
denominators is no news.
Comment is necessary when, as with last week's Swan Lake, a major work is
transmogrified for the unlikely cause of 'poetic truth', and a critic is
entitled to carp. But what Gable offers with the Christmas Carol receiving
its London premiere this week, is solid, jolly entertainment. I may deplore
Massimo Moricone's deadly choreography for A Christmas Carol, as for NBT's
Romeo, yet Gable's company works with enthusiasm, touches its public's
heart, and the staging is expertly done.
A Christmas Carol boasts a cast-iron title, sentiment, and the best of
plots. Its theme invites - and, by Heaven, it gets - a score from Carl Davis
replete with carols everyone knows - and would probably like to hum-along
with. The cast sing them, and there can't be a dry eye in the house when
Tiny Tim gives us 'How far is it to Bethlehem'. To the staging's great
credit, the narrative is everywhere responsive to the original. And it
boasts, in Lez Brotherstone's design, a dazzling and imaginative re-creation
of Scrooge's world. The stage picture is on two levels - an upper walk
offering something like High Holborn, with a distant foggy prospect of St.
Paul's. Below, scenery opens out to show us Scrooge's counting house, the
Cratchit home, and every locale specified by Dickens. Costuming is no less
apt. On these terms alone, the production is a huge success, and
Brotherstone's work notably fine.
What Gable has done is no less remarkable. The story is surely told, vivid,
and aimed straight at the heart - as Dickens alone knew how. (Ah, the tiny
abandoned crutch on the stair; and Ho-ho, the Cratchit family preparing to
feast upon a well-developed starling). The dance is mere chit-chat of steps,
and at moments - a solo for Christmas Past; a duet for the Young Scrooge and
his lost love - numbingly awkward. Carl Davis' score, when it departs from
traditional tunes, is brash, to say the least. To say the most, it is
efficient. But A Christmas Carol does not pretend to be a ballet - in the
sense that another populist work, David Bintley's Hobson's Choice, relies
upon choreographic means alone for its attraction and its dramatic effects.
Gable proposes a form of music-theatre for dancers, of ingratiating and
unrelenting emotionalism, in which song, dance, mimetic drama all have a
part. The piece's flaw is that Scrooge (well taken by Jeremy Kerridge) is
not interesting enough as a peg on which to hang the staging. Christmas
itself is the hero, pervasive in Dickens, but unfocussed as an excuse for
dance-drama. Of course, A Christmas Carol may worry purists - though Lez
Brotherstone's triumphant designs should be seen by anyone interested in the
theatre. But Mr and Mrs Smith will love it.
Sponsored by Digital Equipment Company

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921112

