FT921-11791

FT  30 JAN 92 / Lombard: Man bites watchdog


   By TONY JACKSON


Since the Maxwell scandal erupted, the financial press has been zealous in
rooting out those whose cowardice or venality allowed it to happen: the
banks, the auditors, Maxwell's various helpers and subordinates. One group
has escaped the lash: the financial press itself.
A handful of Maxwell's journalistic toadies have been held up to ridicule.
Otherwise, the official line is that the investigative instincts of the
press were thwarted by the UK's repressive libel laws. So the press is now
calling for changes to the libel laws to make its job easier.
If any of the other guilty parties presented such a self-serving excuse, the
press would have a field day. Certainly, Maxwell could not have exploited
the US laws of libel in the same way. But in the UK, he was perfectly
entitled to demand that any damaging allegation against him should be made
good in court.
In doing so, he imposed on the financial press standards of proof we were
unwilling or unable to meet. This was despite the fact that, as we knew very
well, it was mostly a gigantic bluff. In his latter days at any rate,
Maxwell could not conceivably have risked cross-examination on his business
practices by an experienced barrister.
There is a richly comic aspect to this. Despite the enormities that Maxwell
got away with by dint of bullying and cheek, he was only one man against the
massed ranks of the British media. 'Press hounded by individual' is a
man-bites-dog story with a vengeance. The media have been too much on the
defensive to see it.
The best excuse for the press, and not a very good one, lies in the nature
of the challenge which Maxwell presented to journalists. From 1987 onwards,
I covered his affairs for the FT's Lex column. Almost every time I spoke to
him, he contrived to wrong-foot me one way or another.
This was largely achieved by sheer baffling inconsistency. At various times,
he threatened to sue me and promised not to in any circumstances; flattered
me and swore at me; complained that I did not consult him and, when I did,
accused me of cowardice.
Above all, he lied like a trooper. The effect of this is not easy to convey.
No experienced journalist works on the assumption that he is being told the
truth. But properly used, the direct lie has its awkward aspects.
Some months before Maxwell's death, it began to be rumoured that his
holdings in Maxwell Communication and Mirror Group were partly pledged as
collateral against private loans. Since this was plainly crucial to the
whole ramshackle structure of his empire, I phoned him to put the question.
After a burst of tactical self pity - 'why should I talk to you? Every time
I do I get kicked around. Are you an honourable man?' - he flatly asserted
that none of his shares was so pledged. As we now know, they almost all
were. I was fairly sure he was lying, but that was beside the point. He was
correct in assuming I would not undertake a long investigation on the
off-chance of proving it.
In its own horrible way, some of the Maxwell treatment was salutary.
Journalists are used to being treated with undue deference by a public
nervous of the powers of the press. Maxwell, who as a newspaper proprietor
hired and fired journalists wholesale, treated us with contempt. If we
failed to nail him in revenge, that was hardly his fault.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920130

