FT921-14301

FT  16 JAN 92 / ABP hit by property provisions


   By ANDREW BOLGER


ASSOCIATED British Ports Holdings, the UK's biggest ports group since
privatisation in 1983, said that provisions on its property portfolio had
wiped out the group's profits in the second half of last year.
The continuing deterioration of the British property market caused the group
to review the portfolio of Grosvenor Square Properties, its wholly-owned
subsidiary, and make provisions against the cost of developments completed
and in progress at the end of 1991.
ABP said these exceptional provisions were likely to absorb most, if not
all, of the profits achieved within the group's other businesses during the
second half of 1991, so full-year pre-tax profits were likely to be little
different from the Pounds 31.7m achieved in the first half.
The group said income from the group's port and transport business and from
investment properties continued to be satisfactory, and directors expected
they would be able at least to maintain the final dividend of 4.5p per
share.
ABP's shares fell 4p to 319p yesterday, having fallen more than 40p last
week on speculation of provisions and write-downs on property.
The group said it had organised a revaluation of the investment portfolio of
Grosvenor Square Properties, comprising three shopping centres transferred
from the development portfolio during 1990 and some other income-producing
properties transferred from the development portfolio during the second half
of last year.
The ports group inherited considerable property assets at the time of
privatisation and extended further into property when it bought the
USM-quoted Grosvenor Square Properties for Pounds 15m in 1987. At the peak
of the property boom, more than half of the group's profits came from the
property side.
ABP sold its largest development, Aldwych House, in June for Pounds 75.2m,
but the company still has completed developments worth about Pounds 200m on
its books.
ABP said its balance sheet remained strong, with net borrowings at the
year-end of Pounds 335m, a reduction of Pounds 60m since the previous year.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920116

