FT922-3938

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (23): How to learn from
truancy - Economics, Finance, Industry, Trade, Management


   By KIT MCMAHON


A TRUANT DISPOSITION by Ronald Grierson Weidenfeld & Nicolson Pounds 9.99,
112 pages
THE BOOK is like the man: brisk, stylish, amusing and elusive - especially,
elusive. It is, as the author says, not 'an autobiography in any accepted
sense of the term. It is a random series of reflections on those periods of
my adult life when, instead of pursuing my business career, I frivolously
played truant from it.'
This means that, though the title is Horatio's phrase, the book more
resembles Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, with only the most
tantalising glimpses from time to time of the main action. Ronnie Grierson
was with Warburgs for 26 years - and a director for 16 - but there is
nothing of this, no stories of the great Siegmund, nothing except his forced
resignation at the time of the Plessey bid because he was a director of GEC.
A recurrent theme of the book, signalled explicitly in the foreword, is that
of the awkward German immigrant confronting 'that most intimidating of
mafias, the British Establishment', ineffable in its condescension. But the
incidents themselves suggest something different. Ronnie, having been born
in Nuremburg in 1921, started the war as an interned Oxford undergraduate
and ended it, aged 24, as a Lieutenant Colonel in the Black Watch, complete
with kilt.
His whole life appears to have been punctuated with requests from all parts
of the Establishment to perform important tasks, and his career has been
crowned with a knighthood. Perhaps both he and the Establishment are more
subtle than he suggests (though his picture of the straight-faced
shin-kicking of the Civil Service rings true).
As for the truancies themselves, the puzzle remains why he embarked on his
various ventures into public service - most famously, but not only, the IRC
and the Brussels Commission. There is a pattern. The request arrives; his
friends advise against it; his previous experience and his instincts suggest
that he will encounter fatuity, banality, bureaucracy, misguided
interventionism and frustration. He takes the job. It turns out just as he
feared and he leaves it in something of a blaze. He comes over, in short, as
disillusioned without having been illusioned in the first place.
Which is not to say that the reasons for his disillusionment are not well
set out. He is devastating on the naivete and muddled thinking that
characterise much interventionism; on the false analogies between government
and business; and on the dreary unreality of much that goes on in the
Commission in Brussels. Perhaps the simple truth is that he is a romantic.
It is good to see that his last truancy was no truancy at all but the highly
successful development of the South Bank.
As in any reminiscences, the anecdotes are the best bits. His first
encounter with the world's public service was a surreal attempt to join the
Egyptian army in 1940. We get no details of an obviously distinguished and
exciting career in the SAS, except for the War Office's choice of his cover
nationality: a New Zealand Grierson is an oxymoron indeed] There is a
picture of the Swedish Gunnar Myrdal, one of the world's great one-worlders,
who could not stand Norwegians. There is the moment when James Callaghan,
praising Alf Robens for his diligence in closing pits, discovered that the
latest was in his constituency. And many more.
But not enough. This really is a slim volume. And unlike Paradise Lost (in
Dr Johnson's view) and most autobiographies (in mine), one would wish it
longer.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920609

