FT922-7236

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (11): Risk and Mr Haberer - Profile:
Credit Lyonnais


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


'IN TEN years time, if the markets favour him, Haberer may be hailed as a
genius and the rest of us will look like idiots,' said one prominent Paris
banker to the FT, this time last year. 'But in the meantime, he gives me
gooseflesh.'
Less then a year later, gooseflesh looks like a rather mild reaction to the
plight of Credit Lyonnais, one of the biggest and by far the most ambitious
of France's banks, and its chairman, Mr Jean-Yves Haberer. At the time,
Credit Lyonnais' main problem was Mr Giancarlo Parretti, the Italian
businessman with whom it was locked in a legal fight over the future of
MGM-Pathe, the stricken Hollywood movie studio.
The Parretti problem has since almost paled beside all the other traumas
that have developed around Credit Lyonnais. It won the legal battle over
MGM, but now faces the gargantuan task of salvaging the studio.
It has also been hit by heavy losses on loans to the late Robert Maxwell; on
La Cinq, the television channel which collapsed this spring; and VEV, the
troubled French textile group. It is also the second largest European
creditor of Olympia & York, the precarious Canadian property group, although
its O&Y loans are secured.
Credit Lyonnais totted up the cost of last year's bad debts in its 1991
results which were published last month. It was forced to make provisions of
FFr9.6bn (Pounds 972m), thereby reducing net profits from FFr3.7bn in 1990
to FFr3.1bn in 1991.
Mr Haberer's many critics in France have hailed the 1991 figures as proof of
the failure of his grandiose plan to turn Credit Lyonnais into a 'universal
bank' - with a wide range of international banking interests and extensive
industrial investments - along the lines of Deutsche Bank, in Germany.
Deutsche Bank, claim the critics, owes its structure to its roots in the
post-war reconstruction of western Germany. By the time Credit Lyonnais
began its expansion towards the end of the 1980s, it was too late and too
expensive to construct a universal bank.
The performance of Credit Lyonnais' loan portfolio over the last year or so
has seemed to justify the critics' concern. Whenever a new corporate horror
story has unfolded, Credit Lyonnais has been high up the list of creditors;
although it should be noted that its provisions as a proportion of loans -
roughly 1.6 per cent last year - are still low by international standards.
Other aspects of Mr Haberer's strategy have been more successful. The French
retail banking network, the original base of the business, has fared well in
an increasingly competitive market after stringent restructuring, as have
the recent acquisitions in other countries, notably in Spain and Italy.
Altus, the French banking subsidiary bought from the Thomson electronics
group in 1989, produced an impressive profit last year, as did the US junk
bond portfolio.
In spite of these successes, Mr Haberer's critics claim he has taken too
many risks with one of the grand old names of French banking. Their hopes
that he would be fired next month, when the Credit Lyonnais chairmanship
comes up for renewal, suffered a setback when Mr Pierre Beregovoy, one of
his staunchest supporters, was appointed prime minister.
But Mr Haberer may face another political hurdle after next year's general
elections if Mr Jacques Chirac returns to power as the head of a
conservative government. Mr Chirac has been prime minister before, and one
of his first acts in the financial sector was to fire the head of the
Paribas banking group - Mr Jean-Yves Haberer.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920520

