FT921-12074

FT  29 JAN 92 / CBI reports sharp fall in business confidence


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


A SHARP fall in business confidence was reported yesterday by the
Confederation of British Industry in a report casting further doubt on the
speed of recovery from the recession.
According to the CBI's latest quarterly survey of industrial trends,
manufacturing output and investment are continuing to fall.
It found little evidence of any imminent upturn, though it supports
contentions that a steady increase in growth across the economy may be
visible in the second half of this year.
The survey covered 1,241 companies in 50 manufacturing sectors. It was
conducted between December 18 and January 15.
After a big increase in business optimism recorded in the CBI's October
survey, only one in 10 of companies contacted in the new study said they
were more confident about the commercial outlook than four months ago.
With 34 per cent of businesses saying they were less confident, that gives a
balance of 24 per cent which gave a pessimistic view of the period to May.
The balance of pessimism in the new study is much the same as in July last
year when the recession was about a year old, and on some economists' views
was starting to peter out. The CBI's 'confidence index' swung up markedly in
the October survey, when a balance of 2 per cent said they were more
optimistic, a finding that encouraged expectations about a recovery.
According to the CBI, factors which have reduced confidence recently include
the worsening economic outlook in big export markets such as the US and
Germany. Also, many companies were disappointed that the increase in UK
demand predicted by the Treasury for the second half of 1991 failed to
materialise.
While in the October survey a balance of 2 per cent of companies said they
thought output would rise in the period to January, production has continued
to decline.
A balance of 29 per cent of companies in the new study said production was
down in the past four months compared with the May-September period, about
the same as reported three months ago.
On investment, a balance of 16 per cent of companies expect to spend less on
plant and machinery over the next year, compared with a 7 per cent balance
in October which anticipated a reduction in spending.
New orders, a good advance indicator of economic change, are still extremely
hard to come by. A balance of more than a third of companies said their
order books had shrunk in the past four months, about the same as in the
October survey. A balance of just 2 per cent of companies think orders will
increase in the next four months, the same as October.
Export prospects also appear to have worsened. A balance of 7 per cent of
companies are expressing overall pessimism about the potential for exports,
while in October a balance of 14 per cent were optimistic.
One bright spot concerns inflationary pressures, which remain weak, as
companies try to remain competitive by cutting costs and imposing lower wage
settlements.
According to the survey, a balance of just 5 per cent of companies said they
increased their costs per unit of output over the past four months  - the
lowest figure since October 1959.
On prices, profit margins have been squeezed still further thanks to
companies attempting to build sales in a weak market. A balance of 19 per
cent of businesses say they have been unable to raise domestic prices in the
past four months, the lowest result since February 1959.
In line with the overall tone of gloom, the survey is more pessimistic than
the one in October on the outlook for employment, with a balance of 41 per
cent of businesses saying they will cut jobs.
Parliament, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 7 Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph
(Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph
(Omitted).

920129

