FT922-7356

FT  19 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Alcan says aluminium still
flooding from CIS


   By KENNETH GOODING


RUSSIA'S aluminium smelters are living a hand-to-mouth existence but are
still managing to produce a great deal of metal, according to Mr David
Morton, chairman of Alcan Aluminium of Canada.
He said it would therefore be 'imprudent' for western producers to assume
that the flood of aluminium exports from Russia would ease this year.
'The Russian smelters are terribly inefficient, in poor condition, short of
raw materials and are awful polluters,' said Mr Morton. But the Commonwealth
of Independent States' aluminium industry had 3.5m tonnes of installed
capacity and, in spite of all its tribulations, should be able to produce
2.5m to 3m tonnes this year.
CIS domestic demand had collapsed so it was prudent to expect that exports
to the west would be 800,000 to 1m tonnes compared with Alcan's estimate of
845,000 tonnes in 1991.
Mr Morton said an Alcan team recently returned from a fact-finding trip to
Russia and reported that, in contrast to the poor state of the aluminium
smelters, the hydro-electric plants supplying the smelters were
'impeccable'.
He suggested the western aluminium industry could offer Russia some
technical assistance - for which it could justify taking payment.
But it was not possible for Alcan to contemplate any large investment in the
CIS because of the absence of a legal framework or financial institutions,
taken for granted in the west.
Mr Morton, in London during a visit to institutional investors and banks in
Europe, pointed out that, apart from the extra metal from Russia, about 1m
tonnes of new capacity was coming on stream in the west in the next 18
months. So conditions in the aluminium industry 'are going to be miserable
for the next year or two'.
He said it was essential that more of the west's high-cost smelting capacity
was closed down. The highest-cost smelters were in Europe and it would take
some time for closures to occur because of social and other pressures.
However, at present aluminium prices, 50 to 60 per cent of smelters in the
west were not covering their full costs and this could not go on
indefinitely.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920519

