FT921-484

FT  28 MAR 92 / Heron tells banks it wants Pounds 1.3bn debt rescheduling:
US losses prompt Gerald Ronson's group to seek deal with lenders


   By BRONWEN MADDOX and ROBERT PESTON


HERON INTERNATIONAL, Mr Gerald Ronson's international property and finance
group, surprised its banks yesterday by announcing that it was seeking to
reschedule its net debt of some Pounds 1.3bn.
In a meeting earlier this month with Credit Suisse, a leading Swiss bank,
Heron gave no indication of any problems. The bank said yesterday: 'We were
astonished by yesterday's announcement.'
The move comes a week after Canada's Olympia & York, the world's largest
property developer and backer of the Canary Wharf development in London's
docklands, ran into financial difficulties.
Heron, Britain's second largest private company, said last night: 'This is
no last minute crisis . . . the company initiated this move, not the banks.'
The company has also suspended the trading of its bonds on the Swiss,
Frankfurt and Luxembourg exchanges until after a meeting next Friday, at
which it will ask its bankers to extend the maturity dates on some of its
debt and bonds.
The announcement was made three days before the end of Heron's financial
year, in which, for the first time in its 26-year history, it is likely to
show a loss.
Heron said last night that 'one of the main elements' of the decision was
losses from its US financial services and property businesses, an ill-fated
expansion of the mid 1980s, which has cost it about Pounds 200m over the
past four years.
At the same time it is fighting recession in its key markets of property,
housebuilding, and luxury car sales.
Heron has no publicly-traded shares but has financed itself by debt and
bonds, denominated mainly in Swiss francs.
Its last accounts at March 1991 showed net debt of Pounds 1.3bn, including
Pounds 447.8m in bonds. The company said yesterday that its present debt was
'roughly in line' with that figure.
The rescheduling plan will propose that the principal and interest on
Heron's loans will be paid in full 'over some period'.
However, Heron is expected to ask banks to defer interest payments. The
company will not seek more loans, and will start selling investment
properties.
The Bank of England has been kept informed about the restructuring but has
so far been little involved. One banker said last night that he hoped the
rescheduling would prove to be 'more straightforward' than other recent debt
reconstructions.
The bank lenders to Heron are being led by Barclays, the UK's biggest bank,
which has been kept informed of the property group's plans. Barclays'
exposure is understood to be less than Pounds 150m, but it saw its shares
slip from 335p to 322p yesterday on worries about the loans' safety.
When Mr Ronson was tried and convicted in August 1990 for his role in the
Guinness affair, Sir John Quinton, chairman of Barclays, gave him a glowing
testimonial, saying that Mr Ronson 'had the reputation of being perhaps the
most successful businessman of his generation', and that his
creditworthiness was 'as high as it had ever been'.
Bank of America and National Westminster are next in order of exposure.
Credit Suisse is both a lender to Heron and lead manager of some Swiss franc
bonds. It said yesterday: 'We met Heron's executives earlier this month and
they said nothing about this.'
The company's 11 bond issues - six in Swiss francs, two in Ecus, one in
D-Marks, one in French francs and one in US dollars - will remain suspended
until April 6.
Recent concerns about Heron's indebtedness, combined with the property
slump, have been reflected in the bonds' price.
At their suspension prices yesterday the Swiss bonds were at between 30 per
cent and 43 per cent of their face value, a 'junk' rating, and offering
buyers yields of between 31 per cent and 47 per cent if the bonds were held
to maturity.
None of bonds mature until next year. Heron said yesterday that an interest
payment on the SFr105m bond dated 1989-98, which is due on Monday, would
still be made.
Heron said that it had detected the need for rescheduling in February and
had called in Price Waterhouse, the accountancy firm, which had previously
had no links with the company, to do a 'full independent review'.
Heron said yesterday it had 'positive net worth, substantial liquidity (cash
and liquid investments) of over Pounds 100m and no cash flow problem'.
Lex Page, 24
Barry Riley, Weekend I

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920328

