FT924-825

FT  22 DEC 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Enterprise looks for a
way out - Small firms should not rule out a public flotation of stock
despite the difficulties


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


Two years after buying control of Orthofix, an Italian manufacturer of
devices for treating fractures, Edgar Wallner began making plans for a
public flotation. He ruled out the Italian stock market as being too small
and London because he felt it had a prejudiced view of Italian companies.
Acting on the advice of one of the venture capitalists who had backed him,
Wallner, an Englishman, decided to list his company on Nasdaq, the US
electronic market.
Orthofix duly went public last April listing 3m of its 10m shares at Dollars
12 a share. 'London investors would not have paid 21 times earnings for an
Italian company,' says Wallner. Orthofix, with projected 1992 sales of
Dollars 27m, (Pounds 17.7m) now has funds available to make acquisitions.
Wallner's decision to go for a US listing highlights a problem facing
growing businesses throughout Europe. The revelation last month that the
London Stock Exchange was thinking of closing the Unlisted Securities Market
reflects a wider malaise affecting secondary stock markets throughout
Europe.
According to one estimate 17,000 companies in Europe have received equity
funding over the past decade. Most will not be suitable for a public listing
but the managements of these businesses, and the venture funds which have
backed them, will all be looking for a way to realise their investment.
Flourishing stock markets are essential for putting a price on these
businesses and allowing them to raise new capital.
The secondary markets launched in Brussels, Paris, Amsterdam and several
other European centres in the 1980s have been struggling to maintain, and in
some cases even establish, viable trading volumes. London scrapped its Third
Market in 1987, is likely to shut down the USM and is incapable of creating
liquidity for many of the 1,500 companies (out of a total of 2,100 on the
main exchange) with a market value of less than Pounds 50m.
'Unless a young company can have access to the public market at an earlier
stage than is now possible there will be a brake put upon enterprise,'
comments Ronald Cohen, chairman of Apax Partners, a venture capital company.
One reason for the decline of Europe's secondary markets was that they
failed to reach a critical mass and so were unable to provide profits for
the promoters, stockbrokers and market makers, says Dick Onians, managing
partner of Baring Venture Partners.
This lack of expertise meant they attracted ephemeral businesses selected
because they could be easily understood by the investors, he told a
conference on 'Realising Enterprise Value' organised by the European
Foundation for Entrepreneurship Research in London.
The high-tech businesses which have sought an early market listing in the US
have not been a feature of the European secondary markets.
Indivers, a Dutch-based company providing services to turbine manufacturers,
airlines and the semi-conductor industry is illustrative of companies which
decided against a European flotation. It twice looked at a listing in
Amsterdam in the 1980s but rejected it because knowledge of its industry on
the Dutch market was low.
Bert Twaalfhoven, founder of Indivers, calculates that Amsterdam would have
valued his company on a price earnings ratio of six while Singapore and
London would have rated the company on p/es of 25 and 10 respectively.
Finally Twaalfhoven decided to keep his company private.
Keeping the company in the family is attractive to many entrepreneurs but it
can act as a brake on growth. And unless the venture capitalists who back
fast-growth companies can find profitable 'exits' they will have difficulty
raising further money from their investors to back the next generation of
new businesses.
The most common alternative to a stock market listing is a trade sale where
a business sells out to another company. Howard Rose, founder of
Runcorn-based Waverley Pharmaceutical, sold his company to Ivax Corporation
of the US for Dollars 50m earlier this year. Rose, who built his business
with the backing of a wealthy 'business angel', says he rejected a London
listing because the USM was 'a waste of space'.
There is a widespread feeling among venture capitalists and entrepreneurs
that many European exchanges make it too difficult for the young company to
obtain a listing. 'The stock exchange seems to see its role as protecting
investors against business risk and not just against fraud,' comments Cohen.
Entrepreneurs have mixed feelings about the attractions of a flotation,
according to a study of nearly 300 European venture-backed businesses by
William Bygrave, professor of enterprise studies at Babson College in the
US.
Business owners were attracted to the idea of a listing by the prestige of
running a public company and the relative ease of subsequently raising
finance. But they were concerned at the cost and worried that sponsors and
investors would lose interest after the float, leading to a fall in the
share price.
The most successful market at attracting fast-growing businesses has been
Nasdaq, which trades 181 foreign stocks out of 4,400 listed on its two main
markets. On average Nasdaq stocks are dealt in by 12 market makers while 98
per cent of the top 2,200 companies are the subject of regular analysts'
reports.
European companies are already using Nasdaq to obtain a listing and it has
tried to establish links with European exchanges. 'But we have not found a
local partner who did not see us as a threat,' says John Wall, executive
vice president.
Modern technology makes it irrelevant where an electronic market is based
but European companies would welcome a market which attracted European
investors, if only to cut the amount of time spent travelling. Wallner says
he has made three trips to the US since April and given 110 presentations
about Orthofix to US investors.
One suggestion from Baring Venture Partners is for an Europe-wide exchange,
to be owned and operated by the European venture capital industry. The
exchange would be self-regulating and would recommend valuations, provide a
quotation service and complete transactions, says Onians.
However, investors and entrepreneurs might have their reservations about a
market run by venture capitalists, whose own valuation procedures have come
in for criticism. But some new mechanism for floating young companies is
needed. 'We have to put on pressure to re-establish a market,' says Cohen.
'In three to four years everyone will be wanting small company stocks.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921222

