FT923-9748

FT  04 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Sterling helps uncertain equity
sector


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


CONCERN IN the London stock market over sterling was eased yesterday by
commitment to a strong pound from Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, and
by news of a pro-Maastricht opinion poll in France. An improvement in the
sterling rate against the D-Mark in late dealings found a ready response
from UK share prices, although trading volume remained relatively light.
The London stock market jousted with the FT-SE Index around the 2,400 mark
in early dealings and it was a lead from the stock index futures sector
which first took the Footsie firmly above this benchmark level. But the
overall mood of the market remained cautious as economic commentators
continued to call for government action to promote recovery from the
economic setback. The market was only about 10 Footsie points ahead until
the late upswing in sterling doubled the earlier gain.
The final reading showed the FT-SE Index at 2,420.2, a gain on the day of
20.6 points. But initial trading, when neither the Nikkei Average, Friday's
Dow reading, nor the London futures market gave much encouragement, saw the
Footsie down by more than 10 points at 2,389.
The seemingly unending flow of woe in the City continued yesterday when
Oxford Economic Forecasting, the Confederation of British Industry and
National Westminster Bank all bore witness to the depth of the recession and
in some cases urged changes in official policy.
Nor was the mood lightened when Abbey National, one of Britain's largest
mortgage lenders, called for tax help for prospective house sellers after
disclosing a 12 per cent drop in its half-time profits.
The late improvement in sterling helped to calm fears in the market over the
near-term outlook for domestic interest rates. While hopes of further cuts
in UK base rates have receded significantly since the rise in money rates in
Germany, London remains fearful that a full-flown sterling crisis could
force UK rates higher.
Traders were wary of putting too much faith in yesterday's firmness in the
London stock market. Turnover remained unexciting, with Seaq volume at only
329.6m shares; Friday's 378.1m shares reflected only Pounds 812.6m in terms
of customer, or retail, business, no great figure by standards of market
profitability.
Among interest rate-related stocks to benefit directly from the pound's
firmer tone, the high street retailers stood out well. But construction
issues continued to suffer from doubts over the continued profitability of
the industry.
Equity strategists agreed that the market outlook for this week will be
dominated by prospects for the interim trading report from British Petroleum
on Thursday and, in particular, by the decision taken on the dividend
payment by the board of the blue chip oil company.
BP opened sharply lower yesterday after the UK press had commented bearishly
on the outlook, suggesting that the impending trading statement might be
taken by the board as an opportunity to write off costs in less profitable
areas.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920804

