FT924-11410

FT  26 OCT 92 / Long wave interference


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


The Long Wave is the least understood and most important (cycle) . . . but
it moves so slowly that the motion is imperceptible to the human eye. Yet
like the glaciers, it can have the most devastating effect on the
countryside -
Professor John Sterman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Everybody seems to be talking about 'long waves' - the 50-60 year economic
cycles that Kondratieff, the Russian economist, first claimed to have
identified in the 1920s. A fortnight ago, I was discussing the US outlook
with Mr Charles Venus, an economic consultant in Little Rock, Arkansas. He
pointed to low interest rates and gave the usual textbook arguments for a
solid US recovery over the next few years. But then he surprised me by
raising a horrible doubt. Might not the US - indeed the entire global
economy - be caught in a Kondratieff downwave?
This is precisely what is happening, according to a paper* presented to a
recent Bank Credit Analyst conference in New York by Mr John Sterman, a long
wave theorist at MIT's Sloan School of Management. The economy is hard to
understand, he believes, because four things are happening at once.
Over the longest time span, technical change and population growth result in
steady economic growth - about 3.5 per cent a year since 1800 in the US.
Long waves represent very slow, very powerful fluctuations about this trend,
lasting some 50-60 years. Superimposed on each long wave are numerous
short-term business cycles, lasting on average about five years. Finally,
there is 'random noise', reflected in arbitrary variations in the growth
rate from quarter to quarter.
Most academics refuse to believe in long waves. Joseph Schumpeter, the
Austrian analyst of capitalism, was an exception. In his book Business
Cycles (1939), he identified three long cycles, the first beginning with the
birth of modern capitalism in the 1780s, the second in the 1840s, and the
third at the end of the 19th century. Lengthy economic downturns - including
the Great Depression of the early 1930s - occurred roughly on cue in the
second 'down-swing' phase of each cycle. In the 1940s, Schumpeter was one of
only a handful of economists to predict strong global growth after the
second world war, partly because he believed the powerful expansion phase of
the fourth Kondratieff cycle would then be under way.
But what could cause cycles of such long duration? The long-term dynamics of
capital goods industries and the tendency for innovations to occur in
clusters provides a possible answer. The start of an upswing is
characterised by pent up consumer demand and a wave of investment in new
technologies. Motor cars, washing machines and televisions helped power the
post-second world war expansion, just as railways provided a boost in the
mid-19th century.
But the supply of new products first requires investment in capital goods
industries, a process that can feed on itself for several decades. At some
point, however, capital goods production exceeds demand, precipitating cuts
which eventually trigger the contraction phase of the cycle. In long waves,
assets - such as plant, equipment and real estate - thus play an analogous
role to inventories in short-term business cycles.
There is another plausible reason for long waves: after 50-60 years the
people whose mistaken expectations shaped one cycle will be dead or very old
and thus unable to influence their successors. Put another way, you are
unlikely to repeat the mistakes of your parents, but you may easily fall
into the same traps as your grandparents. The speculative excesses of the
1980s, for example, could not have occurred in the 1950s because too many
people then vividly remembered the 1920s. In the 1950s in the US it was
difficult to borrow against the security of a house, because real estate was
still seen as a highly illiquid asset of uncertain value.
I remain agnostic about long waves. But if they exist, where are we now?
According to Mr Sterman, the current long cycle peaked in the early 1970s
when excess demand began to emerge in heavy capital goods industries such as
steel. We have been in the downswing phase ever since; this is why growth
has tended to be below the long-term average of 3.5 per cent and why
short-term recessions have been more severe than in the immediate post-war
decades. The final phase of a long wave is characterised by a trough in
which the economy moves sideways in preparation for a new Kondratieff
upswing.
If the trough began with the 1990-91 recession, might an expansion soon
begin? It is possible, but not probable. None of the relevant leading
indicators - such as the rate of capacity utilisation in capital goods
industries - point to an early upturn. Most economies still seem burdened by
the excesses of the last cycle. There is not yet a sense either of pent-up
demand from consumers or of an imminent wave of investment in new
technologies. But long wave theory suggests most of the downswing is behind
us. By the late 1990s, the mostly myopic economics profession may be amazed
by the strength of the global recovery.
*BCA Publications 3463 Peel Street, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. H3A 1W7.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921026

