FT923-9639

FT  04 AUG 92 / Will privatisation deliver the goods?: Andrew Bolger on the
parcels industry upheaval


   By ANDREW BOLGER


THE parcels industry faces upheaval with British Rail's parcels division and
Parcelforce, the Post Office's delivery service, due to be privatised.
The move is not entirely unexpected, but the timing of both announcements -
just before parliament rose for the summer  - still came as a surprise and
has sent managers, employees and prospective buyers into a huddle trying to
assess the implications.
All agree that crucial decisions remain to be made about how those parcels
operations can be separated from their parent organisations.
Parcelforce delivers 750,000 parcels daily, giving it a leading 34 per cent
share of the market for ordinary parcels delivered later than next day - but
it has only 2 per cent of the premium 'next day' market, which is most
attractive to the private sector.
The Post Office is split into Parcelforce, which employs 12,500 people; the
Post Office Counters division; and the Royal Mail, which handles letters.
Parcelforce lost Pounds 24m on turnover of Pounds 508m in the year to April,
but that compared favourably with the previous year's loss of Pounds 131m,
and the operation was profitable in the second half.
The greatest buyers' interest will focus on Red Star, BR's express parcels
service. Although BR's parcels division lost Pounds 34.7m last year, Red
Star is one of the leading carriers of express parcels.
TNT, the international transport group, said it was interested in the BR and
Parcelforce businesses, but awaits further details.
Securicor Omega Express said it was interested in operations that offered
business-to-business services, such as Red Star. It was less attracted by
delivering to domestic addresses, which had lower price margins and the
difficulty of catching people at home. Parcelforce delivers to almost all
the UK's 24m homes.
Many observers believe Parcelforce is likely to become the subject of an
employee/management buy-out, as the National Freight Corporation was in
1982. Announcing the Parcelforce decision, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary, said financial support would be available so that
management and employees could bid - although rival bids would be
considered.
Mr Heseltine also insisted that there would continue to be a universal
parcel service at a uniform and affordable tariff. 'That is not negotiable,'
he told MPs. Under questioning, he suggested that some of the responsibility
could be shared with Royal Mail, which already delivers for Parcelforce in
remote areas.
DHL International, the air express company, said privatisation would produce
a fairer, more competitive environment by preventing the Post Office from
cross-subsidising its parcels service with profits made by Royal Mail.
Private companies say that Parcelforce will have a big advantage if it
retains access to its 18,500 existing 'retail outlets' - post offices all
over the country.
Prospective buyers might also face heavy investment demands. In April,
Parcelforce announced a five-year plan to invest Pounds 250m in new
vehicles, depots and information technology. Mr Heseltine has said such
investment would be a decision for new owners.
These opportunities for purchase and investment in the UK parcels business
do not come at a good time for the international operators in the sector,
which have seen profits cut by recession. Earlier this year US parcels
carrier Federal Express pulled out of all European domestic and regional
activities, including the UK domestic express market.
Last autumn DHL disposed of its UK overnight delivery company Elan through a
management buy-out. DHL said it was keeping an open mind about the latest
sell-offs, but wanted more detailed government proposals. Having focused on
the international market, it is likely only to be interested in
business-to-business services for those clients who want deliveries in the
UK.
Other potential bidders might include United Parcels Service, the US company
that in June bought Carryfast, the UK's largest privately owned express
delivery company. UPS seems likely to concentrate on bedding in its
acquisition before taking on any more business in the UK.
The unanswered questions are best illustrated by Rail Express Systems, the
other part of BR's parcels division, which mainly carries letters for Royal
Mail. As a loss-maker, how would it fare if split from the more attractive
Red Star? What deal would a prospective buyer strike over trains and track
fees with BR, which itself faces privatisation? Only when the full
privatisation packages have been unwrapped will the serious bidding begin.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920804

