FT922-4220

FT  06 JUN 92 / There's something nasty at the bottom of the garden /
Visiting a Dutch village which has woken up to pollution


   By KEN GOODING


BUDEL-DORPLEIN is one of those villages that the Dutch do so well. The
houses are solid and substantial. Gardens are lovingly tended; even the
trees seem to be carefully trimmed into shape. No scrap of litter, no stray
dog, is permitted to mar the village's bourgeois charm.
Yet there is something strange about the houses at one end of the village.
They obviously were built many years ago - one has 1901 etched into its
brickwork - yet all the gardens are brand new. That is because staff from
the Dutch Environment Ministry recently dug up the old gardens, full of
well-established plants, vegetables, bushes and trees and carted them away -
together with all the top soil.
'Some of the people did not want to lose the gardens they had looked after
from many years,' says Marinus van Weel, director of water, environment and
transport for the Noord-Brabant regional government. 'But one by one they
gave in as their neighbours decided to let their gardens go.'
From the new gardens there is a clear view across neighbouring marshland,
teaming with wildlife attracted by the area's tranquillity. There is a green
pond with a sandy scum around its edge - and beyond it, a tall chimney
pinpointing the Budel zinc smelter.
The smelter produces cadmium, and the Budel-Dorplein gardens were ripped up
because they were contaminated with this metal, one of the most toxic known
to man. The human body cannot cope with cadmium - the metal builds up in the
kidneys and destroys them.
This episode is only a small part of an environmental drama of extreme
complexity being played out in the Netherlands. It shows that cleaning up
Europe after 100 years of industrial pollution can never be easy, and is
expensive.
It it a stark demonstration of the fact that when one government opts for
environmental standards that are higher than those of its international
neighbours, it does so at the risk of damaging or even killing off its
domestic industry. It carries a warning that, in Europe, society will
increasingly have to choose between a cleaner environment or a loss of
manufacturing jobs.
In this case it might result in the closure of one of the world's most
efficient zinc smelters, because it happens to be in the Netherlands rather
than in Belgium, two kilometres away, where environmental standards are less
exacting.
There is no doubt about the source of the pollution at Budel-Dorplein. The
village grew up in sight of the Budel smelter, one of eight similar plants
established at the turn of the century along the Belgian-Dutch border. Over
the years the smelters severely polluted, with cadmium and other metals, 800
square kilometres of land in the Kempen region, which also straddles the
line between Belgium and Holland. The Dutch government says that, as with
the gardens at Budel-Dorplein, the contaminated earth should be cleaned up.
The Netherlands has some of the most strict environmental standards in the
world. Much of the country is at or below sea level, so the water table is
very close to the surface and can easily be contaminated. Dutch regulations
state that if the level of cadmium in the soil reaches 20 milligrams per
kilogram of dry material, the soil should be sanitised.
Yet, although there are no obvious signs of ill-health among the local
population, the gardens at Budel-Dorplein were excavated if they contained
an average of 2.5 milligrams a kilo - just one eighth of the accepted
maximum level.
Cadmium pollution in the Kempen region was caused by old technology - old,
coal-fired smelters which spewed out contaminated smoke and ash. At Budel
these were replaced by modern, electrolytic plant in 1973. But for nearly
three quarters of a century the old smelter produced waste ash, which was in
great demand. It was used to pave 800 kms of roads in the area. Local
farmers scattered the ash around their lands because it was cheap and no
weeds grew in it. Nobody knows just where all the cadmium-contaminated ash
went but they do know that, ever since it was first used, rain has been
leaching out the cadmium and other heavy metals.
That is all history. Today the Budel smelter, jointly owned by Billiton, the
metals arm of the Royal Dutch/Shell group, and Pasminco, the Australian
metals company, is one of the world's most efficient. It contributes about 5
per cent of the western world's zinc - a product much in demand, mainly for
galvanising steel used by the construction and automotive industries.
In its way, zinc is an environmentally-friendly metal because it protects
products against rust and makes them last longer. But the legacy of past
pollution haunts the smelter. Huge quantities of ash were used to provide a
base for buildings, roads and storage areas on the smelter site and metal is
being leached out of it into the ground water. Only 10 kms away, the town of
Weert is pumping ground water up for drinking. Also, a waste storage pond
constructed in 1973 is leaking into the ground water, although this is being
contained by an drainage system underneath.
Budelco, the company which owns the smelter, has, with the help of
consultants TAUW and Grondmechanica Delft, devised an ingenious 'water
curtain' to contain pollution from the smelter ashes and leaking pond.
Twelve wells have been drilled and a water purification plant has been
installed to suck up contaminated water and purify it.
These efforts to eliminate its pollution problems might be to no avail and
the Budel smelter might still be forced to close. For it is running out of
space to store acadmium containing hazardous waste, called jarosite. At
present this yellowish, sandy substance is stored in three artificial ponds
lined with heavy-duty plastic. During the past 20 years the smelter has
generated nearly 2m tonnes of jarosite and continues to produce 100,000
tonnes a year. The Noord-Brabant regional government says this cannot
continue - the ponds already cover 50 hectares or half a square kilometre -
and the smelter must find another method of dealing with this substance.
By working flat-out since 1985 Budelco has, in co-operation with Outokumpu,
the Finnish metals group, developed a method of smelting (or burning)
jarosite to turn it into an inert material which can be used for
construction and road building. But Budelco cannot afford to use this
technology - it would increase the smelter's costs by 25 to 30 per cent and
leave it unable to compete with other zinc smelters world-wide.
The Budel smelter provides more than 600 jobs, nearly 20 per cent of them
for Belgians, and is estimated to support about 3,000 people in all. So
there is a great deal of sympathy for its predicament at the Noord-Brabant
government's headquarters in Den Bosch, 70 kms north of Budel. But the
regional government, which licenses the smelter's operations, insists that
the waste material must be treated differently in future.
Marinus van Weel is an affable individual and by no means an environmental
crusader. But he says, firmly: 'If we force the smelter to close it will not
be a popular decision. But if we have to choose between employment and the
environment it will not be difficult. Unemployment in the Netherlands is not
that high.'
Noord-Brabant cannot offer financial help, so Budelco is negotiating with
the Dutch government. The burden of saving the smelter is carried by Wim de
Graaff, the company's general manager. He says: 'We have come to a point
where a decision has to be made. We are the only zinc smelter in the world
being pushed to smelt jarosite. We don't mind being environmental guinea
pigs but to compensate we must be financially assisted, either by the Dutch
government or by the European Community.'
de Graaff, 54, a geologist by training with 30 years in the mining and
metals industry, agrees that stopping present groundwater pollution from the
jarosite ponds on its site is the responsibility of Budelco. He says: 'We
can't just say our fathers and grandfathers did it wrongly, but our job is
to go on making zinc.'
He argues, however, that the expensive jarosite processing project can only
be contemplated if Budelco is given financial help until the rest of the
industry catches up. Most zinc smelters are producing iron-rich jarosite,
all contaminated with heavy metals, and he suggests that in due course EC
harmonisation will force at least those in the Community to follow the 'best
practice' pioneered by Budelco. But that might take many years.
Budelco has already spent more than Fl 30m (Pounds 10m) on research and
development associated with treating jarosite. A jarosite smelter would to
cost about Fl 400m (Pounds 133m). Jarosite has to be burned at 1,600 degrees
C so annual fuel costs would be high.
Other zinc smelters have been contacted but say they do not wish to share
the technology and the costs. So very recently the new process was adapted
to treat sludge from water purification plants and contaminated harbour
sludge as well as jarosite. Water authorities at Noord-Brabant and Limburg
'are interested but sitting on the fence.'
Meanwhile, one option de Graaff must consider is the smelter's phased
closure over the next two years. 'It might seem silly to close down this
smelter and then import zinc from Belgium a few kilometres away, but the
Dutch are a strong-minded people and it might well come to that,' he says.
Budelco would take responsibility for ensuring that there was no ground
water pollution from the smelter site but would resist pressure to
contribute towards cleaning up the mess outside the site caused by polluted
ashes and by the previous owners.
Neither would Budelco take kindly to any suggestion that it should
contribute towards cleaning up the rest of Kempen valley, where the average
cadmium contamination is over 1 milligram a kilo and in some areas more than
5.
The Dutch government is still mulling over what it should do about the 300
square kilometres of polluted land on its side of the border. It spent Fl
18m to replace contaminated soil and vegetation in 66 relatively small
gardens in Budel-Dorplein. The cost of doing the same in all Kempen would be
prohibitive.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920606

