FT924-6215

FT  23 NOV 92 / Before making the world's longest commercial flight first
fire frozen chickens at the aircraft: The Airbus A340 will take passengers
further in one hop than ever before but what strains will that put on the
aircraft and travellers?


   By PAUL BETTS


THE 'jet age' entered a new dimension on Saturday when an Airbus A340
four-engine widebody airliner in Lufthansa colours flew 12,500 kms non-stop
from Frankfurt to Honolulu. At 15 1/2 hours, it was the longest non-stop
passenger flight ever undertaken under scheduled airline conditions from
Europe and ushered in a new era of long-distance air travel.
But the journey was only a small, if spectacular, part of one of the most
exhaustive test programmes ever undertaken for a civil aircraft. And it
comes in the wake of the long-running controversy that Airbus has faced
after three A320 crashes, two in France and one in India.
Against that background, the European aircraft consortium has spent about
Dollars 1.5bn on testing the safety and performance of the A340. That is two
fifths of the aircraft's total Dollars 3.5bn development cost, and it has
taken the group two years to prepare its airliner, which claims the longest
range of any aircraft in aviation history and will enter commercial service
next January.
So what testing efforts have been made by the group, which is still
struggling to win broad public acceptance for the fly-by-wire system it
introduced in its A320 narrowbody twin-engine aircraft and is adapting to
the A340 and its shorter-range sister aircraft, the A330 twin?
All new commercial aircraft undergo gruelling testing to meet increasingly
tough airworthiness certification requirements. But Mr Bernard Ziegler, the
head of Airbus engineering and a test pilot himself, says Airbus has had to
undertake more extensive development testing than its US competitors, Boeing
and McDonnell Douglas, not only because it is a relative newcomer to the
airliner market but because its aircraft have introduced new - and at times
highly controversial - technology to commercial aviation.
Such is fly-by-wire, a system of flying an aircraft through computers, but
which Mr Ziegler insists is a safer and more efficient way of controlling an
aircraft. Boeing, he notes, is introducing such systems in its 777 widebody
twin-engine airliner. 'The technology is not at stake and all three A320
accidents were crew-related,' he says.
He acknowledges, though, that with the A320 Airbus may not have sufficiently
understood and addressed the task of training crews to fly using the new
flight computer system. To test the safety of the fly-by-wire system on the
A340, the aircraft - like the A320 - has undergone rigorous testing for
electromagnetic interference. 'The problem is: what happens if an airliner
flies by mistake over a secret military base equipped with special radars
which could interfere with the electronics on board?' another Airbus
executive explains.
'To study electromagnetic interference to the extreme, we stuck an aircraft
in a French naval base, where it was bombarded by radio and radar waves of
various intensity.'
Lightning strikes can also cause serious electromagnetic interference, so
the A340 was flown into a storm to seek out lightning. After 17 strikes, all
systems continued to operate normally. The A340 also flew over the North
Pole to test its navigational equipment when everything suddenly points from
north to south. It was the first flight by an Airbus aircraft over the pole.
At the other end of the sophistication table comes the method used to test
the A340's resistance to birdstrikes. Here a cannon was loaded with dozens
of frozen chickens which were fired at the aircraft's windshield and engine
fan blades.
The runway at the French military base of Istres had to be lengthened by
about 120 metres to test aborted take-offs and the aircraft's brakes. Mr
Robert Alizard, Airbus public-affairs manager, says: 'We needed the
additional runway length to give ourselves sufficient margin for these tests
when brakes become red hot and tyres sometimes burst.'
Structural and fatigue tests have taken place on the ground as well as
flight tests using six aircraft costing Dollars 100m each. During this
process, Airbus has made 1,200 modifications to the aircraft, many costing
millions of dollars.
In ground tests, the structure of one A340 was stressed to breaking point.
The wings were bent by 240 hydraulic jacks four metres up before the first
damage appeared. Another aircraft was used for fatigue tests, when
vibration, landing impacts and pressure variations are simulated.
'We test all our aircraft for fatigue up to three times its planned service
life and for some components up to five times,' Mr Ziegler says.
One difficulty the A340 ran into in testing was vibration on the wings. 'We
had to make a slight modification in the wing profile in one local area but
it still cost Dollars 40m,' Mr Ziegler says. Another snag arose when the
aircraft's landing gear refused to lock properly.
While static tests were performed, Airbus ran flight tests. Two prototype
aircraft loaded with computers studied the behaviour of the airliner at all
speeds and altitudes, including the worst-case scenario: finding out how the
aircraft reacted when various systems failed.
For the first time, Airbus conducted flight tests on the A340 in real time.
The information from computers in the back of the aircraft monitoring all
aspects of test flight was directly beamed down by satellite to the Airbus
Toulouse test centre.
The aircraft was thus constantly linked in real time to Toulouse, which
could itself monitor the tests and instruct the pilots to conduct particular
tests or repeat them immediately. In the past, the data from the test
computers on board had to be deciphered after the aircraft had landed. That
can take up to four days.
Mr Ziegler says about two thirds of the test programme related to safety;
the rest involved the performance of the aircraft in airline operation.
'Today all the safety issues are resolved and closed; we are in the final
route-proving programme to test the aircraft's operational reliability in
commercial airline conditions,' he says.
The two launch customers, Lufthansa and Air France, are taking part in the
three-week route-proving tests involving long-distance and shorter-haul
flights around the world using two aircraft: a longer-range A340-200 in
Lufthansa colours and a shorter-range but higher-capacity A340-300 in Air
France livery. The two aircraft are fitted out for commercial operations but
also carry flight test instruments to measure not only aircraft performance
but also cabin systems and passenger comfort.
'Although less significant for the manufacturer, it is extremely important
for the airlines to start up operations with as mature an aircraft as
possible,' Mr Ziegler explains. 'This involves chasing all the snags and
teething problems you get when you introduce a new airliner. We plan to
avoid with the A340 about three quarters of the introduction problems we had
with the A320.'
The first delay suffered during the present route-proving exercise by the
Lufthansa A340 was on a short hop between Frankfurt to Madrid. 'The coffee
machine did not work,' Mr Ziegler said. 'My flight engineers couldn't care
less - but the airline does . . . '
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
AIRBUS A340 TEST PROGRAMME: THE LONG HAUL SAFETY
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
November 21 flight
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
FRANKFURT
Local time: 11.40
Airborne time: 15 hrs 21 min
Local time: 16.35
HONOLULU
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
The key test flights
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Completed:    Toulouse - Singapore - Mauritius - Toulouse
  Completed:    Hot and high trials: Toulouse - Abha - Toulouse
  Completed:    First flight over North Pole: Toulouse - North Pole -
                Fairbanks - Toulouse
  Completed:    Longest test flight to date, 16 hours 22 minutes (but
                without full passenger weight): Toulouse - Perth
21 November:    Frankfurt - Honolulu - Los Angeles - Atlanta -
                New York - Frankfurt
24 November:    Paris - Denver - Houston - Mexico City - Paris
27 November:    Paris - Johannesburg - Paris
28 November:    Frankfurt - Caracas - La Paz (altitude tests) -
                Frankfurt
29 November:    Paris - Beijing - Singapore - Paris
 2 December:    Frankfurt - Buenos Aires - Sao Paulo - Rio de Janeiro -
                Frankfurt
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921123

