FT921-3781

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: Budget relief among marginals


   By ALISON SMITH


IF THE Budget bears the hallmark of Mr John Major, he seems to have recalled
his days in the whips' office and thought of the need to hearten those
troops with the hardest battles to fight in the coming campaign.
In terms of Conservative marginals, Tuesday's package contained something
for just about everyone.
The best value for money may be the changes to the transitional arrangements
for the uniform business rate.
For a cost of Pounds 480m next year and Pounds 590m the following year, the
Budget has relieved the position in southern seats where small retail
businesses had suffered under revaluation. Two examples are Bath, where Mr
Chris Patten is defending a majority of less than 1,500, and Ipswich, where
Mr Michael Irvine won by less than 1,000 in 1987.
It has also helped in some seats in the north of England, where the gains
from the business rate will flow through more quickly. Mr Tim Devlin,
defending a 800 majority in Stockton South, was among those welcoming the
change.
There was also a heartfelt sigh of relief at the halving of the special car
tax, and other measures to help the motor industry, from a swathe of West
Midlands marginals.
These include not only Mr Roger King's constituency of Birmingham
Northfield, held by just over 3,000 and containing the Rover plant at
Longbridge, but others with factories making car components, such as
Wolverhampton North-East, held by Mrs Maureen Hicks with a majority scarcely
over 200.
Another measure welcomed across a range of marginals was the removal of
family businesses - including working farms - from inheritance tax.
This was highlighted for country constituencies containing family farms
central to the local economy.
The extra money for pensioners on income support may particularly benefit
not traditionally safe Tory seats, but some industrial marginals and a few
rural ones where the proportion of poorer pensioners can be higher than
average.
The new 20p tax band is also versatile. In southern urban marginals - such
as Thurrock where Mr Tim Janman defends a 700 majority and Swindon where Mr
Simon Coombs is defending a majority of just under 5,000 - it is seen as
crucial in retrieving or shoring up the blue-collar C1 and C2 vote that
brought the Tories victory in the past.
It also helps in more rural seats, many of them targeted by the Liberal
Democrats, where there are large numbers of workers in low-paid farming and
tourism jobs. One is Torridge and West Devon, held by Miss Emma Nicholson
with a 6,500 majority.
The Budget also proved a little can go a long way. Mr Lamont's robust
comments about the future of the cider industry did not add anything to
public borrowing but will doubtless find their way into election addresses
in the south-west.
Most Tory MPs seem reconciled to the limits on what the Budget could do and
appreciative of the skill shown. But there was still some wistful talk of
cut in interest rates.
'It hasn't lost it for us, but ask me next week whether it's won it,' one
backbencher with a 6,000-odd majority said yesterday. 'People should be
grateful, but they can be perverse.'
Editorial Comment, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920312

