FT923-15732

FT  01 JUL 92 / Smoker acts to test liability


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


SOLICITORS acting for a smoker with a rare circulatory disorder who is suing
Gallaher, the US cigarette manufacturer, said yesterday his case could
provide the first test of the duty of care that tobacco companies owe to
smokers.
Mr Cormac Fitzpatrick, of Belfast solicitors Vincent P. Fitzpatrick & Co,
said he was confident that it could be proved his client's disease was
attributable to smoking.
Mr John Dean, 37, of Ballywalter, Co Down, suffers from Beurger's disease,
which causes constriction of the arteries and in its most severe form can
lead to gangrene and loss of limbs. The disease is incurable but can be
controlled.
Although the disease has not advanced to the serious stage in Mr Dean's
case, he claims that he has been unable to work for seven years and his
family life has been adversely affected. Mr Dean began smoking in his early
teens.
Mr Fitzpatrick said the uniqueness of his case lay in the fact that
Beurger's disease is thought to be caused directly by smoking. With other
smoking-related diseases such as heart disease and lung cancer it is very
hard to prove that nothing else could have caused the disease.
Mr Fitzpatrick said Mr Dean had a strong case because he had only ever
smoked one brand of cigarette, Benson & Hedges, made by Gallaher.
The case will revolve around the extent of the tobacco industry's knowledge
of the harmful side effects of its products, when it took action to warn
people of those side effects and whether the warnings it gave were
sufficient.
He said: 'Just because a company complies with the statutory obligation to
warn about the dangers of smoking does not necessarily mean it has complied
with the wider common-law duty of care owed to consumers.'
The court will have to look at what warnings were available to Mr Dean
during the period when he was smoking and what advertising and promotion was
being pursued by the tobacco companies at the time. His lawyers will argue
that there has been an attempt by the tobacco industry to disarm the
statutory warning through advertising suggesting that the warnings are
included on packets and in advertisements only because the government
insists on them.
Mr Mark Mildred, a personal-injury and product liability lawyer with London
solicitors Pannone Napier, said
that to succeed in a damages action against a cigarette manufacturer under
English law, a plaintiff had to prove negligence by the manufacturer in
promotion of the product; that the negligence resulted in damage; that the
injuries were caused exclusively by tobacco; and that the manufacturer of
the product which caused the injury could be clearly identified.
Gallaher said yesterday it could not comment on the case but it would be
defending it vigorously.
The company is expected to argue that Mr Dean was addicted to smoking by the
time there was a duty to warn him of the danger of Beurger's disease.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920701

