FT922-13384

FT  11 APR 92 / Race for Labour's leadership begins


   By IVO DAWNAY and RALPH ATKINS


THE Labour leadership race was under way last night amid feverish behind the
scenes debate about who may replace Mr Neil Kinnock.
Widespread speculation put Mr John Smith as odds-on favourite, but the
shadow chancellor said he would 'wait to see what Mr Kinnock decides' when
the Labour leader makes a statement on his intentions on Monday.
Officials insisted that Mr Kinnock had fought a highly-praised campaign and
might opt to continue in the leadership. But close colleagues were convinced
he would step down in the wake of Thursday's defeat.
'The party is determined that he is not pushed,' one said. 'But the feeling
is that he will not want to go on.' No candidate wishes to be seen as
throwing his or her hat into the ring before Mr Kinnock decides on his
future. There was also public praise for his conduct of the campaign.
However, Labour's unexpected failure to win even a hung parliament after
hopes had been so high has persuaded even Kinnock loyalists that his
position will be contested. Mr Roy Hattersley, deputy leader, is also
expected to step down, but is believed to have delayed his decision so as
not to embarrass the leader.
The expected battle for the succession is thought likely to start almost at
once and not to end until the party's autumn conference in Blackpool. It
threatens to be a serious distraction for the party from next month's local
government elections and could also form the focus of the lengthy
post-mortem into the defeat.
Despite his refusal to comment, supporters of Mr Smith, who is likely to win
the backing of some of the big trade unions, believe he is certain to run.
They also expect he would put his name forward early and hope to avoid a
damaging contest.
This strategy may well be disrupted by the intervention of other candidates.
Among those whose names are the subject of speculation are Mr Robin Cook,
the health spokesman, Mr Gordon Brown, at trade, Mr Bryan Gould, at
environment, Mr John Prescott, at transport, and Mr Tony Blair, at
employment.
Candidates for the leadership must win the backing of at least a fifth of
the parliamentary Labour party. They must then win a majority of an
electoral college comprising 40 per cent unions and 30 per cent each
constituency parties and PLP.
Mr Kinnock said he will make a statement on Monday about the action he
proposes to take.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920411

