FT921-15193

FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: A rush of Salomes - Records


   By DAVID MURRAY


Richard Strauss: Salome (in German). Marton, Zednik, Weikl, Fassbaender,
Keith Lewis, Mehta/Berlin Philharmonic. Sony S2K 46717 (two CDs)
Salome (in German). Studer, Hiestermann, Terfel, Rysanek, Bieber,
Sinopoli/Orchester der Deutschen Oper Berlin. DG 431 810-2 (two CDs)
Salome (in French). Huffstodt, Dupouy, Van Dam, Jossoud, Viala,
Nagano/Orchestre de l'Opera de Lyon. Virgin Classics VCD 7 91477-2 (two CDs)
Johann Strauss II: Die Fledermaus. Te Kanawa, Gruberova, Brendel, Bar,
Fassbaender, Leech, Krause, Previn/Vienna Philharmonic and State Opera
Chorus. Philips 432 157-2 (two CDs)
SUDDENLY we have three new recordings of Richard Strauss's Salome. Even in
the days of LPs, Ljuba Welitsch's searing account of (just) the final
monologue outdid anything to be heard in a 'complete' version, and there was
rarely more than one of those to be found on record in any year. Among the
ones that came and went, the incisive Nilsson/Solti performance (revived on
Decca CDs) held its ground - too unremitting and ferocious to brook any
argument, but just for that reason not exactly definitive. Neither is any of
the new versions; but 'definitiveness' is a will-o'-the-wisp virtue, whereas
each of these performances has specific virtues of its own.
On Sony, Zubin Mehta's boasts sensible tempi, canny expertise in bringing
out orchestral details (especially the exquisite silvery filigree that
Strauss often sets around the effusions of Salome and Herod), and a staunch
cast which includes Brigitte Fassbaender's scathing Herodias and Keith
Lewis's faultlessly ardent Narraboth. On the other hand, the carefully
realised detail seems to come in separate panels, at severe cost to the
cumulative, 'symphonic' impetus of the score.
This one-act piece was after all not only Strauss's first operatic triumph,
but in a way the culmination of his ideal 'symphonic poem', on a straight
track from Don Juan and Till Eulenspiegel through Ein Heldenleben. If Salome
sounds like a string of colourful episodes, it is wrong. On DG, Giuseppe
Sinopoli achieves a hypnotic continuity of feeling - personal and wilful,
super-silken (though he finds Bergian raptures in all the string-writing, he
plays down Strauss's dry grotesqueries and savage punctuations), and yet
steadily forward-looking. One's attention is held taut, even if the
symphonic muscle of the score is under-exercised.
One of Sinopoli's best assets here is the Deutsche Oper orchestra, which may
not compete with the Berlin Philharmonic in virtuosity but is deeply
familiar with the score. By comparison with Mehta's stolid reading, the DG
performance is fully theatrical, eerie and insinuating. And if Sinopoli's
Narraboth, and his efficiently nasty Herod and Herodias, do not quite equal
their opposite numbers on Sony, he holds trump cards in Cheryl Studer's
heroine and Bryn Terfel's Jokanaan.
Notoriously, Strauss wanted 'a 16-year-old princess with the voice of an
Isolde' - to which his mature first Salome retorted that that was an
either/or. On the kindest diagnosis, Mehta's Eva Marton sounds like a heavy
Isolde, embarrassing to hear after Miss Studer's brilliant, teasing
lightness in repartee and her haunted anxiety later. I doubt that there is a
Salome to match Studer now. For the Prophet, Mehta has Bernd Weikl,
sympathetic and mellifluous but hardly more likely to excite Salome's lust
than Jose Van Dam's weighty senior cleric in the Nagano performance on
Virgin Classics; Terfel's splendid young baritone, passionately committed,
is unbeatable.
The special interest of Kent Nagano's recording is that it is the first to
use Oscar Wilde's own, idiosyncratic French text, for which Strauss himself
adapted his score (with guidance from Romain Rolland). It works rather well,
though there are passages where music designed for strenuous German diction
is awkwardly slow for French, and Nagano's cast is good enough to make it
effective: a nervy young princess from Karen Huffstodt, an unusually sane,
worried Herod by Jean Dupouy (not the hysterical character-tenor we most
often get), an imposing First Nazarene from Jules Bastin.
If the Lyon orchestra doesn't sound perfectly idiomatic in Strauss's music -
more bon gout here than is strictly appropriate - Nagano secures a
creditably intelligent, alert performance. He does particular justice to the
high orchestral writing which gives Salome its neurotic glitter, where
Sinopoli prefers to emphasise the dark undertow at the bottom of the band.
It must be admitted that the French recording is not up to Austro-German
standards: the voices are kept so far forward that they sometimes cover
instrumental details as they never would in the opera-house.
Die Fledermaus, by that other Strauss (no relation), enjoys an all-star
performance under Andre Previn on Philips. Dame Kiri's Rosalinde rises
beautifully to the Csardas, and in Adele's coloratura Edita Gruberova is as
fearless and fetching as you would expect. The baritone Eisenstein (Wolfgang
Brendel) and Falke (Olaf Bar) are all right, not remarkable; Richard Leech
and Fassbaender are more dashing as the indefatigable tenor Alfred and the
louche Prince Orlofsky. Tom Krause is a ripe, winning Frank, and the
opera-producer Otto Schenk makes a rich character of the gaoler Frosch.
Previn knows well enough how this music should go, and there is a decent
degree of verve, if few witty finesses. The Vienna chorus is first-rate
(sumptuous and funny in 'Duidu'). We are spared any trendy interpolations,
and the text is not manhandled, though bits of English are planted in it to
excuse Dame Kiri's not-quite-native accent. In fact the spoken dialogue
rattles along admirably; after the first time round, nevertheless, most
listeners will be pressing the CD button after each musical number to get on
to the next one. It might be easier to wait for the 'highlights' record.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920111

