FT921-1175

FT  25 MAR 92 / Australian Name granted court order


   By KEVIN BROWN and RICHARD LAPPER


   SYDNEY, LONDON


THE LIST of countries in which Names are taking legal action against Lloyd's
of London, the international insurance market, has grown to include
Australia, as well as Canada, the US and the UK.
The Supreme Court of Victoria has granted an interim injunction to Mr Emlyn
Williams, a Melbourne anaesthetist, preventing the payment to Lloyd's of the
equivalent of Pounds 58,000 from a financial guarantee lodged with National
Australia Bank.
Names are the individuals whose assets provide the insurance market's
capital. More than 600 of the market's 22,400 Names are Australian nationals
with average commitments of ADollars 350,000 (Pounds 155,000).
Mr Geoff Rees, a solicitor acting for Mr Williams, said his client had
already paid the equivalent of Pounds 50,000 after an earlier demand to meet
losses.
Lloyd's claims that the Australian courts have no jurisdiction in the case
on the ground that, according to the terms of Mr Williams' agreement with
his agent, all disputes are to be settled in UK courts.
Mr Williams says the agreement is void because Lloyd's breached various
aspects of Australian law in its dealings with him.
There will be a preliminary hearing on this jurisdictional issue soon,
probably on Friday, and a full hearing in four to six weeks.
In the US, Lloyd's has already won two actions against US Names on the same
issue, although both cases are subject to appeal.
Earlier this month a Chicago court upheld Lloyd's contention that any
dispute must be heard in an English court. Last autumn a judge in Denver
found that US courts had no jurisdiction over similar claims.
The main issue in the Australian case turns on the way in which Mr Williams
was recruited as a Name in 1985.
Mr Williams claims his contract with Lloyd's is void because it breaches the
Australian Corporations Code, which requires that a prospectus should be
registered with the Australian Securities Commission for any 'prescribed
interest'.
No prospectus has ever been lodged by Lloyd's but there have been several
changes of corporate law over recent years in Australia. It is not clear
whether Lloyd's was required to lodge a prospectus at the relevant time.
Mr Williams also says that the members' agents made representations that
were misleading and deceptive under the Australian Trade Practices Act. Mr
Rees emphasised that there was no allegation of fraud against Lloyd's.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920325

