FT922-13339

FT  11 APR 92 / Breathing space for Scots Tories: A shifting political
landscape north of the border


   By JAMES BUXTON


In the paradoxical world of Scottish politics a party has only to take two
seats and produce a decidedly modest total of 11 MPs out of 72 to be awarded
the victor's crown. Yet that was the remarkable position of the Scottish
Conservative party yesterday.
The fact that the party won the election in the rest of the country meant
that it could claim a decisive victory in Scotland. It was vital for the
Scottish Tories to retain all the nine seats with which they entered the
contest, otherwise they would have been in even more of a minority. It was a
triumph to pick up two more, including Kincardine and Deeside which they
lost to the Liberal Democrats in last November's by-election.
Until election night many Scottish Conservatives gave every sign that they
believed opinion polls showing them trailing the Labour party by 14 points
and the Scottish National party by three points. But the bad news is all
behind them. The question is whether their success will lead to a new
approach to the administration of Scotland, and in particular to the issue
of Scotland's constitutional future.
The Conservatives, whose share of the Scottish vote went up by 1.6
percentage points to 25.7 per cent, can claim that their policy of trying to
make the constitutional debate a stark choice between independence and the
status quo was a success. This is despite campaign opinion polls showing
that three-quarters of the Scottish electorate want constitutional change.
The Tories' policy of polarising the opposition over the constitutional
debate pushed up the SNP vote sufficiently to weaken Labour, without
boosting it enough to enable the Nationalists to win Tory seats - though Mr
Ian Lang, the Scottish Secretary, had a close shave in Galloway.
Scottish Tories will find it difficult to change their policy on home rule.
Two committed opponents of devolution won their seats - Mr Michael Forsyth,
the Thatcherite Scottish Office minister, and Mr Phil Gallie, the new MP for
Ayr. Mr Struan Stevenson, an ardent devolutionist, failed to win Edinburgh
South. The Tories also failed to take seats that should have been within
their grasp such as Edinburgh South which stayed with Labour, and
Strathkelvin and Bearsden, on the outskirts of Glasgow, where Labour also
won.
What the Scottish Tories have won is a breathing space. The election result
may even make it possible to change the line-up of familiar faces at the
Scottish Office. 'It would have been very difficult for the Tories to bring
in English MPs to fill the four Scottish Office ministerial jobs when it was
the only way of manning them,' says an observer of the Scottish scene, 'but
now that they have enough MPs to fill them, it could be a lot easier.'
New ministerial faces could open the way for Mr Lang and Mr Forsyth to
escape what has been called 'that grim cookhouse of government' and move to
Whitehall. An expatriate Scot of acceptable Scottish credentials such as Mr
John MacGregor, leader of the House of Commons in the last parliament, could
become Scottish Secretary.
It might eventually be possible to make some modest change in Scotland's
relationship with Westminster which would meet the party's criterion of not
'damaging the union', and partially fulfil the aspirations of some Scots for
some form of self-government.
For the losers, there will be an agonising period of readjustment, made more
bitter for Labour and the Liberal Democrats by the dashing of hopes that a
Scottish parliament may soon be at hand. For the Scottish National party,
Scotland's independence in Europe seems as far away as ever, maybe farther.
Labour and the SNP will be distracted by their own internal difficulties for
months. Labour is vulnerable to the accusation of the SNP that it talked
Scots out of voting for independence by promising a majority Labour
government which would then usher in a Scottish parliament.
In the event it failed at the UK level and its Scottish vote fell three
points to 39 per cent. The SNP's share of the vote was 21 per cent, several
points below its standing in the opinion polls during the campaign but more
than seven points up on 1987.
One faction within the Scottish Labour party covertly favours full
independence, rather than a slow process of devolution. Neither of these
developments now seems possible and the frustration of some Labour
supporters at the election outcome could boil over. Mr Charles Gray, the
Labour leader of Strathclyde regional council, said on election night:
'We'll have to live a little dangerously,' adding that it 'may come to'
civil disobedience. Significantly, Mr Alex Salmond, the SNP leader,
yesterday refused to rule it out.
One possibility for disaffected Labour MPs is to defect to the SNP. Or they
could form a breakaway Labour group along the lines of Scottish Labour
Action, created after the 1987 debacle when Labour won 50 seats in Scotland
but the Tories formed the UK government. Yesterday, Mr George Galloway,
Labour MP for Glasgow Hillhead, called for a 'patriotic front of anti-Tory
forces'. Such a group could co-operate with the Nationalists to strengthen
the forces seeking independence, but this would be opposed by the Labour
leadership.
For now the SNP's priority is to avenge its failure at the polls by
achieving a big vote for the Nationalists and against Labour in the district
council elections on May 7. That, Mr Andrew Welsh, one of the party's three
MPs, said yesterday, is 'the only message that London will understand'. It
did not sound like a message destined to bring the disunited Tory opposition
together.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920411

