FT924-8021

FT  13 NOV 92 / Arts: An Ideal Husband - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


There is not one cabinet minister's wife that should not rush along to see
this play. It would be better yet if their husbands would accompany them -
but are they men enough to take it? Oscar Wilde's 1895 treatment of
political corruption and cover-up - as exposed and handled at home - returns
to the London stage at so ripe a moment that its audience gasps at the
nerves it touches. Not that An Ideal Husband is scathing. On the contrary,
it is so morally pellucid, and so witty, generous and humane, that it might
well reduce our political masters to embarrassed tears.
Sir Robert, the blackmailed hero of the piece, is, in fact, placed by Wilde
under a light less searching than is his wife. Lady Chiltern is an idealist,
who thinks her husband ideal, then rejects him bitterly when she finds he is
not. A character closer to Ibsen than any of Shaw's heroines - close to
Trollope, too - she has to learn to live in a world that is not ideal but
real. It is Wilde's genius that he sets the problems of this basically
serious, seldom humorous, couple amid all the glittering repartee and banter
of high society. An Ideal Husband is a brilliant comedy, and it keeps
revealing the deep seriousness on which high comedy is constructed.
Peter Hall's staging is excellent, alert to the full dimensions of the play,
and and with unostentatious but elegant designs by Carl Toms. There are
flaws, and no wonder: An Ideal Husband keeps up so perpetual a juggling-act
between frivolity and profundity that even its smaller roles are exquisitely
difficult to play.
Take Martin Shaw, who plays Lord Goring, the endlessly amusing aesthete who
saves the Chilterns' marriage - surely the play's hardest role. He has the
authority to convey the moral seriousness behind the dandy's facade. Yet he
radiates not only self-satisfaction but also affectation. It is a pity that,
in his effort to resemble Wilde himself, Shaw demonstrates a hitherto
unsuspected likeness to Ken Dodd.
The great performance in this staging comes from David Yelland as Sir
Robert, who shows all the role's ambition, gravitas, and torment to
perfection. His wordless gasps are as memorable as his deep-baritone voice.
There is a frigidity in his wife that Hannah Gordon misses. Her Lady
Chiltern is handsome, rigorous, self-assured and surprisingly forceful. She
is at her best in the final act, when her reconciliation with her husband is
movingly and delicately negotiated.
Though Anna Carteret could be more dangerous and more natural as the
anti-heroine Mrs Cheveley, she wields every scrap of sensual elegance in her
armoury to fine effect. Dulcie Gray plays Lady Markby with hilarious
brusqueness. Unfortunately, Michael Dennison - never a convincing actor -
dreadfully overdoes Lord Caversham's bluff-but-charming-old-codger
humourlessness.
Victoria Hasted brings off Lady Mabel, Sir Robert's sister, very well; but
to play this role as a bespectacled, nasal, energetic hoyden is an amusing
mistake. Wilde's stage directions compare her to both a flower and a Tanagra
statuette. But nothing in this production, thanks to Peter Hall's grasp,
diminishes the scope of this enthralling play.
The Globe Theatre

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921113

