FT924-11360

FT  27 OCT 92 / Storehouse sells Habitat and Richards for Pounds 108m


   By JOHN THORNHILL


STOREHOUSE, the retailing conglomerate created by Sir Terence Conran through
mergers in the 1980s, was dismantled yesterday as the new management sold
two of its five trading companies, Habitat and Richards, for Pounds 108m.
The proceeds from the disposals - to Ikea's holding company and Sears,
respectively - will be used to speed development of the core BhS and
Mothercare chains, which accounted for about three-quarters of last year's
group sales of Pounds 1.2bn. Blazer, the small men's-wear chain, has also
been earmarked for disposal.
Mr David Dworkin, chief executive since July, said: 'This is a dream come
true. It is an opportunity to focus on our two core businesses where there
is still great potential for expansion.'
Analysts welcomed the deal and suggested it might signal a new phase whereby
sprawling retail businesses slimmed down to concentrate on more narrowly
defined areas. Storehouse shares rose 3p to 164p.
The Habitat furniture chain, which runs 76 stores in the UK and France, will
be bought by the charitable Stichting Ingka Foundation (SIF), which owns the
Ikea Group of furniture stores, for Pounds 54m in cash plus the repayment of
Pounds 24m of inter-company loans. Storehouse said it was also in talks to
dispose of its Conran's Habitat chain in the US but if these failed the
loss-making business would be shut.
Last year, Habitat in Europe lost Pounds 1.1m on sales of Pounds 172m while
the US business lost Pounds 7.7m.
Mr Ingvar Kamprad, Ikea's founder, said Habitat would be run as a 'totally
independent group' to secure the 'distinct Habitat identity'.
Sears, which has withdrawn from the men's wear market, is paying Pounds 30m
for the 213-store Richards women's wear chain, which made profits of Pounds
1m last year on sales of Pounds 98m.
Sears' already runs the Miss Selfridge, Wallis and Warehouse chains.
Storehouse, due to report its interim results next month, forecast it would
break even after pre-tax losses of Pounds 13.9m a year ago.
Substantial sales increases have been reported at BhS and Mothercare but the
group will suffer from an extraordinary charge of Pounds 30m resulting in a
reduction of net assets as a result of the disposals.
Lex, Page 24; The future, Page 28

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921027

