FT923-9583

FT  04 AUG 92 / Collor tries to hold power by spending


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


   BRASLIA


BRAZIL'S economic realities were thrown to the wind yesterday as beleaguered
President Fernando Collor held a crisis meeting of his economics team to
draw up an 'anti-impeachment plan'. His aim is to cling to power at all
costs.
The Sao Paulo stock market closed 7.3 per cent down on the day yesterday,
after the Brazilian press had reported that senior economy ministry
officials, including Mr Francisco Gros, central bank governor, were
threatening to resign over Mr Collor's decision to relax economic austerity
and redraw the government budget to devote resources to projects such as
road-building.
He would thus seek crucial support in Congress for the president needs the
votes of 168 Congress members to survive the impeachment initiative,
expected to begin next week, over his ties to Mr Paulo Cesar Farias, a
businessman under investigation for alleged running of a
multi-million-dollar bribery scheme.
The members of the economic team are eager to resist compromising the
economic stabilisation programme, as this could jeopardise the country's
accord with the International Monetary Fund and agreement in principle with
creditor banks abroad on the restructuring of Dollars 42bn in commercial
debt.
The political crisis could hardly have come at a worse time in terms of the
economy. Inflation remains near 22 per cent a month, domestic debt is
soaring - up 157 per cent so far this year in real terms  - tax revenues are
10.4 per cent down and unemployment in Sao Paulo, the country's industrial
heartland, is at record levels.
With urgently-needed fiscal reform delayed by the political crisis, Brazil
is continuing to miss the targets of its IMF accord, agreed in January, and
it is becoming increasingly difficult for Mr Michel Camdessus, IMF managing
director, to keep the agreement in place. Officials of the Brazilian economy
ministry admit that no one wants to head a mission to Washington to explain.
Mr Collor is in a very sensitive position. On the one hand, he needs to open
Treasury coffers to buy political support; on the other, he cannot risk
resignations from his cabinet. If one minister goes, others may well follow.
The continued presence in the cabinet of Mr Marclio Marques Moreira, the
well-respected economy minister, is seen as more important to the country's
stability than the survival of Mr Collor.
Yesterday, the minister denied that key members of the economic team had
threatened to resign over Mr Collor's efforts to redraft the budget.
The government hopes Congressional enthusiasm for impeachment will be
dampened by threats from Mr Farias to expose over 100 federal and state
legislators he claims to have helped financially in their election
campaigns. Congress has not yet considered any impeachment requests against
Mr Collor; a Congressional committee investigating the corruption charges is
still a week away from announcing its findings. Mr Jorge Bornhausen,
minister in the president's office, said at the weekend a request for
impeachment was inevitable, but 'the impeachment will not pass.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920804

