FT924-8178

FT  12 NOV 92 / Technology: Pigs hold the cure - Transfusions using
artificial blood may not be far off, write Jennie Lynch and Clive Cookson


   By JENNIE LYNCH and CLIVE COOKSON


Incredible as it may seem - and no doubt disconcerting to some - animals'
blood transformed by biotechnology could soon be coursing through human
veins.
Spurred by the growing fear of blood-transmitted diseases like Aids and
hepatitis and by a shortage of donated human blood, research companies are
in a race to develop blood substitutes. These would carry oxygen around the
body like the real thing but be free of unwanted contaminants.
Pigs are a promising non-human source. A US company aims to extract
haemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells, from herds that have been
genetically engineered for the purpose. Another firm is developing a
substitute based on cows' blood.
These and other efforts are aimed at serving a market which is potentially
huge. Already, hospitals and health services around the world spend an
estimated Dollars 5bn a year on blood for transfusions - if safe substitutes
become widely available, the market could double to Dollars 10bn a year.
A dozen companies are seeking to develop blood substitutes. Their first
products are beginning clinical trials, but none is likely to be in
commercial use before 1995.
Producing 'artificial blood' is a complex task, not without potential risk.
So what criteria should it satisfy? First and most obviously, it must be
safe. It should not be inherently toxic or made from anything liable to be a
source of disease. Nor should it contain any fragments of cell membranes
likely to cause reactions due to cross-matching incompatibilities.
Next, it should be stable - preferably more stable than human blood, which
has a shelf life of only three weeks and has to be kept chilled.
Finally, it should easy to make in vast quantities. In the US, 4m people a
year receive 12m pints of blood. If substitutes are to replace even a small
fraction of this, they will have to be produced in greater volume than any
other drugs emerging from the biotech industry.
Haemoglobin is the key to the problem. It is responsible for transporting
and delivering oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body.
Researchers have followed two main approaches so far: to use purified and
modified forms of haemoglobin, extracted from various sources; or make an
inorganic chemical to take on the oxygen-carrying role of haemoglobin.
Several companies have investigated the use of purified haemoglobin as a
substitute for red blood cells. Baxter, based in Deerfield, Illinois,
extracts haemoglobin from human blood which has passed its expiry date; DNX
of Princeton has developed a genetically engineered pig with the ability to
make human haemoglobin; and Biopure of Boston is purifying natural
haemoglobin from slaughtered cows' blood.
Yet all of these developments suffer from similar drawbacks. When removed
from the protection of the red blood cell, haemoglobin becomes unstable and
split in half. The damaged molecules aggregate and block the smallest blood
vessels, particularly in the kidneys.
Baxter, Biopure and DNX all modify their haemoglobin products chemically in
order to stabilise their structures and enhance their release of oxygen. DNX
uses a cross-linking chemical which simultaneously achieves both aims.
DNX envisages extracting blood from herds of pigs which would be genetically
engineered to produce human as well as porcine haemoglobin. The human
haemoglobin would be separated and modified chemically for use in
transfusions. Its cost would be comparable with natural blood. 'I am very
confident that we can produce haemoglobin at Dollars 5 a gram,' said Paul
Schmitt, DNX's chief executive.
Somatogen, a biotechnology company based in Boulder, Colorado, has taken a
different approach, in collaboration with scientists at the MRC Laboratory
of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, England.
To stop the haemoglobin from splitting, the scientists used genetic
engineering to make a protein bridge between the two halves of the molecule.
Somatogen has copied a natural haemoglobin mutant which binds oxygen less
strongly than usual, potentially boosting oxygen release into the tissues
30-fold. And the protein is produced by bacteria, allowing large quantities
to be made in a fermenter with no recourse to natural blood products and
their associated contaminants.
Somatogen started human tests, giving patients up to a pint of the
engineered 'blood', last February under the guidance of the US Food and Drug
Administration. Although there have been slight flu-like reactions, no toxic
side-effects have been seen so far, said Charles Scoggin, president of
Somatogen.
He envisages the product being used primarily to replace blood lost in
surgery. Somatogen is building a Dollars 40m production plant in Boulder,
with two 3,000-litre fermenters.
The alternative to haemoglobin is to use inert chemicals to carry oxygen.
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) have such properties and they first reached the
headlines in 1966, alongside photographs of submerged mice breathing oxygen
from PFC solutions.
Although PFCs have been in development for longer than engineered
haemoglobins, they still have several hurdles to overcome before they can
replace human blood. Like oil and water, PFCs and blood do not mix;
therefore, they have to be emulsified with the help of chemicals called
surfactants. These, in turn, cause the PFC to become unstable, requiring the
addition of another fluorinated compound to stabilise the first.
The pioneering PFC is Fluosol, sold by Alpha Therapeutics, a subsidiary of
Green Cross of Japan. It is licensed in the US and UK for use to prevent
severe oxygen deprivation when treating patients with blocked coronary
arteries. But no PFC has been approved as a general blood substitute.
Researchers expect eventually to find new applications for artificial blood
in several fields of medicine. In cancer treatment, for example, carrying
more oxygen to the tumour would make radio-therapy more effective and reduce
the doses of radiation required.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921112

