FT923-10831

FT  28 JUL 92 / Saddam's wriggle explodes UN myth


   By JOE ROGALY


A cloud of self-deception is obscuring the United Nations tower in New York.
It allows the famous building's inhabitants to imagine that their
organisation is an effective force. The hard truth is that it is nothing
without the United States - and this summer the US is likely to withdraw its
hand from the glove puppet.
President Bush will pounce, either alone or through the UN, if he sees a
chance to score a victory somewhere on the face of the globe - perhaps even
in the Gulf - that might ensure his re-election. In real life such
opportunities are rare. The risk usually outweighs the potential reward.
Washington's foreign policy is therefore gradually being put on hold until
after November 3. That means the UN may have little more to offer the world
this year.
Take the latest myth, generated over the weekend. Its proponents would have
us believe that President Saddam Hussein has once again been obliged to bow
to UN pressure. The world's peacekeepers will after all be allowed to enter
the ministry of agriculture building in Baghdad, where they may search for
information on Iraq's missile programme. It is supposed to be a famous
victory. Piffle. Consider what Mr Saddam has achieved. First, he kept the UN
inspectors hanging around for 18 days in a camp outside the ministry. Then
he waved them goodbye as they went back to base. Then he failed to register
the slightest sign of concern at threats of renewed military action.
Finally he did a last-minute deal that suited him more than it suited the US
or the UN. If there was useful evidence in the agriculture ministry before,
there is unlikely to be more than shreds and ashes left behind now. Mr Rolf
Ekeus, the UN official in charge of the dismantling of Iraq's weapons, has
acknowledged that the building has probably been 'effectively cleaned out'.
That is bad enough. Far more damaging is the fact that Mr Saddam has been
able to tell the UN who it may send in and who it may not. The team of
inspectors includes two Americans. The latter will not be allowed inside the
agriculture ministry, but may hover outside. There they may sift through
material brought to them by colleagues more acceptable to Baghdad. There is
nothing to find, and the Americans are not permitted to find it. Farce is
piled upon farce. Civilised diplomats see it as a small compromise. As
yesterday's Iraqi papers indicated, Mr Saddam regards it as a useful
precedent.
We have been here before. Last September the president of Iraq 'backed down'
twice, once over the UN inspectors who had bravely sat him out in a Baghdad
parking lot, and once over UN helicopter surveillance flights. 'There's been
a pattern of cheat and retreat all the way through this,' said the White
House press secretary, Mr Marlin Fitzwater. The word went out that the
Iraqis would not be allowed to get away with it again. Now, less than a year
later, Mr Saddam has tested the 'cheat and retreat' policy to its limits.
Worse, he has extended those limits. He has finessed the UN into accepting
that some of its inspectors are less unwelcome than others. This must give
him hope of a new formula - cheat and defeat. President Bush warned on
Sunday that 'behaviour along the lines we have just witnessed will not be
tolerated'. If you were Mr Saddam, would you believe him?
None of this means that there is an easy solution. The Gulf ceasefire was
negotiated before the allies' implicit war aim, the toppling of the Iraqi
president, had been achieved. It was thought that since he had brought such
disaster upon his own people they would overthrow him. That was a US
miscalculation. The world now has to live with the consequences. The UN
believes it has succeeded in blowing up many of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction, although nobody can be sure about replacements. It may be that
renewed bombing would be effective, although the experts doubt it. Perhaps
air power should be used to protect the Kurds in the north and the Shia
Moslems in the south. Perhaps a political settlement should be sought.
I make no judgment about these and other possible strategies for ensuring
that Iraq does not again threaten the peace. What is clear is that until
either Mr Bush is re-elected or Governor Bill Clinton enters the White House
the new world order is suspended.
This affects other areas of UN activity. When Yugoslavia first began to fall
apart the US decided to regard it as a regional problem for Europeans to
handle. Europe failed. National follies destroyed its unity. The Germans
insisted on the recognition of Croatia. The Greeks would not accept the name
'Macedonia'. President Mitterrand parachuted himself into Sarajevo. Now Lord
Carrington is being undermined.
Washington could not ignore the chaos. The US secretary of state, Mr James
Baker, decided that his country's interest lay in demonstrating that no
borders may be altered by force. The alternative was that a terrible example
would be set, leading to strife in eastern Europe and the former Soviet
Union. In US eyes the former Yugoslavia is therefore no longer a regional
problem, but a global one. Solving it has become part of building the new
world order. The question remains: will Washington provide the necessary
finance and military support? The Serbs seem unlikely to take notice of any
power on earth other than the US. So far, there is little sign of this being
seriously deployed. President Bush, so brilliant at foreign affairs in 1990
and 1991, has become immobilised by his opinion polls.
There is a third area of UN concern. In Somalia, a far-away land that was of
strategic interest to the US when Ethiopia was regarded as a Soviet client
state, some 2,000 people are dying of starvation every day, according to a
reported assessment by an official of the US Agency for International
Development. A quarter of the 8m population is reckoned to be in imminent
danger of starvation. Assistance has been sent by a variety of donors,
including the UN world food programme, the Save The Children Fund and the
British government. The trouble is that the rival clans fighting a merciless
civil war either steal such food as it arrives or prevent its passage.
Last week, 47 unarmed UN observers arrived to monitor a ceasefire that seems
about as likely to be effective as any in ex-Yugoslavia. The difference is
that an outside military force would stand a good chance of bringing the
Somali civil war to an end, or at the least act as an effective guard for
the relief convoys. The argument against sending a force in is that the UN
should not interfere in the internal affairs of its member states. That did
not stop the allies from protecting the Iraqi Kurds. Unfortunately for the
dying Somalis, Uncle Sam is disinclined to be the world's policeman, the UN
is impotent, and there is no one else to turn to.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920728

