FT924-8259

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Company News: Pemex revamps borrowings with
Dollars 350m bond issue


   By STEPHEN FIDLER and DAMIAN FRASER


   CARACAS, MEXICO CITY


PETROLEOS Mexicanos, Mexico's state-owned oil company, is set to announce
today a significant departure in its foreign-borrowing programme, with the
issue of at least Dollars 350m of bonds in the New York market, to be backed
by the company's deliveries of oil into the US.
The use of oil receivables for the first time by Pemex will allow it to
reduce significantly the costs of borrowing.
Mexico is rated just below investment grade when it borrows in its own name.
Backing the issue with receivables has secured a single-A rating, well into
investment grade and thereby securing a significantly wider group of
potential investors.
The issue, being arranged by Citicorp, is expected to be priced at 165 basis
points over the five-year US Treasury note. It carries a final maturity of
seven years, with an average life of five years.
The issue may be further expanded with an issue of Dollars 100m of bonds to
small banks that have shown interest in the bonds.
According to Mr Ernesto Marcos, corporate director of finance at Pemex, such
issues in the US could significantly exceed Dollars 1bn. Further issues in
Europe and Japan, backed by oil deliveries to these regions, are also
conceivable.
The issue forms part of a significant borrowing programme for Pemex.
The company's five-year plan calls for an investment programme of Dollars
20bn-Dollars 22bn between 1993 and 1998, of which up to 40 per cent may be
borrowed and the rest internally generated.
In addition, Pemex wants to repay a significant amount of other external
debt, including a long-standing bankers' acceptance facility arranged
through Bank of America of up to Dollars 4bn.
Mr Marcos said the company was considering a future registration with the
Securities and Exchange Commission in the US, a move which would intensify
the financial discipline on the company.
'What we are looking for is the discipline of regular disclosure in
financial markets,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921112

