FT922-13443

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: House sale shortfalls stifle job moves


   By BARBARA ELLIS


MILLIONS OF homeowners are facing the serious threat that they will have to
sell their houses for less than the size of their mortgages. On even the
most optimistic forecasts, job mobility could be stalled seriously until
almost the end of the century if lenders insist that all mortgages are
redeemed fully at the time of a sale. But lenders do not seem to have
arrived at any common policy on how to handle this severe problem.
In London, the south-east and East Anglia, people who bought at the top of
the 1988 price boom may have to wait another five years at least before
seeing the same level of nominal prices, according to Gary Marsh, house
price specialist at the Halifax.
Paradoxically, it is much more expensive to move previously-mobile young
people than older people with longer-established mortgages. 'A lot of people
at the moment are sitting with a mortgage that is more than the house is
worth and they don't have the benefit of relocation,' says Vic Thomson, of
Hambros Countrywide.
How do lenders react when their borrowers are faced with a shortfall? Some -
particularly those likely to have a high proportion of borrowers affected -
downplay the situation. Others recognise an increasing difficulty and admit
resorting to solutions they would not have considered a few years ago.
Meanwhile, insurers appear to be trying to cut mortgage indemnity losses by
interpreting policy terms more flexibly.
Lenders have discussed the shortfall problem among themselves, although the
topic has yet to figure on any official agenda, according to Adrian Coles of
the Building Societies Association/Council of Mortgage Lenders. 'There is
every sympathy with borrowers but no solution,' he says. 'Effectively, it
means people are stuck.'
Coles says lenders would not halt sales willingly by refusing to release the
deeds on a property. 'There is no problem if people don't want to move and
are continuing to pay the mortgage,' he adds. 'But this is a factor
inhibiting recovery in the housing market and reducing labour mobility.'
The three largest lenders, the Halifax and Nationwide building societies and
the Abbey National bank, have targeted first-time buyers repeatedly. These
are the people most likely to be caught in the cleft between high percentage
borrowing and falling property prices. But all three refuse to estimate how
many sales are falling short, apart from saying that the number is very
small. They insist that the only solution is for borrowers to stay in the
property until the mortgage can be redeemed in full.
When pressed on options, such as covering a deficit to an unsecured loan,
both the Halifax and Nationwide retreat into vague generalities about
considering each case on its merits and taking all circumstances into
account. The Halifax drew attention to its Pounds 7,500 limit on unsecured
loans and suggested that people moving because of a job change would be
helped out by their companies. Ambrose McGinn, marketing manager at the
Abbey National, said the bank did not offer loans to pay off loans.
The Cheltenham & Gloucester building society said its deficiency sales had
increased significantly. After agreeing 21 for the whole of last year, the
society is now processing a few applications every day. A spokeswoman
stressed that cases were treated individually, with examination of the
marketing history of a property. Borrowers wishing to move who stayed with
the society could be offered the amount of the shortfall as an unsecured
loan at the same rate as their next mortgage. However, the society would
stick to its 95 per cent mortgage ceiling on the new property.
Kevin McGinnis, of the Bradford & Bingley building society, says it would
sometimes give borrowers the chance to pay back the deficiency over a period
of years, effectively as an unsecured loan. 'In the past, we certainly never
would have done something like this.'
Lenders may get help from mortgage indemnity policies in shortfall cases
although, strictly, the standard terms cover losses only on sales after
repossession. Eagle Star said most insurers would now examine such cases and
could agree to pay out if they felt they would lose less than by going
through an entire repossession.
The insurer would still have the right to pursue the borrower for the
shortfall. But Eagle Star said this would not be done in cases of extreme
hardship or where it was not worth powder and shot.
For individual borrowers, relocation with a job could be the best hope of
escape. Thomson says he is seeing increasing cases of shortfall sales,
generally ranging from Pounds 2,000 to Pounds 15,000 (although the worst, in
Cambridgeshire, had run to Pounds 70,000 and resulted in a company
withdrawing the offer of a move for an employee). 'There is no clear
answer,' he adds. 'Nobody seems to have thought that house prices would ever
go down.'
Thomson said employers were arguing with the Inland Revenue, on behalf of
employees, that making up a shortfall should not be treated as a taxable
benefit. They would then offer either an interest-free loan or a lump sum
payment to cover the deficiency.
If you have now outgrown the house you bought four years ago, but cannot
sell without a loss, it looks as though you are probably on your own. But
the moves some building societies are making provide some glimpse of light
at the end of the tunnel. For the time being, you have nothing to lose by
putting your case forcefully to your lender.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920411

