FT921-3919

FT  12 MAR 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Tories down a pint
for top billing - How the parties will compete for prime poster sites during
the election campaign


   By DAVID OWEN


Jeff Palmer is half-expecting a call from one of the hired guns in the Tory
publicity machine in the next few days.
With the British general election now confirmed for April 9, he expects soon
to be asked whether Allied-Lyons is prepared to relinquish any of its
pre-booked poster space during the four weeks of the campaign.
It is a request the brewing and drinks group's head of marketing services
will consider with great care.
Asking big advertisers for favours is one option open to party tacticians as
they plan their campaign poster blitzes for the period to April 9 on
extremely short notice.
'Accessing' as it is known in the trade provides a means of supplementing
the billboard space the parties will already have snapped up on the open
market, sometimes under the guise of a corporate alias.
It is a technique that has yielded significant dividends - particularly for
the Conservatives - in past elections. In 1987, the party was given the free
use of several hundred Imperial Tobacco poster sites.
In that campaign, Allied-Lyons decided to hand over about 600 six-sheet and
large 48-sheet sites to the Tories for the all-important period. The
agreement was struck on a strict commercial basis, with the Conservatives
picking up the bill for the space.
Such agreements are described by Palmer as 'very last minute' arrangements.
A typical 48-sheet site would today command about Pounds 300 a month.
For good measure, the Shepton Mallet-based group - whose brands include
Teacher's whisky and Courvoisier brandy and which was the second-largest
corporate donor to the Conservatives in 1990 - also relinquished one
specific site to Labour.
This time, the election campaign is breaking with almost 30 per cent of
Britain's 2,200 giant 96-sheet sites carrying advertisements for Castlemaine
XXXX, Allied's Aussie lager brand. That campaign is scheduled to run until
the end of March - or some nine days before polling day.
'If by chance they were going for 96-sheets, then I guess they would have to
talk to us,' Palmer says.
In fact, those buying billboard space for the political parties may find
themselves more spoilt for choice than in 1987.
Then the advertising industry was buoyant; now it is in the doldrums.
'If you are trying to get poster sites at three weeks' notice you have quite
a good chance,' says John Klue, director of the Outdoor Advertising
Association, a trade body.
Prices have accordingly softened - although the election is widely expected
to trigger a recovery to the tune of 15-20 per cent.
An all-embracing 4,000-5,000 site campaign would now cost about Pounds
900,000-Pounds 1m a month, according to poster specialists.
Political buyers may shortly be further advantaged by the return to the
market of an estimated 2,700 48-sheet sites (more than 7 per cent of the
national total) that were previously booked by the Central Office of
Information (COI) and Benetton, the fashion company.
The COI's planned 1,450-site car crime prevention campaign - due to hit the
streets on March 15 for two weeks - is now almost certain to be scrapped
following the announcement of the election.
Poster specialists estimate, meanwhile, that about half of the 2,500 sites
originally booked by Benetton may ultimately be available for reselling, as
a result of the controversy the proposed campaign has provoked.
But the buyers' market has not left those working directly for the parties
with time on their hands.
As the phoney election war rumbled on, Poster Publicity - Labour's main
poster specialist - was in daily contact with the 20-25 leading UK poster
contractors in a bid to 'get a detailed idea of what has been sold'.
According to Labour officials, the party has already booked just over 100
London sites for the duration of the campaign. This includes its favourite
Vauxhall Bridge location in south London.
The majority of these sites have been earmarked for a self-contained poster
offensive in the capital.
The Vauxhall location, which is convenient for press photographers and TV
cameras, is expected to continue to be used as a prime launching-pad for the
party's nationwide campaigns.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920312

