FT921-14091

FT  17 JAN 92 / Conflicting polls leave election wide open: Labour ready to
soften planned increases in National Insurance


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and ALISON SMITH


TWO NEW opinion polls last night left the outcome of the impending general
election as uncertain as ever as the Labour party confirmed that it is ready
to soften its planned increases in National Insurance contributions.
With one survey giving the government a 4.5 percentage point lead over
Labour, some senior ministers - buoyed further by yesterday's round of
mortgage rate cuts - were canvassing April 9 as the most likely date for an
election.
But the second pointed to a 3 point Labour lead, and other ministers
insisted that the prime minister was still keeping open the possibility of
May 7. They acknowledged, however, that the prime minister may face a
growing bandwagon in favour of an election within weeks of a tax-cutting
March Budget.
The date of the Budget is expected to be announced next week, with Whitehall
officials insisting that March 3, March 10 and March 17 all remain options.
The latter, however, would effectively rule out an early April election.
Facing a fresh Conservative onslaught on Labour's tax and spending
proposals, Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, said that he would keep
open the option of phasing in over a number of years the proposed ling on NI
contributions.
As shadow cabinet colleagues admitted that Labour had underestimated the
potential impact on voters in south-east England of taking another 9 per
cent from earnings over that ceiling, there were signs that Mr Neil Kinnock
now regards phasing as inevitable.
Mr Smith denied that the decision marked a retreat from the party's previous
policy, citing long-standing Labour commitments to avoid large disruption of
family budgets.
But amid angry clashes with Mr Kinnock, Mr John Major said Labour's tax and
spending policies had been reduced to a 'shambles'. He added: 'The only
thing that is certain is that a party that promises to spend and spend is a
party that has to tax and tax.'
The attack was followed up by Mr Chris Patten, Conservative party chairman,
who demanded that Mr Kinnock spell out how and when NI contribution changes
would be phased in. The Tories issued figures showing that in London
abolition of the ceiling would bring higher bills for those on just above
average income.
As campaigning reached a new pitch, both parties drew consolation from the
two apparently conflicting opinion polls which suggest that they are running
neck-and-neck.
A Gallup survey for today's Daily Telegraph gave the Conservatives a 4.5
point lead with 42 per cent of the vote against Labour's 37.5 per cent and
the Liberal Democrats' 16 per cent. That compared with a 2.5 point
Conservative lead last month.
The survey also appeared to confirm recent private opinion polling showing
that despite the recession, the voters have more confidence in the
Conservatives' economic and tax policies. According to Gallup, 57 per cent
of voters believed they would pay more tax and NI under a Labour government.
But an NOP survey for today's Independent showed a 3 point Labour lead. The
poll put Labour support at 43 per cent (up 2 points), the Conservatives at
40 per cent (unchanged) and the Liberal Democrats at 13 per cent (down 2
points).
The most striking feature of both polls appears to be the confirmation that
the Conservatives' core support has edged up to around 40 per cent from the
38 per cent seen in much of 1991.
UNEMPLOYMENT RISES TO 9%
The unemployment rate rose to a four-year high of 9 per cent in December. An
increase of 31,100 in the seasonally adjusted figure took the jobless total
to 2.55m. Page 9
Page 10
Major says Labour 'in a shambles' over plans
Smith defends tax flexibility
Editorial Comment: Labour wobbles on tax Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 1 Photograph Chris Patten demanded that Neil Kinnock spell out
in detail how and when National Insurance contribution changes would be
phased in (Omitted).

920117

