FT922-13391

FT  11 APR 92 / Entertainment: A mean old man without a mummy


   By ROBERT TANITCH


CAPTAIN James Hook made his first entrance at the Duke of York's Theatre,
London, on the December 23 1904, in Peter Pan, and Freudians have been
hooked ever since. Steven Spielberg's film fantasy, Hook, is a reworking of
this instant children's classic and Dustin Hoffman becomes the latest in a
long line of actors who have played the pirate chief.
Hook is a parody of a stage villain: part blood-curdling, lip-smacking
relation of Robert Louis Stevenson's Long John Silver; part highly educated,
cigar-smoking scoundrel in a Victorian melodrama; part Shakespearian ham
(shades of Macbeth and Richard III); part Restoration fop with his
extraordinary oaths ("Split-me-infinitives]' and 'No, bicarbonate of
soda]'); and part music-hall comedian in his double-act with Smee.
Barrie, whose stage directions are nearly as long as the play proper, says
this about him: 'Cadaverous and blackavised, his hair dressed in long curls
which look like black candles about to melt, his eyes blue as the
forget-me-not and of a profound insensibility, save when he claws, at which
time a red spot appears in them. He has an iron hook instead of a right
hand, and it is with this he claws.
'He is never more sinister than when he is being polite, and the eloquence
of his diction, the distinction of his demeanour, show him to be of a
different class from his crew, a solitary among uncultured companions. This
courtliness impresses even his victims on the high seas, who note that he
always says 'Sorry' when prodding them along the plank.'
The role was created by Gerald du Maurier whose daughter, Daphne, has left a
vivid picture of her father:
'When Hook first paced his quarter-deck in the year 1904, children were
carried screaming from the stalls, and even big boys of 12 were known to
reach for their mother's hand in the friendly shelter of the boxes. How he
was hated, with his flourish, his poses, his dreaded diabolical smile] That
ashen face, those blood-red lips, the long, dank, greasy curls; the sardonic
laugh, the maniacal scream, the appalling courtesy of his gestures; and that
above all most terrible of movements when he descended the stairs and with
slow, most merciless cunning poured the poison into Peter's glass.
Du Maurier set the precedent for doubling Hook and Mr Darling. But then, of
course, Hook is Mr Darling in disguise, and his death is the Darling
children's Oedipal revenge for his trying to 'poison' Nana, the dog, with
the medicine he was too cowardly to take. Hook ends up inside the ticking
crocodile. Mr Darling ends up in the dog-house (literally). When Sir George
Curzon played both roles, some critics were persuaded that Hook was really
much the more pleasant man.
Ernest Thesiger asked Barrie to give him a hint on the characterisation.
'Always remember', he said, 'that the Captain was educated at Balliol.' The
Captain was also educated at Eton and politically he was a Conservative.
Barrie was not keen for Charles Laughton to play Hook, fearing that Hook
might turn into Bligh and frighten the children. So anxious was Laughton not
to offend that he went to the other extreme. 'This is a portly rounded
pirate,' said The Times, 'with whom it would be pleasant to dine at ease
after a morning's murder and a little plank-walking with afternoon tea.'
The play, a mixture of romantic fantasy, gooey sentiment, Edwardian
spectacle, patriotism and religion, has been kept alive by generations of
parents, rather than by their children. The Spielberg epic (a tribute to
mother-love and a kick in the teeth for workaholic dads who neglect their
kids) will also appeal to grown-ups, especially when spunky little Wendy
dismisses Hook as a 'mean old man without a mummy]'

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920411

