FT922-7237

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (9): Giving the banks a run for
their money - David Barchard profiles GE Capital, the US non-bank with its
eye on Europe


   By DAVID BARCHARD


'All over the world, banks love to use us as their whipping boy. When
talking to their regulators, they give us as an example of what they could
do if they had no regulation to contend with,'
THE SPEAKER is Mr Gary Wendt, chairman and chief executive officer of GE
Capital Corporation, and president and chief operating officer of GE
Financial Services, its immediate parent company, which also includes Kidder
Peabody, the investment banking and securities firm.
Last year GE Financial Services contributed Dollars 1.27bn (Pounds 711m) of
General Electric's Dollars 4.4bn profits, making it the most profitable of
its 14 subsidiaries. More than four fifths of GEFS's earnings came from GE
Capital.
Only the top half dozen US banks are larger. With assets of Dollars 80bn,
spread between 22 subsidiaries, including commercial real estate finance,
retail financial services, mortgage services, aircraft leasing, private
mortgage guarantee insurance, and the credit card and private label card
businesses, GE Capital operates businesses traditionally owned by banks and
insurance companies.
But although some of the subsidiaries it has purchased in recent years have
banking licenses, neither GEFS nor GECC is a bank. In the mid-1960s, General
Electric decided that it no longer needed a financial services organisation
to support the sale of its products, and decided to let GEFS go its own way.
Today, only 3 per cent of GEFS' business is linked to the sale of General
Electric products. The group has evolved into the second largest non-bank
finance group in the US (the largest belongs to General Motors), funding not
from deposits but by issuing commercial paper with a triple-A rating from
Moody's and S&P.
'That means that the rating agencies are, in fact, our regulators,' says Mr
Wendt. 'We have no government protection and we have to compete in the free
market for our money.'
To be sure of doing this successfully, GECC maintains much stronger capital
ratios than it would do if it were a bank. About 12 per cent of its total
assets are kept in liquid capital, and it lends about eight times its
capital, about half what it would do as a bank.
In the last three years, however, GECC's return on equity has stayed above
15 per cent. 'We are not a single organisation, but 22 separate but
specialised organisations, each concentrating on its own important segment,'
says Mr Wendt. 'You get strength from diversity. When one business is not
going so well, the rest can pick up the slack.' This policy has sheltered
GECC from the risks of some of its chosen areas: commercial real estate,
aircraft leasing, and leveraged buy-outs.
It has also enabled GECC, in its selected niche markets, to expand steadily
further into overseas markets, starting with the UK. It now has 10 different
business subsidiaries in Europe, including store-card business in the UK,
which it virtually dominates after having bought out the financial services
arms of Harrods, House of Fraser and Burton Group; Mercantile, the car loans
business, purchased from Barclay's Bank last year; and a 3 per cent stake in
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya, of Spain.
In February came an agreement to buy the vehicle leasing and fleet
management business of Avis Europe, the car rental company; followed on May
1 by the purchase of a 50 per cent state in United Merchants Finance (UMF),
of Hong Kong. On May 10, GECC bought 45 per cent of Finanzia, a specialised
financing company, as a first step to a joint-venture in retail leasing and
store-card businesses in Spain and Portugal.
Once purchased, provided good local management is in place, GECC makes only
minimal interference and keeps a low profile. At Mercantile, for example,
purchased a year ago, GECC has only one or two US citizens out of a
workforce of 2,000. All the new European businesses are, Mr Wendt says,
firmly in the black. 'We are able to do things on a less expensive base than
the retailers can themselves, and let them release (consumer) debt from
their balance sheets and reduce their interest rate risk.'
Where GECC encounters businesses that are unlikely to stay in the black, it
does not compromise. In the UK, it decided that about 1,800 small store-card
outlets were uneconomic and stopped their card-issuing scheme, to the dismay
of some smaller retailers.
Since April 1990, GECC has also become a significant issuer of
sterling-denominated commercial paper, in line with its policy of funding
operations in local markets as far as possible. It now accounts for about 6
per cent of the sterling CP market. It is also starting to emerge as a
significant CP issuer in other European markets.
For GECC's eyes are now on possible acquisitions in its chosen areas in
almost every western European market. It is a remarkable contrast to the
general picture of withdrawal from European retail operations by most large
US banks. Europe's banks may not enjoy living alongside a large US non-bank
finance group, but whipping boy or not, they are going to have to do so.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920520

