FT921-15381

FT  10 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Major, Kohl seek early accord


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


MR Helmut Kohl, the German Chancellor, and Mr John Major, the British prime
minister, yesterday discussed the stalled world trade talks under the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) in a 35-minute telephone
conversation, and agreed it was essential to reach an early conclusion.
Their talk, arranged before the Christmas holiday, comes on the eve of the
two-day European Community ministerial meeting in Brussels opening today,
and involving foreign, trade and farm ministers.
'The aim is to get a positive message (from the ministerial meeting) on
Saturday,' a German official said yesterday. 'We need a positive message for
Geneva to conclude the talks in the early spring.'
A British spokesman in London said there was 'a shared determination on the
part of not only Mr Kohl and the prime minister, but also US President
George Bush, to reach agreement.'
In Bonn, a somewhat irritated chancellor's office, where the conversation
had been assumed to be confidential, simply confirmed the British statement.
The issue of the Gatt negotiations remains extremely sensitive in Germany,
where a strong free-trade lobby, headed by Mr Jurgen Mollemann, the
economics minister, has been campaigning against the equally entrenched
agriculture lobby, headed by Mr Ignaz Kiechle, the agriculture minister.
In spite of claims from the Mollemann camp that the battle has been won, Mr
Kiechle last year won a firm pledge from the cabinet that whatever farm
subsidies were lost in the form of high and protected prices would be
replaced in the form of income support.
Chancellor Kohl is also mindful of the need not to offend France, his
closest ally in the EC, which is the largest agricultural exporter in the
Community and therefore by far the most affected by the proposed Gatt farm
trade liberalisation.
'Now is an unfavourable moment to go against France,' one foreign policy
commentator said yesterday. 'There are many problems with the Franco-German
relationship, including Yugoslavia. But Chancellor Kohl also knows he cannot
have it both ways any longer.'
German officials said yesterday that the compromise proposals put forward by
Mr Arthur Dunkel, the Gatt director-general, were 'not enough,' but still a
'useful basis' on which to take the negotiations forward.
'Even the British are not satisfied on agriculture,' one senior official
said. 'The key question is: what will replace price cuts?'

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Photograph Kohl, agreed with Major on need for early
conclusion to talks (Omitted).

920110

