FT921-15563

FT  09 JAN 92 / Scheme to promote NHS job-sharing


   By LISA WOOD


JOB-SHARING in senior posts is to be promoted within the National Health
Service as part of a programme launched yesterday to improve women's
employment opportunities.
Eight goals to increase and improve the participation of women in senior
posts in the NHS were highlighted by Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health
minister.
The Department of Health is the first government department to launch a
detailed plan in response to Opportunity 2000, the business-led initiative
seeking to improve the position of women in the workforce.
The NHS - the largest employer of women in the UK - was criticised recently
by the Equal Opportunities Commission for not doing more to improve the
position of its female employees.
Mrs Bottomley said the goals were not about positive discrimination, but
rather about positive action for women.
Mr Eric Caines, NHS director of personnel, said he saw the initiative in
three stages. The first was to continue with existing programmes, such as
improving childcare. The second was to equip women to move up the management
ladder through confidence-building, the third, to put them in positions to
compete for top jobs.
All shortlists for senior jobs within the NHS, such as regional general
managers, should for example include women. Regional health authorities will
be asked to prepare registers of women who are well-equipped for promotion.
Should short-lists not include sufficient female candidates, women on the
register could be asked to apply. One specific goal is to increase the
number of women in general management posts from 18 per cent last year to 30
per cent in 1994.
Mr Caines said that above all he wanted flexibility. Job-sharing was a key
to part-time working at senior levels, he added, and those opposed to the
idea should provide evidence that it was not feasible.
The department is not advocating any sanctions for non-compliance with its
goals, although the NHS trusts will have to provide details of their
progress in annual reports.
Ms Caroline Langridge, head of the department's women's unit, said she did
not see the initiative in terms of sanctions but rather in terms of
generating enthusiasm and commitment.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920109

