FT921-15546

FT  09 JAN 92 / Labour unveils strategy for investment-led recovery


   By ALISON SMITH


THE POLITICAL row over the prospects for the economy took a fresh turn
yesterday as Labour launched its package of measures to revive British
industry, while the Tories focused on a leaked paper from a junior
opposition spokesman.
At the start of an intensive campaign on the theme 'Made in Britain', Mr
Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, unveiled a strategy founded on Labour's
belief that economic recovery must be investment-led rather than
consumer-led.
Among measures proposed is a cash-limited fund for investment in small and
medium-sized manufacturing companies, to last for six months, and new
measures to promote exports. These would include creating an integrated
export service, and launching regional export drives.
The paper setting out the strategy also brings together policies such as
enhanced first-year capital allowances for manufacturing investment and
improvements in skills training.
The paper will form the basis of intensive campaigning in the regions by the
Opposition economic team for the next two to three weeks, and was the theme
of last night's party political broadcast featuring Mr David Puttnam, the
film producer.
Mr Kinnock condemned the government for seeing competition 'only in terms of
going down-market to low-tech, low-skill goods and services. That is not the
way for Britain to succeed.'
Mr Kinnock brushed aside questions about a paper written by Mr Chris Smith,
a Labour Treasury spokesman, which raised questions about the possibility of
a luxury value added tax rate and whether cuts in defence spending could be
the North Sea oil of the 1990s.
It was, Mr Kinnock said, a personal paper written two years ago for
discussion, and had not even been seen by members of the economic team.
But Mr Chris Patten, the Conservative party chairman, said the paper showed
Labour had a hidden agenda that would 'bring economic chaos'.
Labour needed a recovery package for its credibility, he said, adding that
the reference in Mr Smith's paper to a costing of Labour's spending
programme at Pounds 35bn showed that Labour's own estimate tallied with the
government's figures.
Labour retorted that Mr Smith's paper had been referring not to the party's
actual spending plans, but to Conservative estimates of what they would be.
Observer, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920109

