FT924-6249

FT  23 NOV 92 / US keeps a low profile on Paris opposition


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


US OFFICIALS are keeping a low profile and making no public statements about
the disarray within the European Community over last week's farm trade
reform deal.
Mr Carla Hills, the US trade representative, and Mr Ed Madigan, the US
agriculture secretary, were asked about French opposition on Friday when
they briefed the press.
The response was to point to the approval by the European Commission as if
the deal were now done. It has been their view that the Commission had
obstructed progress in the past on instructions from French president
Francois Mitterrand, passed through EC president Jacques Delors.
Privately, officials regard the French response as a manoeuvre to obtain a
better deal within the Community's reform of its Common Agriculture Policy
(CAP).
US officials are already looking forward to a return to the negotiating
table in Geneva and an early conclusion to the wider Uruguay Round talks
under the aegis of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt).
The hope is that major political decisions can be concluded by Christmas.
After that, the tremendous amount of detailed work to be done is expected to
take weeks if not months.
Inevitably, the Bush administration will run out of time. President Bush has
vowed to negotiate until January 20, the day governor Clinton is
inaugurated. The president-elect has said nothing to discourage this final
burst of activity by his predecessor.
A senior US official said Mr Clinton had 'pulled the rug out' from under
French efforts to delay agreement by saying after his election: 'There's
only one president at a time.'
Specifically he said he wanted a good Gatt agreement as soon as possible,
and that he said he would study the details of the farm trade pact reached
last week.
The Gatt talks, unlike the North American Free Trade Agreement linking the
US, Canada and Mexico, never became a campaign issue, and they have had the
support of leading Democrats in Congress.
Senator Lloyd Benson, the chairman of the Senate finance committee has been
mentioned as a possible member of the Clinton cabinet.
Last week he flew to Brussels to urge a speedy end to the farm trade dispute
and a return to the negotiating table.

The Financial Times


International Page 4

921123

