FT924-6352

FT  21 NOV 92 / London Stock Exchange: FT-SE Index peak attacked again


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


ONCE AGAIN, the UK stock market bounced successfully off its support level,
moving ahead strongly towards the close on news of favourable progress at
the GATT talks in Washington, to close within a whisker of the all-time peak
reached in May. Trading volume remained high, underlining the return to
profitable levels of activity recorded since Britain quit the European
exchange rate mechanism in September.
Reports of a GATT deal inspired sharp rises in food and brewery stocks which
were threatened by the prospect of an international clash on agricultural
product pricing. Among the internationals, Unilever stood out well and
firmness in the US dollar helped the rest of the blue chip sector.
Equities opened cautiously, discouraged by confirmation overnight of savage
workforce cutbacks at British Rail and in the UK building industry.
An early rally was not held and the FT-SE Index repeated Thursday's initial
trend to slip to within two points of 2,700 as doubt was cast over
Thursday's hints that rates cuts in German rates might come sooner than
expected.
But this level again brought out buying support and when stock index futures
began to move higher - following news that the GATT talks had successfully
achieved agreement on an agricultural trade agreement - share prices rose
very sharply.
At best the FT-SE Index touched 2,732.9 before closing at 2,732.4, a net
rise of 26.2 on the day. Traders sounded ebullient at the close and hoped
that, as the GATT news is absorbed, the Footsie will shortly challenge the
closing peak of 2,737.8 and trading peak of 2,744.5, both reached on May 11
when the market was still responding to the re-election of Mr John Major's
Conservative government.
This week, the Footsie has gained nearly 2 per cent, helped both by more
favourable views on the GATT talks and also by news of unexpectedly better
UK retail sales in October. Trading volume has also recovered after a brief
pause at the beginning of the week. Yesterday's Seaq total of 545.7m shares
traded compared with 659.3m on Thursday, when retail business was worth
Pounds 1.2bn.
UK government bonds, about easier for most of the session as investors
continued to worry about public funding prospects, steadied on reports from
the GATT talks.
After falling away briefly at the beginning of the week, retail business has
recovered to regain the average levels of the past two months.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921121

