FT922-471

FT  27 JUN 92 / Finance & the Family: Pension plot thickens


   By NORMA COHEN


EQUALITY between men and women ought to be a fairly straightforward matter.
But when the UK government unveils its plans to make men and women equals in
pension rights, the solution is likely to leave many unsatisfied.
This week is the closing period for comments on a government paper,
published six months ago, outlining possible ways to ensure equality in
social security benefits paid to men and women. At the heart of the problem
is that, for a number of historical reasons, women have been allowed to
retire at 60 with full State pensions while men have had to wait until 65.
Thus, women receive more pension benefits than men, because their payments
start earlier. The European Court has ruled that this is unfair.
However, since publication of the paper last December, government ministers
have hinted broadly that the so-called 'decade of retirement', which would
allow individuals to retire anywhere between age 60 and 70, is unworkable.
Instead, the government is leaning towards a common retirement age of 63.
This will cost the public purse nothing, but it is still far out of tune
with what is offered by most occupational pension schemes.
Mike Brown, a spokesman for the National Association of Pension Funds, the
industry's trade association, said that the group has just submitted its own
proposals in response to the government's paper, outlining ways to make
flexibility workable and affordable for government.
The NAPF is urging a flexible decade of retirement which could begin at 60,
but those who delayed receipt of their pensions until, say, 65 or 70 could
receive higher monthly payments.
The NAPF is calling for the re-introduction of an earnings rule which would
prohibit those with salaries above a certain level from collecting
government benefit. Thus, the government could ensure that it was not making
payments to those who were still employed and would allow it to devote
resources to those who have genuinely retired.
Pensions experts acknowledge that part of the government's difficulty with
flexibility is the fact that UK benefits are funded on a pay-as-you-go
basis, with younger working people paying for the pensions of their parents.
The government's view is that it would have to assume that if it passed new
laws allowing all men to retire at 60, it would have to raise taxes to cover
the possibility that all would choose to do so.
But Ron Amy, pensions director at Grand Metropolitan and vice-chairman of
the NAPF, argues that this is nonsense. 'The worst case assumption that
everyone wants to retire at 60 must be challenged. People's decisions are
much more likely to be driven by whether they have a job or not.'
Furthermore, Amy said, there is already some flexibility in the state
pension system with women having the choice of retiring between 60 and 65
and men having a similar choice between the ages of 65 and 70. 'Why not just
extend all choices to everyone?' Amy says.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920627

