FT921-3704

FT  13 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Delta deal fuels Airbus-Boeing subsidy row


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


TENSIONS in the transatlantic dispute over Airbus aircraft subsidies have
been heightened following complaints by Boeing that its European rival won a
Dollars 675m (Pounds 383.5m) order for nine Airbus A310 aircraft from Delta
Air Lines last week by providing the third largest US carrier with creative
lease financing, writes Paul Betts, Aerospace Correspondent.
But Airbus yesterday denied providing Delta either special leasing terms, or
a so-called 'walk away' clause, emphasising that it was 'an outright
purchase'.
Boeing, the world's largest commercial aircraft manufacturer, claimed in the
US this week that Airbus had offered bargain-basement lease terms to Delta
to clinch the A310 order against a rival offer by the Seattle manufacturer
for Boeing 767-300 extended-range aircraft.
Boeing said it planned to complain to the US government as part of its case
against Airbus government subsidies. The latest controversy coincides with
an imminent showdown between the US government and the European Commission
on the eight-year-old dispute.
The US has set a deadline of March 31 to resolve the controversy and has
warned it would consider taking either unilateral action against Airbus or
lodge a formal complaint with the subsidies committee of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt).
The Delta contract has further inflamed the dispute because the deal
represents a significant inroad for Airbus into the US market at a time when
large aircraft orders are rare.
Mr Jean Pierson, Airbus managing director, said this week he feared the US
was hardening its stance in negotiations over subsidies: 'I have the feeling
the Americans are no longer seeking a compromise and that they believe
Europe is too weak to react in an election context which weakens the French
and British governments,' he said.
'I fear they may have chosen to force matters, either by suspending talks,
or by submitting a complaint before Gatt, or by taxing European aircraft.'
While denying that the Delta deal involved any special lease agreements, a
senior Airbus official claimed yesterday that US aircraft manufacturers had
offered customers 'walk away' clauses in the past.
These clauses enable an airline customer to return aircraft to the
manufacturer after a set period of time.
Airbus has already won big orders from American Airlines, Northwest
Airlines, Continental, TWA and now Delta.
Boeing claimed it could not match the Airbus-Delta deal which had reinforced
its concerns about Airbus subsidies. But Airbus reiterated its own complaint
about Boeing's 'special relationship' with British Airways which led to a
big BA order for Boeing 777 airliners last summer. Boeing had also beaten
Airbus on an order from Emirates, the Dubai-based airline, because the
European consortium could not match 'the predatory pricing' of its US
competitor.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920313

