FT923-6364

FT  25 AUG 92 / Lautro tells 13 life companies to withdraw adverts


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


TWO life assurance companies may have to refund money to policyholders who
bought one of their products based on what has been found to be misleading
advertising, the industry regulator Lautro said yesterday.
After reviewing the advertising for single premium with-profits bonds,
Lautro said it had ordered 13 companies  - more than half of the 22 that
sell the product  - to withdraw some advertising. Of the 13 companies, two
were told to write to clients in order to clarify the bond's
characteristics.
The bonds offer a fixed rate for a set term, typically 10 years, but with
some conditions. Some sales agents have marketed them as a higher-yielding
alternative to building society deposit accounts.
When it announced the review of the single premium bonds in April, Lautro
said clients who claimed  - after receiving the required clarification  -
that they bought the product under misleading circumstances might be
eligible for refunds.
Equity and Law is one of the two insurers that has been asked to contact
investors. Mr Duncan Kerr, chief actuary, said of the 20,000 policies sold
by his company, only 300 clients who bought the product after a direct-mail
campaign would need to receive clarifying letters. He said it was unclear
whether they would be entitled to refunds.
Equity and Law has roughly Pounds 300m of the bonds outstanding and Mr Kerr
said the company had withdrawn the product last week because it wanted a
more suitable mix of single-premium and annual premium business.
A spokesman for Sun Life, which has also ceased its sales of single-premium
with-profits bonds for the current year, said the company was one of those
that had been asked to withdraw advertising.
The spokesman said Lautro's concerns were 'minor' and concerned the way in
which building societies were characterised in the advertisements.
Prudential Insurance, the UK's largest purveyor of the product, said it had
not been asked change its advertising. It has sold more than Pounds
750m-worth of the product, under the title 'Prudence Bonds', since it
entered the market in April 1991.
However, last year Prudential twice made changes in its advertising after
conducting an internal review and discussing the modifications with Lautro.
In only two cases were refunds to policyholders required.
According to the Association of British Insurers, with-profits bonds made up
the biggest share of the Pounds 3.06bn in non-linked single-premium business
sold by insurers last year.
Lautro said there was no evidence that the product had been sold to people
for whom it was inappropriate.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920825

