FT924-6113

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (10): Obstacles to
progress - EC deregulation plans


   By PHILLIP HASTINGS


AMBITIOUS plans to totally deregulate European Community road haulage
operations have had a bumpy ride over the past couple of years.
But while full deregulation will not be achieved in time for the formal
creation of the EC Single Market at the end of this year, there are signs
that the remaining obstacles to further progress are slowly being
dismantled.
'We do not yet have cabotage in the EC and they still have not solved the
problems of vehicle taxation. Nevertheless, when you consider what has been
done in the last few years after years and years of stagnation, a great deal
of progress has been made,' says Mr Reg Dawson, a leading EC transport
consultant.
Still far from clear is the effect that the likely eventual liberalisation
of EC road haulage activities will have on future demand for commercial
vehicles.
On the one hand, deregulation is expected to result in considerable
rationalisation of the European road haulage industry, suggesting fewer
customers for commercial vehicle manufacturers. Conversely, though,
survivors of the anticipated shake-out will need more vehicles to support
their expanding operations.
Crucial to the full deregulation of EC road haulage activities is the issue
of cabotage - the right of hauliers from one EC country to freely operate
inside another state.
Vehicles engaged in cabotage work are subject to many of the regulations of
the state where the work is carried out. But that situation is itself
causing complications. For example, while the host country's laws apply to
issues such as pricing, contracts, vehicle weights and dimensions, work and
rest hours, other matters including social security, vehicle registration
and taxation come under the jurisdiction of the operator's home country.
The establishment of EC cabotage made little progress until mid-1990 when
the European Council of Ministers finally agreed to its introduction in a
very limited form. Basically, that system makes available a quota of
cabotage authorisations - just under 17,000 for 1992 - distributed among the
member states.
Supporters of full deregulation of the European road haulage industry had
hoped that initial moves on cabotage would lead to its full introduction in
1993. But vested national interests have slowed down such development.
Some EC countries, notably Germany and France, fear their domestic haulage
industries could be badly damaged by a sudden influx of competition from
outside countries such as Spain and Greece where operating costs are lower.
For that reason, Germany in particular has insisted on linking the issue of
cabotage with moves to harmonise hauliers' costs, for example through
vehicle and fuel taxes, throughout the Community. Germany also wants to see
the establishment of a common system for tolls and road-user charges for
heavier commercial vehicles.
The German authorities appear to be winning the argument over the need to
harmonise haulage industry costs within the EC. The European Commission has
within the last couple of months put forward a proposal which, if accepted,
could mean that hauliers have to pay a road tax for using the Community's
motorways from January 1994.
The Commission claims such a tax, which would be based on the size of
vehicle and the time spent on the road, would allow member states to recoup
some of the costs of building and maintaining road infrastructures.
The most recent meeting of EC transport ministers in October made some
further progress on harmonising road taxes. However, the Commission's
published proposals do not suggest any minimum or maximum charges. Instead,
individual member states would set their own tax levels.
That absence of a standard tax figure, it is feared, could lead to
continuing disputes between countries such as Germany, which want to set
higher charges, and poorer member states who fear that implementing such
taxes would badly damage their industries.
Meanwhile, pressure is growing on EC ministers to reach agreement on the
subject of cabotage. Specifically, time is running out on a controversial
European Court ruling that if the ministers fail to agree a timetable for
full cabotage by the end of this year, there must be complete cabotage
freedom from 1993. Detailed proposals on the subject are expected to be
ready for discussion at the next European Council meeting in early December.
Having had a deregulated road haulage industry for some 20 years, the UK is
one of the countries most in favour of deregulating and harmonising
operations throughout the EC.
However, the UK remains out of step with the rest of the Community on the
subject of vehicle weights. While other EC countries allow trucks of 40 or
even 44 tonnes on their roads, the UK has a limit of 38 tonnes and a
derogation to continue with that limit until 1999.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921123

