FT924-1041

FT  21 DEC 92 / Businesses warned of fake fax invoices


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


ONE OF three large-scale, foreign-run fax directory frauds in Britain is
trying to charge interest on unpaid fake invoices sent out earlier this
year, Ian Hamilton Fazey writes.
Invoices from the Brussels office of a company called Intercontex Publishers
of America, state: 'We enclose details of your full outstanding account
before handing the matter over to our legal representatives.'
One sent recently to Capital Business Machines of Chatham, Kent, claims
Pounds 358.51 plus Pounds 73.65 interest at 2.5 per cent a month for a fake
invoice sent in the spring.
Officials of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce believe the
tactic is to trap companies that, to protect cashflow, have told accounts
clerks not to pay bills until legal action is threatened, but then to do so
immediately without referral.
The association, which is liaising with the Metropolitan Police, is being
sent up to 60 fake invoices a day by chambers and companies.
Police are usually unable to act because the fake invoices are prepared in
one country and posted in another, with payment sometimes to a third one. If
sent from a third legal jurisdiction, all the sender has done is post a
letter. Pursuit through three or four countries' courts is costly, with high
risk of failure.
Ms Jocelyn Jackson Matthews of the Association of British Chambers of
Commerce said: 'These people take advantage of cheap bulk mailing rates . .
but have never, to my knowledge, produced anything tangible in the way of a
directory.
'Our advice is not to acknowledge the documents, never to pay, and seek
guidance from the local chamber or the police if in doubt.'
The frauds work by criminals sending thousands of 'invoices' for entering a
victim's company name in international fax directories which are never
published.
The fake invoices are illegal and payment cannot be enforced unless the
victim appears to confirm an order.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921221

