FT921-11680

FT  30 JAN 92 / Budget tax reduction of up to Pounds 2bn forecast


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Correspondent


MR NORMAN LAMONT, the chancellor, is expected to announce a small net
reduction in taxes of between Pounds 1bn and Pounds 2bn in his Budget on
March 10, according to a joint study published yesterday.
In their 1992 Green Budget, the independent Institute for Fiscal Studies and
Goldman Sachs International, the London-based arm of the US securities
company, say the chancellor is likely to reduce the burden of income tax,
but argue that he should concentrate on helping the business sector.
Their report predicts that the Budget deficit, or public sector borrowing
requirement, for the 1991-92 financial year will total about Pounds 11.8bn
and exceed the government's Autumn Statement forecast of Pounds 10.5bn. It
forecasts a 1992-93 PSBR of Pounds 19.5bn on unchanged government policies,
and says that will constrain the government's scope for a giveaway Budget.
Mr Andrew Dilnot, IFS director, said Mr Lamont would probably delay his tax
decisions until the weekend before the Budget because of electoral
considerations.
Adding to the uncertainty is the weak state of the economy. However Mr Gavyn
Davies, chief UK economist with Goldman Sachs, said he believed the economy
should recover slowly this year. Real economic growth could turn out at
about 1.5 per cent for the year, reflecting the easing of monetary policy in
the past 15 months, an anticipated fall in the personal-sector savings ratio
and an improvement in the financial position of the corporate sector.
In spite of better company finances, the Green Budget - so called because it
is meant to be a discussion document - urges the chancellor to help the
business sector. It advocates action to halt increases in national
non-domestic rate payments by businesses. Planned increases will affect many
companies, especially in the recession-hit south-east of England,
irrespective of whether they make profits or not. By contrast, changes in
corporation tax only affect those businesses which pay tax.
On income tax, Mr Lamont has the option of cutting the basic rate of tax or
raising tax allowances by more than inflation. Both moves are expensive - 1p
off the basic rate costs about Pounds 2bn, while a 10 per cent rise in
allowances above inflation costs Pounds 2.2bn - and, according to the IFS,
will probably need to be offset by tax rises elsewhere in the system.
Mr Dilnot yesterday emphasised that the chancellor's final decision on
income tax will be a political judgment. He will have to weigh the merits of
easing the tax burden of a large number of low income earners through a rise
in allowances against the simple headline attractions of a cut in the basic
tax rate.
The IFS-Goldman Sachs study assumes that the British economy will grow at a
2.25 per cent annual rate over the medium term. If true, each main party
will be hard-pressed to fulfil its economic policy promises if elected. The
Conservatives would be unable to cut the basic rate of income tax to 20p
from 25p while balancing the budget. Labour would have little scope to go
beyond its short-term spending commitments until 1994-95 without increasing
taxes more than already indicated.
Tax Options for 1992: The Green Budget. IFS, 7 Ridgmount St, London WC1E
7AE. Pounds 6.
Economic Viewpoint, Page 19, Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920130

