FT921-1304

FT  25 MAR 92 / Leading Article: Nuclear leaks


THE ACCIDENT at the Sosnovy Bor nuclear plant may have been a narrow escape
for the people of St Petersburg. The release of radioactive iodine showed
that the fuel in the RBMK reactor was damaged - and that means it could have
come close to a Chernobyl-type explosion.
The incident also reminds the west of the need to help the CIS - and the
other countries of eastern Europe - to make safe their huge legacy of
dangerous Soviet-designed nuclear power stations. It is a worthwhile
reminder because for the last few months nuclear specialists have been
preoccupied with the task of making safe the stockpile of Soviet warheads,
and they have neglected the civil nuclear sector.
Russia is too dependent on nuclear power to contemplate shutting down its
reactors for the time being, even though the Ukraine plans to close the two
remaining RBMK reactors at Chernobyl by the end of next year.
In the short run, therefore, the west needs to accelerate its programme of
helping the CIS to operate the reactors as safely as possible, by retraining
their demoralised staff and technicians and by installing modern control
systems. Funds and technical assistance can be channelled through the new EC
programme of technical aid to energy industries in the CIS. At the same
time, the International Atomic Energy Agency needs more resources to expand
its existing nuclear safety work.
Assistance should come not only from western governments but also from the
nuclear industry and equipment manufacturers. The order-starved companies
take a schizophrenic view of the former Soviet Union. On the one hand they
see a potential lifeline from contracts to rebuild or replace the dangerous
Soviet-designed reactors. But there is also the potential nightmare of
another accident like Chernobyl or worse, which would destroy any prospect
of nuclear power re-establishing its credibility in western public opinion.
Either way the industry has strong self-interest in adopting a generous
attitude now.
Looking beyond immediate safety measures, it is clear that the 14 RBMK
reactors in Russia and Lithuania must be shut down as soon as possible. The
IAEA regards their design as intrinsically dangerous - something that even
the most modern control system and the best bolt-on safety equipment cannot
put right. (The other Soviet-designed reactors, the VVER model based on the
western PWR, are relatively safe).
To enable the Russians to shut down the RBMKs, the west will have to provide
technology to build new generating capacity, for example clean coal-fired
power stations or even modern nuclear plants, and at the same time improve
the appalling inefficiency with which Russians consume energy. In other
words, western technical and financial assistance will have to encompass a
far wider field than the nuclear industry if it is to help prevent another
Chernobyl.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920325

