FT922-455

FT  27 JUN 92 / Gardening: The seeds of discontent - There is tension over
the sorbet in the Sloane-Wally household


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


IT IS an extraordinary season and its wonderful strangeness has not been
lost on the Sussex Old Rectory to which Julian and Veronica Sloane-Wally
emigrated from Onslow Gardens in 1986.
Since then the property-market has gone wildly up and now wildly down,
narrowing the former Sussex-to-London gap. None the less, there are no
thoughts of returning, because the garden is coming on stream. Five years is
the span which a newly-planted garden needs in order to begin to show its
mettle. This weekend, the Sloane-Wallys are entertaining friends in a big
way, but there is a slight unease between them as they look at the fruits of
their past years' experience. It goes beyond the usual ups and downs of
mistakes and difficult seasons.
It is not just that the entire garden, like yours or mine, may well be over
for the year by Sunday. All week, Veronica has been praying that the
old-fashioned rose borders will not have dropped their petals by 6pm on
Saturday: even Julian lost some of his optimism when he found himself
dead-heading the pink delphiniums on Wednesday after work. Magenta geraniums
are fading with the first flush of flower on the purple petunias, and the
tassles of Love-Lies-Bleeding are already tumbling from the terracotta pots
which Julian recently bought.
For Love-Lies-Bleeding is not quite the emblem of the enterprise, but, as
the five years have passed, a clear rift has developed between the two
partners' styles. Histories of gardening have much to say about the great
English gardens which have resulted from husband-and-wife partnerships, but
they have less to say about those which emerge when he and she disagree.
Julian has held firm to his taste for boldness, order and formality: this
weekend, he is particularly proud of the walk of upright Ballerina
apple-trees, which he bought for the lower lawn when they first appeared at
Chelsea.  Veronica, however, has waivered.
At first, she thought she wanted controlled planting in formal beds, packed
together tightly so that none of it flopped. In the last two years, she has
changed course and now has fastened on to the natural look. Wild flowers
keep company with purples and stale yellows as a breath of hedgerow in the
garden. There are no weed-killers in her ecological Eden, although the white
Ox-eye daisies have driven out everything else which she raised from the
famous Farmers Nightmare seed-mixture, pioneered by Miriam Rothschild.
On late summer evenings, Julian longs to root out the jungle of
white-flowered Feverfew which has been allowed to seed into Little
Sissinghurst, the all-white garden which they started together, adding only
a touch of purple foliage. When Veronica caught him with a Killaspray in the
twilight, the two of them realised that a garden can become grounds for
divorce. Since then, separate spheres have been the answer. Half of the
garden is trimmed, edged and given over to Julian's growing taste for
clipped hebes. The other half has meadow planting in which vetch twines
among Evening Primrose and white-flowered Lavatera Barnsley.
Gardens should breed unity, not division, but what really alarms Julian is
that this taste for the hedgerow has spread to the cooking. No weekend seems
safe, nowadays, from one of Veronica's forays for food from the wild: they
have had nettle soup, dandelion salad, and she seems to believe everything
she reads in Richard Mabey's old best-seller, Food for Free. The trouble has
been compounded by a reunion with her old friend, Tiffany. She asked
Veronica up for one of her fund-raising evenings for the Marsden Hospital,
but for once Veronica did not return overwhelmed with nostalgia for her old
Chelsea comfort-area. Instead, she returned with a new zeal and plans to
make ice-creams from the worst weeds in the English hedgerow.
According to Tiffany, who is very conscious of the planet's future, this
last week in June is the golden moment for an ice sorbet, the main
ingredients of which can be gathered free from any hedgerow in England.
All you need are 15 to 20 heads of fully-opened flowers of an elder bush,
preferably gathered on a sunny day when they are most strongly scented.
Veronica swears by a Josceline Dimbleby recipe. It involves buyinga pound of
gooseberries, topping and tailing them, heating them up with the elder
flowers, a spoonful of lemon juice and water, and then letting this mixture
cool. Next, you should add two-thirds of a pint of cream, whipped until
stiff but not thick; mix the cream into the syrupy mixture and let the
wholething cool for several hours in a freezer.
To Veronica's eye, the hedgerows this weekend are a foaming mass of
greenish-yellow potential ice-cream, being ignored by the British public,
who go shopping for highly-priced raspberries instead. To Julian, there is
now a threat of elder among his clipped walks of purple lilacs; dinner
parties, this weekend, have a definite air of tension.
On a trial run, the elder flower ice-cream turned out very oddly. This
weekend, Julian is trying to ease tension with a simpler alternative from
his days of bachelor cooking.
What country people knew yesterday Sloane-Wallys recycle for today's
weekend, and so Veronica and Julian find themselves arguing about how best
to make a pudding out of a plant which, five years ago, they were poisoning
to death with SBK. First, it was the design; now it is the cooking.
Gardening is not a bed of roses, and once the hedgerow look intrudes, there
is nothing - not even a sorbet - at which its converts will not stop.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920627

