FT921-3788

FT  12 MAR 92 / Deal with Borrie helps to clear clouds of acrimony: An
agreement that ends months of hard bargaining


   By DAVID LASCELLES


MR RON PROBERT, who has been representing British Gas in its tortuous
negotiations with the Office of Fair Trading, said: 'It's the end of a long
road marked by bumps and pitfalls.'
It was something of an understatement. Yesterday's agreement was the
culmination of months of hard bargaining in which Mr John Wakeham, the
energy secretary, had intervened at times to prevent collapse. Nor is it the
end of the road - implementing the deal will take three years.
The agreement, designed to reduce the dominance of British Gas in the UK
market, obliges the company to retreat from more than half the industrial
gas market, which represents about a third of the total market. It will also
have to split its pipeline business from the rest of its operations so it
can be managed as an arm's-length entity serving British Gas on equal terms
with other gas shippers.
All those close to the deal - the OFT, British Gas itself and Sir James
McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, the regulator - welcomed it yesterday.
It dispels the acrimony surrounding gas, and removes the threat of a
reference to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission with its attendant
uncertainties.
They were all also agreed that the success of the agreement depends on
British Gas abiding by the spirit as much as the letter. This is something
the company was keen to stress it would do. 'We are totally committed to
these undertakings,' said Mr Probert. 'We're not going to undermine them.'
British Gas will withdraw from the industrial market in stages over the next
three years. It will do this by on-selling gas it is contracted to buy to
other shippers. It is assumed that other companies will be willing to buy
this gas, but if the quantities or prices offered fail to attract buyers,
the OFT will be able to step in and set terms which ensure sales.
Instead of being a direct supplier, British Gas will become a middleman for
this segment of the market. But the danger is that this could leave some
industrial consumers without gas or facing sharp price rises - particularly
in the market for interruptible supplies, which can be less profitable if
supplies become unbalanced. The OFT has accepted British Gas's promise to
satisfy 'so far as it is economical to do so, any reasonable request for a
supply of gas'.
Sir James said there was an element of 'competition for its own sake' about
this aspect of the deal, and he warned that he would use his powers to
compel British Gas to keep supplies flowing.
British Gas has until January 1994 to set up its separate transportation and
storage unit, so the shippers who take over its business will have access to
a transmission network. But in the coming weeks British Gas will have to
publish a discussion document laying out the pricing arrangements. This will
have to be approved by the OFT.
Overall, the agreement marks something of a victory for British Gas, which
went into the negotiations uttering dire warnings about the danger of
massive disruption to the gas market if attempts were made to break it up.
The OFT has scaled back its original aim of reducing British Gas's share of
the industrial market to 25 per cent. Instead, the target share is now 40
per cent. Also, British Gas will be able to keep its transmission business,
albeit as a separately accounted unit. Provided the gas-release negotiations
go according to plan, the company need not face another review until 1995.
Although the deal will cost British Gas a sizeable segment of its existing
business, the impact on profits could turn out to be smaller than feared.
The company estimated yesterday that the overall cost, by the time of full
implementation in 1995, would be less than Pounds 100m before tax. (Last
year it earned Pounds 1.16bn after tax).
The loss of profits from the divested business will be offset by two fresh
sources of revenue. One will be the on-selling, for which British Gas will
charge a handling fee and a premium to reflect its risk. The other will be
transmission fees for the pipeline business.
'People are relieved that a monopolies reference has been removed,' Mr Paul
Spedding, gas industry analyst at Kleinwort Benson Securities, commented on
the overall deal.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920312

