FT921-405

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (13): Gulf
war raises profile of kidnap insurance


   By TOM LYNCH


THE PLIGHT of people detained as part of Saddam Hussein's 'human shield' in
the Gulf war raised once again the profile of kidnap and ransom insurance,
which began to be written in the 1930s, following the Lindbergh kid-napping.
Most K&R policies are taken out with criminal kidnap in mind - Colombia is
the world capital with three a day. But hostages can be taken by terrorists
demanding ransom in cash or reciprocal action, and by governments such as
Iraq's acting outside international law.
Policies reimburse any ransom paid out, and the salaries and other costs to
the insured company associated with unavailability of the staff kidnapped or
detained.
Detention is defined as a person being held against his will, provided he
has not broken the law of the country of which he is a national. It is,
admits Mr Edward Creasy, underwriter at Cassidy Davis Underwriting, a
difficult line to draw - a murderer is clearly not covered, but where
someone is imprisoned for a crime there can be a dispute about whether the
case would have stood up in the UK, or whether the charges are false.
About 500 of Saddam's detainees were insured against detention, at a loss to
the market as a whole of more than Dollars 8m. Although the affair raised
the profile of K&R, it did not, says Mr Creasy ruefully, raise premium
income.
The London market has a big lead in K&R, accounting for Dollars 40m of the
Dollars 70m premiums generated in the world, with Cassidy Davis writing the
lion's share of the Dollars 40m. In most years, it makes an underwriting
profit, says Cassidy Davis.
Premium income is static, and is not expected to grow substantially -
although 97 per cent of kidnaps are uninsured, most companies have by now
considered, and rejected, K&R policies. Any growth is expected in specialist
areas, such as emergency political repatriation.
There are conditions on a K&R policy. Perhaps the most important is that the
policy becomes void if its existence is disclosed - this prevents a company
going to a bank and raising ransom money on the back of the policy, and
conceals from terrorists who they are dealing with.
The company must also co-operate with law enforcement agencies; the insurer
reimburses the company, and will not fund a ransom payment; there is no
reimbursement where an illegal act has been committed and the policy limit
is always less than the net worth of the insured company.
In a tie-up with Control Risks, a specialist risk analysis and advisory
group, Cassidy Davis clients are offered advice on reducing the risk of
kidnap, and a crisis management service if a kidnap takes place, though most
companies prefer to pay for such services without paying insurance premiums.
Mr Charles Webb, Control Risks operations director, says inexperienced
companies often do not realise the amount of damage a company can suffer
from the abduction of one person, with the effect on moral, disruption of
business and press attention.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920330

