FT922-13284

FT  13 APR 92 / Reichmann to ask for 90-day grace on debts: O&Y founder to
unveil 10-year repayment plan in Toronto today


   By ROBERT PESTON and BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


Mr Paul Reichmann will today make an offer to 100 banks which he hopes that
they cannot refuse. The founder of the world's biggest property developer,
Olympia & York Developments, will ask the banks at an afternoon meeting in
Toronto's Sheraton hotel to reschedule principal and interest payments on
between USDollars 4bn (Pounds 2.2bn) and Dollars 5bn of loans.
O&Y will warn that if the banks refuse they risk unbearable losses on
Dollars 12bn, which is the debt in all O&Y companies, excluding its
non-property subsidiaries. Those loans are less than some analysts believed.
Nonetheless, if O&Y were to have asked for a reconstruction of all that,
some banks could have been in difficulties.
O&Y does not expect the banks to give agreement to the plan without months
of wrangling.
As a first step, O&Y wants a 90-day period of grace during which principal
payments will be frozen and some interest will be deferred. The final plan
will, however, involve rescheduling principal and rolling up interest to the
end of the decade.
This famously secretive company will make a detailed presentation of how the
crisis evolved and its long-term prospects. Banks will receive hundreds of
pages of financial documents. There will also be speeches from Mr Steve
Miller, partner in investment bank James D Wolfensohn Inc, and from O&Y's
key managers, such as Mr Michael Dennis, in charge of O&Y's UK operations,
which are at the heart of the company's difficulties.
Whenever a company asks for a financial reconstruction, banks are forced by
regulators to make big provisions to cover the risk of losses on loans to
that company. O&Y is bending over backwards to minimise the provisions banks
will have to make. It hopes to convince them that in time they will be
repaid in full.
'The rationale behind the restructuring is that everyone eventually gets 100
per cent', said a source close to the talks between O&Y and its banks, which
are led by Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Citicorp of the US and
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation.
Banks will be told that O&Y's net assets, at market value, are between
Dollars 5bn and Dollars 5.5bn. The balance sheet value of those assets,
based on their cost rather than their market worth, is Dollars 4bn.
Both those figures are calculated on the assumption that O&Y remains out of
liquidation. If there were a fire sale of its properties and shareholdings,
it is by no means certain that the proceeds would cover its borrowings.
O&Y is so influential in certain markets, such as the Manhattan office
market, that if it collapsed, the effect on prices would be devastating.
It is confident that by the late 1990s, an economic upswing will push up
both rental income from its properties and the value of the buildings
themselves. The banks may question some of those assumptions.
Of the debt to be rescheduled, only Dollars 300m is unsecured. The Dollars
4bn to Dollars 5bn being renegotiated has four main elements:
Dollars 2.5bn provided by a banking syndicate.
Another Dollars 500m in a separate syndicated loan.
Dollars 300m in working capital lines.
Around Dollars 1bn borrowed to finance the construction of Canary Wharf in
London's docklands.
Around 50 banks in all, out of O&Y's 100 banks, will be affected by the
rescheduling. O&Y's future depends in part on whether they can be persuaded
that it is fair that the remaining 50 will not be asked to make sacrifices.
Mr Reichmann wants to insulate all debt outside the central holding company
from the reconstruction. Banks which have provided finance for individual
property developments in the US and Canada - totalling Dollars 5.8bn for the
US properties and USDollars 1.8bn for the Canadian - will not be asked to
reschedule, since rental income from most of these properties will be
sufficient to service the loans. O&Y will also argue that the interests of
lenders to the parent will be damaged if the property finance is
renegotiated. It will note that the intrinsic value of the parent rests on
its reputation for honouring all its commitments on individual buildings.
However, some lenders may be convinced that O&Y's reputation has already
been damaged considerably. They may ask what more they have to lose by
pulling the rug.
'If we have to reschedule', they may argue, 'everyone has to reschedule'.
Mr Reichmann has to convince them that threat would be suicidal.
Observer, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920413

