FT923-10946

FT  28 JUL 92 / Congress calls for changes to Nafta pact


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE US Congress will block the North American Free Trade Agreement unless
fundamental amendments are made to it to protect US jobs and the
environment, Democratic Congressman Richard Gephardt, the US House majority
leader warned yesterday.
Mr Gephardt's speech to the Institute of International Economics in
Washington may scupper one of the vote-winning initiatives left to President
George Bush, who is trailing Mr Bill Clinton, Democratic presidential
candidate, in opinion polls.
Mr Gephardt said Nafta negotiators 'can and must do better'. The pact could
become an 'engine of growth' but only if 'properly drafted'. He called for a
bilateral commission to clean up the environment on the US-Mexico border and
a cross-border tax to finance it.
Mr Clinton was expected last night to echo Mr Gephardt's comments. Mr
Clinton has previously said that he would only support a Nafta that
safeguarded jobs, the environment and Mexican labour rights. He has also
stressed his support for open world trading system.
The attacks on Nafta come as trade ministers from the US, Mexico and Canada,
who met in Mexico at the weekend, reported progress on a number of fronts
and appeared close to completing a final draft text.
Negotiators have worked hard in recent months to conclude an agreement which
could be submitted to Congress this year.
Mr Gephardt argued that uncontrolled free trade was part of the past and
that environmental and labour concerns could not be divorced from trade
agreements.
He frequently referred to European Community practices on regional subsidies
and worker compensation as providing a model for future US policy.
He said the current agreement was 'a lose-lose situation', failing to stem
either the flow of jobs to Mexico or a returning flood of cheaply produced
goods to the US.
Mr Gephardt detailed the environmental degradation and devastating living
conditions resulting from industrialisation along the US-Mexico border. He
insisted that a properly drafted agreement could create jobs on both sides
of the border and improve living conditions in the area.
Congress last year voted to give the Bush Administration 'fast-track'
negotiating authority for the Nafta - meaning the pact could not be amended
as it goes through the House and Senate.
However, Mr Gephardt has argued that a simple vote in the House could change
the fast-track rule to allow amendments, because the administration has
reneged on commitments to protect jobs and the environment.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920728

