FT921-1419

FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Labour to seize fiscal initiative


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


LABOUR strategists are increasingly convinced that the Conservatives'
attacks on its tax policies have backfired on the government, offering them
a rare opportunity to go on the offensive over fiscal policy.
Mr Neil Kinnock yesterday seized on the prime minister's remarks on the tax
burden at his morning news conference to claim that Mr John Major had all
but confirmed longstanding charges that the Tories' have a secret agenda to
increase value added tax.
'The VAT cat is now well and truly out of the bag. It is clear John Major is
backtracking on what he said only a couple of weeks ago,' said Mr Kinnock.
'I am not surprised. It has always been clear that if they were re-elected
the Conservatives would have to raise VAT.'
That theme was taken up by Mr John Smith, the shadow chancellor, in a speech
in Hatfield, Hertfordshire, last night. He said the Conservatives were now
'hunting for scapegoats' to justify the poor state of the economy in
negative campaigning that was making little impact on the electorate.
Turning round an old Tory charge against Labour, he said to resounding
applause: 'The British economy is not safe in their hands.'
The buoyant mood in the Labour camp was fuelled by a report in The Guardian
yesterday claiming that the government had breached longstanding convention
by allowing current government outgoings to exceed the amount that the
Treasury receives in taxation.
The report provoked a call from Mr Kinnock for the resignation of Mr Norman
Lamont, the chancellor, and a flurry of attacks from shadow ministers.
In an open letter to the prime minister, Mr Smith argued that increases in
National Insurance contributions from 6.5 per cent to 9 per cent and VAT
from 8 per cent to 17 per cent showed that 'the Tories are the party of high
taxation'.
He added: 'It is the Labour party - as my Budget demonstrated conclusively
last week - that will reduce the burden of taxation on the ordinary taxpayer
and in the process make eight out of 10 families in Britain better off.'
Heartened by the weekend's opinion poll figures, Labour is now expected to
shift its attack to allegations of deteriorating public-sector services.
The main thrust of Labour's strategy will be gradually to move the campaign
towards its key 'winning' issues of education and the National Health
Service.
While senior party officials are aware that the Conservatives will
relentlessly press their charges of a hidden Labour 'tax bombshell', they
believe that the raising yesterday of the government's record on the tax
burden has supplied them with valuable ammunition to use the VAT card to
counter such claims.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920324

