FT923-10892

FT  28 JUL 92 / Bosnia's warring factions begin new search for peace


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER, Diplomatic Editor and REUTER


LEADERS of Bosnia's three warring factions began another attempt in London
yesterday to bring peace to their stricken country, in spite of the
breakdown of the latest ceasefire agreed only 11 days ago.
The meeting has been overshadowed by last weekend's British proposal to
organise a wider international peace conference on the former Yugoslavia in
London at the end of next month. Apart from the three combatants, this will
bring together the European Community, the United Nations, the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe and other 'interested parties' such as
the US.
Though the Bosnian Moslems have again refused to meet their enemies face to
face, Mr Jose Cutileiro, the Community's chief negotiator in the
EC-sponsored talks, will hold separate meetings with Mr Radovan Karadzic,
leader of the Bosnian Serbs, Mr Mate Boban, leader of Bosnia's Croats, and
Mr Haris Silajdzic, the Bosnian Moslem representative.
Lord Carrington, the chief EC mediator, considers it pointless to negotiate
another ceasefire, which is likely to collapse as quickly as the previous
ones. He will try, therefore, to focus the talks on a constitutional and
political settlement rather than on military problems.
However, a British official made it clear that this did not mean that no
attention would be paid to halting the fighting. 'They have a ceasefire and
they will be told in no uncertain terms to implement it,' he said, while
admitting at the same time that there was no point in getting the parties to
agree on a new ceasefire.
Mr Karadzic yesterday proposed that the rival communities could be separated
by a 'green line' patrolled by UN peacekeeping troops, while their leaders
worked out a political settlement. Such a 'green line' has been in effect in
Cyprus ever since the Turkish invasion of the northern part of the island in
1974.
The London meeting is being held against the background of a quickly
deteriorating refugee crisis in the former Yugoslavia which will be the
subject of an international conference in Geneva tomorrow.
Germany, which has taken in more than 200,000 of an estimated total of 2.2m
Yugoslav refugees, has called on Germany's European partners to share the
refugee burden more equitably, but France and Britain are refusing to accept
a quota system.
However, western officials are understood to be studying the creation of a
Kurdish-style safe haven for refugees inside the former Yugoslavia to halt
the increasing flood of people fleeing their homeland.
US Navy jets flew sorties over the Adriatic yesterday but were under strict
orders not to stray near Yugoslav airspace, Reuter reports from aboard the
USS Saratoga.
The US stepped up its presence in the narrow sea on Friday, moving in a
battle group led by the aircraft carrier Saratoga. As waves of F-14 Tomcats
and A-6 intruders took off from the Saratoga, pilots were repeatedly told to
stay out of Yugoslav airspace and not to stray near two Yugoslav islands in
the middle of the Adriatic.
'Whatever the message Washington may be wanting to send to Yugoslavia, the
military orders are to keep things cool in the Adriatic,' said battle group
commander, Rear Admiral Philip Dur.
The US battle group, which includes the amphibious assault ship Iwo Jima, is
by far the biggest military presence in the area. Its nearly 9,000 men dwarf
a four-ship Nato patrol off the coast of Montenegro and a three-ship
detachment of the Western European Union at the mouth of the Adriatic.
An Egyptian soldier (right) bound for United Nations duty in Sarajevo reads
his Koran before take-off in Cairo

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920728

