FT921-1361

FT  24 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Kohl sees clear signs of movement in farm
talks


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl of Germany returned yesterday from his talks with
President Bush in Washington, insisting he detected clear signs of movement
in Gatt's farm trade liberalisation talks.
At the same time, he flatly rejected calls for Germany to put pressure on
France to compromise in the fight over how far to cut the subsidies and
quantities of EC farm exports. 'We have made progress, but we have still not
made the grade (necessary to reach a final agreement),' he declared.
Mr Kohl rejected suggestions that President Bush would be happy to allow the
talks to drag on until after the US elections, or that President Francois
Mitterrand of France would prefer a failed Gatt round to a successful
compromise.
'President Bush wants the Gatt round to be brought to a successful
conclusion by the end of April, just as President Mitterrand and I and the
other partners in the EC do. We must have a compromise, and that means all
the participants will have to make concessions.'
As far as France was concerned in resisting more EC concessions, 'I am not
ready to put pressure on one member of our Community. It is a common affair
and we should not single out one country. Anybody who knows French politics
should know that would be a fatal thing to do.'
Mr Kohl suggested that the three key areas for compromise concerned cuts in
EC exports (in quantity and level of subsidy), control over US cereal
substitute exports to the EC (Germany wants a total freeze), and securing
European farm income subsidies as part of the continuing reform programme.
A German official involved in the talks said two conclusions emerged from
the talks with Mr Bush: both sides were absolutely determined to reach an
end in April; and compromise could only be found in flexibility on both
sides. 'This movement is certainly to be seen.' But he declined to say just
where.
Mr Kohl expressed his determination that the Gatt talks should not dragged
on until the Group of Seven's economic summit in Munich in July. 'If we do
not have an agreement by then, we will not be able to solve it in Munich
either.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920324

