FT924-6309

FT  21 NOV 92 / Computing: The facts about databases - How to pick from a
bewildering range of software


   By DAVID CARTER


SELECTING a database programme can be confusing. The two other common
software packages - word processing and spreadsheet - are well charted
territory, but databases are tricky. There are 'flat file' and 'relational'
databases, menu-driven and programmable databases, specialised databases for
text retrieval and for personal information management.
In its original meaning, a database is simply a mass of data. You might talk
of a database of names and addresses, or a database of membership records.
Different types of database demand different types of database package. At
the simplest level, a list of client names and addresses can be handled by a
single file (or 'flat file') database. At the other extreme the package
might need to be 'relational', that is, able to accommodate several related
files which pass information between (update) one another. For example, a
sales order database will generate a sales invoice which in turn updates the
sales ledger file, the nominal ledger file, and the stock file.
To write complex business packages such as sales order processing,
developers use 'database development packages' such as dBase IV, Foxpro,
Clipper, DataEase, Paradox and R:Base 3.1. These are called 'programmable'
databases because they use programme-like instructions. Complex applications
demand the flexibility of a programmable database. These top of the range
packages cost Pounds 500 plus and their power and sophistication really make
them suitable only for professionals.
For non-technical users who want to perform simpler tasks database packages
are available which are entirely 'menu-driven'. Without having to learn any
programming language you can design your own database, enter data, edit it
and print out reports. Menu-driven databases are the nearest you or I will
get to writing our own computer programs.
Most of the top-range packages use menus for simple tasks. Some come in
cut-down versions for the amateur where the underlying programming language
has been removed so that they are entirely menu-driven. Examples are Paradox
Special Edition (Pounds 80 from retailers like Dixons or Wildings) or
Personal R:Base (about Pounds 80 by mail order in PC magazines) In terms of
price / performance these are probably the best value database packages on
the market. However, they were originally designed for the professional and
employ a formal, classical approach. This takes some getting used to and
Personal R:Base, for example, is simply too powerful and complex to be given
to the novice. But database users who think they have outgrown their first
package and want something more sophisticated will love it.
This leaves packages designed ab initio for the amateur rather than cut-down
versions of professional packages. Examples are Q & A, Reflex, Masterfile,
Cardbox Plus, Professional File, Rapidfile. Which do you choose? There is
one fundamental question - is your database primarily made up of text or
numbers? Each requires different functions.
In the case of a text application such as address lists or membership
records you need to be able to query the file in order to extract, say,
prospective customers who live in Wales and have expressed an interest in
antique furniture. The important thing is to be able to search through 5,000
records, retrieve the half-dozen that meet your criteria, then print them
out in a list. Maintaining contact name and addresses is the most common
application for a database. Every package on the market can do this, and do
not forget the databases within integrated packages such as Microsoft Works,
Smartware, Eight-in-One Gold, PFS First Choice. They are more than adequate
and have the added advantage that they are designed to work with the
integrated word processor to produce mailshots.
These are textual databases. The other type is a numeric database, for
example, a database of sales invoices. In this case you are not interested
in retrieving individual sales invoices but in data analysis and reporting
analysing which products have been sold to which customers by which
salesmen, producing summary reports and identifying trends. Here you must be
careful.
All databases can handle text applications; few can handle numeric. For data
analysis the key requirement is 'cross-tab reporting' which enables you to
summarise data in different ways rather than simply listing individual
records within the database. A database package without cross-tab reporting
is useless for analysis of numeric data.
Few packages excel in data analysis and reporting, but one that does is
Borland's Reflex which is a easy to use and can be recommended even to
beginners.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

921121

