FT922-4012

FT  08 JUN 92 / Portillo loses fight to limit spending bids


   By RALPH ATKINS


PRE-EMPTIVE meetings called by Mr Michael Portillo, chief secretary to the
Treasury, with Whitehall's spending departments have failed to stop bids for
expenditure in 1993-94 from far exceeding the government's target.
A rare series of negotiations by Mr Portillo appears to have trimmed the
most excessive spending ambitions of cabinet members, but they have still
submitted bids that together are much higher than the Pounds 245bn planning
total pencilled in by the Treasury in January.
Among the departments likely to face the biggest squeeze are defence, health
and environment. The Welsh and Scottish Offices have also been under special
scrutiny this year.
Mr Portillo will be looking for modest public-sector pay rises, including
MPs' allowances. The Top Salaries Review Body report on the allowances is
due in the next few weeks.
Usually, bilateral meetings between Treasury and cabinet ministers do not
take place until after the cabinet has set the framework for the spending
round at the beginning of July.
Mr Portillo's early start reflects a widespread fear in Whitehall that, with
the general election out of the way but public borrowing high, this year's
negotiations will be the most fraught since the early 1980s.
Mr Michael Howard, environment secretary, is pushing for a cushion to soften
the impact of the new council tax. Treasury officials will look to the lower
end of the Pounds 1bn to Pounds 4bn estimated for the cost of the
transitionary arrangements from the poll tax. The Treasury will also want
tight control on housing expenditure and on the City Challenge programme for
urban regeneration projects.
On health, the Treasury will argue that spending rounds before the election
were generous and that there is scope for increasing enterprise within the
National Health Service. Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, will
point to the prime minister's commitment to continuing real increases in
spending and to how the flat property market has trimmed NHS income from
asset sales.
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, defence secretary, who has yet to meet Mr Portillo to
discuss his bid formally, is preparing a case against a clampdown on
spending. He will argue that change can be made only slowly and will involve
redundancy costs.
Mr Portillo is also likely to find a tough battle in settling the budget for
the employment department. Mrs Gillian Shephard, employment secretary, wants
additional resources for the Training and Enterprise Councils. With
unemployment still rising, treasury officials are concerned about the value
for money of schemes such as Employment Training, run by the Tecs.
Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, is likely to find Treasury pressure
on his department's roads programme and on any extra spending on transport
links to London's Docklands, including the Jubilee Line extension.
Observer, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920608

