FT924-1049

FT  19 DEC 92 / Raking in a lucrative cut for the croupier: Plans for a
national lottery are a bizarre reversal of Tory policy


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


THIS is the time of the year when I am accustomed to panic. So many
relatives, a surprising number of friends, and so little imagination. In
other words, I am haunted by the spirit of Christmas Giving. But this
Christmas, I have worked everything out. I shall ask all my best friends and
relatives to make a donation to The Dominic Lawson Christmas sinking fund.
Then I shall put all their names into a hat. The winner shall receive about
half to three-quarters of the fund (I have not made up my mind exactly how
much) as a bumper present, to spend as he or she wishes.
The remainder I shall spend on what I consider to be worthy causes, such as
the opera. I shall support the opera by keeping the money myself and
spending it on attending the biggest loss-making productions at Covent
Garden. It goes without saying that I shall make no contribution to the
fund, but, in the spirit of Christmas, I shall not charge my friends for my
time spent in administering and dispensing the fund.
This idea is not mine, I claim no credit for it. It is merely borrowed from
the government, which on Thursday revealed its plans for a national lottery.
Essentially, it works just like the Dominic Lawson Christmas sinking fund.
Indeed, according to a report on the matter in yesterday's Daily Telegraph:
'The national lottery. . . senior government sources are describing as 'the
government's Christmas present to the nation.''
Thank you, Mr Secretary of State, how did you know it was exactly what I
wanted? And to think all I have given your lot is my pathetic taxes. The
introduction of a national lottery was not just a Conservative commitment
during the last election campaign. It was also firmly written into the
Labour party's manifesto. There, it fitted in perfectly. But for a Tory
government, it is a bizarre reversal of everything that Conservatism has
stood for over the past 13 years.
The main ideological plank of these administrations has been privatisation.
But it was not a matter of mere ideology. It was based on the essentially
practical idea that the economy is harmed when the public sector competes
for limited funds and manpower in areas where the private sector is both
competent and willing to do the job, and the notion that the public sector
is incompetent in running businesses and allocating capital.
This belief led from the privatising in 1979 of some pubs in Carlisle owned
by British Rail right up to the sale of entire utilities. Never, until the
National Lottery Bill, has the government considered reversing this process,
and introduced the public sector into an area prefectly well managed by
private companies such as Littlewoods, the leading football pools company.
That company, incidentally, forecasts that, if the National Lottery Bill
becomes law, it will lose 40 per cent of its turnover and have to sack about
3,000 of its Liverpool-based staff.
That is probably an exaggeration for polemical purposes, but there is no
doubt that the effect will be to steal market share from the private sector.
The only reason why the government permits even Littlewoods to operate is
that it considers the football pools to be a game of skill rather than
chance. This, of course, is not the case, but it is a loophole convenient
for both parties to overlook. It allows the government to continue to claim
that it is the only body with the morals and incorruptibility to be
permitted to operate a lottery. And it clearly believes that under its
benevolent dictatorship, a lottery will not, in the words of a Commons
select committee in 1808, lead to 'idleness, dissipation and poverty. . .
the most sacred and confidential trusts are betrayed, domestic comfort is
destroyed, madness often created, crimes subjecting the perpetrators to the
punishment of death are committed, and even suicide is produced'.
None of these consequences are as bad as those which will actually follow
from the National Lottery of the 1990s: the government will simply be using
its croupier's take as an additional form of voluntary taxation to pay for
things which it is embarrassed about not funding already. The only exception
might be the absurd Millenium fund, aptly described as a something at which
you throw public money which will not be seen again for 1,000 years.
Perhaps the closest parallels to the government's lottery are the bingo
competitions intermittently launched by tabloid newspapers. They are
designed to rally flagging support for a product which, on its merits, is
facing a sharp decline in public appreciation. Or, in other words, the
government is taking a leaf out of Robert Maxwell's book.
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

921219

