FT924-12178

FT  22 OCT 92 / Political Notebook: Jogging for growth


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


MR John Major has put his economic policy in place. He stated it most
clearly in an interview this week with Mr Michael Brunson of ITN: 'A
strategy for growth is what we need; a strategy for growth is what we are
going to have.'
The vacuum left by sterling's departure from the European exchange rate
mechanism has been filled by an approach that says deflation rather than
inflation poses the most immediate threat to the economy.
It is not quite a dash for growth. Rather a medium-paced jog. Mr Major has
not abandoned the fight against inflation that persuaded him to endure the
pain of the ERM. There are sensible economic arguments to be marshalled in
favour of some further relaxation of monetary policy.
A central part of the new strategy is to talk up shattered business and
consumer confidence. Presentation may in the end be as important as actual
policy adjustments in persuading consumers to spend and businesses to
invest.
Political confidence is also vital. After the coal industry debacle, Mr
Major faced the prospect that the Conservative party would disintegrate
under the pressures of public spending cuts in the Autumn Statement and his
determination to ratify the Maastricht treaty. His judgment was that the
cost of stable prices had become too high for the economy, the electorate
and his own backbench MPs to bear.
So when ministerial colleagues tell him that no great harm will come from
some acceleration in inflation, the prime minister no longer shows them the
door. Instead, he is inclined to quote from the satirical novel Scoop: 'Up
to a point, Lord Copper.'
Not all in the government have caught up with the switch in emphasis. The
prime minister appears to be running ahead of the Treasury, which insisted
yesterday that very little had changed.
But the message from Mr Major's intimates was unambiguous. He had discussed
with Mr Norman Lamont the Treasury's latest (gloomy) domestic economic
forecasts and the deteriorating international environment. Inflation was
under control and the prospects for output at best flat.
So policy would now be directed towards promoting recovery. Mr Lamont would
spell out the strategy in the Autumn Statement. The prime minister was
perfectly happy with headlines declaring 'Major goes for growth'.
The chancellor will be more cautious in his presentation. Even now, Treasury
mandarins are writing into the drafts of next week's Mansion House speech
the usual warnings that he will be as willing to raise interest rates as
reduce them if circumstances demand.
But the frame of mind of those operating the policy levers is more important
than public statements of good intentions. Two weeks ago Mr Major was
cautious about interest rate cuts. Now he is looking for an opportunity for
another reduction soon after the Autumn Statement.
A looser monetary policy will be offset by a determination to hold to the
Treasury's spending targets. Mr Major has said he is determined to protect
capital projects. Public-sector pay will be correspondingly squeezed. That
balance of spending is deemed less inflationary than in past years.
The new emphasis placed by Mr Major on facilitating private-sector
involvement in infrastructure projects is designed to emphasise that the
recovery strategy is looking to the long as well as the short term. There
will be other wheezes to emphasise the partnership between government and
industry.
The shift in policy will be seen as a defeat for those in the cabinet - Mr
Kenneth Clarke and Mr Michael Heseltine among them - who have been arguing
that sterling should re-enter the ERM sooner rather than later.
Mr Major judged that there was little prospect of limiting the Tory
rebellion against Maastricht if backbench MPs believed attempts to shadow
the D-Mark were holding up interest rate reductions. But the pro-ERM lobby
was aware also that its case would remain unheard in the government as long
as the economy remained mired in recession. Mr Major is still on their side.
So recovery is a shared political priority in a government that has seen its
authority shredded. The risk is that by relaxing policy too quickly and by
too much, Mr Major will sow the seeds of the next unsustainable boom. But in
present circumstances the prime minister has calculated - probably correctly
 -that worrying about events one or two years hence is a luxury he cannot
afford.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921022

