FT923-15710

FT  01 JUL 92 / Business and the Environment: Company reports leave vital
queries unanswered


   By HILARY DE BOERR


UK COMPANIES will probably have to be forced by law to report fully on their
environmental performances if they are to be made environmentally
accountable, according to a study of annual accounts released today.
Companies increasingly include environmental matters in the annual report,
say authors Peter Kirkman and Chris Hope of Cambridge University, who
analysed 237 UK company reports.
Most, however, tend to focus on positive activities which have public
relations value and they fail to provide substantial information.
Large companies were the most likely to disclose environmental information
(54 per cent), compared with 23 per cent of medium-sized companies and only
nine per cent of unlisted companies.
Large companies also provided a broader range of information. There was
little difference between company reporting in different industry sectors.
Most of the environmental information provided was partial and selective -
with few numbers provided - and many companies did not give any evidence to
substantiate their claim of being environmentally responsible.
For some companies, environmental reporting amounted simply to the fact that
the company report was printed on environmentally friendly paper.
ICI was the only company to say in its accounts exactly how much it had
actually spent on the environment: Pounds 350m.
Only four companies voluntarily disclosed 'bad news' about their
environmental performance, with ICI and Thames Water, for example, reporting
that they were being prosecuted for environmental offences.
Pressure from institutional investors and other initiatives to encourage
'green reporting' would most likely need to be backed by legislation, the
study says, with a compulsory independent audit to ensure accurate
disclosure.
Environmental Disclosure in UK Company Annual Reports, Management Studies
Group, University of Cambridge, Mill Lane, Cambridge CB2 1RX. Pounds 20.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920701

