FT924-11263

FT  27 OCT 92 / Lloyd's Names launch fresh legal challenge


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S came under new legal pressure yesterday when five Names lodged a
complaint alleging breaches of European competition rules by the insurance
market in a move that might threaten the insurance market's ability to meet
claims.
A 100-page complaint about an alleged failure of self-regulation was lodged
with the European Community. It argues that Lloyd's immunity from suit or
judicial scrutiny runs contrary to the principles required by the EC treaty
of redress to a national court. It details arguments under articles 85 and
86 of the Treaty of Rome.
The five Names behind the action are pressing the EC to prevent Lloyd's
drawing down from their deposits pending a full investigation of their
complaint. The Names - the individuals whose assets back underwriting at the
market - are members of the 172-strong Lloyd's Deposit Defence Group.
Lloyd's said yesterday that it took the action 'as seriously as any action
affecting the market's underlying security'.
Solicitors SJ Berwin, representing the Names, said they were not 'aiming to
harm the Lloyd's market'. However, one solicitor active in the litigation
that has dogged the market's fortunes for over two years, said that the
challenge was 'fairly fundamental'.
In its complaint, the group says Lloyd's immunity from suit or judicial
scrutiny runs contrary to the principles required by the EC treaty of
redress to a national court.
Mr Richard Platts, one of the Names backing the action, said: 'Lloyd's is
out of line. No other commercial body in Europe has similar immunity.'
The Names allege that Lloyd's has failed to supervise the market adequately
or ensure proper working practices. It questions the absence of solvency
rules for syndicates.
The complaint also alleges a conflict of interest between working Names  -
who have jobs with Lloyd's brokers or agents - and outside Names. It says
working Names are given the opportunity to participate in better syndicates.
If successful, the move to prevent drawdowns of the funds, which all Names
must deposit with Lloyd's or their agents when they join the market, may
threaten Lloyd's ability to meet insurance claims and might also lead to a
re-emergence of the liquidity shortages that threatened the market earlier
this year.
In April, Lloyd's defeated efforts by 820 Names to prevent payment of
drawdowns when the High Court ruled that cash calls against Names must go
ahead.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921027

