FT922-7414

FT  19 MAY 92 / Britain's thin blue line on the drawing board: Kenneth
Clarke, the home secretary, is to deliver a message of reform and greater
efficiency to the police force


   By ALAN PIKE


Mr Kenneth Clarke will arrive at the Police Federation conference in
Scarborough on Wednesday like a relay runner passing the baton of reform
from department to department in Whitehall.
His audience will see him as man with a mission to reduce the power of
public sector vested interests in the cause of efficiency and better
service.
At the Department of Health Mr Clarke braved the outrage of doctors. One
consequence of the government's reforms was to attack the medical
profession's collective power.
Moving to education, he displayed similar decentralising tendencies towards
management of teachers, unions and local education authorities.
Now Mr Clarke is home secretary, and he is turning his attention to the
police. And while he does not wish to be seen as imposing cuts for the sake
of it, public spending pressures mean he must improve police performance.
Britain's police forces have enjoyed a growth in financial resources under
Conservative governments that is the envy of other public services. The
Conservative election manifesto claimed a 74 per cent increase in real terms
in spending on the police since 1979. Police strength has grown by 16 per
cent since then. If this is measured against a single criterion - the crime
rate - it was wasted. Recorded crime now stands at all-time record levels,
with offences notified to the police rising by 16 per cent to 5.3m last
year.
It would be unfair to assess the value of the police service purely in terms
of crime figures which are, in any case, not the most accurate statistics.
They are, however, one way in which the public and MPs evaluate the police.
Opinion polls show that the public wants more police officers on the beat,
and Conservative governments have tried to provide them. Not only is Mr
Clarke now constrained by pressures to contain public spending, but there is
evidence that increasing officers on the streets is not necessarily the best
way of tacking crime - a Home Office study found that a London foot patrol
officer was likely to pass within 100 yards of a burglary in progress only
once every eight years.
The police service has recently been trying to place the debate about the
effectiveness - and thus value - of policing in a broad social context.
Senior officers have spoken about the impact of unemployment and other
social problems on crime. A nine-point policing agenda published by the
Police Federation last autumn focuses firmly on the broad agenda.
But both the federation - the nearest thing to a trade union for
rank-and-file officers - and senior ranks will find the home secretary also
wants to examine the performance of the police service itself.
There are similarities between the police and Mr Clarke's old battlegrounds
in the National Health Service. Labour costs account for the bulk of
expenditure in both organisations - about 80 per cent in the case of the
police - and this is therefore an area where improved efficiency must be
sought.
The grip of professional insiders on both services is maintained by the
specialised nature of the work and the fact that there is little scope for
outside competition. So incentives to improve performance have to be
constructed within the organisation.
In the health service Mr Clarke separated the purchasing of health care from
its supply, making health authorities and hospitals bid for contracts in an
internal market. While this could not find a direct parallel in policing,
the home secretary is certain to encourage efforts already under way in some
forces to shorten lines of command and devolve decision-making and
budget-holding responsibility.
The management structure of the police service is powerfully reinforced by a
hierarchy based on formal, military-style rank. Although the great bulk of
day-to-day police work is carried out by humble constables acting on their
own initiative, they are supported by a senior management structure which,
the Audit Commission suggested in a report last year, has become top-heavy.
Some jobs, concluded the commission, tended to be allocated on the basis of
rank rather than the actual requirements of the post. Once a job was
occupied by a superintendent, it implied the need for 'all posts of similar
levels in management lines to be occupied by superintendents.'
Many forces are addressing such criticisms by adopting simplified management
structures, pushing decision-making to lower levels and sometimes giving
control of budgets to local commanders supported by civilian business
managers.
Lower ranking officers are also likely to face Mr Clarke's scrutiny. The
Police Federation has, for example, been accused of dragging its feet over
measures to dismiss officers whose performance is poor.
To improve efficiency, police forces are developing similar internal audit
procedures to other public authorities. In policing terms performance is
more difficult to measure, but forces have begun trying to allocate
resources in line with priorities determined by public opinion surveys.
West Mercia, a force which has restructured its management to give shorter
lines of communication, commissioned the Harris Research Centre to test
public opinion. The results showed that while 85 per cent of respondents
thought the police were doing a good job overall, 26 per cent were
dissatisfied with the treatment of telephone callers and a similar
proportion found police station reception areas off-putting.
In recent years, the biggest single step towards improving financial
performance in the police service has been through the replacement of police
officers with less expensive civilians in administrative, control and other
non-front work. Since civilians do not have to be as broadly trained as
police officers, they can be recruited more cheaply to perform specific
tasks.
The relatively generous funding of the police service during the 1980s did
not stop Mr Clarke's predecessors facing demands for yet more resources. It
would, therefore, require political courage to tell a Police Federation
conference that the days of generous spending increases for the service are
now over. But whatever impression Mr Clarke makes on delegates, there is
little doubt he will be try to reduce the police budget.
A really brave Mr Clarke could always relate the story of New York's
experience in the late 1970s, when a 20 per cent reduction in police
department manpower had no impact on the rate at which crime rose.
The New York episode supports one of Mr Clarke's favourite themes from his
health service days - that there is no automatic link between particular
levels of resources and the effectiveness with which they are used. But the
relationship between offending and deprivation, unemployment, schooling, and
countless other aspects of social policy is a highly complex one. Neither
the police nor Mr Clarke can solve those problems on their own.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920519

