FT921-15374

FT  10 JAN 92 / Bush in Japan: Motor industries still on collision course


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL and ROBERT THOMSON


THE US and Japanese motor industries are still on a collision course, in
spite of promises by Japanese manufacturers to increase their purchases of
US parts and to market in Japan more vehicles made by the US Big Three -
General Motors, Ford Motor and Chrysler.
The agreements were hailed yesterday by President George Bush of the US and
Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, Japanese prime minister. But Japanese executives
resented the pressure on them to give assistance to their US competitors,
while American executives were angry that more had not been done to 'open'
the Japanese market.
Mr Bush, who has made the motor trade the main bilateral economic issue of
his visit, praised the agreements, saying they would mean more US car parts
and cars coming into Japan.
However, Mr Harold Poling, chairman of Ford, said that, though progress had
been made, the Japanese industry's proposals were 'inadequate'. Mr Jack
Reilly, president of Tenneco, the motor parts group, said progress was
'definitely insufficient'.
A spokesman for Mr John Dingell, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce
Committee, said that Japan's promise to buy 20,000 US-made cars amounted to
'one afternoon's production' for the US auto industry.
Mr Fred Bergsten, head of the Washington-based Institute for International
Economics, told a Congressional hearing that Mr Bush had made a tactical
mistake in focusing on the auto sector instead of trying to co-ordinate
economic fundamentals such as exchange rates and interest rates.
Japanese industry leaders said the targets they had set were the highest
they could manage and would be difficult to achieve. Mr Yutaka Kume,
chairman of the Japan Automobile Manufacturers' Association, said consumers
decide what make of car to buy.
The Japanese concessions came in two forms: commitments by manufacturers to
increase their purchases of US parts and their sales of US-made vehicles,
and promises by the Japanese government to assist US parts suppliers in
finding Japanese customers and to ease technical certification requirements
for imported vehicles.
A joint 'action plan' also contains a series of less painful promises by the
US government, including a commitment to 'an economically viable US
automotive industry'.
Those programmes include a budget allocation next year of Dollars 1.5m
(Pounds 825,000) to help US parts companies establish ties with Japanese
companies at the design stage of vehicles, and tax concessions for companies
opening facilities in Japan. The Fair Trade Commission, an anti-monopoly
body, is also conducting a study on competition in the auto parts sector.
To the annoyance of US executives, the agreement does not specify targets
for imports to Japan of finished vehicles. Japanese car companies resisted
an overall target, arguing it would be very difficult to predict how many
cars consumers might buy.
Instead, individual companies have made separate - and modest - commitments.
Toyota Motor promised to increase imports of US-made Toyotas to 20,000 by
the 1994 financial year and to talk to GM about the possible import of 5,000
GM cars. Nissan pledged to import a mini-van jointly developed with Ford and
other Ford cars to a total of 3,000 a year.
Honda Motor plans a sharp rise in US-made Hondas from 14,000 last year to
27,000 in 1994, plus a rise from 424 to 1,200 in imports of Chrysler jeeps.
Muffin on wheels, Page 12; Chrysler's aims, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Photograph Mitsubishi Motors chairman Yohei Mimura, Chrysler
chairman Lee Iacocca and Toyota chairman Eiji Toyoda during a working
breakfast yesterday (Omitted).

920110

