FT921-1408

FT  24 MAR 92 / The Kinnock factor


   By JOE ROGALY


This election was supposed to be about rubbishing Mr Neil Kinnock, to the
advantage of the Conservatives. It is turning out to be about Mr John Major,
and so far the Tories are not the beneficiaries.
The theory was that the country would never accept Mr Kinnock. Most members
of the cabinet have at one time or another suggested, in public or in
private, that the leader of the opposition is a garrulous economic
illiterate whose principles are dictated by opinion polls and whose general
demeanour varies between that of jester and bully-boy.
The government's campaign strategy has been constructed around this
characterisation. It is intended to be reinforced in the voters' minds by
contrasting it with the optimum representation of Mr Major - as a man of the
people who understands economics, sticks to his principles, is serious,
straightforward, and not Welsh.
That is why the prime minister personifies the campaign. His face dominates
the Tory manifesto. His boyhood reminiscences fill the TV screens. His
parents' treatment by the National Health Service informs every argument
about the NHS. His brief spell of youthful unemployment is never allowed to
be forgotten. The early-morning press conferences centre on the answers
given by this decent man with the ready smile. The subliminal message is
plain: would you exchange honest John for untrustworthy Neil?
Unfortunately for the Conservatives, Labour has not followed the
government's script. The plan was that Mr Major's plain visage would be set
against the uncontrolled smirking and loud presence of Mr Kinnock. It has
not happened yet. With a deviousness typical of your average socialist
fiend, the Labour leader has spoiled the game. He has declined to play. Mr
Kinnock's face is not on the Labour manifesto. His presence on TV is
carefully controlled by members of his staff. When he appears he is soberly
dressed. His face is not awry: it bears the self-confident expression of a
man who believes he is winning. Mr Kinnock is an actor; he projects himself,
for better or worse, according to the tastes of the audience as he sees it.
He is shown where it suits his managers' purposes, when it is of help to his
party, speaking to issues long planned to be raised on a particular day,
against the most propitious of backgrounds, always to Labour's best
advantage. What a cheat] The man has probably fought general elections
before.
Mr Major has not. Yet in personal terms he is still well ahead of Mr Kinnock
in the opinion polls. He is better-liked, and more trusted. His scores on
most aspects of political popularity have fallen since the end of the Gulf
war, but if the two of them were running for president Mr Kinnock would come
nowhere.
The difficulty for the Conservatives is that Mr Major is running for
president against a Labour party that is running for parliamentary control
and a Labour leader who is running for prime minister. Mr Kinnock will not
stand still to be compared with Mr Major. He and his colleagues know who
would win such a contest.
The perverse consequence is that the eye of criticism is falling on the
prime minister. Mr Kinnock has had many years in which to unite his party
around an agreed strategy and programme. There are, to be sure, incorrigible
leftists lurking in Labour's ranks, but they are under restraint. Mr Major
is still having to judge every move against his need to hold the Tories
together. The bitterness of Mrs Margaret Thatcher's supporters has not been
entirely assuaged. That explains the complicated Thatcherite but caring,
free-market yet interventionist, pro-European/anti-Brussels message of the
Conservative manifesto.
Labour can afford to laugh off the lapses of hopeless junkies of 1960s
orthodoxies like Mr Roy Hattersley (although not for much longer); the
Tories are embarrassed even when they show unity-in-desperation by bringing
Mrs Thatcher into the fray. Every glitch in the Conservative campaign is
blamed on Mr Major; Labour's serious foot-faults are yet to come. The prime
minister's strategic sense in choosing the election date will be put to the
test on April 9. His tactical instincts are being questioned, not least by
his own side, right now.
If the polls turn decisively in the government's favour the questions will
vanish; if not the list will lengthen. There is no obvious way out. When the
election was announced Mr Kinnock challenged Mr Major to a TV debate. The
prime minister demurred, saying only losers accepted such invitations. Thus
he left himself no possibility of changing his mind. That was a mistake.
Now Mr Kinnock's appearances are entirely in his own hands. The Tories may
be tempted to run an advertising campaign aimed crudely and directly at his
many changes of mind and his past leftwing views. The effect of that could
not be guaranteed. Mr Kinnock may trip himself up - he has done so before -
but it is on that slender expectation alone that the 'rubbish Kinnock'
strategy depends.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920324

