FT924-5975

FT  24 NOV 92 / People: Mobil - gearing up for Europe


Mobil is pressing ahead with plans for closer integration of its European
operations in time for the single European market. When Brian Davis,
chairman of Mobil Oil, the UK refining and marketing affiliate, retires at
the end of the year, his successor will be Geoffrey Cardinal, currently
manager of marketing services for Mobil Europe - which co-ordinates the
activities of the 16 European affiliates.
In parallel moves, Gerhard Roth, manager of planning and administration with
Mobil Oil AG (Moag) in Germany will replace Burkhard Genge as country
manager. Genge becomes vice president of lubricants for Mobil Europe.
In France, Chris Schneebeli will move from manager of logistics support and
development to become president of Mobil Oil Francaise. He replaces Georges
Dupasquier, who moves on to be vice president of Mobil Europe.
At the same time, some European managers will join the boards of other
national affiliates to enhance the process of European integration. This
will produce what Geoffrey Cardinal calls a 'form of matrix operation, where
we have strong local teams, but each of their functions is part of the
European refining enclave'.
One of the strengths he can bring to his new post, Cardinal says, will be
his experience of cultural differences and the 'many, many commonalities' in
different parts of Europe.
Cardinal has spent nine years with Mobil Europe, first as manager, marketing
analysis, and later as manager, public affairs. He then gained wide European
exposure as general manager of Mobil's marketing and refining businesses in
Cyprus, Norway and Austria, where he had responsibility for Mobil's
marketing business in eastern Europe.
Last year, when Mobil moved the headquarters for its European operations
from Fairfax, Virginia to London, Cardinal became manager of marketing
services across Europe.
He was born in Warwickshire in 1947, and studied economics at Sheffield
University. His career with Mobil began in 1971 as a planning analyst. After
moving into marketing, he became general manager of Prime Garages, a company
responsible for Mobil's service stations.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921124

