FT923-6352

FT  25 AUG 92 / Business Law: Hidden menace to land values


   By MATTHEW MITSON and ANDREW WAITE


That bug-bear of the property industry, registers of potentially
contaminated land, has resurfaced in a consultation paper which was issued
by the Department of the Environment on July 31.
The registers are to be maintained by local authorities under section 143 of
the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and will contain details of land which
is contaminated, or has been used for any specified industrial purpose which
may cause contamination. Under the new proposals the registers are now
likely to include far fewer sites than previously envisaged.
The government's original proposals, which emerged last year, were met with
howls of protest from the property sector and were eventually withdrawn.
Under those proposals, a property would have appeared on the registers if it
were currently or had at any time in the past been put to any one of a long
list of uses. That list included not only obvious polluting industries, such
as oil refineries and gas-works, but also less obvious candidates, such as
dry cleaners and demolition sites.
The result would have been the inclusion of a vast number of sites in the
registers, raising fears of widespread blight and a fall in property prices.
The government's initial response to these concerns was to point out that
inclusion on the registers would not mean that the property concerned was
necessarily contaminated, only that it might be contaminated due to its
previous use. That did not allay people's fears, however.
The new proposals issued by the Department of the Environment reveal
significant changes from the earlier consultation paper. There are three
major changes.
First, 'the list of contaminative uses has been reduced to those where there
is a very high probability that all land subject to those uses is
contaminated unless it has already been appropriately treated.'
According to the department's estimate, the registers are now likely to
cover only 10 to 15 per cent of the area affected by last year's
consultation paper.
The new list of contaminative uses comprises gas, coke, bitumen, lead, steel
and asbestos works, oil refineries, most chemical works, landfill sites,
waste incinerators, plants for the chemical treatment of waste and scrap
metal yards.
Those who have escaped the department's attentions on this occasion should
not take undue comfort as 'the government has it in mind to extend the list
of uses by further regulations in due course in the light of experience'.
The second key change from the earlier proposals is that local authorities
will be required to take reasonable steps to notify owners or occupiers of
their intention to include land on the registers before the entry is made.
That will give those persons affected sufficient time to make any objections
in an endeavour to convince the local authorities that particular sites
should be excluded.
An unsatisfactory aspect of this proposal is that no statutory appeal
machinery is provided. It is considered sufficient that owners affected can
take their cases to the local ombudsman or seek judicial review. However,
the local ombudsman can only deal with cases of maladministration and will
have no powers to direct that property be delisted.
Judicial review is equally inappropriate as it is intended as a means of
identifying flaws in the procedural processes adopted in reaching decisions
rather than in the merits of decisions themselves. In any event, the courts
are already overloaded with such cases. It would seem much more sensible to
appoint a special tribunal to deal with these cases, possibly comprising one
or more surveyors.
The third major difference is that the registers are to be split into two
parts, A and B. Part A will deal with land which has not been investigated
or treated. Part B will cover land which has been investigated and/or
treated for contamination. The existence and whereabouts of any available
reports will also be noted.
In other respects the proposals are similar to those issued last year. The
local authorities will not give any guarantee as to whether decontamination
work has been successful. Once a site has been entered on the register it
will not be possible to remove it.
Two reasons are given. First, factual information on the history of the site
will be required when a change of use is proposed in the future. Secondly,
contamination may have migrated from the site to adjacent areas. The owners
of those sites and regulatory authorities and developers will need to use
the registers to identify those sources of contamination.
However, many people are likely to find that aspect of the proposals
unsatisfactory. No doubt there will be demands for further thought to be
given to overcome this concern so that 'cleaned' sites do not remain
blighted.
The Department of the Environment hopes to have the new regulations in place
by the end of 1992, with a view to opening the registers to the public
around April 1994.
The registers are also regarded as 'part of a wider strategy to tackle the
country's legacy of contamination'. A programme of research is being carried
out aimed at providing further guidance on the assessment and treatment of
contaminated land. As a result, priorities for action will be drawn up.
What is not made clear is who is to pay for any remedial work carried out.
There already exists a wide range of provisions in different environmental
statutes under which polluters, owners or occupiers of the site may be
liable for the costs of clean-up, depending on which authority takes action,
under which legislation and under what circumstances.
The government should give serious consideration to rationalising the
current diverse legal provisions. A clear philosophy should be adopted as to
who is to be responsible for decontamination.
Should historic contamination which is not the fault of the present owner
(who may not have paid a reduced purchase price) be the responsibility of
the private or the public purse? The Department of Environment may be
groping towards answers to these questions, but if so, they are keeping
their thoughts to themselves for the present.
It is inevitable that the revised proposals will raise the question of
blight once again, even if not to the extent caused earlier. This is
something that the government will have to take seriously.
Although only a limited number of sites are to be included on the registers
in the near future, others will follow in due course. This is likely to have
an adverse impact on the property market at a time when it urgently needs a
boost.
If the economy continues in recession, there will be little money or
inclination to deal with pressing environmental concerns. For that reason,
the government must educate the public to understand that the real problem
is not the registers but existing land contamination.
What is abundantly clear is that the issue of contaminated land has come to
stay, with or without the proposed registers.
In almost all transactions involving the transfer of land, the question is
asked: is the land likely to be contaminated? If it is, the purchaser will
normally require a reduction in the purchase price, an assurance that the
vendor will pay for any necessary clean-up works or an indemnity against any
liabilities which may fall on the purchaser.
One of the principal difficulties at present is uncertainty over whether
potential liabilities for cleaning-up contaminated land are likely to
materialise. The answer can only be known when the government, in
conjunction with the authorities concerned, produces a clear policy
statement of its proposals for dealing with contaminated land.
Once clear policies and priorities are established, uncertainties will
disappear and the fear of blight will recede. For the time being, all
purchasers of land should beware.
The authors are solicitors in the environmental unit of Linklaters & Paines.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920825

