FT922-3998

FT  08 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Waiting for Denmark


THERE WAS no need to panic when the Danes rejected the Maastricht agreement
on European union last Tuesday. So far, the British government has not done
so. There was an initial wobble over whether or not to postpone debate on
the bill enacting the treaty, but since then the prime minister has, quite
rightly, played for time. His government will respond pragmatically to
events as they unfold. Meanwhile, it will follow the plan agreed by the
foreign ministers in Oslo, which is to proceed as if the Danes, having
voiced their dissatisfaction, can be relied on to come round later.
Any other strategy would be immediately destructive. As leader of the
Conservative party, Mr Major must take notice of the growing strength of the
anti-federalists, while staying true to the delicate balance he worked so
hard to establish during the negotiations. As head of government, he must be
sensitive to the switch in national sentiment away from support for the
Maastricht accord, without being seen to abandon his commitment to both the
European Union and Britain's place 'at the heart of it'. As president of the
EC from July 1, he must consider the interests of a community of 12, and the
possible future of a club with perhaps 20 or more members.
Yet there is always danger in a minefield, even when you proceed with
extreme caution, and especially when you move ahead in a straight line. The
bill to ratify the Maastricht deal will have to be withheld from further
parliamentary consideration until the whips can be certain they will get it
through. The Labour party is aware that a government with a majority of only
21 can be embarrassed, particularly on an issue on which the ruling party is
divided.
Another upset
The Irish electorate, thought to be in favour of a 'yes' vote, may cause
another upset at their referendum in 10 days' time. If they accept the deal
they may temporarily neutralise the effect of the Danish rejection, but that
would not be the end of it. A popular vote called for by President
Mitterrand follows later in the year. The polls suggest that the French
electorate will not reject the deal, but in its present mood its response to
a long summer 'anti' campaign cannot be taken for granted.
At the same time, the pressure for a British referendum is growing. The
anti-federalists see it as a glorious opportunity to smash the Maastricht
deal. The Labour party has not succumbed to the temptation to make mischief,
but the possibility is always there. There is a decent argument in favour of
a British consultation, namely that since all the parties contesting the
general election in April were in favour the public has not had an
opportunity to vote on the proposed treaty. Against this must be set the
fact that no fringe anti-EC election candidates have succeeded in making an
impact. Yet the weekend polls suggest there is strong public support for a
chance for the British people to have a direct voice in the proceedings.
Theoretical merits
The theoretical merits of the case are, however, outweighed by the practical
damage that a government espousal of a referendum would do. It could be
widely misinterpreted at home as a chance to vote 'against the common
market'. In the rest of the community, it would almost certainly be seen as
a reversion to the traditional, ever-negative, insular opposition to all
things European that has kept Britain on the sidelines for most of the past
40 years. It would weaken the authority of Britain's EC presidency when
there is much work to do, not least on enlargement and the community budget.
What was agreed at Maastricht was imperfect, but then any closely-negotiated
agreement between 12 states is likely to be. It does, however, represent a
workable way forward for European union, in a direction that should give
greater comfort to those who wish to preserve the strength of national
governments than to the proponents of a super-state. The EC does not need to
become a superstate to achieve the cohesion needed to compete economically
with Japan and the US and to reinforce its position as the pillar of
political stability in a continent of shifting forces. But to achieve these
ends, the Community needs workable co-operative mechanisms of the kind the
12 sought at Maastricht. The excitable politics of referendums do not alter
that.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920608

