FT921-11920

FT  29 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Privatisation to proceed, says
Rifkind - Tees & Hartlepool Port


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


MR MALCOLM RIFKIND, the transport secretary, yesterday announced that the
privatisation of the port of Tees & Hartlepool would proceed as planned in
spite of controversy over the way the port's sale had been conducted.
This means that Britain's second biggest port seems set to be bought for
Pounds 180m by Teesside Holdings, a consortium led by Powell Duffryn, the
industrial group.
The last obstacle to the sale is the possibility of a judicial review which
had earlier been threatened by the management-employee buy-out team, one of
the losing bidders.
Mr John Hackney, the buy-out team's leader, yesterday appeared to be backing
away from the threat. He said that the team was seeking further legal advice
before making its decision.
Mr Rifkind, replying to a Commons written question, said he was satisfied
that the board of the Tees & Hartlepool Authority had conducted the sale
'properly and fully' in accordance with the procedure agreed with his
department.
Mr Rifkind dismissed suggestions that an offer of seats on the board of
Teesside Holdings might have swayed the authority's board.
He also dismissed references to the record of companies associated with Mr
John Holloway and Humberside Holdings, members of the Teesside Holdings
consortium, saying he had found nothing in the evidence put before him which
would make it proper for him to withdraw his consent to the sale.
Maritime Transport Services, an unsuccessful bidder, warned that the outcome
might affect its involvement in bidding for other trust ports coming up for
privatisation. Mr Geoffrey Parker, chairman, said: 'We put in the best bid,
but failed to win.
'The decision is very hard to understand, but we accept the secretary of
state believes it is right,' he said.
'In the absence of any clear explanation, it makes us question our
involvement in future trust port bids.'
Mr Bill Andrews, chairman of Teesside Holdings and chief executive of Powell
Duffryn, said he was delighted with the decision.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920129

