FT922-4250

FT  06 JUN 92 / World Stock Markets: Tokyo weathers cold backwash from 1991
 -But the OTC market remains vulnerable to Japan's current economic downturn


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


While Japan's current economic downturn has forced companies to report poor
earnings results for the last fiscal year, the Tokyo stock market has
remained calm against the slew of poor earnings announcements during the
past few weeks.
Contrary to previous forecasts of a 5 to 10 per cent growth in earnings for
the year ended March, profits at Japanese companies have been hit by the
sharp decline in demand resulting from a weakening economy, and heavy losses
on securities investments.
According to the Nihon Keizai Shimbun, the business daily, pre-tax profits
for Japan's 1,404 listed companies fell 14.8 per cent. However, share prices
have weathered the spate of poor earnings announcements, and the Nikkei
stock average has managed to restrict its decline to 4 per cent from April.
Ms Kathy Matsui, strategist at Barclays de Zoete Wedd in Tokyo, explains
that profits have become a neutral factor since the bad news has already
been factored into share prices. 'The market turned negative on earnings
concerns at the end of last year,' she adds.
The exceptions have been the traditionally conservative companies posting
losses on speculation in the real estate and stock markets; unwelcome
surprises like these have depressed companies' share prices. 'Investors have
been shocked by solid companies revealing hidden spectres of the stock
market bubble,' says Mr Craig Chudler, strategist at UBS Phillips & Drew in
Tokyo.
Sekisui Chemical, for example, said it would incur an 18 per cent fall in
pre-tax profits for the current year, due to securities losses of Y60bn at
its finance subsidiary. Since its earnings announcement at the beginning of
May, Sekisui's shares have fallen 24 per cent, and closed yesterday at Y840.
Makita, the electric tool maker, posted a 27 per cent fall in pre-tax
profits for the past fiscal year due to heavy losses on its investment
portfolio. The company posted losses of Y5.9bn on its tokkin - or specified
money trust. Makita has lost 10 per cent since its earnings announcement.
A rebound in the economy is expected in the second half of the current
fiscal year to March 1993. However, investors remain confused about
corporate forecasts for the current fiscal year, due to the uncertainty
shrouding the path of the economy.
Ms Matsui at BZW, who foresees a robust pick up in corporate earnings in
fiscal 1993, says that until the direction of the economy can be confirmed,
the corporate profit factor will have little impact on overall share prices.
In contrast, the over-the-counter market has been hit by weak corporate
earnings at Japan's smaller companies. The OTC average has declined 6 per
cent from the beginning of April, as the smaller companies have shown
themselves vulnerable to the current downturn in the economy.
Figures compiled by the Nihon Keizai Shimbun indicate that pre-tax earnings
at OTC companies, which announced results for the year ended March, fell
24.6 per cent from the previous year.
Daily volume, which has been as high as 5m shares at the height of the OTC
market boom in 1990, has also been subdued, with figures teetering around 1m
on most days.
OTC stocks were promoted on their high earnings growth potential, and the
index surged above 3,000 in 1990. However, the market has nearly halved from
those levels, as small companies have had trouble withmounting inventories,
and were affected by the fall in profits at the larger companies.
Pre-tax profits for the OTC steel sector fell 30.1 per cent, while
electronics declined 27.3 per cent and the real estate sector saw a total
pre-tax loss of Y11.3bn.
The OTC market also faces an overhang of supply. Domestic and foreign
investment trusts rushed to set up OTC funds at the height of the market. Mr
Chudler of UBS Phillips & Drew points out that such funds, which sought
shares at overblown prices, now carry heavy losses.
In addition, the oversupply is expected to be aggravated by forthcoming new
listings. The popularity of a recent listing by Ito-en, a tea leaf and
beverage company, is likely to encourage a number of companies which have
been waiting since the end of last year, when new listings were suspended
due to sluggish market conditions.
Last October's implementation of Jasdaq, the automated trading system, has
also hurt the market. The system, which matches and processes orders
automatically through a host computer, has helped remove speculation in
deals previously matched by phone.
Overpriced issues, in what used to be an inefficient market, have ironically
been deflated by the speeding up of transactions and the increase in trading
capacity.
For the current year to March, OTC companies expect pre-tax profits to
recover by 21.7 per cent. However, traders remain pessimistic, as
institutions await to run down their holdings on a rebound.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920606

