FT922-4235

FT  06 JUN 92 / Markets: A voice that cried 'halt' - London Markets


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


IT WAS A week when a small group of worried voters, battered by non-stop
television and newspaper debate, plucked up their courage and cried 'stop'
to the juggernaut of history.
This plucky handful was not the anti-Maastricht Danes but the members of the
Lloyds Bank board, who on Friday decided to drop out of the bidding for
Midland Bank.
Enough was enough, they said: the rival bidder, Hongkong and Shanghai
Banking Corporation, by upping its offer earlier in the week, had set a
price that Lloyds could not meet without threatening its shareholders'
interests. So Lloyds dropped out of an auction it had never formally
entered.
Shareholders in Midland have seen the price of the bank's shares rise from
around 250p earlier this year, before Hongkong Bank announced its thinking,
to 452p on Tuesday immediately after it raised its bid. The new, final,
offer was the equivalent of 480p, of which 65p could be taken in cash. In
the following days, the market price rose, in anticipation of a counter-bid
from Lloyds of over 500p.
It never came: on Friday afternoon Lloyds announced it was dropping out. The
share price immediately fell from 468p to 446p.
Only the Hongkong bid, which closes on June 25, remains on the table.
Institutional shareholders, unhappy with the original offer of shares and
bonds, were somewhat mollified by the second version. It now contained 1.2
HSBC shares (themselves worth more than before, because of the strong
performance of the Hong Kong stock market). The non-share element was also
more attractive: 65p in a higher-yielding bond, or the equivalent in cash
provided by a syndicate of underwriters.
Other things being equal, institutional investors would still have preferred
a bid from Lloyds, with its potential cost-savings. Now that possibility has
vanished, investors have a simple choice.
On the one hand, they are offered a chunk of cash, an immediately higher
dividend, and the future benefits of the bidder's stream of Hong Kong
profits; on the other, the undiluted impact of Midland's possible sharp
recovery in earnings. The Midland board, despite a few lingering sighs, is
firmly convinced of the advantages of a bird in the hand; investors are
likely to come to the same conclusion.
Meanwhile, the financial markets have been adjusting to the impact of the
Danish factor. With economic and monetary union called into question, gilt
yields move up after the Danish vote: by the end of the week, the benchmark
gilt was yielding 9.1 per cent, compared with just under 9 per cent a few
days before.
Shares fell too, following the stock market's conventional valuation
arithmetic: higher yields on gilts make the existing dividend yield on
shares less attractive, so share prices adjust downwards to compensate. As
the chart shows, the ratio between gilts and shares has in any case been
heading upwards since the beginning of June, making shares look relatively
dearer.
That calculation partly explains the distinct note of caution detectable in
brokers' circulars this week. They leave the reader with a clear sense that
the market, which dipped below 2,700 on the FT-SE index this week, is likely
to hover around or below that mark for some time.
Maastricht worries reinforce that case. European interest rates have been
dominated by the convergence theory for the past few years: the belief that
inflation and economic performance across Europe were coming into line with
those of Germany. Two propositions underlay that convergence: the belief
that it made economic sense; and the belief that it was politically
unavoidable. Of these, the second certainly carries more weight as a
motivator of politicians' actions.
The Danish vote has called the second proposition into question, and thus
placed a much greater strain on the politicians' commitment to the first.
This week, the markets have been demonstrating their scepticism about just
how well that commitment can take the strain. Italy, with a political class
particularly vulnerable to scepticism, has had to raise interest rates a
half-point.
Even Britain, with a newly-elected government, has seen the backwash. The
pound briefly touched the bottom of the ERM for the first time since the
election. It closed second from bottom on Friday, having dropped two
pfennigs to DM 2.9150 since the Danish vote.
It is not clear whether the Danish factor has produced a one-off adjustment
in expectations, now past, or whether it opens a period of prolonged
uncertainty which will leave its mark on UK markets for months to come. In
support of the second theory is the view that government borrowing will mop
up any institutional liquidity for the foreseeable future, so that UK shares
and bonds are very dependent on inflows of overseas capital. This will be
particularly necessary if the unexpectedly meagre flow of rights issues
resumes in full force, as Thursday's Blue Circle's request for Pounds 241m
to pay for an acquisition, suggests it might.
Italy's problems are thus directly relevant to Britain, if the markets start
to fear that they may culminate in an EMS realignment. In such a
realignment, only a particularly strong-minded British prime minister would
be able to resist the temptation of a sterling devaluation - especially if
he is trapped in the middle of what is likely to prove at best a patchy
economic recovery.
John Major might be that man: but until it is clear that he is, overseas
investors are likely to find British securities less attractive than before
the Danish vote. Of course, UK share prices may be less dependent on
overseas investors just now than the pundits think. It would all be a lot
easier, no doubt, if the government did not need to sell quite so many
gilts.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920606

