FT924-966

FT  21 DEC 92 / Arts: Saint Francois d'Assise - Opera in Paris


   By RONALD CRICHTON


Nine years after a tentative first production at the Palais Garnier,
Messiaen's only opera returns to Paris. Not to the old home but to the Opera
Bastille, in a new and radically different staging by Peter Sellars, first
seen at this year's Salzburg Festival. The cast, headed by Jose van Dam in
the title-role, is the same except for Robin Leggate who now sings Brother
Elie. The Paris Opera chorus and orchestra are conducted by Sylvain
Cambreling.
Sellars, who was able to discuss his ideas with Messiaen before he died, has
modified the staging given at Salzburg in the picturesquely problematic
Rocky Riding School to suit the Baalsoe stage, still large but normal in
shape and fully equipped. The set by George Trypin, with a great chapel-like
structure of skeletal wood and a slanting panel of neon tubing flashing on
and off with (though you might not immediately guess so) Fra Angelico
colours, looks very fine. The by now notorious TV sets described by David
Murray after Salzburg are very much in evidence, flickering and blinking,
eclipsing a shy little board with French and English surtitles. Sellars has
said that the flickering motion relates to mystical experience - a daunting
prospect.
Sometimes the screens distract because one cannot see what is on them,
sometimes because one can. In the Sermon to the Birds anyone who likes
feathered friends is sorely tempted to stop listening and go bird-spotting.
Most of the screens are arranged in a double frame round the proscenium
arch. Those on stage, disposed in various ways, too often make it hard to
distinguish principals standing in front of them. With too much light
directed at the audience the singers' facial expression is at a discount. In
spite of various aggravations, when the magnitude of the problem is taken
into account, this is an impressive staging of a major but extremely
demanding work.
It is futile to engage in discussion as to whether or not Saint Francois is
'really an opera'. It is not, and was not meant to be one in the sense of
Don Giovanni or Lohengrin or Otello. Surely what matters is, on Messiaen's
chosen ground, does it work in the theatre? After hearing the live recording
of the original production I felt that although he had little inborn theatre
instinct, in certain scenes (the Leper, the Angel as musician and the
Stigmata) Messiaen reveals himself as a musical dramatist of considerable
power. Having now seen his opera on the stage I am tempted to modify that to
'musical dramatist of an in every way exceptional kind.'
In the theatre the four hours of music seemed even longer than on record.
The principal reason for that is the static nature and almost uniformly
slow, hieratic pace and metrical sameness of the declamation. Here something
unexpected happens. Messiaen is careful with the vocal lines, many vocal
phrases, especially in the Saint's part, being unaccompanied, between
instrumental outbursts. But increasingly, as the evening went on I found the
words difficult to catch. Not the fault, surely, of this expert cast, nor I
think in this case of the Bastille acoustics, but because the general pace
is so far from the rise and fall of normal speech. Also because there was a
miscalculation about the ability of soft singing and half-voice to carry in
this theatre. They do not carry, and Jose van Dam, sensitively suggesting
Francois' growing physical weakness in the later scenes, suffered with the
rest.
The exception was Dawn Upshaw, singing the Angel, the only solo woman's
voice in the opera and as a result marvellously effective when done with
such shining, secure tone and such gentle humour. The role is now split into
two, with a 'dancing angel' to mime such episodes as the stigmatisation.
She, unlike her androgynously clothed alter ego, is allowed a real angel's
costume, with wings.
One good point for the Bastille acoustics: the multiple bird song, the
clanking, clicking tuned percussion and the gurgling, swooping Ondes
Martenot sound notably well. The Opera chorus was magnificent; the whole
array was finely controlled by Cambreling. One longs now to hear more 20th
century French opera at the Bastille - including the announced and then
cancelled Padmavat of Roussel. Any hope? On the first night of Saint
Francois quite a few people in the stalls drifted away, to be swiftly
replaced in the next interval by enthusiasts from higher up (London please
note: top prices for this production were about Pounds 62). Everyone
listened devotedly - how things have changed in Paris in this respect] The
applause at the end easily drowned a few boos for the production team.
Five more performances until 29 December. Production shared with the
Salzburg Festival and the Los Angeles Philharmonic.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921221

