FT921-385

FT  30 MAR 92 / Bundesbank call for tight money


   By ANDREW FISHER and ANDREW GOWERS


   FRANKFURT


GERMANY must continue its efforts to reduce inflation to put its own house
in order before European monetary union (Emu), according to Mr Otmar Issing,
one of the five top directors of the German Bundesbank.
Reiterating the central bank's commitment to tight monetary conditions, Mr
Issing said its policy, including last December's half-point rise in
interest rates, was in line with the need to ensure that Emu began under the
right conditions at the end of this decade.
German efforts to curb inflation - now well over 4 per cent - and keep its
currency stable despite weaker economic performance and rising public sector
deficits caused by unification were important because of the D-Mark's anchor
role in the EC.
'The European central bank will start afresh,' he said, 'so it is important
that it begins in a stable environment.' Countries taking part in Emu will
have to achieve a high degree of economic convergence. 'This can't be
achieved if the D-Mark is weak and German inflation is at 4 per cent.'
The Bundesbank has warned ceaselessly about rising inflation, high wage
settlements, and unchecked state spending in west Germany at a time of big
transfer payments to the east. Latest money supply figures also show that
the bank's target for 1992 is being exceeded by a wide margin.
Mr Issing expects German inflation to fall clearly below 4 per cent by the
year-end, and possibly below 3 per cent. But it would still be above 4 per
cent in the next month or so, which was unfortunate in view of the wage
negotiations.
This year's wage trends would have a strong influence on the economy, Mr
Issing said. The gradual economic decline after the strong first quarter of
1991 should bottom out later this year with a renewed upturn in 1993, helped
by recovery in the US. 'The real economic basis for wage rises has become
decisively smaller.'
Mr Issing said it was too early to tell when December's policy moves,
bringing the Lombard rate up to 9.75 per cent and the discount rate to 8 per
cent, would brake money supply expansion. But he indicated that these rates
would not be cut for some time in view of present monetary growth. 'It's
like a big tanker,' he said of the money supply. 'If it's on the wrong
course, it takes time to correct this.'
M3 grew at an annual rate of 8.5 per cent in February against the target of
3.5-5.5 per cent. 'We have to wait and see when this flattens out.'
If wages rose too much, the resulting economic weakness could dampen money
supply growth. The scope for easing rates would thus depend on how the
economy developed.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920330

