FT921-15387

FT  10 JAN 92 / EC revives Yugoslav peace plan prospects


   By DAVID GARDNER and JUDY DEMPSEY


   BRUSSELS, SARAJEVO


PROSPECTS for a negotiated solution to the civil war in Yugoslavia flickered
back to life last night as Mr Slobodan Milosevic, president of Serbia, said
a European Community blueprint to provide self-government and minority
rights guarantees for Serbs in Croatia was 'adequate'.
Though the Serbian leader raised hopes of a breakthrough by expressing
similar sentiments on this crux of the conflict last October 4, a senior EC
diplomat last night expressed hope that 'this time the movement looks more
solid'.
Mr Milosevic was told by the EC that 'he has to move now or risk total
isolation', an senior EC diplomat said. After Tuesday's killing of five EC
monitors, when their unarmed helicopter was shot down by a Yugoslav air
force jet over Croatia, Serbia would 'have nowhere to turn unless it comes
to terms', he added.
The Yugoslav army yesterday blamed poor co-ordination and mistakes in air
traffic control for the shooting down of the helicopter. But the interim
report, delivered to the EC monitoring mission in Zagreb, did not explain
why the Yugoslav pilot shot down the EC helicopter and forced another to
crash land.
Mr Ed Koestal, an EC monitor from the Netherlands, said when he returned
home yesterday after three months based in Zagreb that the shooting down of
the helicopter was unlikely to have been a mistake caused by poor air
traffic control.
'Croatia does not have an air force. The only aircraft that could operate in
that area were EC planes and they were clearly marked,' Mr Koestal said.
Four of the five dead were Italians, who were buried with full honours
yesterday after a service in which Pope John Paul lamented the 'agonising
tragedy' of Yugoslavia's war.
Polityka, a pro-Serbian daily paper with close ties to the military, carried
the army's explanation, saying the EC helicopters had been in closed air
space, and federal military authorities had not been told of their incoming
flight from Hungary.
The Hungarian authorities had informed the air control centre in Zagreb of
the flight, but the Mig pilot had been in contact only with air control in
Belgrade.
Yesterday's movement on the diplomatic front came at the EC-sponsored peace
conference, which reconvened in Brussels after a two-month suspension due to
Serbian intransigence and the escalation of bloodshed in Croatia.
The conference was attended by Mr Herbert Okun, a senior aide to Mr Cyrus
Vance, the United Nations special representative, emphasising to the
presidents of the six Yugoslav republics that the EC peace process and UN
efforts to send a 10,000-strong peacekeeping force to Croatia formed part of
a single strategy.
Lord Carrington, the former UK foreign secretary who chairs the conference,
stressed that the seven-day-old ceasefire and the UN decision to send a
50-strong advance guard to Yugoslavia, plus the prospect of the EC
recognising republics which fulfilled a list of democratic conditions, had
transformed the background to the talks. 'For the first time it really does
look as though the ceasefire will hold,' Lord Carrington said, but he
cautioned that 'it would be an exaggeration to say the way is entirely
clear' for a settlement.
However, Mr Milosevic, who left the Brussels conference after a visibly
cordial discussion with President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia in the courtyard
of the Egmont Palace in Brussels, insisted Serbia would demand the right to
remain at the heart of a reduced Yugoslavia.
Lord Carrington stressed that 'Mr Milosevic has made clear that if (EC
proposals on self-government and minority rights) are accepted, as far he
was concerned this was adequate protection for the Serbs in Croatia.'
He praised Mr Milosevic for the 'very stern steps' he had taken to condemn
Mr Milan Babic, leader of Serbian irregulars in the Krajina enclave of
south-west Croatia, who has threatened to resist the entry of UN forces into
his self-proclaimed autonomous republic.
The issue was further complicated yesterday when Bosnia's Serbs declared an
autonomous Serbian republic in the region and said they were prepared to
defend themselves.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920110

