FT923-15593

FT  01 JUL 92 / Scargill stance on sell-off criticised


   By DIANE SUMMERS and MICHAEL SMITH


MINERS' leaders were told yesterday by Mr Frank Dobson, Labour's energy
spokesman, to accept that they would probably lose the battle against
privatisation of the coal industry.
Mr Dobson said at the National Union of Mineworkers annual conference in
Scarborough he believed 'the cards are stacked heavily against keeping coal
in the public sector'. The NUM should draw up plans to protect the most
vulnerable pits and maintain safety standards, he said.
Mr Arthur Scargill, NUM president, disagreed that privatisation was now
inevitable. If contingency plans were discussed, then 'everyone in Britain
knows we have conceded the argument', he said.
The union wants to see the repayment of some EC grants if privatisation goes
ahead. Mr Scargill added that the conference 'should not rule out any
additional action'.
He outlined a campaign of action against sell-offs that would include legal
appeals to the European Court. The NUM is to argue that British Coal or
future mine owners should repay money saved by taking pension contribution
holidays.
Thousands of employers will watch closely as the NUM attempts to persuade
the European Court that the coal corporation acted illegally by taking a
pensions holiday.
The NUM's argument, outlined by Mr Scargill at the conference, is that the
European Court's Barber judgment established that pension-fund money was
deferred wages. The implication is that by withholding payments the
corporation is breaking the law.
According to the National Association of Pension Funds, 47 per cent of
companies were on holidays last year.
Mr Ivan Walker, a partner at law firm Russell, Jones and Walker, is one of
many who believe the European Court has no jurisdiction over the issue
because it involves property. The Barber ruling was different, he said,
because it was in the context of equal pay, an issue over which Europe has
jurisdiction.
Mr Scargill may consider a challenge through the UK courts where any
argument would rest, in part, on whether the fund's trust deeds empowered
its trustees to sanction a holiday, and if they were making a valid exercise
of their power.
British Coal said the power to take a holiday rested on a change agreed by
the rules amendment committee.
The corporation said that when there had been a shortfall in the pension
fund between 1975 and 1988 it had topped up its normal contributions with
Pounds 800m to make up the deficiency.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920701

