FT922-4357

FT  05 JUN 92 / Reinsurer to sue over losses


   By RICHARD LAPPER


A LEADING European reinsurer is to take legal action in an effort to recover
losses of more than Fl 500m (Pounds 153m) made in 'spiral' reinsurance
business underwritten in Lloyd's of London.
Spiral reinsurance - in which companies and syndicates reinsure each other's
exposures to catastrophe risk - has already caused considerable controversy
at Lloyd's, where hundreds of Names - the individuals whose assets back
underwiting at the London market - face financial ruin as a result of losses
by specialist spiral syndicates.
Amsterdam-based Nederlandse Reassurantie Groep is taking the action after
running up heavy losses at its Victory subsidiary, which it bought from
Legal & General in 1990.
NRG alleges that its advisers in the transaction - Ernst & Young, the
accountants, Bacon & Woodrow, the consultant actuaries, and Swiss Bank
Corporation, the investment bank - failed to advise the company about
Victory's exposure to claims from marine and aviation reinsurance
transactions.
The Dutch company claims: 'The advisers failed properly to assess the
account and failed to issue any warning about the possible extent of the
shortfall at the time of acquisition.'
NRG paid L&G Pounds 120m for Victory in July 1990. Subsequently the Dutch
company has been forced to set aside some Fl 500m in extra provisions as
claims from insurance policies underwritten before the transaction have
emerged. The company has suffered a series of catastrophe losses.
Mr Willem Dikland, chief executive, said NRG would be seeking substantial
damages, probably in excess of Fl 500m. Mr Dikland indicated that NRG might
not have bought Victory had it been aware of the scale of the exposures.
Allison & Humphreys, the solicitors, expect to issue writs this month.
Mr Colin Lever, senior partner at Bacon & Woodrow, said the firm would
'vigorously resist' any action. Swiss Bank Corporation said it had not been
required to provide advice on Victory's reserves. 'It is a matter of
surprise and regret to SBC that it has been named in the action.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920605

