FT923-6424

FT  25 AUG 92 / Build-up of allied air shield for Shias faces delays


   By Our Foreign Staff


US DEFENCE officials yesterday said the US military was ready to enforce an
allied ban on Iraqi warplane flights over southern Iraq, but diplomats in
the Gulf said the allied plan was facing delays.
The unnamed defence officials, quoted by Reuter news agency, said the
aircraft carrier Independence, carrying fighter and reconnaissance aircraft,
sailed north from Abu Dhabi in the Gulf on Sunday. US Air Force fighters
were also in position in the region, they said.
The readiness of the US forces contrasted with indications that the
timetable for deploying British and French fighter aircraft had not been
finalised and that the siting of operational bases in the Gulf had not been
confirmed.
The reports from Washington indicated that President George Bush might delay
announcing that the US, Britain and France would enforce a no-fly zone to
protect Iraq's dissident Shia Moslems south of the 32nd parallel.
Initially, Mr Bush had planned today to present a united allied front to
shield the Shias by formally warning Iraq not to attack them from the air.
Gulf-based officials and diplomats, quoted by Reuters in Kuwait, said that
delays had arisen because of widespread Arab concern that the no-fly zone
could lead to the dismemberment of Iraq.
In London, the Foreign Office said consultations among the allies about the
operation's mechanics, such as the precise area of the exclusion zone, were
continuing, and emphasised that there had been 'just a few working days'
since last week's initial announcement.
Acknowledging reports of Middle East concern about the future of Iraq,
officials drew attention to strong US and British statements last week about
the allies' absolute belief in the integrity of Iraq.
Britain has committed six Tornado aircraft to protecting the Shias, but
there has been no announcement on when they will go or where they will be
based.
The French Defence Ministry said yesterday that no decision had been taken
as to where its Mirage 2000 jets would be stationed in the Gulf.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920825

