FT923-9539

FT  05 AUG 92 / London Stock Exchange: Company news undermines equities


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


GLOOMY reports from the corporate news front undermined the UK stock market
again yesterday, reversing an early gain and leaving share prices to react
sharply when Wall Street made a dull start to the new trading session. Pleas
from Britain's boardrooms for government action to stimulate the domestic
economy did little to help sentiment, and hopes for base rate cuts dimmed as
sterling failed to hold Monday's improvement.
Equities opened firmly on the back of stable performances in the New York
and Tokyo stock markets. But investment interest was lacking and it was
again left to the stock index futures to provide the lead for share prices.
An early rise of 14.6 on the FT-SE Index was soon challenged by a cautious
response, in the banking sector, to the disclosure by Royal Bank of Scotland
that it faces a substantial law suit, as well as provisions against property
losses. The market also responded coolly to the interim report from National
Westminster Bank, while the industrial share sectors featured a fall in TI
Group, also on half-time trading figures.
The stock market drifted back towards overnight levels but saw little
selling pressure. It was a fall of 15 Dow points in early trading on Wall
Street that took the heart out of London. UK share prices sagged in late
trading and the final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,407.5, the net fall
of 12.7 bringing the 2,400 mark into jeopardy yet again.
An increase in the day's Seaq volume total to 466.8m shares appeared to
reflect little more than the focus on trading news from a handful of leading
blue chip companies. Monday's Seaq total of 329.6m shares was worth a mere
Pounds 704.1m in retail business, an exceptionally low figure even by recent
standards and certainly well under levels regarded as profitable for the
securities industry.
National Westminster Bank and the Woolwich Equitable Building Society
followed Abbey National, Britain's second largest mortgage lender, in
calling for official moves to stimulate the UK housing market, which is seen
as the key to any recovery in consumer confidence. Such pleas have found a
ready reception at City brokerage houses; Mr Robin Aspinall of Panmure
Gordon commented that interest rates are 'so obviously' the appropriate
instrument to tackle the debt problem overhanging the UK economy.
The building and construction sectors, long identified as the chief
casualties of the implications of high domestic interest rates, came in for
renewed pressure yesterday. Even the international stocks, which have
benefited from their perceived status as 'safe havens' from the storm,
drifted as buyers showed no inclination to support current price levels.
Traders are waiting nervously for tomorrow's decision on the quarterly
dividend by the board of British Petroleum.
Among the few firm exceptions was the publishing sector, where the presence
of a few buyers proved enough to inspire substantial recoveries in the
leading names, which have suffered severely over the past three months.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920805

