FT924-8346

FT  11 NOV 92 / International Company News: Head of BNZ quits in wake of
takeover


   By TERRY HALL and REUTER


   WELLINGTON


MR LINDSAY PYNE, the man credited with returning Bank of New Zealand (BNZ)
into profit after the near-disastrous losses of the 1987-1989 period,
announced his resignation as managing director yesterday, only five days
after the National Australia Bank (NAB) announced it had succeeded in buying
it.
Mr Pyne was appointed to head BNZ in 1989 when the first signs emerged that
the bank was faced with large scale losses. He led its restructuring and
took considerable political and shareholder flak when he insisted on making
public the full extent of its bad debts, totalling NZDollars 2.8bn
(USDollars 1.48bn at current rates).
He said that while other banks might succeed in hiding these for a time, in
the end this would only slow the bank's recovery.
Mr Pyne, a New Zealander who formerly worked for Citibank, said that he was
retiring because 'the job is done' although NAB has said publicly it wants
him to continue.
He said: 'BNZ is now in safe hands. I made the decision to go a long time
ago, once its recovery was complete and its future was secure.'
Mr Pyne's special field of expertise was restructuring companies. He
restructured Broadbank, a leading New Zealand finance company, and brought
to profitability Postbank, which was sold to ANZ Bank.
Mr Pyne's resignation takes effect from November 20, but he will remain a
consultant in the meantime.
He intends to continue in restructuring work, though he said his next job
would not necessarily be in handling a bank or financial institution.
Standard & Poor's, the international ratings agency, has raised to A1 plus
from A3 the short-term certificate of deposits of BNZ to reflect its
takeover by NAB, Reuter reports from Wellington.
Separately S&P Australian Ratings confirmed that it had raised BNZ short and
long-term ratings to AA/A1 plus from BBB/A3.
S&P also removed BNZ from its creditwatch.
'Completion of the acquisition by NAB has made BNZ a strategically important
member of a strong regional and international bank,' S&P added.
Conditions of the purchase also gave additional protection from the previous
two main shareholders, the New Zealand government and merchant bank Fay,
Richwhite, over further provisioning requirements for some outstanding loans
and litigation.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

921111

