FT922-4245

FT  06 JUN 92 / The Long View: Debt and Danegeld


   By BARRY RILEY


TWO MONTHS have passed since John Major gained his unexpectedly clear
election victory. The achievement was enthusiastically celebrated by the
financial markets but economically it appears to have been much less of a
landmark.
Most of the economic news since the election has been negative, with the
exception of a small cut in short-term interest rates and a tiny upturn in
car sales. For the rest, inflation (especially of pay) is running
persistently too high, unemployment is continuing to rise quite fast, and
the balance of payments has deteriorated - giving an advance warning that
any serious recovery in the economy will suck in imports at a disturbing
pace. In fact the national income figures for the first quarter proved
unexpectedly poor, making it appear inevitable that even if the economy
picks up smartly from now on the government's March modest-looking forecast
of 1 per cent growth for 1992 as a whole will prove optimistic.
This shadow over growth prospects has important negative implications for
government borrowing, which will be even higher than at present forecast -
Pounds 28bn for the current financial year - if the economy underperforms.
It is in this respect that the damage the discontented Danes have inflicted
upon the Maastricht Treaty could have its earliest effects. Global bond
investors have until now obtained comfort from the commitment to monetary
union and have been prepared to accommodate a convergence of bond yields
within the context of the European Monetary System. It has become easy - you
might say, far too easy - for European governments to borrow, under the
umbrella (somewhat tattered, but still giving shelter) provided by the
deutschemark. Now the price of being a big borrower could rise further.
Two crises are beginning to loom for the British government. There is a
problem of excessive public spending which will need to be tackled this year
and next. That embarrassment could be regarded as no more than the
conventional price for winning an election. But something more sinister is
developing: an impending weakness within the financial system, highlighted
by the renewed surge of big bankruptcies.
In many respects Britain has an American problem here, but it cannot adopt
the American solution, which has been to cut short-term interest rates
sharply and encourage lending institutions to increase their margins. By and
large (with the exception of Scandinavia) other European countries do not
share this financial solvency problem, so high interest rates are not so
awkward for them. But in Britain the debt keeps mounting in the arrears
accounts of individuals and businesses who cannot afford it. There are
estimated to be anything up to 2m home owners with mortgages bigger than the
value of their houses (although many of them may be perfectly capable of
paying their monthly instalments). Commercial property developers are
rolling up 12 per cent or more on their borrowings each year while the value
of their assets continues to fall, which is a short-cut to Canary Wharf.
So far any institutional failures - such as of minor building societies -
have been covered up (apart from BCCI which was rather different in nature);
but there is an increasing risk that a bigger collapse will appear. If so,
the Government will have to decide whether to finance a bail-out, the kind
of situation in which public spending can get right out of control.
Even if the banks all manage to avoid serious damage they will only do so
behind some sturdy fortifications. So the economic forecasters at the
Treasury, as they tear up yet another failed attempt to predict the
recovery, might ponder on the implications of the banking pressures for the
economy at large. We are seeing a reversal of trends that became evident
when the deregulated lenders were left to run riot in the 1980s. It was,
after all, the decade of the small business sector - which the banks made
into their own territory. Small services businesses mushroomed, and buyouts
boomed as big companies were offered fat bank-financed prices for various of
their offshoots. But the big companies were mostly little affected by the
lending spree except for some in the property sector and those (many of
which are now extinct) which took up huge lines of bank credit in order to
participate in the notorious but fortunately short-lived takeover bubble at
the end of the decade.
Now the credit taps have been mostly shut off. Local bank managers tell
their business clients that they have been ordered by head office to stop
lending; the chairman denies it, but then, perhaps no-one has told the
chairman what is really going on. At any rate, the small business sector is
in for some tough years. Big companies, on the other hand, have direct
access to the still buoyant capital markets, as Blue Circle showed this
week. Bigger buyouts such as Taunton Cider and MFI are coming back to the
stock market. We can expect to see a wave of smaller company flotations over
the next couple of years. But most companies are too small for this to be a
solution, and many others would fail the required tests of financial health.
Anyone worried about the recent track record of his economic model of the
British economy must also do some hard thinking about what sort of engine
might replace the housing market. During the late 1980s anything up to
perhaps Pounds 18bn a year of equity was released from the housing market to
finance other spending as Pounds 30bn or Pounds 40bn each year of net
lending cascaded into residential property. Now, net lending is running at
little more than Pounds 20bn a year and a prime source of finance for
consumer spending has largely fizzled out, for the foreseeable future.
With the political pressure off, John Major has no need to force events. But
the possibility of paying Danegeld interest rates could concentrate his
mind.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920606

