FT924-766

FT  22 DEC 92 / UK Company News: First cracks appear in the
standards-setting machinery - Rule bending in accounting


   By ANDREW JACK


DAVID Tweedie, chairman of the Accounting Standards Board, has been highly
animated in the last few days. The reason is not his usual zealotry, but a
growing anger as the first cracks have started to appear in the
standards-setting machinery over which he presides.
Just a little over two years since the ASB was created, companies are
starting to show signs of bending the new rules to suit their own purposes -
while their auditors turn a blind eye.
Last week the ASB issued a curt statement on the way in which some companies
are interpreting a ruling from its urgent issues task force on the treatment
of goodwill on the disposal of an acquisition. Its implications are far
wider.
'As with accounting standards it is important when applying task force
abstracts to be guided by the spirit and reasoning . . so as to achieve
their underlying purpose,' it stressed. 'I'm furious,' says Mr Tweedie. 'I
thought we could get away from this approach. I have told the profession
that they can either play the game and get short standards, or play by the
letter of the law and they will get monster standards.'
The problem dates back almost a year, when the task force issued its third
abstract concerning the treatment of goodwill - the difference between the
purchase price of an acquisition and its net asset value. The ruling said
that from January 23 this year, companies would have to pass through the
profit and loss account the goodwill of a business when they disposed of it.
That caused considerable consternation among businesses, since the amounts
involved were substantial and many companies had previously simply buried
the gain or loss in reserves.
So many voiced concern at the proposals and the speed at which the abstract
was to become mandatory that the ASB was forced to allow greater time for
consultation on future pronouncements.
But that was clearly not enough for many companies. Company Reporting, the
Edinburgh-based monthly monitoring service of annual reports, began to
highlight divergences from the ruling in the autumn. Others were drawn to
the ASB's attention from other sources. Audit partners in the larger
accounting firms warned that more clients were on the brink of adopting the
same approach if no action was taken.
Last week's statement from the urgent issues task force stresses two points
in response to alternative treatments beginning to appear:
The goodwill element should be included as part of a single number showing
the profit or loss on disposal, not distanced from it as a separate item.
There should not be a credit to the profit and loss account before the
deduction of dividends which is equal to the amount of goodwill on disposal.
There should be no implication through devices such as a sub-total that
profit is calculated after re-instating the goodwill.
Among those adopting alternative approaches was Enterprise Computer
Holdings. Its accounts for the 15 months to March 31 show separate
extraordinary losses of Pounds 1.1m for sale and closure of subsidiaries,
and Pounds 23.1m for purchased goodwill written off to reserves. It also
breaches the second ASB point by showing a gain of Pounds 23.1m on the
profit and loss account after dividend payments entitled 'reinstatement of
goodwill written off above'.
Racal Electronics - audited by Touche Ross - showed an extraordinary loss of
Pounds 53.8m in its latest accounts. That is explained at the bottom of the
profit and loss account, with separate lines showing a Pounds 1.1m loss on
disposal and closure of businesses, and Pounds 12.2m on acquisition goodwill
written off in prior years.
Hickson International - audited by Price Waterhouse - shows exceptional and
extraordinary losses. The notes on both items listed goodwill separately
from disposal profits and losses. A statement of retained earnings on the
profit and loss account shows a reinstatement of Pounds 9.7m of goodwill.
Halma - also audited by Price Waterhouse - shows a Pounds 1.1m extraordinary
debit, itemised as a Pounds 437,000 loss before goodwill adjustment and a
goodwill adjustment of Pounds 656,000. It then reinstates the goodwill after
profits and before a prominently displayed final 'profit' figure.
Companies bending the rules on goodwill in the future may well end up before
the financial reporting review panel, and their auditors before their
professional bodies. Both will face highly detailed rules if they continue
to ignore the spirit of ASB standards.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921222

