FT923-10870

FT  28 JUL 92 / Evangelist in industry's hottest seat: David Lascelles meets
the chief executive of Nuclear Electric, which posts its results today


   By DAVID LASCELLES


SOME might describe it as the hottest seat in British industry: that of
chief executive of Nuclear Electric, the state-owned nuclear power
generator. But if it is, Mr Robert Hawley does a good job of looking
unconcerned.
'Are these difficult times?' he asks with a shrug. 'All life is difficult.'
Only six weeks in the job, he comes to Nuclear Electric at a time when it
faces perhaps its biggest challenge - to persuade the government to give
nuclear power a chance rather than condemn it to a lingering death.
Nuclear Electric, formed in 1990 out of the former Central Electricity
Generating Board, owns and operates 12 nuclear power stations in England and
Wales.
Mr Hawley's first hurdle will come today when he and Mr John Collier, his
chairman, will present Nuclear Electric's latest results. Last year the
company reported a loss of Pounds 14m. What will it be this time? 'The
trends are all improving,' says Mr Hawley.
An upbeat message is essential if Nuclear Electric is to build any momentum.
Its target is 1994, the year when the government has said it will review
Nuclear Electric and, in effect, decide its future. By that date, Nuclear
Electric must be able to present a plausible case that it can produce
electricity profitably and safely.
If it succeeds, it should receive the go-ahead to build the Sizewell C
station on the Suffolk coast to complement Sizewell B which is now nearing
completion. If it fails, nuclear power will go into decline as ageing
stations are taken out of commission and not replaced.
As one might expect, Mr Hawley is something of an evangelist for nuclear
power. A tall 55-year-old with a good-humoured manner, he is a qualified
electrical and mechanical engineer who has spent his whole career in the
power business. Much of it was at Northern Engineering Industries which
later merged with Rolls-Royce.
He says he took the job at Nuclear Electric because he wanted a fresh
challenge. 'I feel very comfortable about it,' he adds. 'With my background
I can bring a great deal to Nuclear Electric.'
He argues the case for nuclear power on several grounds. First, he says, it
is clean - if Britain's nuclear capacity, which accounts for 20 per cent of
the total, were coal-fired, some 48m more tons of carbon dioxide would be
spewed into the atmosphere each year.
'Without us, the government hasn't got a cat in hell's chance of meeting its
carbon-dioxide reduction targets,' he says. He also stresses nuclear power's
safety record and the contribution it makes to fuel diversity and
employment. 'We're part of the solution, not part of the problem.'
Mr Hawley's greatest challenge will be to bring Nuclear Electric into a
condition in which it can justify its existence on commercial grounds.
Even if it reports a small profit today, this will not reflect the true
state of the business.
Nuclear Electric receives Pounds 1.2bn a year from the government to
compensate it for the heavy provisions it has to make to finance the
clean-up of reactors when they end their useful lives.
Mr Hawley's target is for Nuclear Electric to make a profit without that
money, and to do so by 1995. Government aid is due to be phased out anyway
in 1998.
This implies a needed profit improvement of about Pounds 250m a year between
now and then. This will be achieved by selling more electricity  - if
possible at a higher price - and by hammering down costs.
The workforce is to be reduced from 12,400 to 9,500 over the next three
years, and overheads are being pared back.
Mr Collier said recently that if Sizewell C were built it could produce
electricity at just under 3p a unit - considerably less than Sizewell B's
expected 4p to 5p, thanks to economies of scale. It would also be closer to
the 2.5p cost of conventional power stations.
At this level, the station would earn a rate of return of 8 per cent if it
could be made to run 85 per cent of the time. Although this rate is low by
commercial standards, it meets the government's requirements.
'This all means that we have got a competitive product,' Mr Hawley says.
'This is not a doomed industry. This is a growth industry.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920728

