FT922-4465

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Company News: Czech deal with clear
attractions - Glaverbel's glass-making venture with Sklo Union


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


GLAVERBEL, the Belgian-based glass company controlled by Asahi Glass of
Japan, is pleased with its pioneering decision in 1990 to invest in a joint
venture with Sklo Union, Czechoslovakia's largest glass company. The move
has given it a significant advantage in the highly competitive European
glass market.
Since Glaverbel's decision to invest an initial Dollars 48m in a 40 per cent
stake in the joint venture - known as Glavunion - more than 1,500 workers
have been shed from the original workforce of 4,900. Over the same period,
production of plate, vehicle and mirror glass has risen by over 25 per cent.
Exports to western markets, which already accounted for 40 per cent of Sklo
Union's sales before the joint venture, have risen to 65 per cent.
Production from Glavunion's plants in Teplice, northern Bohemia, has found
new outlets through Glaverbel's existing European sales network.
In addition, sales into the depressed domestic market have also been
revitalised through the establishment of a new privatised retail and
distribution network with 14 outlets across the republic.
Glavunion's energy, raw material and labour costs are all 'significantly'
lower than in Glaverbel's west European plants and those of its main rivals
 -St Gobain of France, Pilkington of the UK and Guardian Glass of the US,
according to Mr Stepan Popovic, managing director of the joint venture.
These factors, and Teplice's location only 60km from Dresden, are clear
advantages in supplying the booming construction market in eastern Germany.
Specific German investments in Czechoslovakia, such as Volkswagen's plans to
expand production at Skoda, the Czechoslovak carmaker, have also prompted
Glaverbel to boost output of vehicle glass.
The company currently delivers 200,000 glass sets a year to VW-Skoda and
expects to double this within two to three years. At the same time,
Glavunion recently elbowed aside St Gobain to win what Mr Popovic would only
describe as a contract 'to supply a substantial and rising volume' of
vehicle glass to Fiat in Italy.
The experience of Glavunion reflects the attraction of Czechoslovakia as a
relatively cheap and efficient production base for sales to European
Community markets. Provided this weekend's general elections offer a
reasonable chance of continuing political stability, foreign investment
bankers and advisers there believe several billion dollars of foreign
investment is forthcoming.
Encouraged by early signs of progress, Glaverbel decided to speed up its
original investment timetable. It raised its stake from 40 to 51 per cent
last July, and paid another Dollars 32.4m to raise its shareholding to 67
per cent on June 1, bringing its total equity investment to Dollars 80.4m.
Four per cent of Glavunion's shares are reserved for employees, while the
remaining 29 per cent shares are held by Sklo Union, still a 100 per cent
state-owned enterprise.
This will change shortly, however, as 61.5 per cent of the shares in Sklo
Union have been submitted for the 'first wave' of the mass privatisation
scheme under which shares in 900 Czech and Slovak enterprises will be
available for purchase through special vouchers. These have been taken up by
8.5m Czech and Slovak citizens.
Along with other Czech banks and enterprises, Sklo Union and Glavunion
decided to set up their own investment fund in a 50-50 joint venture with a
private entrepreneur. The fund, called First Privatisation Fund, attracted
117,000 voucher booklets from individuals willing to leave investment
decisions to the fund managers. The fund will invest the vouchers in some 70
companies, including Sklo Union.
Glavunion's emergence as the jewel in the Sklo Union crown has left Czech
senior management full of praise for Glaverbel's managerial style.
Contrary to earlier fears, the company was able to shed 1,500 workers
without strikes or protests. 'We closed down one old fashioned sheet glass
plant employing 300; privatised our wooden box manufacture, transport and
maintainance divisions; and asked for voluntary retirements. But those who
were made redundant have found jobs in the fast-growing private sector,'
said Mr Popovic.
For those who remain, pay and conditions have improved. The head office
currently reverberates with the sound of pneumatic drills as workers rebuild
the building's toilets. 'In a way the dirty, stinking toilets symbolised the
basic contempt for people under the old communist regime. I vowed that one
of our priorities would be to make decent toilets both in the offices and
the plant.'
The biggest problem inherited from the old regime, according to Mr Popovic,
is the difficulty of finding bright people capable of thinking in a
market-oriented way. 'We have just employed two plant directors in their
early 30s, and in future will only take on people straight from university.
We will send them to gain experience at Glaverbel plants in Benelux and
Canada and only then will we set them to work here.'

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920605

