FT924-8145

FT  12 NOV 92 / The Matrix Churchill Scandal: Major challenged over personal
knowledge


   By RALPH ATKINS and DAVID OWEN


MR JOHN Major was challenged last night over documents which it was claimed
showed the prime minister had 'personal and specific' knowledge that Matrix
Churchill exported machine tools to Iraq for munitions manufacture.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, escalated the political row over
the sale of defence-related equipment to Iraq by writing to the prime
minister saying that the 'veracity' of his past assurances could be in
doubt.
The letter came amid fresh allegations by Labour that ministers had covered
up the extent to which they helped an Iraqi arms build-up.
The party accused the government of lying over the reasons why four
ministers signed 'public interest immunity' orders trying to stop the
release of hundreds of documents setting out apparent attempts by the
government to reinterpret the arms embargo imposed on Iraq since 1980.
Mr Ashdown said that in December 1990 Mr Major told him in a letter that the
guidelines on arms to Iraq had been observed. But he said a document dated
June 21 1990, released in the Matrix Churchill trial, 'contains clear and
explicit indications that the government knew that Matrix Churchill and
other companies had exported machine tools to Iraq and that these were to be
'used for munitions manufacture'.'
Mr Ashdown said the letter from Mr Nicholas Ridley, then trade and industry
secretary, indicated that copies had been sent to the Cabinet's Over seas
and Defence Committee, of which Mr Major was a member.
His letter to the prime minister said: 'It is clear from this that you would
have had personal and specific knowledge that Matrix Churchill has exported
machine tools to Iraq and that these were to be used for munitions
manufacture . . . I hope there is a rational explanation for this.'
It was the second letter Mr Ashdown had sent to the prime minister yesterday
about the affair. Earlier Downing Street said officials were 'trawling'
files to allow a substantial answer to his points.
Separately, Mr Robin Cook, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, said a
public interest immunity certificate signed by Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, a
foreign office minister, showed that the government was wrong to claim
ministers had no alternative to signing the orders.
Mr Garel-Jones wrote: 'It has been arranged that where a document has
originated from a department it will be for a minister of that department to
consider whether a claim for public interest immunity should be made for
such a document.' He argued that it would be against the public interest to
release documents revealing the identity of informants whose security might
be jeopardised, intelligence material, or the process of providing ministers
with advice.
But Mr Cook said: 'Citizens should not have their liberty put at risk
because the government claims immunity for documents vital to their
defence.'
The row descended into angry clashes over the legal precedent for using
public interest immunity in a criminal case. Mr Cook quoted remarks by Lord
Kilmuir, who was lord chancellor in 1956, saying that in the case of
documents 'relevant to the defence in criminal proceedings, crown privilege
should not be claimed'.
Downing Street retaliated by releasing selections from judicial rulings
dating from 1846 to back up its case. Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and
industry secretary and another signatory of the orders, said on BBC
television that he was 'merely carrying out my duty'.
Mr Heseltine added: 'In so doing I was asking the judge to make a decision
as to whether these documents should be used in the course of justice.'
Asked about the words used by Mr Garel-Jones, he replied: 'He is doing the
same thing.'
Meanwhile Sir David Steel, the Liberal Democrat MP, called on Lady Thatcher
to say whether she will give evidence to the inquiry.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921112

