FT921-3945

FT  12 MAR 92 / Germans expect 2.5% inflation by end of year


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BONN


WEST GERMAN inflation will be down to 2.5 per cent by the end of this year,
but an upturn in economic growth is not now expected before next year,
according to a report published today by Kiel University's IfW world
economic institute.
Even then, gross national product in western Germany will grow by only 2 per
cent and unemployment is expected to peak at 2m in the middle of 1993.
Inflation is likely to be held at around 2.5 per cent.
While the inflation forecasts will reinforce expectations that the
Bundesbank will reduce interest rates later this year, giving other central
banks more room for manoeuvre, the institute's prognosis for short-term
economic developments in Germany will add to the mounting gloom.
Real growth this year will be only about 1 per cent, it says. Most recent
forecasts from government and other economists, which have steadily
downgraded expectations over the past few months, suggest 1.5 per cent. They
have also predicted an export-led upturn, starting in the second half.
While interest rates are still likely to fall, there will be little other
relief from the Bundesbank in the short term. Mr Helmut Schlesinger,
president of the Bundesbank, made plain in Bonn yesterday that he had no
intention of easing rigorous monetary controls.
He demanded an immediate clamp on credit expansion, and insisted that from
now on 'everything' must be financed out of the DM260bn (Pounds 90.2bn) of
savings within the overall economy.
'It would be wholly counter-productive to turn on the money taps and arouse
expectations that with interest rate reductions everything will become
easier,' he told a bankers' meeting. Mr Schlesinger added that too much bank
lending to the private sector was largely responsible for the recent surge
in money supply.
The IfW report says the German economy has been stagnating since the end of
the first quarter of last year. This year's expected minimal growth is
mainly attributable to the calendar - there will be 1.4 per cent more
working days than in 1991, thanks to the leap year and the fact several
national holidays fall on weekends. Some impetus will also be given by the
ending on June 30 of a special 7.5 per cent income tax levy and the
consequent increase in purchasing power.
East Germany, by contrast, is showing strong signs of climbing out of the
economic trough. The 10 per cent real growth in GNP expected this year and
next will boost overall German growth to 1.5 per cent in 1992 and 2.5 per
cent in 1993.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920312

