FT923-6610

FT  22 AUG 92 / Books: Third World literature exploded


   By AC GRAYLING


IN THEORY: CLASSES, NATIONS, LITERATURES by Aijaz Ahmad Verso Pounds 19.95,
358 pages
SOME years ago, the literary theorist and Urdu poet Aijaz Ahmad engaged in a
celebrated controversy with the American critic Frederic Jameson over 'Third
World Literature'.
Jameson had eloquently advocated a widening of the literature syllabus in
American institutions of higher education to include works from outside the
standard list of Western classics. Ahmad welcomed Jameson's call, but was
deeply disturbed to find him talking of 'Third World Literature' as if it
were a homogeneous category. There is, Ahmad argues, no such category: there
are instead the many diverse literatures of many different countries which,
for reasons of geopolitical theory, tend too glibly to be lumped together as
'the Third World.'
This observation is as profound as it is simple, as Ahmad shows in this
collection of essays woven around his original critique of Jameson. Their
theme is that the notion of 'Third World Literature' connects with views
about nationalism and postmodernist literary theory in deeply revealing
ways.
Ahmad explores these connections in essays on Edward Said's Orientalism,
Salman Rushdie's Shame, Indian literature, and other topics. The opening and
closing essays unify the whole collection into a sustained and searching
polemic.
In Ahmad's view, the 'metropolitan' (First World, Western) propensity to
think in agglomerative terms of 'Third World Culture' generates a false
understanding of recent world history and the way literature relates to it.
The story goes as follows.
In the three decades following 1945, nationalism was a powerful force in
African and Asian countries engaged in throwing off colonial bonds. Literary
theorists applauded the drive to cultural independence associated with these
anti-colonial struggles, but in doing so subsumed them all under the single
'Third World' label.
With the rise of poststructuralist literary theories in the 1970s,
nationalism itself came to be seen as oppressive, coercive and retrograde.
According to poststructuralism, it is nonsensical to think in terms of such
concepts as the origin of national identity and the possession of collective
cultural consciousness; and it is likewise mistaken to interpret the
development of these phenomena by means of determinate historical
narratives.
There are only individuals, poststructuralists argue, each with his own
relative point of view; and there is no independent rationality or
historical truth by whose means sense can be made of national struggles and
the fate of cultures.
Ahmad is opposed both to 'Third-Worldism' and to poststructuralism. His
chief reason is that, despite the fact that the political, economic and
historical analyses offered by Marxism appear to have been exploded by
events, he remains a Marxist none the less, and as such believes that
although nationalism has too often suppressed questions of 'gender' and
class, and has too often been retrogressive, it nevertheless has progressive
forms, and these must be historically understood.
If fellow-critics try to dismiss Ahmad's views on the grounds that the moths
of history have eaten his theoretical garb bare, they will be doing him an
injustice. Marxist theory may be in eclipse, but on this occasion it serves
as a powerful dissenting voice to the two orthodoxies - 'Third-Worldism' and
post-structuralism - which have succeeded each other in misrepresenting, as
Ahmad convincingly shows, the nature of the many different literatures and
cultures flourishing in Africa and Asia. Because of this vigorously argued
claim, Ahmad's voice is one of the most important in the current critical
debate.
One of the best features of Ahmad's account is its disentangling of
geopolitical appearances from cultural realities. At the Bandung Conference
in Indonesia in 1955, presided over by the formidable figures of Nehru and
Zhou En Lai, an effort was made to forge a consensus among nations outside
the immediate hegemonies of the US and Soviet Union.
Writers like Edward Said have mythologised this moment as the birth of the
Third World; but Ahmad shows that for all its importance otherwise, Bandung
does not mark - for nothing could ever mark - the creation of that 'Third
World Culture' which metropolitan criticism, addressing itself to a phantom
of its own making, so vociferously praised and then later attacked.
It is a great pity that Ahmad will not be read by the general educated
public, but only by fellow theorists. He writes too often in the Higher
Gobbledygook which characterises so much academic writing today. Academics
now write solely for their professional colleagues, in a putrefactive jargon
which would turn the stomachs of Hume and Arnold.
If Ahmad were to write for readers outside academic circles he would spread
more widely his message concerning the crudity and complacency of Western
thinking about what lies beyond its cultural borders. In the newly emerging
world such understanding is essential, Ahmad is splendidly equipped to
provide it; one earnestly wishes he would.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920822

