FT924-11910

FT  23 OCT 92 / International Company News: Cheap steel imports push Usinor
Sacilor into loss


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


USINOR SACILOR, the world's second largest steelmaker, yesterday announced a
sharp swing to a FFrs360m (Dollars 70.5) net loss in the first half of the
year, which it blamed on weak demand and a fall in prices, worsened by
'massive' cheap imports from eastern and central Europe.
The French state-owned group complained that the European Community market
was being swamped by imported steel at prices 'incompatible with the rules
of fair competition'.
To make matters worse, the devaluations of the British, Spanish and Italian
currencies forced Usinor Sacilor to slash its margins in those markets to
compete against the lower prices offered by local producers. The group said
net losses in the current half were set to be 'very distinctly' worse than
in the first six months.
The loss, which followed a FFr3.1bn deficit in 1991, the first for four
years, compares with a FFr875m profit in the first six months of last year.
Interim sales fell by 6.5 per cent to FFr48.11bn from FFr51.44bn. Operating
profits dwindled to FFr144m from FFr1.09bn.
Flat products, like steel sheet for the motor industry, were profitable, as
were engineering steels and stainless products. But there were losses in
long products, like beams and wire for the construction industry. Usinor
Sacilor was running down stocks and cutting back on working capital in an
attempt to adjust.
The company said the outlook was gloomy. Demand had fallen sharply in the
current half, driving prices down.
Like several other European steelmakers, the group has cut production in
line with the fall in demand. This has centred on Sollac, the flat products
unit, which is to trim output by 20 per cent over the final quarter,
compared to the same period of last year.
Usinor Sacilor is in the forefront of attempts by Eurofer, the EC steel
industry grouping, to obtain European Commission help for 'improved
functioning of the internal and external market'. Among others, the company
wants more help from the commission in attacking the recent rise in US steel
import duties.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921023

