FT923-10972

FT  28 JUL 92 / Labour set to decide tactics against Lamont


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


LABOUR is to use the first meeting of the new shadow cabinet, to be held
today, as a springboard for a summer campaign against the government's
handling of the economy.
The party will revive the charge of Thatcherite dogmatism against the
government and accuse Mr John Major of underestimating the extent of the
recession. It will also charge him with misleading the public during the
election and with complacency in the face of mounting unemployment and
business failures.
Labour officials are convinced that the failure of the economy to take off
in the wake of the Conservative election victory has offered it
opportunities to subvert an already vulnerable chancellor.
A detailed strategy to be agreed at tomorrow's meeting is intended to keep
ministers on the defensive while stimulating Conservative unease already
stirred up by the efforts of Tory Euro-sceptics. Mr Gordon Brown, shadow
chancellor, has begun the process by charging Mr Norman Lamont, the
chancellor, with 'breathtaking and arrogant complacency' and 'fundamental
neglect of duty' towards the effects of the recession.
He is expected later this week to present a number of policy options to
support his scorn for the nostrum 'there is no alternative'.
Among the proposals will be a revival of Labour's argument that fiscal
incentives should be adopted to help revive investment. Opposition figures
will ask why the government is holding to its refusal to continue its
'holiday' on stamp duty beyond next month when the housing market is in
steep decline.
Officially, Labour is claiming that the government was aware even before
April 9 that an upturn was never on the cards. It will use the charge that
the Tories deliberately 'lied' to the electorate during the campaign.
However, there is some evidence that the continued economic gloom was as
unexpected to Labour as it appears to have been in Whitehall. The aim now is
to portray Mr John Major's government as ideologically hamstrung in a way
that would not hamper more pragmatic administrations elsewhere in Europe.
'We have a government that is so non-interventionist they are letting
everything drift - it has decided it has no part to play,' one Labour
official claimed. The offensive on the economy gives the new Labour
leadership a breathing space in which to reevaluate how it can revamp its
own agenda and lift the spirits of its rank and file after the April
election defeat.
Staff in the office of Mr John Smith, the party leader, are beginning work
on a document to be submitted to the party conference in Blackpool in
October, setting out how the party's core aims and values should be
reinterpreted as the century draws to a close.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920728

