FT921-1208

FT  25 MAR 92 / Lloyds and Midland merger was blocked by threat to quit


   By ROBERT PESTON


A MERGER between Lloyds Bank and Midland Bank was scuppered when Midland's
chief executive, Mr Brian Pearse, threatened to resign only hours before the
announcement of the merger talks was to be made to the Stock Exchange, it
emerged yesterday.
This brinkmanship at the highest level of Britain's clearing banks took
place while Hongkong and Shanghai Bank was deciding whether to make a bid
for Midland, which it said it would do last week.
According to an authoritative account of the behind-the-scenes manoeuvring
leading up to the Hongkong bid, an announcement that Lloyds and Midland
planned to merge was scheduled to be made at 8.30am on March 3.
The banks' brokers - Cazenove for Midland and Hoare Govett for Lloyds - had
been alerted and a press conference planned. However, late on March 2, Mr
Pearse told Mr Brian Pitman, Lloyds' chief executive, that he could not play
a role in the merged organisation.
As a result, Lloyds could not proceed with the announcement. Lloyds had
planned to say that Mr Pearse would play an important role in the bank
formed by the merger.
Bankers said that Mr Pearse took his stand because he believed Midland was
being 'bounced' into a deal likely to be blocked by competition authorities
in the UK and Brussels.
'A merger of the two banks would have entailed massive job losses and branch
closures at Midland,' said a banker with a close knowledge of the talks.
'Morale among Midland's staff would have been devastated. It would have been
almost impossible to rebuild that morale if the merger had been blocked.'
Lloyds began analysing the likely benefits of a deal just over a year ago.
Work began seriously in December when it appointed Mr Andrew Tuckey,
chairman of merchant bank Baring Brothers, to advise on the deal. Despite
the March 2 rebuff, Lloyds was invited to make a presentation on the
benefits of the merger to Midland's board on March 13. That morning, Sir
Jeremy Morse, Lloyds' chairman, and Mr Pitman put their case to Midland's
directors.
That afternoon, however, Mr William Purves, Hongkong chairman, also made a
presentation to the Midland board about why Midland should be taken over by
his bank. In the evening, Mr Pitman was told he had lost the competition.
On March 17 Midland made a Stock Exchange announcement that it had agreed to
be taken over by Hongkong Bank.
Lloyds, the UK's most profitable clearing bank, yesterday announced that Sir
Robin Ibbs, former head of a government 'think tank', would be its next
chairman. Mr Pitman, 60, will stay as chief executive until 1995.
Lloyds appointments, Page 21 Observer, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920325

