FT922-550

FT  26 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Liberty's fraternity seeks to limit
equality - A report on the challenge to the existing order at the famous
retailer


   By PETER PEARSE


TODAY'S extraordinary shareholder meeting at Liberty, the upmarket fabric
and fashion group, will be devoted to the vexed questions of equality and
fraternity.
There is little equality in Liberty's share structure, though it looks as if
the fraternity uniting the many stakes held by the descendants of the
founder and his wife will remain solid enough to see off the issue.
Together they hold between 52 and 55 per cent of the voting shares.
The challenge to the Stewart-Liberty family comes from Mr Brian Myerson, a
London-based South African investor who requisitioned the EGM. Through
Concerto Capital Corporation, his family investment vehicle, he bought the
bulk of his 15 per cent stake in the retailing and wholesaling group last
October. He wants to exploit the Liberty name more fully.
The meeting will be the latest shareholder skirmish in a 10-month saga,
which has thrown the perceived reputations of the protagonists into sharp
relief.
On one side there is the hidebound and cosy Englishness of the 117-year-old
upmarket fashion retailing name, which 'is muddling along'. Based in its
Tudor-style and neo-classical West End store, it is an 'underperforming'
company long on tradition, but shorter on business acumen and drive.
On the other, there is the barbarian at the gates, Mr Myerson, the arrogant
young colonial interloper with a beady eye for the main chance, looking to
put another respected UK institution into play, as he had with Aquascutum.
Neither reputation is completely true.
It is true that Liberty has recently been hit hard by the recession, the
Gulf war, the VAT increase and the impact of the Uniform Business Rate. In
the year to February 1, the group suffered a 21 per cent decline in pre-tax
profits to Pounds 5.66m, with the retailing side tumbling 62 per cent to
Pounds 823,000.
Three stores were closed in the US when the leases expired, leaving one,
only accessible through another shop, and the company no longer has a
European retailing presence since the disposal of the Dutch Metz & Co
venture in 1989 and the short-lived idea for a store in Lyon. Mr Myerson
maintains that for a company with a brand as unique and valuable as Liberty,
it has negligible awareness among consumers internationally.
The board suggests that closing the loss-making US stores was a sign of
good, not poor, management and that licensing is, at the moment, the best
way to progress across the Atlantic.
It points to the lack of success of virtually all cross-border expansion in
retailing, both into and out of the UK. It plans organic growth in the UK,
opening more shops, creating more space in the Regent Street flagship and
pushing hard a London retail joint venture with Muji, a Japanese retailer.
It is also true that a ball Mr Myerson started rolling forced the Aquascutum
board into the arms of a Japanese white knight and that he did emerge about
Pounds 6m richer.
He acknowledges he is not a retailer, rather an investor, though he says he
has been immersed in the sector for four years now. He stresses the need to
have stores overseas to carry the brand, thereby reinforcing the wholesaling
side. 'Otherwise Liberty will dwindle into a small property and wholesaling
business.'
Last October, the board referred him to the Stewart-Liberty family, the
shareholder group he would need as a partner to implement his changes.
Rebuffed by the family, he proposed a Pounds 20m rights issue and the
appointment of a new chief executive in place of Mr Harry Weblin, who is
also chairman.
Those plans have since been changed and the agenda before today's meeting is
Mr Myerson's scheme to enfranchise the non-voting shares, 'no more, no
less'. Of Liberty's shares 70 per cent are voting and the balance
non-voting.
Mr Myerson says that the institutional shareholders he has seen agree with
enfranchisement as a principle and that the exercise has forced Liberty to
renew dormant contact with its non-family investors. 'The institutions
accept that our calculations are fair,' he says, adding: 'There's an element
of understanding and some sympathy among certain Stewart-Liberty members.'
Liberty says that Mr Myerson's scheme is fundamentally flawed and would
disadvantage the holders of the non-voting stock. It adds that it is not
essentially opposed to enfranchisement, but wants to be able to choose the
time and the formula.
Mr Myerson says enfranchisement would lead to more non-executive directors.
Mr Anthony Blackmore, the only one at present, was elected 22 years ago and
is part of the Stewart-Liberty family.
'They need help round the boardroom table, there isn't the depth there,'
says Mr Myerson. The board dismisses the non-executive question as
irrelevant and says it is always looking for non-executives who can make a
contribution.
Mr Weblin says that customers have given him 'quite a towsing' over Mr
Myerson's proposals and both he and Mr John Pugh, Liberty finance director,
are confident that they will be voted down. 'The proxies are looking OK,' Mr
Pugh said last night. The Liberty board wants to get back to running the
business.
Mr Myerson insists today's meeting is 'only round one', that he is 'not in a
hurry and has inevitability on his side'.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920626

