FT923-15494

FT  02 JUL 92 / Thousands turn out to mourn Algerian leader


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS and FRANCIS GHILES


   ALGIERS


TENS of thousands of Algerians took to the streets yesterday to mourn their
murdered president, Mr Mohamed Boudiaf.
A grief-stricken crowd gathered outside the presidential palace as mourners
filed past Mr Boudiaf's coffin in the hours before his funeral at Algiers'
main mosque. Women ululated as a green army truck bearing Mr Boudiaf's
coffin left the gates to move slowly towards the Djema Khebir mosque.
Some demonstrators blamed the recently banned fundamentalist Islamic
Salvation Front (FIS) for Mr Boudiaf's assassination on Monday. Near the
palace, old posters of the Salvation Front remained on the walls, warning:
'We will strike with force.'
Others in the crowd chanted: 'Chadli assassin', accusing former President
Chadli Bendjedid, forced out of office in January. This echoed Algerian
press reports that the killing might have been organised by senior
politicians with much to fear from Mr Boudiaf's crusade against corruption.
'He died because he wanted to break with the old business, because he wanted
radical change and because he fought corruption,' said a weeping steel union
official.
'Boudiaf was clean, Hardly anybody else left in government is like that,'
added Mr Said Chitour, a tourist guide. Mr Boudiaf, who succeeded Mr
Bendjedid, elicited widespread respect among the crowd yesterday not just
for his anti-corruption campaign but also for his attempts to launch
economic reforms and curb Islamic extremism. Some FIS voters in yesterday's
crowd strongly opposed terrorism.
The poor central area of the Casbah was almost deserted and shops pulled
down their steel shutters in respect. Several thousand silent mourners
milled around the mosque on the harbour front and prayers were said over the
body. Ships sounded foghorns as the cortege left the mosque for the El Alia
cemetery, accompanied by an ashen-faced Mr Yassir Arafat, leader of the
Palestinian Liberation Organisation, among the many foreign dignitaries
there.
Yesterday's calm will have come as a relief to Algeria's military-backed
government. It is coming under pressure to choose a new leader to end the
power vacuum.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920702

