FT921-14230

FT  17 JAN 92 / Dispelling German scent of scandal


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


THERE is one word which is not mentioned in yesterday's long and carefully
argued paper from the German finance minister on financial market reform:
that word is scandal.
And yet scandal is the word that has been the word on every Frankfurt
financier's lips in the last year, and there is no doubt that it is scandal
that has driven the Finance Ministry to launch yesterday's comprehensive
package of reforms.
For 1991 was a year when the Frankfurt tax authorities launched
investigations into the private tax affairs of 400 traders at prominent
brokers and banks, amid widespread allegations of longstanding tax evasion.
It was also the year when the Frankfurt Stock Exchange undertook an
investigation into alleged insider dealing at the mighty Deutsche Bank, and
when the Economics Ministry of the state of Hesse - in which Frankfurt is
located - unleashed a probe into local brokers and a market practice known
as 'dividend stripping'.
Senior German financiers never use the word scandal to describe any of these
individual cases without prefacing it with the phrase 'so-called'. They are
able to find good reasons why each case was not really scandalous. The tax
problems of traders reflect the problems of private individuals, they argue.
They note that all those scrutinised for alleged insider dealing were
exonerated.
Yet, they tacitly admit that the collective impact of this unfortunate
sequence of events is bad for the image of Germany and bad for the German
financial services business. Behind the scenes, senior bankers, market
officials and representatives of regional and central government have been
meeting regularly to decide what they ought to do to counter the damage. The
result is yesterday's announcement from Bonn.
The central proposals, floated individually before but bound together for
the first time in yesterday's document from the Finance Ministry, are as
follows:
There should be a central authority for stock-market regulation, 'as is
usual in the most important financial markets and already exists in banking
and insurance'. There are few details about the scope of the new body's
authority, but it will be responsible for policing insider trading and
liaising with international stock-market authorities over issues such as
regulation.
A new insider law will be introduced. This is necessary, the minister says,
because the present system is limited by the fact that it relies on the
voluntary co-operation of market participants and lacks tough sanctions.
There will be legal sanctions against insider offences with the possibility
of confiscating any financial gains. Legal, investigatory and other powers
will be vested in the new regulatory body.
It is intended that these measures will be implemented in law by the end of
1992, giving plenty of time for all parties involved to agree detailed plans
for implementation.
As the minister says, it is hoped that these and other measures will make
Germany's financial services industry fitter. What he does not say is that
it is hoped it will make Germany scandal-free.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

920117

