FT922-13268

FT  13 APR 92 / UK Gilts: Tory win sparks surge in demand


   By PETER MARSH


THE BANK of England has kicked off its gilt funding programme for the
1992-93 financial year at a much healthier rate than it could have envisaged
a week ago, thanks to the surge in the market sparked by the surprise
Conservative election victory.
A massive rise in gilt prices of nearly 4 points on Friday pushed yields
down to levels last seen at the end of February, just before the gloomy
period in the gilt market.
The strength of demand enabled the Bank to sell up to Pounds 4bn worth of
gilts in less than 24 hours, a good start to a financial year in which it
will probably have to find buyers for some Pounds 30bn worth of the
securities to fund Britain's large public sector borrowing requirement.
Including gilt sales already in the pipeline due to Bank actions taken in
the 1991-92 financial year, Threadneedle Street has already accounted for
about Pounds 5bn of the total gilt funding which it will need to arrange
during 1992-93.
A hint of the pace of funding ahead came with Friday's announcement that the
Bank will hold its next gilts auction on April 29. This is expected to be
the first of a programme of auctions which could number one a month over the
next two years. It is likely to invite bids for Pounds 2bn-Pounds 3bn of
stock, in a range of stocks due between 2015 and 2020.
The auction announcement is the first sign that the Bank intends to issue
large amounts of stock at the distant end of the yield curve, where demand
is relatively low due to a shortage of available securities. Issuing large
volumes of such bonds could push down prices and increase yields, leading to
a marked flattening in the currently downward-sloping yield curve. Details
will be announced on April 21.
Underlining the extent of the task ahead for the Bank in funding the PSBR
will be figures due out on Thursday on the borrowing requirement for March,
the final month of the 1991-92 financial year. This is expected to be a huge
Pounds 6.2bn, pushing up the total PSBR for 1991-92 to nearly Pounds 14bn.
In the current financial year, the Treasury expects the borrowing
requirement to be about Pounds 28bn, jumping to Pounds 32bn in 1992-93.
An important question for gilt practitioners is whether the surge in demand
for gilts last week, which was especially marked from foreign investors, can
be sustained in the coming months. Essentially, the Tory election victory
confirmed to gilt investors that the chances of a sterling devaluation are
extremely unlikely.
At their prices on Friday, gilt yields are roughly 1.6 per centage points
above those of comparable German bonds. At the start of last week, as a
result of a depressed four-week period in which gilt yields had been pushed
up by concern about the election outcome, yields were more than 2 percentage
points above those of their German counterparts.
According to projections by UBS Phillips & Drew, the difference between
yields for German and UK bonds will continue to decline, to about 1.4
percentage points by mid-1992 and just 1 percentage point by the end of the
year.
The strength of sterling last week in the wake of the election victory has
sparked speculation that the government may soon cut base rates, held at
10.5 per cent for more than seven months. However, many economists believe
the government is more likely to keep interest rates at their current level
for some months.
It may instead capitalise on the strength of sterling and the newly found
confidence on financial markets to make a decision soon to move sterling to
a narrow, 2.25 per cent band in the exchange rate mechanism, a move that
could accelerate progress in narrowing the UK and German yield differential.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920413

