FT924-11906

FT  23 OCT 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar volatile against DM


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR zig-zagged against the D-Mark on the foreign exchanges yesterday,
staging another rally against the German currency in Thursday's Asian
trading but slipping in Europe as dealers took short-term profits, writes
James Blitz.
The D-Mark was stronger against the dollar and European currencies on
Wednesday after the Bundesbank engineered a smaller cut in money market
rates than expected. However, traders pushed the dollar up to a high of
DM1.5250 in Asia overnight, partly reacting to rumours that Mr Boris Yeltsin
was planning to resign as President of Russia.
Yesterday morning, this move was reversed and the dollar moved back to a low
of DM1.5035 in Europe. Mr Robert Parry, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, helped the currency down by saying that the Fed could
ease interest rates again because of the sluggishness of the US economy. The
dollar closed at DM1.5100 against the D-Mark, up nearly a pfennig.
There were signs yesterday that the market is still unsure when the dollar
will stage a fundamental rally against the D-Mark. The market did not
respond to a surprisingly upbeat set of jobless data, with claims for the
week to October 10 falling to 368,000 from 383,000.
However, Mr Christian Dunis, an economist at Chemical Bank in London, said
that the market remains fundamentally bullish about the US currency. 'There
is pent-up demand for dollars,' he said, claiming that the majority of
potential dollar buyers have still not come into the market yet. He believes
that a break through DM1.53 would see more substantial investor interest.
Sterling rose against the D-Mark in Asia, partly buoyed by the dollar's
rise, but mostly helped by the House of Commons' decision to support the UK
government in a vote on the closure of the UK coal mines. The pound closed
at DM2.4500 against the D-Mark, up nearly two pfennigs.
Sterling's moves are increasingly difficult to assess because the UK
authorities are increasingly committed to cutting interest rates, paying
less heed to the exchange rate. Mr Ian Beauchamp, chief economist at Hambros
Bank in London, says that the only way of judging it is by its trade
weighted value, which he puts at DM2.55. 'When it is below that, we have to
assess how bad Britain's political situation is, and, right now, it is very
bad,' he said.
Fears that today's European Monetary Committee meeting in Berlin heralds a
realignment of the European exchange mechanism continued to evaporate
yesterday, and most European currencies looked firmer against the D-Mark.
The Italian lira closed at L877.6 against the D-Mark from a previous L879.6.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921023

