FT921-563

FT  28 MAR 92 / International Company News: Hongkong Bank to gain dual
listing


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


THE Hongkong and Shanghai Bank has reached an agreement with both the Hong
Kong and London stock exchanges for it to have a primary listing on the two
exchanges in the event that its offer for Midland Bank is successful.
The Hongkong Bank said yesterday that if its offer - due within the next few
weeks - was accepted by Midland's shareholders, it would comply with those
regulations which impose the higher standard of disclosure, or the more
onerous requirements.
The Hong Kong Stock Exchange and the Securities and Exchange Commission, the
colony's corporate watchdog, said the move would offer investors in Hong
Kong greater protection. They both supported the bank's application.
Mr Herbert Hui, of the Hong Kong exchange's listing division, said the
bank's decision would remove doubts about the regulatory authority for HSBC
Holdings - the Hongkong Bank's holding company which will own Midland.
The bank said the dual primary listing - which it believes to be unique -
would ensure that its shares are traded on both exchanges.
The move was seen, however, as a necessary one if, as expected, the Hongkong
Bank's offer for Midland is a straight share swap. The bank would want to
offer Midland shareholders equity which was regulated in the same way as
that which they were giving up, analysts said.
The Hongkong Bank last week proposed a merger to Midland, bringing to an end
more than four years of discussion about a link-up. It is expected to
disclose the terms its offer for Midland within the next few weeks.
Hong Kong's listing rules are based on London's and the implications for
Hongkong Bank of submitting to UK rules are not great. Differences between
the two exchanges' rules are largely those of detail, not thrust or intent.
Some of the main differences relate to the definition of a discloseable
transaction, and the interest of directors in a company's shares.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920328

