FT921-1310

FT  25 MAR 92 / Arts: Perverse appetite for mumbo jumbo - Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


The 'New Age' with all its anti-rational fancies is upon us and there is a
growing tendency towards the credulous on television, which should be nipped
in the bud. It is less important in drama than in journalism. Moon And Son
has been a pretty silly series, yet it would be wrong to campaign for its
removal solely on the grounds that it encouraged belief in astrology,
psychokinesis and other supernatural mumbo jumbo. If that was our aim it
would be more important, as late in the day as 1992 in what we are
perpetually assured is a 'multicultural society', to oppose the way that the
BBC continues to cleave to just one of the world's many supernatural
religious faiths. Anyway, fiction has always been chock full of the occult,
from the witches in Macbeth to the ghosts in Truly, Madly, Deeply. We may
justifiably look to fiction to cater for what is obviously a huge appetite
for the mystical.
But it should play no part in journalism. It is embarrassing to find a
supposedly serious programme such as the BBC's QED, which bills itself as an
'investigative science series', chasing after a herbal cure-all in the
Arizona desert. For centuries there have been snake oil salesmen on the
roads of America, but it is not the job of serious journalists to encourage
belief in their products. The chap publicised by QED was a regular observer
of flying saucers who claimed to have got the formula for his nostrum from a
Red Indian medicine man. If anyone had started out genuinely believing his
was the ultimate wonder drug (it is said to cure baldness as well as cancer)
one researcher operating alone could have discovered the truth of the story
in 48 hours, without the huge expense of taking an entire film crew into the
desert. The BBC's Science And Features unit should be ashamed of itself.
Worse by a considerable degree is Channel 4's continuing encouragement of
the 'Satanic Ritual Abuse' industry. No doubt over the centuries there have
been people who dressed up as devils or witches prior to sexually abusing
children. It is hard to see that it makes much difference to the abused
child whether or not the abuser is wearing a pointed hat or pretending to be
Lucifer: it is the abuse that matters and which should be rooted out and
stopped. But the SRA merchants, among them Christian fundamentalists and
socialists who have seen their belief systems crumbling, are intent upon
convincing us that devil worship allied to sexual abuse is rife in Britain
today.
The lack of evidence is clearly a difficulty (though not in the US, origin
of this fad, where the SRA hunters say 'You see? That just proves how clever
they are]') but each programme contains one seemingly telling exhibit which
is tricked out with endless ooky-spooky footage of people looming out of the
mist on Hampstead Heath. In the most recent Dispatches programme the
'evidence' was a peculiarly nasty bit of 'satanic' video which we were told
was being investigated by Scotland Yard. Now it turns out (according to the
London listings magazine Time Out which has a pretty reliable line on these
things) that the video was created nine years ago for the Genesis P-Orridge
rock group. The trouble is that in allowing the hunters of Satanism to keep
on and on, Channel 4 eases the public towards dismissing the whole thing -
including genuine abuse of children.
BBC2's three-part adaptation of The Old Devils is proving quite splendid, as
of course it should, having been written by Kingsley Amis, adapted by Andrew
Davies (author in his own right of A Very Peculiar Practice, one of the
funniest drama serials this decade) and with a cast that will have future
generations marvelling: Sheila Allen, Anna Cropper, Bernard Hepton,
Elizabeth Spriggs, John Stride, and more. It is packed with typically wicked
Amis lines, right from the off when the home-going London Welshman, Alun,
tells the minicab driver 'We're going to Paddington, would you know that at
all? It's a railway station' - a line that was actually invented by Davies,
though you have to check the book to be sure, so good is the faking. But
however enjoyable the wit, however impressive the ensemble acting (very),
however scathing the view of professional Welshness, the true power of this
piece is in its observation of the shift from middle to old age.
There is a fearful honesty about Amis at his best, and this is the best
since Lucky Jim. Behind the surface humour you sense the baleful eye of a
weary Everyman, measuring the human race and finding it pathetic,
hypocritical, cowardly, unctuous, and pretty well unchanging. Of some
writers you could go on to say 'Nevertheless he loves them individually' but
with Amis the truth seems to be that he doesn't. Certainly he sees the
comedy of their lives, senses the absurd, but finds it in himself to like
them very little. Indeed, despite all the laughter he creates he seems to be
a pretty thoroughgoing misanthropist.
Comic misanthropy is a powerful brew, and one you do not find on American
television. Series such as The Golden Girls may get close to the bone
occasionally, but American network managers would be put off by anything
that was not consistently 'positive'. British television, on the other hand,
is rich in this area. As time passes Carla Lane's work becomes increasingly
misanthropic: her funniest series (it may be significant that other writers
contributed) was her first, The Liver Birds. Subsequent series have become
more and more like situation tragedies: Butterflies, Solo, The Mistress. In
Bread there seemed to be a deliberate policy to make the lines funnier, but
even then the view of life was often jaundiced.
With Screaming on BBC1 we are definitely back to melancholia in general and
animosity towards men in particular. Admittedly Carla Lane does not let
women off lightly: Jill Baker, Gwen Taylor and Penelope Wilton (another
superb collection of actresses, is there truly poor acting somewhere on
television which I miss?) share a house, are about to discover that they
have shared the same lover, and are keenly aware of one another's
shortcomings, from huge ugly feet to the inability to say 'No'. However, in
Lane's book women's 'faults' tend to be the gifts of the gods and thus
deserving of our sympathy whereas men's shortcomings are invariably their
own fault. That is not to deny that Screaming is subtle and funny and that I
want to see the rest.
In last week's 01, ITV's critical guide to what's on in London, Paula Yates
interviewed those coming out of the new musical, Moby Dick and suggested it
was 'tacky and sexist' and an excuse for showing 'girls in tassels'. Yet
Paula Yates posed for a famous picture spread in Penthouse using the Reform
Club as the setting. In one photograph her only accoutrements are black lace
gloves, patent leather stilettos and a copy of the FT. In other shots there
is not so much as a tassel to obscure the view. So why the high mindedness
on television?

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920325

