FT921-14388

FT  16 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Financing difficulties delay
Anglesey base metals project


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


DEVELOPMENT OF Britain's first big base metals mine for decades, at Parys
Mountain, Anglesey, is being seriously delayed by financing difficulties.
Anglesey Mining, the company floated on the London Stock Exchange in 1988 to
develop the Parys Mountain property into the UK's biggest-ever metals mine,
is now seeking a joint venture partner to bring the project back on track.
The zinc-lead-copper mine was scheduled to come into operation early in
1993. Anglesey says that production can start 15 months after financing is
completed.
Plans also call for the mine to produce a steady stream of authenticated
Welsh gold for which there are customers who will buy at a premium to the
market price.
Anglesey so far has spent about Pounds 8.5m on the project and now needs
another Pounds 25m to take it through to production.
Two banks, the Swiss Bank Corporation and the Bank of Scotland, agreed in
October to provide project loans of up to Dollars 25m (Pounds 14.5m) and
Anglesey also received a Pounds 2m Welsh Office assistance grant because the
mine will create 147 jobs.
However, raising the equity part of the package has proved impossible so
far. Most of Anglesey's shareholders seem keen to subscribe for new shares
but its biggest shareholder, Imperial Metals, a Canadian mining company
which owns 43 per cent, is not able to.
Like nearly every other metals mining company in the world, Imperial is
suffering from present very low prices and it has other projects requiring
capital.
Mr Mark Wellesley-Wood, a director of Kleinwort Benson Securities,
Anglesey's advisers, said two companies were studying joint venture
proposals but any arrangement obviously would take some time to work out.
Two of the likely candidates, Outokumpu, the state-owned Finnish group, and
Minorco, the offshore investment arm of the Anglo American Corporation of
South Africa, had been approached but indicated that they would prefer to
concentrate on projects in Ireland in which they had interests, he added.
A Parys Mountain feasibility study suggested that, by milling 250,000 tonnes
of ore a year, the mine would produce concentrates containing 13,000 tonnes
of zinc, 5,700 tonnes of lead and 2,500 tonnes of copper. The mine would
also produce about 5,000 troy ounces of gold of which 2,500 to 3,000 ounces
could be recovered by Anglesey and authenticated as 'Welsh' gold.
During pilot plant testing, more than 2,000 tonnes of ore was processed and
about 250 tonnes of metal concentrates were sold to the Pasminco smelter at
Avonmouth.
Parys Mountain has a long mining history dating back to Roman times. During
the late 18th century it was one of the world's largest copper mines,
supplying much of the metal required for Britain's Industrial Revolution.
About 3.5m tonnes of rock was moved by hand, pulled up from a growing pit by
ropes and eventually the mountain contained the biggest man-made hole in the
world - a record that was not overtaken until the 1890s. Mining eventually
ended in 1911 after 143 years of almost continuous activity during which an
estimated 130,000 tonnes of coper was produced.
The site is owned by the Marquess of Anglesey who will collect substantial
royalties if the mine eventually proves profitable.

The Financial Times


London Page 32 Map (Omitted). Map (Omitted).

920116

