FT924-1064

FT  19 DEC 92 / Books: Bait for anglers - Fishing books


   By TOM FORT


THAT remarkable man and fine angling writer, Arthur Ransome, described
shaking hands with the man who had caught the record English carp thus: 'he
looked as if he had been in heaven and hell and had nothing more to hope
from life'. Never having met Chris Yates, I cannot testify as to the look in
his eye. But I do know that he, too, held the English carp record. And, more
to the point, he is about the best writer on fishing today - on a par with
Ransome himself.
Yates has given us two classics, Casting At The Sun and The Deepening Pool,
and if his latest book, The Secret Carp (Merlin Unwin Pounds 16.95), is not
in quite the same class, it is still a furlong in front of anything else. It
is a meditation on, and celebration of, the dark, tree-shaded pools where
great carp bask and glide - and, occasionally, take the angler's bait. We
share with the author the vigil by the water, broken at last by the
vanishing of the float and the fish's tearing run. The prose is limpid, the
humour understated, the effect magical.
From the same publishers comes Conrad Voss Bark's History of the Fly Fishing
(Merlin Unwin Pounds 25), an entertaining canter through the evolution of
the sport. The Chinese, we are told, used a kingfisher's feather to lure
fish several thousand years BC. A wily lot, the Chinese, although it would
be nice to know what they caught. The book is sprinkled with similar
nuggets, and Voss Bark wears his learning lightly.
Sidney Vines has produced a large and handsome study, The English Chalk
Streams (Batsford Pounds 19.99), which fulfills most expectations. He is as
informative about the little jewels - like the Meon and the Frome - as on
the Test and Kennet, and is commendably sane on contentious issues, such as
stocking and overfishing. His assertion, though, that Skues, Halford and
Sawyer were greater writers than Grey of Falloden, because they were more
observant, strikes me as absurd.
Serious students of angling literature should be grateful to Justin Knowles
of The Fly Fisher's Classic Library for continuing to exhume the gems of
bygone ages. Among this year's delights have been Chaytor's Letters To A
Salmon Fisher's Sons, Plunket Greene's Where The Bright Waters Meet, Grey's
Fly Fishing, and Bainbridge's Fly Fisher's Guide. They cost between Pounds
31 and Pounds 39 each, and are available from the Fly Fisher's Classic
Library, Bovey Tracey, Newton Abbot, Devon.
The Big Fish (Robinson Pounds 14.95) is a highly entertaining collection of
monster stories edited by Arthur Oglesby and Lucy Money Coutts. Some are
familiar, but many are not, and all will give pleasure. I particularly
enjoyed Jim Corbett's tales of mahseer fishing in India and Byron Roger's
improbable and ludicrous account of the capture of a colossal sturgeon in
Wales.
Even more fun is The Irish Game Angler's Anthology (Country House Pounds
17.95). Ireland's people and its lakes and rivers inspires the story teller,
and the editor, Niall Fallon, has done a splendid job in bringing the best
of them together. Many were English - Grey, JW Hills, GD Luard, Frank Barker
and others, are all here. So are the great Irish writers, among them the
judge, TC Kingsmill Moore. I love the commentary of an envious neighbour on
the judge's capture of four spring salmon from the Slaney: 'Good, Kingie is
in a fish.' 'My God, the judge has got another'. 'The bloody fellow has
hooked a third]'. 'This is too much. The bastard has a fourth.'
Bryn Hammond's Halcyon Days (Swan Hill Pounds 18.95) is more of a series of
essays than a true anthology; although he quotes at length from other
writers to illustrate his subjects. It is a novel and interesting approach,
somewhat incoherently realised.
The oddest and most fascinating book I have read this year, by a wide
margin, is Down The Crazy River by Paul Boote and Jeremy Wade (Sangha Books,
17 Stockton Road, Swindon, Pounds 18.95). It is an account of obsessive
quests for the mighty mahseer of India, and the even mightier goliath tiger
fish of central Africa. I, too, have dreamed of pursuing these fabled
species - and having read of the hideous discomforts and horrors endured by
these fearless adventurers, I am relieved I got no further than that. The
book is riveting, although it would have benefitted greatly from ruthless
pruning.
Two other appealing curiosities are Michael Marshall's Tyne Waters (Witherby
Pounds 18.99), and Lake Vyrnwy - The Story Of A Sporting Hotel, published at
Pounds 12.95 by the authors, Sir John Baynes and George Westropp. The first
charts the extraordinary story of the Tyne's transformation from open sewer
to top salmon river; the other makes me want to do what I have never done,
namely fish for trout in Wales .
Finally, a brief mention for An Angler For All Seasons (Merlin Unwin Pounds
16.95), which is a selection from the writings of HT Sheringham, edited by
me. I will say no more than that there is very little of me in it, and a lot
of him, and that he was an even better writer than Chris Yates.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921219

