FT923-10725

FT  29 JUL 92 / International Company News: Thomson-CSF leaves Loral as sole
buyer of LTV unit


   By GEORGE GRAHAM and KAREN ZAGOR


   WASHINGTON, NEW YORK


THOMSON-CSF, the French state-controlled defence electronics group,
yesterday pulled out of a planned deal to buy a stake in the missiles
division of LTV of the US.
Loral, a New York-based defence electronics manufacturer which last week
announced plans to buy the LTV missiles unit with Thomson as a minority
partner, said yesterday it planned to go ahead with the purchase on its own
at a price of not more than Dollars 240m.
Thomson had originally planned to acquire the whole missiles division from
LTV, with Carlyle Group, a Washington DC investment bank, taking the
aircraft unit. The French group had to back down in the face of a hostile
reception in the US Congress and defence department, and a restructured deal
was announced last week in which Loral would take control of the division
with Thomson taking a minority stake.
Thomson yesterday refused to comment on its withdrawal, except to say it
regarded its original deal with LTV, which is under the supervision of a
bankruptcy court, as 'having been terminated'.
Loral, however, said it had been unable to satisfy Thomson's demands for a
greater participation, including a seat on the board. It added that it
expected the deal to boost its earnings by 40 cents a share.
Thomson's hopes of entering the US missiles market through the purchase ran
into the opposition of Lockheed and Martin Marietta, two leading US defence
companies, which together had hoped to buy the LTV operations.
In repeated congressional hearings Thomson was lambasted as the tool of a
sinister French conspiracy to take over the world defence industry. Senators
complained that US defence secrets would be siphoned overseas, and US
defence companies damaged by unfair competition from a state-owned rival.
The initial Thomson offer was withdrawn when it became plain that it would
be rejected by the committee on foreign investment in the US, a body chaired
by the US Treasury which rules on foreign acquisitions of companies in
sensitive technology areas.
Loral yesterday reported first-quarter net income of Dollars 29m, or 85
cents a share, against Dollars 22.4m, or 83 cents a year earlier, Karen
Zagor reports from New York. Sales were slightly higher, at Dollars 681m
compared with Dollars 677m.
Operating income for the three months to June 31 rose 7 per cent to Dollars
68.8m from Dollars 64.1m. Bookings stood at Dollars 502m in the latest
quarter against Dollars 492m last year, while Loral's backlog slipped 5 per
cent to Dollars 2.73bn from Dollars 2.88bn.
Mr Bernard Schwartz, Loral's chairman and chief executive, said the company
expected 'income, bookings, sales and margins to accelerate as the year
progresses, with double digit per share earnings increase for the year,
without acquisitions'.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920729

