FT924-8188

FT  12 NOV 92 / Economic Viewpoint: Learn from Keynes but don't be a parrot


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Many years ago a reader wrote to the Financial Times to say that it was a
revealing reflection on the would-be scientific standing of economics that
exponents of rival theories thought it important to find chapter and verse
for their views in Keynes - which they always can for, like most such
figures, he said a great many things. Can one imagine the protagonists in a
controversy in physics trying to advance their views by showing that they
were implicit in some obscure passage in Einstein, and their opponents
replying either that this was a misunderstanding or that it was all said
better by Isaac Newton (the Adam Smith of physics)?
Yet I have been enjoying Robert Skidelsky's John Maynard Keynes, Volume II;
The Economist as Saviour, 1920-37 (Macmillan, Pounds 20). Like the first
volume, it is a good read and brings together history, biography, analysis
and reflections. Unlike too many other writers on Keynes, Skidelsky supports
some form of liberal capitalism; so I can be stimulated by the occasional
disagreement without having to get into intellectual battle dress.
There are also striking parallels between today's problems and those of the
interwar period, but equally important differences. An example of both is
shown on the chart. The similarities are the very high rates of unemployment
 -although even here depression-mongers who quote crude numbers out of work
overlook both population growth and the increase in workforce participation
rates.
But of course the biggest discrepancy is in the behaviour of prices.
Interwar consumer prices reached a peak in 1920. After that the price level
 -not just the rate of inflation - was on a falling trend. Thus in some
respects Keynes had a much easier task than present-day advisers. For he
could concentrate on fighting one evil - depression. Recent policymakers
have had to contend with two evils - unemployment and inflation - pulling
them in opposite directions. More fundamentally, we have learnt something
'about the pathology of governments' since Keynes.
Indeed, the net impact of this biography is likely to be to reduce the
exaggerated role so often given to the 1936 General Theory. Skidelsky
obviously has a soft spot for the Treatise on Money, a rambling earlier work
repudiated by card-carrying Keynesians, but perhaps more relevant to
capitalism for most of its history.
The relevance of Keynes today is that, after many false alarms, we really
may face a danger of deficient demand, that is, total spending in money
terms not increasing fast enough for reasonable growth at a low rate of
inflation. Keynes did assume, more often than not, that in such
circumstances any boost to spending must take the form of infrastructure
investment.
In 1928 he wrote in support of the Lloyd George Yellow Book: 'When we have
unemployed men and unemployed plant and more savings than we are using at
home, it is utterly imbecile to say that we cannot afford these things (a
programme of national development).' Skidelsky adds: 'The whole subsequent
history of the Keynesian revolution was not able to improve substantially on
this rationale for state action to get an economy out of depression.'
Keynes had moral and aesthetic reasons for favouring public investment. He
envisaged a time when productive capacity would reach its maximum, the
economic problem would be solved, and people left free to concentrate on
higher matters; and he wanted a crash programme to accelerate this glad day.
He also envisaged rebuilt British cities as noble beacons to the world.
Are there more prosaic reasons why a demand boost should take a fiscal form
at all rather than a credit stimulus? And even if the boost has to be
fiscal, why can it not be tax cuts to finance consumption?
What is wrong with Peter Jay's idea of a two months' holiday from VAT or
income tax, which would inject Pounds 16bn into households (The Independent,
November 10)? As Jay remarks, even if the beneficiaries used their windfall
to repay debt, this would bring forward the time at which they felt secure
enough to resume normal spending. The net effect is that the government
would take over some of the personal sector's indebtedness.
Instead, the government is flying kites about a tax increase in the guise of
higher National Insurance contributions, which can only depress personal
spending power and which non-doctrinal common sense suggests should be
postponed until economic recovery. Those whom the gods wish to destroy, they
first make mad.
The sound, but probably temporary, reason for giving a demand boost a fiscal
emphasis is that an all-out drive for very low interest rates would risk
putting sterling under even greater downward pressure than it is already,
which could feed back into inflation even at today's depressed level of
activity. Last month's import price rise is a warning.
If the Bundesbank decides to pull out the anti-recession stops and go for
cheap money, then the UK should do the same and go back to long-term fiscal
guidelines. But we cannot leap too far ahead and would not do so even if
Kenneth Baker (the Eurosceptic Pretender) were premier.
Within fiscal policy, some of the reasons for favouring public spending over
tax cuts are perverse. Increased personal spending is supposedly more likely
to go into imports - which would help other countries to fight recession,
just as their tax cuts would help the UK. There is also the weak presumption
that public investment will stimulate supply potential as well as demand, so
that it would not be wasted even if the demand boost does not work or is
mistimed.
My main reason for limited acquiescence in the infrastructure fashion is
that it pays to bend to the mood of the times when no great evil is
involved. Since Keynes's time public works have become more respectable,
while reigning puritanical opinion is likely to think tax cuts a sign that
'governments have gone mad'.
Moreover, despite the many millions of words which have been written since
Keynes's time, we are not really much wiser about how much a budget deficit
matters in times of economic slack or how the relevant deficit should be
defined. There is therefore a case for minimising the government's so-called
'current deficit', if that will slightly reassure domestic business or
international financial opinion
A modern New Deal should be compatible with different theoretical models of
the economy rather than be too dependent on any one being true. The more I
think about it, the more this makes sense of many - although not all of -
Keynes's multifold policy zig-zags. The search for the one true Keynesian
model is a wild goose chase, even though it was one in which the Master
sometimes indulged himself.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921112

