FT921-1205

FT  25 MAR 92 / Plan for Karabakh peace conference


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER and REUTER


   HELSINKI, BRUSSELS


THE 51-nation Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe will
organise a special conference 'as soon as possible' to sponsor a peace
settlement in the war-torn Trans-Caucasian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh, the
subject of a bitter dispute between the former Soviet republics of Armenia
and Azerbaijan.
Foreign Ministers from the member countries, meeting to decide on the future
role of the CSCE following the end of the cold war in Europe, mandated Mr
Jiri Dienstbier, the Czechoslovakian foreign minister, to visit the region
at the end of this month to try to establish a ceasefire between the two
warring parties.
The chairman of the conference, which is to be held in Minsk, the Belarus
capital, will be chosen by Mr Dienstbier, the current president of the CSCE.
Several names have been mentioned so far, including that of Sir Geoffrey
Howe, the former British foreign secretary. The 10 CSCE member nations who
will participate in the conference include the US, Russia and Turkey.
A dispute between Armenia and Azerbaijan over what status Nagorno-Karabakh
should have in the conference was finally resolved by an agreement that Mr
Dienstbier would have the last word on the subject. Azerbaijan originally
wanted representatives of the enclave to be part of its own delegation;
Armenia wanted them to report to the conference in their own right. The
ministers said after yesterday's meeting they were convinced a conference on
Nagorno-Karabakh under the auspices of the CSCE would provide an ongoing
forum for negotiations towards a peaceful settlement of the crisis on the
basis of the principles, commitments and provisions of the CSCE.
The membership of the CSCE, which opened its fourth 'Helsinki Follow-up
Conference' at ministerial level, was increased from 48 to 51 by the formal
admission of Croatia, Slovenia and Georgia. Croatia and Slovenia previously
had only observer status, while the recent civil war in Georgia prevented it
from becoming a member when the other former Soviet republics were admitted
as independent states.
However, the decision last Monday by the EC to clear the way for its members
to recognise Georgia, and the appointment of Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, former
Soviet foreign minister, as head of Georgia's State Council, has opened the
republic's path into the CSCE.
The need to strengthen the CSCE's capacity to deal with the regional and
ethnic conflicts which are likely to be a feature of the European landscape
was underlined by all participants. Some, like Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher,
German foreign minister, want the CSCE to have more extensive conflict
management and peace-keeping powers.
Mr Genscher, however, proposed institutional changes, such as setting up a
six- or seven-member steering committee to render decision-making less
unwieldy in dealing with specific conflicts, and the creation of special
CSCE peace-keeping forces.
His suggestions went considerably further than those of other members -
including notably the US, UK, Russia and the Netherlands - which do not want
to give the CSCE a specifically military role but favour the use, at the
request of the CSCE, of peace-keeping troops from organisations such as Nato
and the nine-country Western European Union.
The former Cold War enemies yesterday signed a treaty allowing flights over
each other's territories to gather information, Reuter reports from
Helsinki.
The 'open skies' treaty, signed by the US, Russia and other members of Nato
and the defunct Warsaw Pact, allows signatories to make surveillance
flights. Theforeign ministers of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus signed the pact
in place of the former Soviet Union.  Georgia brought the total of
signatories to 25.
Nato, worried about strains on its vital transatlantic ties, will ask Canada
to drop plans to withdraw all its troops from Europe, alliance sources say,
Reuter reports from Brussels.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920325

