FT924-8088

FT  13 NOV 92 / Industry backs Russian reforms: Leading industrialist says
he supports moves towards a market economy


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE leader of Russia's industrialists yesterday angrily hit out at critics
who had accused him and his members of threatening economic reform.
'Unlike some people in the government, the Russian Union of Industrialists
is doing its best to create the infrastructure for a market economy,' Mr
Arkady Volsky told a Financial Times conference in Moscow.
Mr Volsky, president of the Russian Union of Industrialists and
Entrepreneurs, said his members, drawn from both the state and the fledgling
private sector, were neither 'fat cats' nor 'enemies of reform'.
He was responding to charges made the previous day by Prof Anders Aslund, a
senior adviser to the Russian government, that Mr Volsky and the Civic
Union, a centrist political group of which he was a founding member, were
the 'most serious threat' to Russian economic reform.
Later, talking to Russian deputies in the parliament, Mr Volsky said that in
recent meetings with Mr Yegor Gaidar, the acting prime minister, the two men
had substantially agreed on a number of basic economic issues.
But Mr Gaidar, also addressing the deputies, said the government would not
return to 'the nostalgic central direction of the economy' which Civic Union
proposed in its recently completed programme.
Civic Union will put its programme, which it is pressing President Boris
Yeltsin to use as the basis for policies in a revamped cabinet, to a
congress of industrialists to be held tomorrow in Moscow.
The congress, at which Mr Yeltsin has been invited to speak, will be a
sounding board both for opposition to the government and, the government
hopes, for industrialists who support the policies of economic liberalism
and privatisation.
Mr Volsky's outburst at the FT conference, entitled Doing Business in
Russia, was designed to prove to the audience of business people that he was
no friend to the old centrally planned economy, favouring instead a coherent
and planned transition to a market economy.
He said he backed bankruptcies, privatisations, strict control of credit and
individual initiative.
Later speakers, however, emphasised the need for tight control of the money
supply and faster liberalisation of a still state-controlled economy.
Mr William Crowley, leader of the team from Goldman Sachs, the US investment
bank which is advising the Russian government, said western investment in
large industrial companies would be slow and limited for the foreseeable
future. But he expected a lot of interest in the energy field and in the
creation of plants manufacturing food and other consumer products.

The Financial Times


International Page 18

921113

