FT924-1022

FT  21 DEC 92 / BA hopes of USAir deal fade after Camp David talks


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


MR JOHN MAJOR failed at the weekend to break the deadlock with Washington
over British Airways' bid for a 44 per cent stake in USAir, reinforcing
expectations that the offer will fail later this week.
After talks at Camp David between Mr Major and Mr George Bush, the outgoing
US president, British officials said they were pessimistic that the US
administration would approve the bid before its expiry date on Christmas
Eve.
Mr John MacGregor, UK transport secretary, will have a final round of talks
this week with Mr Andrew Card, US transportation secretary. But officials
said that the talks were likely to be a 'formality'.
President Bush told Mr Major that the US would not drop its demand for
greater access for US airlines to Heathrow airport before clearing the
Dollars 750m (Pounds 493m) British Airways deal.
The three largest US carriers - American Airlines, United Airlines and Delta
Airlines - want a complete 'open skies' policy as their price for the deal
to go through. Britain is offering improved access to regional airports.
Speaking after the Camp David meeting the British official said that the
'two sides are too far apart' to hold out expectations of a last-minute
compromise.
The BA bid for a stake in USAir is designed to further its ambitions to
become a global carrier through the acquisition of stakes in other
international airlines. Last week it secured a 25 per cent interest in
Qantas, the Australian national carrier.
But the official said that despite its disappointment if the bid failed, BA
would probably judge it would lose more than it gained if Mr Major acceded
to the US demand.
Under US regulations, foreign airlines are restricted to 25 per cent of the
voting rights in a US carrier although they can acquire up to 49 per cent of
the shares.
The proposed BA deal with USAir deal is designed to comply with those rules.
BA seeks 44 per cent of USAir shares and 21 per cent of the airline's voting
rights. However, rival US airlines have argued that small print in the
agreement would give effective control of USAir to BA.
Mr Robert Crandall, chairman of American Airlines and the most vocal critic
of the proposed deal, claimed that the big three US carriers would between
them lose Dollars 500m a year in revenues if the BA acquisition went ahead
without a balanced UK-US liberalisation agreement.
BA sends lobbyists into a spin, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921221

