FT921-3699

FT  13 MAR 92 / Japanese fear trouble as trade surplus soars


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


THE Japanese government, reacting to the surge in the country's trade
surplus, said yesterday it would intensify attempts to strengthen the yen
and consider new means of stimulating a slowing domestic economy.
The Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry
(Miti) said that the yen, which closed at Y134 to the dollar in Tokyo, was
'unacceptably weak'. Their comments came after the announcement of a record
monthly surplus of Dollars 10.2bn for February.
Mr Noboru Hatakeyama, Miti's vice-minister for international affairs, said
yesterday the present trend of the surplus, which is on course to surpass
the record of Dollars 82.7bn in 1986, 'will cause a lot of trouble for us'.
'We have to maintain our domestic demand-led economy, and we have to
strengthen our micro-level import promotion efforts,' said Mr Hatakeyama,
who fears that trade friction will rise in tandem with the surplus. He is
also 'not happy' about the yen's weakness, and hinted that the currency
should be around the Y120 level.
The February trade figures showed sharp increases in exports by the
electronics and car industries, which had been warned by Miti in the late
1980s to exercise caution in expanding their production facilities. Despite
that advice, new orders for machinery rose by a striking 25.2 per cent and
17.5 per cent in 1988 and 1989, and the slowdown in the domestic economy has
left companies with surplus production capacity.
While careful not to condemn particular industries, Mr Hatakeyama said 'some
sectors had invested excessively', and that this past expansion of capacity
was prompting companies to increase exports this year.
'It seems to be true that they invested heavily because they enjoyed
low-cost equity finance. Of course, if we look at the other side of the
coin, it was good for us to see this strong growth in our economy,' he said.
He said that the ministry would not advise companies to restrict exports
because such guidance would violate Gatt rules.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920313

