FT921-14054

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Radical change proposed to councils'
pay bargaining


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


LOCAL authorities are being asked to consider a radical change to national
pay bargaining arrangements under which they would gain far greater leeway
in determining increases for groups of workers.
In a suggested 'kitty bargaining' arrangement, national negotiators would
agree on a percentage addition to the pay bill to which each authority would
then be committed. The distribution of the kitty would be determined
locally.
That would allow authorities to link the size of increases to individual
performance. There would no longer be national pay scales or rates.
The proposal is one of three options suggested by the Local Government
Management Board, the body which advises councils on training, pay and
conditions, and by associations of local authorities in a consultation paper
being sent to individual councils.
Its second option is 'two-tier settlements' under which national scales and
rates continue but only some of the available money goes to increase these,
with the remainder distributed locally.
The third option is to keep the current bargaining system under which
national negotiators determine pay scales and rates. 'The existing employer
strategy would continue of taking opportunities to slim down national
agreements.'
The 'kitty bargaining' proposal comes when all public-sector managements are
being urged to introduce more flexible pay systems under the government's
Citizen's Charter.
The proposal has already been attacked by unions, particularly those
representing white-collar workers who have strongly opposed the
fragmentation of national pay structures.
Mr Dennis Reed, national officer for the Nalgo public service union, pointed
out yesterday that more modest proposals for increasing local flexibility
were abandoned by councils in 1989 after a series of strikes. He predicted
there would be little enthusiasm among councils for 'kitty bargaining' or
for the two-tier settlements formula.
The consultation paper says that if there was a consensus among authorities
for radical changes, any reforms would need to be delivered over a number of
years to allow preparations for adjustment.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920117

