FT924-5949

FT  24 NOV 92 / Strike leaves Italian smokers gasping


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


IT'S become a case of fire without smoke in Italy.
Smokers and tobacconists are angry over a strike in the state tobacco
monopoly that has paralysed distribution and exhausted supplies throughout
the country. The tobacconists' union is appropriately acronymed Fit.
'The strike has been going on for 20 days and I know of no one who has got
any stock left - except the most expensive cigars,' said a tobacconist in
central Rome. 'I've never known anything like it - we even had a chauffeur
who had been sent out to buy as many cigarette rollers he could find. People
are desperate.'
Yesterday, a single cigarette was being traded in the street for as much as
L1,000 (48p).
In Rome restaurants, waiters were asking for tips in cigarettes. At the
airport, unsuspecting arriving passengers found themselves being offered
cash for their duty frees.
At the frontiers with Switzerland and France the flow of shoppers was
reported unusually heavy. for this time of year. Even in Naples, the centre
of contraband, stocks have been drawn down and police warned of the dangers
of buying 'doctored' cigarettes.
Today, the country's 60,000 tobacconists are due to strike in protest at
their loss of income. They have already written to the prime minister and
president of the republic seeking their intervention. Faced with higher
taxes next year, they have also asked for special tax exemption for their
lost sales.
The unprecedented shortage of cigarettes has been caused by attempts to
transform the entity running the state monopolies which consists essentially
of tobacco and matches. The government is proposing to turn the entity into
a public company and cut its 13,000 workforce by 600 jobs.
The bulk of the workforce has gone on strike in protest at the threat of job
losses. Since the monopoly controls stocks, Italy's 13.3m smokers are
entirely dependent upon its ability to distribute. The tobacconists
themselves are often small shops with little storage space thus their own
retail stocks are limited
The trouble started because both smokers and tobacconists under-estimated
the determination - or bloody mindedness - of the strikers. There were
frequent reports of settlement which proved groundless.
The latest report is that work will resume on Wednesday but stocks are
unlikely to be delivered until the weekend at the earliest. On current
prices a cigarette could cost L2,000 by then.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921124

