FT924-956

FT  21 DEC 92 / Competing answers to university challenge: Means-testing to
control the cost of further education may be an alternative to ceilings on
enrolment growth


   By ANDREW ADONIS


For students and universities, the party is over and the hangover about to
begin.
After seven years of uninterrupted growth in student numbers, the government
is applying the brakes. Courses for 16 to 19-year-olds are now top priority
for extra education spending, with further education colleges due to pass
from local government to Whitehall control in April.
To contain higher education spending, Mr John Patten, education secretary,
looks set to announce cuts in fees paid by the government for university
courses. He has also imposed a 13 per cent ceiling on the growth in student
numbers over the next three years.
Polytechnics achieved an increase in enrolments of that size last year
alone, and few believe the government will be able to constrain growth for
long. The question is not whether higher education will expand further, but
what form the expansion will take and how it will be funded.
The form of expansion is now settled. Polytechnics have been permitted to
call themselves universities, but the bottom four-fifths of the new
'university' sector will comprise teaching colleges in all but name. The
Universities Funding Council's research assessment ratings, published last
week, indicated that a majority of top-graded departments are in just 12
institutions. Research funding is to be concentrated on those, with teaching
centred on the rest.
The question of funding is more problematic. A year or two from now, it will
be one of the toughest education policy issues facing the politicians.
For a glimpse of the debate to come, a little noticed speech earlier this
month by Mr Jeff Rooker, Labour's new higher education spokesman, is
essential reading.
In an address to the Socialist Education Association, Mr Rooker raised the
issue of means-testing the fees currently paid to universities by the
government for all first- degree students, irrespective of parental income.
He argued that it would be 'totally unacceptable' for school leavers and
mature students of entry standard to be denied the chance to continue their
studies because of government-imposed ceilings on numbers. Then came the
punch line: 'Social equity demands that we look to all possible sources of
revenue from those who can afford to pay . . . The issue of a contribution
from the wealthy (must) be considered.'
For all politicians, Labour as much as Tory, the public spending
implications of the explosion in numbers are beginning to sink in. The
figures are stark. In the early 1960s, the UK had barely 100,000 full-time
students in higher education. By 1987 the number was 549,000; now it is
about 775,000. Vice-chancellors believe that Mr Patten's 13 per cent
increase may be illusory, being largely absorbed as the current intake of
students passes through the system.
Given the numbers, the government's fees bill would have rocketed in any
event. But it has been artificially increased by a decision in the late
1980s to shift higher education funding from grants paid to institutions to
fees following students. The aim was to encourage institutions to take more
students at marginal cost, and to create a market environment in which
universities would sell themselves better. It succeeded beyond almost
everyone's - particularly the government's - expectations. The cost was
enormous. In 1979 the government's annual fees bill was Pounds 238.7m; by
1986 it had risen to Pounds 290.7m; last year it was Pounds 680m.
Since almost everyone - particularly the government - agrees that the bill
cannot go on rising at that rate, there are only two options: capping
student numbers or means-testing fees. (Universities could be more
efficient, of course. But lecturer-to-student ratios are already at 1:20 or
worse in many institutions.)
For the moment, Mr Patten is taking the first option and capping numbers.
Labour is hovering at the entrance to the second.
Mr Rooker insists that his speech was no more than the design for a kite.
But should the kite fly, the impact on the middle classes would be profound.
Annual fees for undergraduate courses currently range from Pounds 1,855 to
nearly Pounds 5,000, depending on the subject. Living costs come on top,
allowances for which are being progressively shifted from grants to loans.
The maintenance grant is fixed at a maximum of Pounds 2,265, but even that
is means-tested. Withdrawal starts if combined parental income reaches a
mere Pounds 13,630.
Fewer than a third of students now receive the full grant. If the regime for
maintenance grants were extended to tuition fees, a typical university would
become as expensive as Eton for students from better-off families.
Ironically, the means-testing option has impeccable Tory credentials. Sir
Keith (now Lord) Joseph toyed with it when he was education secretary in the
mid-1980s, but drew back amid protests from the Tory shires. As a next best,
Mr Robert Jackson, higher education minister in the late 1980s, urged
vice-chancellors to consider additional fees to be paid directly by
students. They declined to do so, though many were attracted to the idea.
Mindful of the electoral consequences, the government finally gave up the
quest last year. Its 1991 Higher Education White Paper stated: 'Public funds
will remain the main source of income for funding the projected expansion of
student numbers.'
It might seem odd, then, that Labour is picking up the means-testing baton.
In fact, the Tories' decision to drop it gives them a golden opportunity.
After its bloody nose at the last election, Labour's leadership is more
concerned than ever at the tax implications of massive public spending
commitments, and higher education is prominent among them.
Labour can also point to the rest of Europe and the US, where the charging
of fees is standard practice. A Mori poll conducted earlier this year showed
a majority of those with incomes over Pounds 15,000 a year were prepared to
pay tuition fees, to the average tune of Pounds 1,000 a year.
Moreover, the Tories abandoned attempts to make students and their parents
pay fees for the very reason that makes the idea potentially tolerable to
Labour: it means taxing the Tories' natural constituency. Mr Rooker is
impressed by a research paper published recently by the National Commission
on Education, showing that in relative terms, over the past 20 years the
proportions entering higher education from manual working class families has
scarcely shifted by comparison with those from professional and managerial
families.
'This is cold comfort for those who seek the 'classless society' ',
concluded the paper. Maybe. But it might enable Labour to turn the tables on
a government reneging on commitments to open higher education to all able to
make the grade.
 ---------------------------------------------
        FULL-TIME STUDENT ENROLMENTS
 ---------------------------------------------
            England: first degree
            courses; polytechnics
              and universities
 ---------------------------------------------
1982                                325,000
1983                                329,000
1984                                330,000
1985                                332,000
1986                                339,000
1987                                348,000
1988                                363,000
1989                                388,000
1990                                428,000
 ---------------------------------------------
Source: Department of Education
 ---------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921221

