FT924-12139

FT  22 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Phoning Europe


EUROPEAN businesses and consumers pay a heavy price for the continent's
fragmented and cartelised telecommunications market. The heaviest burden is
the excessive price of cross-border telephone calls, which are about three
to six times as expensive as calls of the same distance within the unified
and competitive US market.
It is therefore refreshing that the European Commission has in its sights
the monopolistic practices that underpin these excessive prices. In a
consultative document published yesterday, it argues that the market for
cross-border calls within the Community should be opened up to competition.
Given the concern throughout Europe over the Commission's high-handedness on
a range of matters in the past, it is clearly sensible to have a thorough
public consultation before reaching a final decision. But the Commission is
also right to give a firm lead that liberalisation should be the way
forward. Telephone call charges are too high because most European countries
have only one telephone company, while profits from international calls have
traditionally been used to subsidise local calls.
The Commission paper sets out four options. The first - maintaining the
status quo - is rejected because it would not address the problem. The
second - regulating prices directly - is viewed as excessively
interventionist. The remaining options are to liberalise only the market for
cross-border calls or to open up the whole market.
Economically, the case for full-blooded liberalisation is compelling. Europe
suffers not only from higher cross-border call charges than the US, but also
from higher domestic tariffs and a less innovative market in the development
of services.
However, politically, the Commission is wise to limit its action to
cross-border liberalisation. If the principle of subsidiarity is to be taken
seriously, as it must, there is a strong argument that member states should
be left to decide for themselves how far to open up telecommunications
within their borders. But, when it comes to crossing frontiers, it is clear
that only the Commission has the competence to act. It should do so
vigorously.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921022

