FT921-14223

FT  17 JAN 92 / Lisbon plays down recognition issue


   By DAVID BUCHAN and LAURA SILBER


   STRASBOURG, BELGRADE


THE Portuguese presidency of the European Community said yesterday that
recognition of remaining Yugoslav republics seeking independence was for
individual EC states to decide.
Mr Joao de Deus Pinheiro, Portugal's foreign minister, said 'recognition is
a question of national sovereignty' for individual EC states. 'There is
nothing in the Treaty of Rome or the Maastricht treaty which obliges us to
move together. We will try, but there are no guarantees (of success),' he
said.
Portugal has thus signalled it does not intend to spend much of its EC
presidency over the first half of this year in an attempt to maintain
diplomatic unity on the Yugoslav crisis, as happened to the previous Dutch
presidency. None the less, Mr Pinheiro predicted that there would be no
immediate rush by the majority of EC states to recognise Macedonia against
the wishes of Greece.
Though the EC-commissioned Badinter report has cleared Macedonia for
recognition, Athens is unhappy that the name of the putative state implied a
claim on the loyalties of Greek Macedonians.
'Where the interests of one member state are at stake, we must make an
effort and try not to reach a solution unacceptable to it,' said Mr
Pinheiro.
In Belgrade, Serbian leaders yesterday said the newly-recognised Croatia
would have to cede its territory controlled by Serbs after the EC decision
to recognise Croatia and Slovenia, though President Franjo Tudjman of
Croatia has vowed to regain all of the republic's lost territory.
Mr Borisav Jovic, a member of the rump federal state presidency, said:
'Croatia can be recognised only within the borders where it actually has
authority,' reported Tanjug, the Belgrade-based news agency.
The Serb-dominated federal army and Serb militias control about a third of
Croatia's territory.
'In the present situation, the arrival of peace-keeping forces on the
territory of Krajina (southern Croatia) is of great importance.' The very
presence of UN forces limited Croatian sovereignty in those areas,
regardless of recognition of Croatia, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920117

