FT921-681

FT  27 MAR 92 / No pledge on Tube extension


   By DAVID OWEN


LABOUR yesterday declined an opportunity to promise that it would find the
money to ensure that the Pounds 1.3bn Jubilee Line Underground extension to
London's Docklands opened on time if Olympia & York, the project's main
private backer, could not provide its share of the finance.
Mr Bryan Gould, shadow environment secretary, said it was 'unwise off the
cuff to promise a very substantial sum of further public expenditure' in the
current 'very difficult economic straits'.
His remarks followed the Department of Transport's admission earlier this
week that ministers would have to reconsider the future of the extension if
the financially troubled property developer was unable to meet its Pounds
400m commitment.
The extension, once regarded as a pioneering transport project, would create
five Underground stations in south and east London and would service
Docklands.
Turning his attention to Europe's biggest new office complex - Canary Wharf
 -which was developed by O&Y, Mr Gould said it was 'somehow fitting' that in
a general election campaign dominated by the recession, the economic
conditions should 'at last be threatening even that Tory flagship'.
If the 'Tory property developers' could not make a success of Docklands
throughout the long 1980s boom, 'we must conclude there was something wrong
with the model,' he said.
Mr Jack Cunningham, Labour's campaign co-ordinator, said that when O&Y
became involved in the project, they were 'widely regarded as financially
impregnable', yet even they had been 'shaken to their foundations' by the
recession. Labour took 'no pleasure at all from the knowledge there may be
financial difficulties threatening these projects', he said.
Some cross-Channel ferry services are likely to be seriously disrupted this
weekend because of a strike by French seamen.
The action, scheduled for today, tomorrow and Sunday, will affect Sealink's
Dover-Calais services, which are being cut to operate only at peak times.
O&Y debt shake-up, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920327

