FT921-15426

FT  10 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Agent orange and the cash bandits - The
security companies' continuing battle


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


WHEN ONE of Securicor's engineers had his van stolen from a public car park
recently it was about as embarrassing as a weather forecaster being soaked
in a rain storm.
But after contacting his office, the engineer was able to call the police
not only to report the theft but also the location of the stolen van, thanks
to Securicor's Datatrak radio tracking system which is fitted to most of its
vehicles.
The device is one of the latest weapons in an armoury which cash carriers
like Securicor employ to foil the gangs bent on diverting some of the Pounds
190bn moved around the country each year.
Despite the recession and the growth of credit card use, there is more cash
in circulation than ever before. Although the golden age of pay-roll heists
has passed the movement of this amount of cash remains a magnet to
increasingly professional gangs.
Last year the number of attacks fell as did the amount successfully stolen,
according to the British Security Industry Association. Provisional figures
suggest there were 7 per cent fewer attacks and about 45 per cent less cash
lost compared with 1990. However that year was the worst year on record, the
Association says.
Securicor was, however, the unlucky one last year. It suffered a 33 per cent
increase in attacks, according to Mr Roger Wiggs, its chief executive.
Carrying about Pounds 100bn of cash a year in 1,500 armoured trucks,
Securicor is by far the largest carrier with a 56 per cent share of the
cash-in-transit market which has total sales of about Pounds 240m.
Over the past two decades the number of attacks on all carriers has grown
sharply. Securicor faced only one-a-month in the mid 1970s but by 1987
attacks hit an annual peak of 376. And last year a Securicor van was
attacked on average once every working day.
But Securicor is foiling far more villains. The one third increase in
attacks last year has been matched by a rise in the failure rate to about 50
per cent.
Not surprisingly Mr Wiggs sounds like a general marshalling his 'troops' in
an endless quest to second guess what techniques the 'bandits' will make use
of in their next strike.
Mr Wellwood Grierson, sales director of Security Express, which with its
associate, Armaguard, is the second largest cash carrier having about 23 per
cent of the market, is not complacent following the apparent targetting of
Securicor.
He is aware that the gangs tend to rotate their targets and that his company
could be worse hit next year. As it is 45 of the 60 attempted robberies on
his vans were successful last year.
The gangs appear to pick what they see as that month's softest target. Four
years ago, for example, there was a perception that Group 4, the third
largest carrier, was the softest touch. It tightened its procedures and the
gangs' attention appears to have swung away from Group 4 following a heavy
investment programme, industry sources say.
Group 4,a subsidiary of Australia's Mayne Nickless, refuses to give
information about how much it carries and how much it loses.
As the market has matured, the carriers have sought to diversify. Securicor
has moved into the delivery of credit cards in high risk areas like London,
Manchester and Glasgow, and fills the automated teller machines for many of
the building societies.
As banks increasingly try to reduce their handling of cash to turn their own
premises into shops for financial services, cash storage centres
increasingly hold, sort and distribute cash on their behalf.
Securicor is understandably coy about just how much is stored in these
super-high security vaults. There is, on average, one attempt a year on the
vaults, all of which have failed.
In addition Securicor is trying to tempt the small corner shop trader to use
the services of smaller armoured vans for the movement of relatively modest
sums of cash to and from banks.
As the bandits have become more sophisticated, so the security companies
have developed increasingly more fiendish tactics in an attempt to foil
them.
Securicor's Datatrak is one technique, using terrestrial radio technology
developed with Wimpey, the construction group, from offshore navigation
technology. Once a Securicor van veers from its appointed route, the control
centre is immediately alerted.
In a recent raid on a van in Harlesden, north London, the police had been
alerted and were on the scene within eight minutes. Group 4 and Security
Express/ Armaguard use similar techniques.
Another invention restricting the scope for the professional gangs is the
'exploding' cash box which is designed to prevent attacks at the point of
greatest vulnerability as cash is carried across the pave-ment.
Here the carriers have redefined catching a thief red-handed. Should the
cash box be taken more than a certain distance from the armoured van, it
will emit a cloud of orange powder which covers everything, including the
robber, within its immediate vicinity.
Just for good measure, the heat from the 'explosion' reduces the notes to an
ugly unusable mess.
The bottom line for the cash carriers is to cut the loss rate, to cut
insurance premiums and the amount of each loss they have to swallow. As
prevention across the pavement and in the banks themselves improves the
gangs are increasingly turning to kidnapping and extortion from families of
security guards.
None of the major companies believe keeping pace with the criminals while
improving margins in a highly competitive and mature market is going to be
anything but a continuing battle.

The Financial Times


London Page 16 Photograph Training with the exploding cash box, one of the
many devices in Securicor's armoury (Omitted).

920110

