FT923-10717

FT  29 JUL 92 / International Bonds: Traders lack interest as activity slows


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE Eurobond market was subdued yesterday, as depressed European markets and
the summer holiday period slowed activity. Although traders were again
dealing in Ecu bonds in calmer market conditions, after last week's selling
and Friday's suspension of market-making, the market lacked buying interest.
It is likely to remain dormant until the French referendum on European union
in September.
Any activity over the next week or so is likely to be concentrated in the
dollar sector, where historically low interest rates are again tempting US
companies to lock in fixed-rate funding, but many will continue to prefer
the US corporate market to the Eurobond market. Because swap opportunities
are few, most dollar offerings are likely to be for US borrowers prepared to
raise fixed-rate funds.
Investor appetite for dollar paper is not strong, partly due to continuing
nervousness about the weakness of the dollar relative to other currencies.
Once the currency turns, European investors are expected to become
enthusiastic buyers of the sector.
The only substantial issue launched yesterday was a Dollars 510m
three-tranche offering of subordinated debt for Long-Term Credit Bank of
Japan, which had been pre-placed in Asia Pacific. The bank will use the
proceeds to shore up its capital base, in order to ensure it meets Basle
capital adequacy guidelines.
Abbey National, the UK financial services company, has become the latest
borrower to add a D-Mark option to its Dollars 10bn Euro medium-term note
programme, with Merrill Lynch Bank as arranger.
At least a dozen more companies active in the market, including a number of
UK building societies, are expected to add D-Marks to the range of
currencies which can be used under existing programmes. On August 1, new
Bundesbank rules to liberalise the issuance of D-Mark paper come into force,
providing a lift for the booming Euro MTN market. Last week, Nationwide
Building Society added a D-Mark option to its programme.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development will sign the first new
programme to incorporate a D-Mark option on Friday. The signing of the
Ecu1bn programme was delayed to allow the D-Mark option to be included.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920729

