FT923-10659

FT  29 JUL 92 / Barclays must face US court hearing


   By RAYMOND HUGHES, Law Courts Correspondent


BARCLAYS Bank began to reduce its exposure to companies in the Maxwell group
more than three months before Robert Maxwell's death because it had noticed
'some alarming signals', a High Court judge said yesterday.
Maxwell Communication Corporation defaulted on a foreign exchange debt in
July last year and the bank demanded repayment of Dollars 30m due from the
company under an overdraft facility in October 1991, said Mr Justice
Hoffmann.
The money was paid after Barclays threatened Mr Kevin Maxwell, a son of
Robert Maxwell, with a writ against MCC and withdrawal of future
co-operation.
On November 24 last year, Mr Richard Pelly, Barclays' corporate finance
director, wrote to Mr Maxwell: 'This letter will serve as a warning that the
non-payment of the Dollars 30m will result in a breach of the facility and
Barclays will take whatever action is required to recover its money . . . We
believe the co-operation of this bank will be important to you over the days
and weeks to come, both on the private side and in discussions regarding the
financing of MCC, to which we will continue to provide significant
facilities after the repayment of the Dollars 30m. However, we will not be
inclined to 'standstill', thereby improving the position of other banks, if
the Dollars 30m remains outstanding.'
The judge rejected Barclays' plea for an injunction barring Price
Waterhouse, MCC's administrators, from suing it in the US for return of the
Dollars 30m, which the administrators contend was an unlawful preference.
He said the bank was confident that it could resist a claim for the Dollars
30m in the UK but thought it might be vulnerable to a claim in the US, where
MCC is in Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Although MCC was an English company, it had assets estimated at between
Dollars 700m and Dollars 1bn in the US. Its assets elsewhere, which had
largely been realised, were estimated to be worth less than Pounds 100m.
The Dollars 30m had been paid to Barclays out of the proceeds of the sale of
Que, the computer publishing division of Macmillan, MCC's principal US
subsidiary, to Prentice-Hall for Dollars 157.5m.
The judge said the English court had no control over what was done in the
name of MCC in New York and an injunction 'could serve no purpose except to
antagonise the US court and prejudice the co-operation which has thus far
prevailed between the Chapter 11 and the English administration'.
Barclays had argued that the English court was the natural forum for trial
of the dispute because the overdraft facility had been an English commercial
transaction, governed by English law, to provide working capital for an
English company and its UK subsidiaries.
The administrators had contended that they had the right to choose where
they sued for the money.
Barclays later said it might appeal against the ruling.
Price Waterhouse, administrators to Maxwell Communication Corporation, has
been granted access to Pergamon Holdings (US), the company at the centre of
the Maxwell private empire, in its efforts to trace money that circulated
within the group.
The firm was granted the right under US bankruptcy legislation to examine
the books of PH (US) and to interview its directors and executives.
The firm is hoping to use the information to help it trace movements of
funds and the companies to which money was passed from PH (US), which is
ultimately owned by the Maxwell Foundation, a Liechtenstein trust.
A similar request for access to PH (US) documents from Arthur Andersen,
administrators to the private Maxwell empire, has so far been stalled by
legal action.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920729

