FT921-14066

FT  17 JAN 92 / Move to delay plan for fixed legal-aid fees


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


THE LAW Society is to press the government to postpone the introduction of
fixed fees for criminal legal-aid work in magistrates' courts until the
issue has been examined by the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice.
The commission, set up last year after the release of the Birmingham Six,
has invited the society to submit evidence. It told the society it would be
'very concerned if the consequences of the proposed arrangements (for fixed
fees) were to do damage to the criminal justice system'.
Mr Philip Ely, society president, said at a meeting in London yesterday of
leaders of the 127 local law societies in England and Wales that standard
fees for criminal legal-aid work - regardless of the complexity of the case
or the time spent on it by a solicitor - could make the criminal legal-aid
system collapse.
Mr Robert Winstanley, a member of the society's governing council, told the
meeting that the government's proposals amounted to 'a capping of resources
available to the defence'.
He explained that few solicitors would continue to do work worth Pounds 333
 -the current upper fee limit for a not-guilty plea in a magistrates' court
 -when the standard fee was fixed at Pounds 162.
The proposal would add significantly to the present imbalance between
resources available to the prosecution and the defence. This, he said, had
been a significant factor in miscarriages of justice in such cases as those
of the Birmingham Six, Guildford Four and Tottenham Three. 'What is the
point of the Royal Commission reporting in two years' time if standard fees
have by then further increased this imbalance.'
Solicitors say standard fees, coupled with the government's offer of a 1 per
cent increase in legal-aid pay rates from April, will amount to a heavy cut
in real terms in their income from work which is already barely profitable.
Solicitors in Southampton protested last autumn by withdrawing from the
provision of emergency cover at police stations and magistrates' courts.
Solicitors in Devon and Cornwall have threatened to follow suit. Lord
Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, has agreed to attend a special meeting of the
society on February 12.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920117

