FT922-13264

FT  13 APR 92 / Farewell Asimov, prince of Sci-Fi: America


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   I may be wrong, but I suspect most British intellectuals


certainly those with literary pretensions - have nothing but disdain for
Isaac Asimov, the prolific American science fiction writer. Asimov is
associated with ray guns, lurid covers and worthless prose. It may come as a
surprise, therefore, that his death last week was marked by long,
appreciative obituaries in leading US newspapers. The Washington Post
honoured his passing with an editorial.
My own view of Asimov, I confess, is far from objective. In the late 1960s,
at the age of about 12, I became addicted to science fiction. I remember,
for example, being utterly absorbed by Asimov's famous Foundation trilogy,
which described the fall of a future Galactic Empire and efforts by social
scientists to head off a feared descent into 30,000 years of barbarism.
Asimov later admitted that the Foundation stories were inspired by Gibbon's
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, which he had read twice as a young
man. But the name Gibbon would have meant nothing to me then.
Asimov, of course, was more than just a sci-fi writer. From his mid-30s he
was motivated mainly by a desire to make complex ideas accessible to lay
readers. Working at a frenetic pace, he produced nearly 500 books, mostly
nonfiction. He seemed able to master just about any subject, turning out
Asimov 'guides' on topics as diverse as atomic physics, neurology, the
Bible, Greek culture and Shakespeare. Marvelling at his energy, the Post
editorial hails him as a throwback to earlier centuries when scholars had
the confidence to embrace all branches of human knowledge.
I share the Post's admiration for his phenomenal range. But I cannot help
wondering whether an English Asimov would be feasible: the American writer
surely benefited from the greatest virtue of American education: the lack of
specialisation at high schools and colleges.
Asimov embodied several American virtues. He raised himself by hard graft as
much as by intellect, typically working a 15-hour day. (His parents, poor
Russian immigrants, provided a fine example, keeping their Brooklyn candy
store open from 6am to 1am, seven days a week.) He was intensely
individualistic, writing about space travel but refusing to fly, indifferent
to his considerable wealth, and conspicuous only for bushy white sideburns
that looked almost as odd as the pointed ears of Mr Spock of Star Trek fame.
He was a democrat with a small 'd", writing without condescension for often
poorly educated readers. Above all, he reflected modern America's
infatuation with science and technology: it always amazes me that routine
flights of the space-shuttle rate top billing on TV and radio.
What value, however, should we place on Asimov, the sci-fi writer? By normal
literary standards, his work is indeed thin gruel; characters are poorly
developed and his use of language lacks sophistication. Yet contempt for
sci-fi is often misplaced. In a sympathetic recent assessment in the
Atlantic magazine, Mr Thomas Disch, a US theatre critic and sci-fi writer,
argues that the genre should be understood - and hence judged - primarily as
a form of children's fiction. This seems too harsh: the huge sales of sci-fi
books and the dazzling success of movies such as Star Wars, ET, Blade Runner
and Back to the Future demonstrates its appeal to adults. A better way to
characterise sci-fi is to say that it is dedicated to the exploration of
ideas. It hardly matters if the human beings are wooden because they are
often of secondary importance.
Asimov produced his best fiction in the 1940s and 1950s, a period of
extraordinary creativity for sci-fi. Many of the ideas were far ahead of
their time. Asimov, for example, coined the term robotics and invented laws
for programming androids' brains when the electronic computer was in its
infancy and long before artificial intelligence existed as an academic
discipline. He conceived worlds where holograms were so perfect that human
beings ceased to interact physically. His compatriot James Blish imagined
engines and force-fields that would allow US cities such as New York to
break free from the Earth and fly anarchically through outer space. Arthur C
Clarke, later famous for the movie 2001: A Space Odyssey, anticipated
earth-orbiting satellites and wrote about colonising Mars.
Technology played a central role in most of the stories. But some writers
engaged in social satire. Frederick Pohl, for example, satirised American
consumerism in the 1950s, depicting an inverted social pyramid in which the
poorer you got, the more goods and services you were forced to consume; only
the ultra rich were thin and free to live in comparative austerity.
It is hard to know what spurred the creativity of Asimov and his fellow
sci-fi writers. The invention of atom bombs, rockets and gadgets of all
kinds must have impressed young minds. But their penchant for extravagant
scientific fantasy probably also reflected the stability and dominance of US
society in the post-war years - and its focus on technological rather than
economic or social values. When everyday life is dull and predictable, young
minds start free-wheeling. It was, after all, in the late summer of
Victorian stability that young H G Wells produced such classics as The Time
Machine and The War of the Worlds.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920413

