FT922-3970

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (17): Sign of the times, new
ventures in the genre - Management


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


QUALITY: CHANGE THROUGH TEAMWORK by Chaudhry-Lawton, Lawton, Murphy and
Terry Century Business/Sunday Times Pounds 20, 318 pages
MANAGING INTERNATIONAL TEAMS by Nicola Phillips Financial Times/Pitman Books
Pounds 30, 198 pages
TEAMWORK, quality and customer service are three of the obvious top
half-dozen managerial priorities of the early 1990s. So one does not need to
smell conspiracy at the discovery that two of Britain's leading newspapers,
the Sunday Times and the Financial Times, have each chosen these topics as
part of their first real involvement in popular business book publishing.
In partnership with Century Business, the Sunday Times' trio of books form
part of a first batch of five volumes in its new 'Business Skills' series of
training packages. These comprise the books, two videos and a work book on
each topic. The other two initial titles are on time management and
effective meetings. The books are of good quality (the one reviewed here is
excellent), but take second place in the company's promotional campaign to
the video-based courses. Some of the books go well beyond the basics (though
these are very much their focus), and cost only Pounds 20 - quite low for
business hardbacks.
By contrast, the FT's involvement in the arena, in partnership with Pitman
Publishing, is with a self-standing series of hardbacks priced mainly around
Pounds 30. Under the title 'Books for Business', the series is an
international one, in both content and authorship - a number of the planned
titles are by Continental Europeans. This is a refreshing departure from the
convention of English language business books 'having' to be written by
either Americans or Britons. In addition to quality, teamwork, and customer
service (which commands two launch titles), the other two initial topics are
the marketing of professional services, and an investor's guide to warrants.
Even if the two series are not as directly competitive as they may seem, why
should two such strong newspaper titles get involved with popular business
books in the midst of a recession? The short answers are that the recession
arrived after the planning had been done; that the financial risk is being
borne by Century Business and Pitman, rather than by the newspapers; and
that sales of educational business books seem to hold up well in recession,
as companies and individuals trade down from business school courses.
Both newspapers have got involved in the sector because of the maturing of
the business books' market, at least in Britain. Several years ago, when the
enterprise society was in its first flush of youth, it was looking for
blockbusters by million-selling gurus and business leaders such as Lee
Iacocca. Now, with the exception of such American-based giants as Peter
Drucker and Tom Peters, plus home-grown equivalents such as Charles Handy
and Sir John Harvey-Jones, the market has fragmented into a host of detailed
subject areas. In the words of one publisher, 'people are now looking not
just for exhortation, but either for practical information or for a
combination of the two.' The market potential is obvious.
How do the two new series measure up to this objective? Reasonably well,
each on its own terms, Both have a smattering of quirks, to judge from the
initial volumes, which are irritating or attractive depending on your point
of view. The Sunday Times/Century Business have slapped a fashionable
'quality' surtitle on three of their volumes, whereas only one hits that
subject squarely. The other two, on total customer service, and change
through teamwork, cover a far broader ground than just quality, and are all
the more worth reading for that.
The Sunday Times/Century Business book on Quality: Change Through Teamwork
(appropriately by a team of four authors) is especially useful. It deals
simply but thoroughly with a broad canvas of detailed issues: when to use
teams; how to create them with a balanced set of skills appropriate to each
particular task and context; and the need for team leadership to adapt
itself to varying circumstances. It also advises on how to accelerate team
processes. And, having listed a series of tell-tale signs of an ineffective
team, it suggests a series of practical trouble-shooting techniques.
If the Sunday Times/Century Business title writers went over the top in
slapping a 'quality' label on their teamwork book, their FT/Pitman
counterparts did an over-simplification job with their equivalent book,
which they called Managing International Teams. Written by a single author,
it is a stimulating and helpful exercise in the journalistic digestion of a
wide range of research by academics and others on several complex subjects.
But the book is at least half about the effect which differences in national
culture have on the attitudes, motivation, behaviour and leadership styles
of individual managers.
When, halfway through the book, the author turns fully to the subject of
teamwork, her international content tails off, and she concentrates mainly
on the generic mechanics of all types of team. That the two strands of the
book are not sufficiently interwoven may be because of the paucity of
evidence: few companies have much experience of operating successful
cross-cultural teams, and even fewer expert observers have studied them.
All the same, the book contains several instructive case studies and
anecdotes. One gem is the story of a Japanese member of a mainly American
team who, in order to 'belong' to it, created for himself the nickname of
'Fast Eddie'. But after the probing of a culturally sensitive team leader
(one of the book's hero types), it emerged that he preferred the more
respectful title of 'Endo-san'.
The story epitomises one of the main lessons of the book: that multinational
companies do themselves a disservice by trying to impose a monolithic global
corporate culture. Instead, it rams home the point that they will be more
creative and competitive if they try to work with the different national
assumptions and values of their various team members.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920609

