FT921-1423

FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Golden rule hidden by statistical jungle /
Examining whether government borrowing has exceeded investment


   By PETER MARSH


THE ROW yesterday over the consequences of a shortfall in tax revenues
highlights the fact that the recession and its aftermath will cast a shadow
over Britain's public spending plans for the next few years.
The new government will find itself boxed in by likely shortfalls in tax
revenues and the large increases in spending already set in train both by
the effects of recession and by decisions by the Conservatives over the past
two years.
These hard facts of financial life will impede the ability of whoever takes
office from pushing through tax cuts or raising spending significantly on
popular public-sector areas such as education and health.
At the same time, picking out what has happened in public spending in the 13
years of Conservative government is made hazardous by competing statistical
definitions - especially in the tricky area of public-sector investment.
According to the Treasury, receipts from sources such as taxation in the
financial year beginning on April 1 will be limited by weak economic
activity to Pounds 230bn, just Pounds 8bn above the figure for 1991-92.
Meanwhile, government spending will climb to Pounds 258bn, a Pounds 22bn
jump from 1990-91.
That will mean a public sector borrowing requirement of Pounds 28bn in
1992-93, about twice this year's likely figure, followed by a PSBR of Pounds
32bn in 1993-94. On the Treasury's arithmetic, the deficit will fall as
economic growth picks up, to Pounds 25bn in 1994-95, Pounds 19bn in 1995-96
and Pounds 6bn in 1996-97.
While these figures are large enough to have unsettled financial markets in
the past two weeks, Mr Michael Saunders, an economist at Salomon Brothers,
has made his own calculations which point to still gloomier conclusions.
He believes that over the next few years government f what the Treasury is
expecting, due to relatively modest growth in overall economic activity.
Assuming no new increases in public spending programmes - which Mr Saunders
admits is open to question - the PSBR will rise on his calculations to
Pounds 38bn in both 1993-94 and 1994-95, before coming down to Pounds 35bn
in 1995-96 and Pounds 28bn in 1996-97.
While the Conservatives can come up with statistics that suggest a fairly
constant level of public-sector investment spending in the 1980s, Labour and
the Liberal Democrats both accuse the Tories of presiding over a
deterioration of the infrastructure.
However, discussion is hindered by a welter of different definitions.
Depending on which is chosen, capital spending can be taken to be between
about 5 per cent and 15 per cent of total public spending, the rest being
current expenditure, mainly salaries.
The broadest way of looking at public-sector investment is to use what the
Treasury defines as public-sector asset creation (PSAC).
This comprises gross spending on fixed assets by all government bodies
including nationalised industries, but not counting privatisation proceeds
which under normal government rules are considered as negative spending,
capital grants by the public sector, and some items of defence spending such
as tanks and missiles which under conventional UK government accounting
standards count as current spending.
According to the PSAC definition, capital spending by the government in the
1980s, excluding nationalised industries which have since been privatised,
has stayed about constant at just under Pounds 30bn a year in 1990-91
prices. In 1991-92, according to the Treasury, PSAC is likely to be Pounds
28.6bn, about in line with next year's expected PSBR. That would keep the UK
in line with the 'golden rule' in some countries' fiscal accounting which
says that the amount the government borrows over a set period should not
exceed the amount it invests.
On other definitions of public spending investment - and the Treasury uses
no fewer than three others - Britain's position on public-sector spending
looks considerably worse. These definitions lead to more of the public
spending bill being classed as current spending, with the capital figure
being depressed.
Applying the Treasury definition for investment which is used in most UK
government spending calculations, the UK public sector may be in danger for
the first time since records began in the 1960s of running a financial
deficit on current spending.
The current balance is calculated as the difference between current revenue,
excluding capital taxes from public sector revenue, and current public
spending leaving aside capital spending. This would mean the UK might be
about to borrow to finance consumption, violating the 'golden rule' and
shifting the public sector accounts into a difficult period.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920324

