FT922-469

FT  27 JUN 92 / Finance & the Family: New issues: a taxing problem for stags


   By DAVID COHEN


AFTER the famine, the feast. The new issue market seemed never to have
recovered from the stock market crash of November 1987 but, suddenly,
investors have an embarrassment of riches.
Investors interested in this summer's crop of flotations - including
Wellcome, MFI, Taunton Cider, Kenwood and the Daily Telegraph - should bear
in mind the tax position if they are to profit to the full.
Capital Gains Tax will have an immediate impact on 'stags' - those who buy
new issues with the intention of making an instant profit by selling at the
first opportunity. The general rule is that if net gains for a tax year
exceed the annual exemption - currently Pounds 5,800 - CGT will be payable
on the excess at the taxpayer's marginal rate. Wives now have their own
exemption but a transfer to your spouse, immediately followed by a sale, may
provoke an Inland Revenue challenge.
In theory, the taxable gain will be reduced by any purchase commission
payable to a stockbroker or other agent but, in practice, new issues tend to
be acquired directly rather than via an intermediary.
Applicants will frequently be using borrowed funds, particularly on the more
popular issues where the only way to secure a reasonable allocation is to
apply for far more shares than you really want or, in many cases, can
afford. The bad news is that interest payments and other financing costs do
not qualify as deductible under CGT regulations.
The indexation allowance - which raises the base cost of an asset in line
with the increase in the Retail Prices Index over the period of ownership -
has become an invaluable CGT concession for longer-term shareholders but
will do little for stags. Although indexation usually starts to operate from
the first day of the month following acquisition, there is no allowance if
the shares are held for less than ten days.
Even those stags who are prepared to contemplate that degree of sale
deferral are hardly likely to be influenced in their decision by the
prospect of a measly one-month inflation linkage.
CGT can be avoided if the shares are injected into a personal equity plan
within 42 days of flotation, but using a Pep in this way will eat into the
investor's annual Pep allowances.
All this talk of capital gains has proceeded on the optimistic assumption
that gains will indeed be there for the taking. If previous new issues are
anything to go by, a fair number of burnt fingers should be anticipated. How
can disappointed stags mitigate their losses?
Losses can be set against capital gains for the same tax year and, to the
extent that such gains are insufficient, carried forward to future years.
But this will often mean that a taxpayer faces a large income tax bill on
his earnings and gets no immediate credit for his stock market losses.
There is a special statutory provision which allows losses on the sale of
newly-subscribed shares to be set against income, but it does not apply to
fully-quoted stocks. The dearth of USM flotations, and the raft of detailed
conditions which must be satisfied, make it unlikely that many of this
year's distressed stags will be able to take advantage of this.
If an offering is heavily oversubscribed, the only people to enjoy a real
slice of the action are likely to be the flotation company's employees. A
percentage of the issue will often be reserved for the workforce - nine of
last year's 11 offers for sale included this so-called 'priority' offer.
Participation in a priority offer will often be a valuable benefit. Take the
example of Northumbrian Water, the most popular of the water privatisations.
Local residents were rationed to just 200 shares each - outsiders got only
100 - whereas employees received all the shares for which they applied up to
a maximum of 5,000. So a lucky Geordie plumber who took full advantage could
have picked up an extra 4,800 shares. At the opening 60p premium, that would
have translated into a gain of almost Pounds 3,000.
Gains of this type are sheltax charge on employee benefits by an exemption
introduced in 1988. This is forfeited if more than 10 per cent of a share
offering is set aside for employees or if priority rights are skewed in
favour of directors or other higher-paid staff. In practice, every offer
made since 1988 has complied with these conditions.
Unfortunately, this privileged treatment is restricted to general offers for
sale. Employees whose companies join the market by way of a private placing
will be vulnerable to an attack from the Revenue if they pick up new shares
on favourable terms.
Even in an offer for sale, the taxman will show no mercy to executives who
pay less than the public for shares. Beneficiaries of a 'discount' offer
will pay income tax on the full amount of their discount.
David Cohen is a partner in the City law firm Paisner & Co.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920627

