FT924-11507

FT  26 OCT 92 / Tokyo government on knife edge


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


THE first indication of whether the Japanese government has been weakened by
the unfolding power struggle over the leadership of the ruling Liberal
Democratic Party's largest faction will come late this week when the
government unveils political reform plans.
As the vicious infighting over the leadership of the Takeshita faction
continued unabated yesterday, Mr Koichi Kato, chief cabinet secretary, said
the 18-point plan would not propose overhauling the electoral system. It is
likely to include measures to confiscate illegal political contributions.
Many analysts believe the costs of the electoral system, based on large
multi-member constituencies, is largely responsible for the prevalence of
political corruption.
Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, prime minister, will outline the reforms to parliament
which reconvenes on Friday in response to the controversy over the Sagawa
Kyubin political contributions scandal.
The scandal prompted the power struggle in the Takeshita faction, which has
played a vital role in managing the passage of legislation through
parliament, after Mr Shin Kanemaru, its former chief was forced to resign.
Mr Kanemaru who wielded immense power within the LDP admitted receiving
Y500m (Pounds 2.5m) in illegal political contributions from Tokyo Sagawa
Kyubin trucking company.
The Miyazawa cabinet's popularity has slumped largely because of the scandal
and the ailing economy.
The vacuum created by Mr Kanemaru's departure has set off a struggle between
supporters of his chosen successor, Mr Ichiro Ozawa, and an anti-Ozawa
group. Mr Ozawa and his backers are contesting the nomination last week of
Mr Keizo Obuchi as faction chief.
Parliament is likely to become the focus of the scandal, as Mr Noboru
Takeshita, the faction's founder, has promised to testify about his role in
the affair. Japan's political leadership would be further destabilised if
pressure mounted on him to resign.
Government officials are increasingly concerned that the infighting could
spill over to delay passage of legislation to enact the Y10,700bn emergency
public spending programme announced in August.
The economic programme could become embroiled in the power struggle partly
because Mr Tsutomu Hata, finance minister, has aligned himself with the
Ozawa group.
About 86 per cent of parliamentary deputies are believed to want the
electoral system overhauled.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921026

