FT923-15666

FT  01 JUL 92 / International Company News: Parents foster Europe's computer
makers - Alan Cane examines the era of strategic alliances after Digital
takes up to a 10% stake in Olivetti


   By ALAN CANE


THE SCRAMBLE among Europe's computer manufacturers to tie up with a larger,
better resourced partner is virtually at an end.
The deal secured last Friday, through which Digital Equipment (DEC) of the
US will take up to a 10 per cent stake in Olivetti of Italy at a cost of
almost Pounds 200m, (Dollars 370m) is almost the last throw in a poker game
which has occupied Europe's faltering computer makers for the past
half-decade.
Their struggle to secure a lifeline to the future, however, is becoming a
sideshow to the main event: the battle between US computer giants to ensure
their technology stands a fair chance of becoming the world standard.
That was the principal reason DEC was prepared to pay well over twice the
market price for a share in a loss-making Italian manufacturer with no
certain path back to profitability.
European manufacturers, penalised by small, insular markets and rising
research and development costs, have been seeking relief in strategic
alliances since the 1980s. ICL of the UK found a wealthy parent in Fujitsu
of Japan two years ago. Nokia Data of Finland was in turn purchased by ICL.
International Business Machines of the US earlier this year spent Dollars
100m to take a small stake in Groupe Bull of France.
Of Europe's large players, only Siemens of Germany is left unpartnered. It,
however, may be in no mood for courtship. It is still fully occupied
digesting the loss-making systems company Nixdorf, which it bought last
year, and is the only European company which may not need a partner either
for financial or technological reasons.
Olivetti needs both. It lost Dollars 387m last year and revenues are
falling. It has shed 25 per cent of its workforce in the past two years, but
further cuts may be necessary if it is to reach its goal of a return to
profitability this year.
Although it has developed some excellent products, including the Quaderno
small notebook computer, it relies heavily on the US and Japan for basic
technology.
In particular, it needs a reliable source of Risc (reduced instruction set
computing) microprocessor chips. Risc chips are fast and powerful. They are
the microprocessor of choice for scientific workstations; within a few
years, they are expected to power most personal computers and medium-sized
computer systems.
This is the largest and fastest-growing sector of the computing market. It
is also an 'open' market where systems are expected to conform to
industry-wide standards.
This is the heart of the matter. Competing Risc suppliers, which include
IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Sun Microsystems, DEC and Mips, all of the US, are
fighting to establish their Risc technology as the industry standard. That
means, inevitably, forming alliances with competitors who will design the
Risc chips into their systems, so driving up volume.
Sun Microsystems, for example, has licensed its Sparc Risc technology to a
wide range of companies including ICL.
IBM's deal with Bull and DEC's deal with Olivetti, however, indicates that
Risc suppliers are now prepared to trade off equity funding against Risc
'design-in'.
Olivetti currently builds machines based on Risc technology from Mips. Mips,
however, has a question mark over its future. It has just been acquired by
Silicon Graphics and one of its principal supporters, Groupe Bull, has
defected to IBM following the deal between the two companies earlier this
year.
As a result of last week's deal, Olivetti will now use DEC's Risc chip, the
Alpha microprocessor in future products. The Alpha chip is the most advanced
of its kind. When it launched the chip earlier this year, DEC claimed it had
the performance of a small supercomputer. It also claimed that, by 2000, 80
per cent of businesses in Europe would be using Alpha technology in some
shape or form. The Olivetti deal is a clear prerequisite for that prediction
to be fulfilled.
DEC has currently no share of the European Risc market, which is dominated
by Sun with almost a 60 per cent share followed by Mips (19 per cent), IBM
(10 per cent) and Hewlett-Packard (8 per cent).
Olivetti talked to both Hewlett-Packard and IBM before agreeing the deal
with DEC with whom it has had an alliance (one of the 229 Olivetti claims in
advertisements) stretching back over 20 years. Olivetti already provides DEC
with about 100,000 personal computers a year for sale in Europe.
For Olivetti, the advantages of the deal are threefold. It gains an
injection of equity capital at a time when its resources are heavily
stretched. It has access to an advanced Risc technology around which to
design workstations and personal computers.
And it has a US partner to share the burden of future product development
(an earlier alliance with AT&T, the US telecommunications group, fell apart
in 1989).
Olivetti's recent advertising emphasising the number of its alliances has
been widely seen as an attempt to reassure customers anxious about the
company's lack of a larger partner.
For DEC there are both advantages and disadvantages. It has a partner to
help disseminate its Alpha Risc technology. Through its equity partnership
it has a better foothold in Europe and access to Olivetti's distribution
channels. And it opens the door to further co-operation between the two
companies in commercial and technical areas.
DEC today, however, is a giant with feet of clay. The world's third-largest
IT supplier with sales of about Dollars 13bn, it lost more than Dollars 500m
last year and has not made a profit in the any of the first three quarters
of 1992.
In Europe, it is still assimilating last year's purchase of Kienzle from
Mannesmann and the minicomputer operations of Philips of the Netherlands.
It failed to exploit three of the major elements of the modern computer
industry; personal computer, high performance workstations and open systems.
It desperately needs to make a success of its Alpha technology if it is not
to become one of the industry's also-rans.
So both DEC and Olivetti have powerful reasons to make a success of the
joint venture. Questions which remain unanswered, however, include the fate
of Mips, now a falling star among Risc suppliers, and the position of
Siemens. It may have no need of a partner, but it is the last big European
target for America's jostling Risc vendors.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920701

