FT921-3752

FT  12 MAR 92 / Bowed down by a spate of disputes: Japan's troubled
securities houses


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


When Mr Masahiro Dozen was appointed president of Daiwa Securities at the
peak of the bull market in Japanese equities, he jokingly talked of
promoting a selection of stocks as 'Dozen's dozen'.
Yesterday he was in a different mood when he resigned saying his short term
of two years and five months in office had 'seemed like a very long time'.
Daiwa forecast a Y43bn (Pounds 189.4m) net loss for the year to March 31,
compared with a profit of Y146bn in Mr Dozen's first year. He was also
forced to announce yesterday the Y72bn loss caused by tobashi disputes - in
which brokers manipulated clients' accounts to help them dress up the
accounts.
Even before taking this extraordinary loss into account, Daiwa's results are
forecast to be the worst in real terms since the Japanese stock market
crisis of the 1960s. At the pre-tax level, Daiwa forecasts a profit of just
Y13bn, against Y119bn in 1991 and Y313bn in 1990.
While the extraordinary loss is particularly severe, Daiwa's troubles are
shared by the rest of the Japanese securities industry.
All the 250-odd stockbroking companies are suffering the worst slump in
prices and turnover since the 1960s. They are also having to settle disputes
with clients over trading losses suffered since the bull market ended in
1989.
To make matters worse, they have to regain their reputations following a
spate of stock market scandals, including allegations of wrong-doing arising
from the tobashi disputes.
Daiwa is in no immediate financial trouble. All the Big Four brokers -
Nomura Securities, Nikko Securities, Yamaichi Securities and Daiwa -
accumulated substantial reserves in the bull market.
Daiwa's consolidated shareholders' equity stood at Y1,069bn at the end of
March 1991. It is less profitable than Nomura, the largest house, but
comfortably ahead of Nikko and especially Yamaichi, which has already
forecast an expected pre-tax loss of more than Y10bn for the year to the end
of March.
Daiwa's net result will probably be worse than Yamaichi's but the fact that
it expects to be in the black at the pre-tax level is crucial - it means it
is not losing on its day-to-day business.
Smaller companies are in a far worse position. Ten out of 14 second-tier
houses expect losses for the year. However, even the larger groups are
concerned about continuing disputes with clients over portfolio losses.
The total capitalisation of companies listed on the First Section of the
Tokyo Stock Exchange has dropped from Y590,000bn at the end of 1989 to under
Y350,000bn - a loss of more than Y240,000bn.
Only a small fraction of these losses is in dispute. But there is no
estimate yet of how big that fraction might be. Worse, the success of the
claim made by Tokyo Department Store, which won Y49.5bn from Daiwa, is bound
to encourage other suits.
Moreover, in as much as the disputes bring to light shady commercial
practices, such as window-dressing accounts, the disclosures will put the
industry under renewed scrutiny from the finance ministry.
That, in turn, will hurt efforts to restore the market's reputation
following last year's scandals involving links with gangsters and
compensation pay-ments for favoured investment clients.
So far, only small broking companies have lost their independence. But even
medium-sized companies are being forced to make drastic cost savings, even
closing offices. The longer the industry recession goes on, the more likely
it is the Big Four, Daiwa included, will have to resort to such extreme
measures.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920312

