FT922-7247

FT  20 MAY 92 / Inside Whitehall: The people who guide British policy


 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
THE CABINET
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Prime minister                             John Major
Leader of the Commons                      Tony Newton
Leader of the Lords/lord privy seal        Lord Wakeham
Lord chancellor                            Lord Mackay of Clashfern
Chancellor of the exchequer                Norman Lamont
Home secretary                             Kenneth Clarke
Foreign and commonwealth secretary         Douglas Hurd
Trade and industry secretary
(and president of the board of trade)      Michael Heseltine
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster       William Waldergrave
Education secretary                        John Patten
Scottish secretary                         Ian Lang
Welsh secretary                            David Hunt
Health secretary                           Virginia Bottomley
Social security secretary                  Peter Lilley
Northern Ireland secretary                 Sir Patrick Mayhew
Minister of agriculture, fisheries & food  John Gummer
Transport secretary                        John MacGregor
Employment secretary                       Gillian Shepard
Environment secretary                      Michael Howard
National heritage minister                 David Mellor
Chief secretary to the treasury            Michael Portillo
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
MINISTERS OUTSIDE THE CABINET
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Agriculture: minister of state - David Curry; under secretaries - Earl Howe,
Nicholas Soames. Defence: ministers of state - Archie Hamilton, Jonathan
Aitken; under secretary - Lord Cecil. Education and science: minister of
state - Baroness Blatch; under secretaries - Eric Forth, Nigel Foreman.
Employment: minister of state - Michael Forsyth; undersecretaries - Patrick
McLoughlin, Viscount Ullswater. Environment: ministers of state - Sir George
Young, David MacLean, John Redwood; undersecretaries - Robin Squire, Tony
Baldry, Lord Strathclyde. Foreign Office: ministers of state - Douglas Hogg,
Tristan Garel-Jones, Alastair Goodlad; overseas development minister -
Baroness Chalker; undersecretary - Mark Lennox-Boyd. Health: minister of
state - Dr Brian Mawhinney; under secretaries - Baroness Cumberlege, Timothy
Yeo, Tom Sackville. Home Office: ministers of state - Peter Lloyd, Michael
Jack, Earl Ferrers; undersecretary - Charles Wardle. Law Officers:
attorney-general - Sir Nicholas Lyell; solicitor-general - Sir Derek
Spencer. Lord Advocate's Department: lord advocate - Lord Roger;
solicitor-general for Scotland - Thomas Dawson. National Heritage:
undersecretary - Robert Key. Northern Ireland: ministers of state - Robert
Atkins, Michael Mates; undersecretaries - Jeremy Hanley, Earl of Arran.
Office of Minister for the Civil Service: Undersecretary - Robert Jackson.
Scottish office: minister of state - Lord Fraser of Carmyllie;
undersecretaries - Alan Stewart, Sir Hector Monro. Social security: minister
of state - Nicholas Scott; undersecretaries - Alistair Burt, Anne
Widdecombe, Lord Henley. Trade and Industry: minister of state for industry
 -Timothy Sainsbury; minister of state for trade - Richard Needham; minister
of state for energy - Timothy Eggar; corporate affairs minister - Neil
Hamilton; undersecretaries - Baroness Denton, Edward Leigh. Transport:
minister of state (aviation and shipping) - Earl of Caithness; minister of
state (public transport) - Roger Norris. Treasury: financial secretary -
Stephen Dorrell; paymaster-general - Sir John Cope: Economic secretary -
Anthony Nelson; undersecretary - Richard Ryder. Welsh Office: minister of
state - Sir Wyn Roberts; undersecretary - Gwilym Jones. Whips'Office: chief
whip in commons - Richard Ryder; deputy chief whip - David Heathcoate-Amory;
chief whip in Lords - Lord Hesketh.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
MINISTERIAL COMMITTEES OF THE CABINET
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Committee on economic and domestic policy
Terms of reference: Strategic issues relating to economic and domestic
policies - Prime minister (chairman) - Chancellor of the exchequer - Home
secretary - Trade and industry secretary - Lord Privy seal - Lord president
of the council - Environment secretary - Welsh secretary - Chancellor of the
Duchy of Lancaster - Scottish secretary - Northern Ireland secretary -
Employment secretary - Chief secretary, Treasury.
Other Ministers will be invited to attend for items in which they a
departmental interest.
Committee on defence and overseas policy - Prime minister (chairman) -
Foreign secretary - Chancellor of the exchequer - Trade and industry
secretary - Defence secretary - Attorny-general
The chief of defence staff and the chiefs of staff will attend when
necessary.
Ministerial committee on the Gulf
Terms of reference: To keep under review developments in the Gulf region and
to co-ordinate any action.
Prime minister (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Defence secretary -
Attorney-general.
Committee on nuclear defence policy - Prime minister (chairman) - Foreign
secretary - Chancellor of the exchequer - Defence secretary.
Committee on European security - Terms of referance: defence and security in
Europe.
Prime minister (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Chancellor of the exchequer
 -Defence Secretary.
Committee on Hong Kong and other dependent territories
Terms of reference: Implementation of agreementwith China on future of Hong
Kong: policy towards other dependent territories.
Prime minister (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Chancellor of the exchequer
 -Home secretary - Trade and industry secretary - Defence - Lord president
of the council - Foreign office minister of state.
Others include the attorney-general, governor of Hong Kong, British
ambassador in Peking, overseas development minister, the parlimentary
under-secretary at the foreign office may be invited as appropriate.
Committee on Northern Ireland
Terms of reference: Policy on Northern Ireland issues and relations with
Ireland on these matters.
Prime Minister (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Home secretary - Defence
secretary - Northern Ireland secretary - Chief secretary, Treasury -
Attorney-general.
Other ministers will be invited as the nature of business requires.
Committee on science and technology
Prime minister (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Trade and industry secetary
 -Transport secretary - Defence secretary - Minister of agriculture,
fisheries and food - Environment secretary - Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster - Scottish secretary - Education secretary - Health secretary -
Chief secretary, Treasury.
The chief scientific adviser is in attendance.
Committee on the intelligence services
Prime minister (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Home secretary - Defence
secretary - Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
The Chancellor of the exchequer and the Attorney-general attend as
appropriate.
Committee on industrial, commercial and consumer affairs - Terms of
reference: industrial, commercial, and consumer issues including competition
and de-regulation.
Lord privy seal (chairman), Chancellor of the exchequer - Trade and industry
secretary - Transport secretary - Lord president of the council - Minister
of agriculture, fisheries and food - Environment secretary - Welsh secretary
 -Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster - Scottish secretary - Northern
Ireland secretary - Employment secretary - Chief secretary, Treasury.
Committee on the environment - Lord privy seal (chairman) - Foreign
secretary - Trade and industry secretary - Chancellor of the exchequer -
Transport secretary - Minister of agriculture, fisheries and food -
Environment secretary - Welsh secretary - Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster - Scottish secretary - National heritage secretary - Northern
Ireland secretary - Chief secretary, Treasury.
Committee on home and social affairs - Lord Privy seal (chairman) - Lord
chancellor - Home secretary - Trade and industry secretary - Transport
secretary - Lord president of the council - Environment secretary - Welsh
secretary - Social security secretary - Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster
 -Scottish secretary - National heritage secretary - Northern Ireland
secretary - Education secretary - Health secretary - Employment secretary -
Chief secretary, Treasury - Parlimentary secretary, Treasury.
The minister of agriculture, fisheries and food, the Attorney-general and
the lord advocate recieve papers and are invited to attend as necessary.
Committee on Local Government - Terms of reference: issues affecting local
government including the annual allocation of resources.
Lord privy seal (chairman) - Chancellor of the exchequer - Home secretary -
Transport secretary - Lord president of the council - Environment secretary
 -Welsh secretary - Social security secretary - Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster - Scottish secretary - national heritage secretary - Education
secretary - Health secretary - Chief secretary, Treasury - Minister for
local government.
Committee on Queen's speeches and future legislation
Terms of teference: to draft Queen's speeches to parliament and the
government's legislative programme for each session of parliament.
Lord president of the council (chairman) - Lord Chancellor - Lord privy seal
 -Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster - Attorney-general - Lord advocate -
Parliamentary secretary, Treasury - Captain of the gentlemen-at-arms
The foreign secretary should be invited to attend or be represented for
discussion of Queen's speeches.
Committee on legislation
Terms of reference: to examine draft bills; to consider the parliamentary
handling of government bills. European Community documents and private
members' business and other related matters, and to keep under review the
government's policy in relation to issues of parliamentary procedures.
Lord president of the council (chairman) - Lord Chancellor - Lord privy seal
 -Welsh secretary - Scottish secretary - Attorney-general - Lord advocate -
Parliamentary secreatry, Treasury - Minister of state, Home Office -
Financial secretary, Treasury - Captain of the gentlemen-at- arms
Committee on Civil Service pay - Terms of reference: to determine the basis
of the annual negotiations and consider other matters concerning Civil
Service pay.
Lord president of the council (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Chancellor of
the exchequer - Home secretary - Defence secretary - Environment secretary -
Social security secretary - Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster - Scottish
secretary - Northern Ireland secretary - Employment secretary - Financial
secretary, Treasury
Sub-committee on health strategy - Terms of reference: the development,
implementation and monitoring of the government's health strategy; to
co-ordinate policies on issues affecting health. Reporting to committee on
home and social affairs.
Lord president of the council (chairman) - Minister of agriculture,
fisheries and food - Environment secretary - Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster - Scottish secretary - Northern Ireland secretary - Health
secretary - Paymaster-general - Minister of state for health - Minister of
state for employment - Parliamentary undersecretary for national heritage
The home, transport and education secretaries and the trade and industry
secretary should receive papers and may be invited to attend as appropriate
Sub-committee on public sector pay
Terms of reference: to co-ordinate the handling of pay issues in the public
sector. Reporting to committee on industrial, commercial and consumer
affairs.
Lord privy seal (chairman) - Chancellor of the exchequer - Home secretary -
Trade and industry secretary - Transport secretary - Environment secretary -
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster - Scottish secretary - Education
secretary - Health secretary - Employment secretary - Chief secretary,
Treasury
Sub-committee on European questions - Terms of reference: questions relating
to membership of the European Community. Reporting to committee on defence
and overseas policy.
Foreign secretary (chairman) - Chancellor of the exchequer - Home secretary
 -Trade and industry secretary - Transport secretary - Lord president of the
council - Minister of agriculture, fisheries and food - Environment
secretary - Welsh secretary - Scottish secretary - Northern Ireland
secretary - Employment secretary - Attorney-general - Parliamentary
secretary, Treasury - Minister of state, foreign office
Other ministers will be invited to attend as the nature of the business
requires. The UK permanent representative to the European Communities is
also in attendance.
Sub-committee on eastern Europe
Terms of reference: Britain's policy of assisting change in former Soviet
republics and other former Communist countries in Europe. Reporting to
committee on defence and overseas policy.
Foreign secretary (chairman) - Chancellor of the exchequer - Trade and
industry secretary - Defence secretary - Minister of agriculture, fisheries
and food - Environment secretary - Employment secretary - Minister for
overseas development - Minister of state, foreign office
Other ministers may be invited to attend as the nature of the business
requires
Sub-committee on terrorism
Terms of reference: arrangements for countering terrorism and dealing with
terrorist incidents and their consequences. Reporting to committee on
defence and overseas policy.
Home secretary (chairman) - Foreign secretary - Defence secretary - Trade
and industry secretary - Transport secretary - Scottish secretary - Scottish
secretary - Northern Ireland secretary - Attorney-general
Sub-committee on London
Terms of reference: to co-ordinate policies in the capital.
Environment secretary (chairman) - Minister of state, Home Office - Minister
of state for trade and industry - Minister for housing and planning -
Minister for local government - Minister for social security and disabled
people - Minister of state for education - Minister of state for health -
Minister of state for employment - Economic secretary, Treasury - Minister
for transport in London - Parliamentary undersecretary for national heritage
Sub-committee on drug misuse
Terms of reference: to co-ordinate national and international policies on
drugs misuse. Reporting to committee on home and social affairs.
Lord president of the council (chairman) - Solicitor-general -
Paymaster-general - Minister of state, Home Office - Minister of state for
the armed forces - Minister of state, Scottish office - Minister for health
 -Parliamentary undersecretaries from foreign office, Welsh office and for
schools
Others, inculding the minister for overseas development and parliamentary
under-secretaries from the Departments of Environment and Employment may be
invited to attend as appropriate and should receive papers.
Sub-committee on co-ordination of urban policy
Terms of reference: action on inner cities. Reporting to committee on home
and social affairs.
Environment secretary (chairman) - Minister of state, Home Office - Minister
for local government - Economic secretary, Treasury - Parliamentary
undersecretaries for technology and transport and from environment,
education, health, social security, national herigate and employment
departments and from Welsh office, Scottish office and Northern Ireland
Office
City Action Team ministers will be invited to attend for items in which they
have an interest
Sub-committee on alcohol misuse
Terms of reference: strategy for combating misuse of alcohol. Reporting to
committee on home and social affairs.
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (chairman) - Paymaster-general -
Minister of state, Scottish Office - Minister for health - Parliamentary
undersecretaries for consumer affairs and for schools and from Home Office,
Welsh Office, Northern Ireland Office, Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and
Food, transport - department and employment department
Sub-committee on women's issues
Terms of reference: policy and strategy on issues of special concern to
women. Reporting to committee on home and social affairs.
Employment secretary (chairman) - Paymaster-general - Minister of state,
Welsh Office - Minister of state, Department for Education - Parliamentary
undersecretaries for consumer affairs, from Social Secretary, health and
employment departments, Scottish Office, Northern Ireland Office and Office
of the Minister for the Civil Service
The parliamentary secretary, Lord Chancellor's Department, and the
parliamentary undersecretaries from the Home Office and environment
department will also receive papers and be invited to attend as necessary.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- TOP
CIVIL SERVANTS: PERMANENT SECRETARIES AT WHITEHALL DEPARTMENTS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------- Sir
Robin Butler: - Cabinet secretary and head of the Home Civil Service. 54.
Oxford. Formerly Treasury official in charge of public expenditure. Was
private secretary to Edward Heath 1972-74 and Harold Wilson 1974-75. Keen
sportsman who has been known to cycle to work from Dulwich. The ultimate
mandarin: 'A Renaissance prince' (Peter Hennessy, Whitehall).
Sir Terry Burns: - Treasury. 48. Manchester. Entered the civil service in
1980 after an academic career as an economic forecaster at the London
Business School. Was chief economic adviser and head of the Government
Economic Service 1980-91 under Sir Geoffrey Howe, Nigel Lawson and John
Major. Another keen sportsman who supports Queen's Park Rangers.
Sir Christopher France: - Defence. 58. Oxford. Treasury man who spent time
at the Electricity Council and Defence Ministry before heading Health
Department. Principal private secretary to Tony Barber and Denis Healey.
Recreations: 'Keeping the house up and the garden down'.
Sir Peter Gregson: - Trade and Industry. 55. Oxford. Career civil servant in
DTI and its predecessors. Private secretary to Harold Wilson and Edward
Heath 1968-72. Secretary to National Enterprise Board 1975-77. Permanent
secretary at Energy Department 1985-89. Recreations: 'cabinet-making,
automation in the home'.
Sir David Gillmore: - Foreign and Commonwealth Office and head of the
Diplomatic Service. 57. Cambridge. Postings in Moscow, Vienna and in London
before becoming high commissioner to Malaysia 1983-86. One novel published.
Sir Terence Heiser: - Environment. 60 - about to retire. Joined civil
service after leaving school and rose through several departments to become
principal private secretary to Tony Crosland. Freeman of the City of London.
Sir Geoffrey Holland: - Employment. 54. Oxford. After career in Ministry of
Labour, spent 13 years at the Manpower Services Commission, rising to
director.
Sir Clive Whitmore: - Home Office. 57. Cambridge. Rose through Welsh Office,
Defence and Cabinet Office to become principal private secretary to Margaret
Thatcher 1979-82. Permanent secretary at Defence before moving to Home
Office in 1988.
Sir John Caines: - Education. 59. Oxford. Career in trade and industry and
predecessor ministries such as supply and aviation. Chief executive of
British Overseas Trade Board 1980-82. Cabinet Office think tank 1983.
Permanent secretary at the Overseas Development Administration before move
to Education in 1989.
Graham Hart: - Health. 52. Oxford. Most of career spent in Department of
Health and Social Security, apart from spell in Cabinet Office think tank.
Sir Brian Unwin: - Customs & Excise. 56. Oxford. Served with Diplomatic
Service before transferring to Treasury in 1968. Senior posts in Cabinet
Office and Treasury before moving to Custons & Excise in 1987. Secretary to
the board of directors, English National Opera.
Sir Michael Partridge: - Social Security. 56. Oxford. Entered civil service
through ministry of pensions and rose to top of Department of Health and
Social security with a brief stay at the Home Office. Senior treasurer for
the Methodists.
Sir Derek Andrews: - Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. 59. London School of
Economics. Career spent at the ministry, apart from being private secretary
to Harold Wilson 1966-70.
Patrick Brown: - Transport. 52. School of Slavonic and East European
Studies, London University. After eight years with Carreras, the tobacco
manufacturer, he joined Urwick Orr & Partners as a management consultant. He
joined the Environment Department in 1972, spending time in the Property
Services Agency and Transport Department. PSA chief executive 1990-91.
Sir Peter Kemp: - Office of the Minister for the Civil Service. 57.
Chartered accountant who joined the Transport Ministry in 1967. Now heads up
the Next Steps project team reorganising the civil service into executive
agencies. Something of an entrepreneur by civil service standards.
Sir Anthony Battishill: - Inland Revenue. 54. London School of Economics.
Career spent shuttling between Inland Revenue and Treasury, including
principal private secretary to Denis Healey and Sir Geoffrey Howe. Central
Policy Review staff, the Cabinet Office think tank.
Hayden Phillips: - National Heritage. 49. Cambridge. Home Office career
ended with a spell in Roy Jenkins' private office at Brussels. Moved to
Cabinet Office, then Treasury where he was in charge of Civil Service
matters.
Tom Legg: - Lord Chancellor's Department. 56. Cambridge. Barrister who
joined the department in 1962. Assistant solicitor 1975. SE Circuit
administrator 1980-82. Deputy clerk of the Crown in chancery 1986-89.
Sir Russell Hillhouse: - Scottish Office. 54. Glasgow University. Most
departments at the Scottish Office, with a spell at the Treasury.
Recreation: 'making music'.
Sir Richard Lloyd Jones: - Welsh Office. 58. Oxford. Via Admiralty and
Defence to Welsh Office, with short stay in the Cabinet Office, Chairman
Civil Service Benevolent Fund.
John Chilcot: - Northern Ireland Office. 53. Cambridge. Rose through Home
Office with a period at the Cabinet Office. Principal private secretary to
Merlyn Rees and Lord Whitelaw. Seconded to Schroders, the merchant bank,
1986-87.

The Financial Times


Page 12

920520

