FT924-12172

FT  22 OCT 92 / CBI calls for energy policy


   By Our Industrial Staff


THE Confederation of British Industry called for a statement of energy
policy from the government yesterday, and Sir Michael Angus, CBI president,
called last week's pit closure announcement 'a monumental cock-up'.
Mr Howard Davies, CBI director-general, said: 'The government did not seem
to have a framework within which to justify its decision. There is a need
for a clearer statement on energy policy.'
The CBI said it had not formed a view on the attractions of coal versus
other types of fuel for electricity generation.
Sir Michael said: 'We want the commercial economics spelt out, so that they
can receive proper public examination.'
He commented that industry's confidence in the government's ability to
manage had been severely bruised by the presentation of the coal closures.
He said: 'The timing of the announcement and of the actions that were to
follow it were very maladroit.'
He said the CBI council, which met yesterday, had expressed very serious
concern about the depth of the recession and the possible knock-on effects
of the closures.
A report by leading academics on UK energy policy, published yesterday,
attacked the government for 'lack of direction' in the energy sector and
called for an energy commission to formulate policy.
The study was sponsored by Scottish Nuclear and led by Professor Ian Fells,
professor of energy conversion at Newcastle University, and Professor Nigel
Lucas, professor of energy policy at Imperial College, London, who gathered
the views of many senior academics. It condemned what it called
'unco-ordinated policy-making by regulators'.
The report said: 'Bodies such as Offer and Ofgas (the electricity and gas
industry regulators) should regulate markets' roles and not determine energy
policy.
'There is a need to ensure harmony rather than conflict between market
economic and environmental regulation. This should be a function of
government, which at present it seems reluctant to assume.'
The authors condemned pit closures and warned that, in addition to importing
coal, the UK would have to import gas if many combined-cycle gas turbines
were built.
It warned of the danger of relying on gas imports from often distant and
politically unstable countries.
Moving Forward: UK Energy Policy Post Privatisation. Copyright, I. Fells and
NJD Lucas. Scottish Nuclear Ltd, 3 Redwood Crescent, Peel Park, East
Kilbride G74 5PR.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921022

