FT922-7206

FT  20 MAY 92 / Keating unable to dispel image of government in turmoil:
After the resignation of a key ally, Australia's prime minister must wonder
if his luck has run out


   By KEVIN BROWN


MR PAUL KEATING, Australia's prime minister, offered no promises when Labor
MPs installed him in place of Mr Bob Hawke in December. Like everyone else,
Mr Keating knew that winning the next election would require at least as
much luck as leadership.
Until April, he appeared blessed with both as Labor's opinion poll rating
surged to within one percentage point of the conservative Liberal/National
party opposition, compared with a deficit of 18 points in December.
But the recovery has evaporated in the face of renewed debate over the
government's handling of the economy, and growing doubts about the prime
minister's political judgment. The latest Newspoll, for yesterday's
Australian newspaper, put Labor 12 points behind the conservatives.
Five months into his premiership, Mr Keating has sharpened Labor's image and
taken the attack to the conservatives. But he must be wondering if his luck
has run out.
His most pressing problem is the resignation of Senator Graham Richardson, a
key Labor power broker, over his relationship with an Australian businessman
facing forgery charges in the Marshall Islands.
Mr Richardson is a long-time political ally of Mr Keating, and was regarded
as one of the most influential members of the government. He denies any
impropriety over the Marshall Islands affair, but admits writing a reference
for the businessman and telephoning the Marshall Islands government on his
behalf.
The affair is especially damaging for the government because it has
refocused attention on the relationships between Labor leaders and failed
entrepreneurs such as Mr Alan Bond and Mr Laurie Connell, head of the
collapsed Rothwell's merchant bank.
The opposition is now trying to prove that Senator Gareth Evans, the foreign
minister, was also involved in the Marshall Islands affair, which it claims
is a prime example of Labor cronyism, known in Australia as 'mateship'.
Mr Keating may also have been damaged by revelations that he blocked
attempts by a royal commission in Western Australia to investigate the tax
records of state politicians and local businessmen accused of corruption.
Mr Keating later backed down, but the public row with the commission left
the impression that he had been trying to shield state Labor leaders from
potentially embarrassing revelations in another example of mateship.
With hindsight, the turning point for Mr Keating appears to have been
Labor's defeat by a protectionist independent candidate in a by-election in
mid-April in Mr Hawke's former constituency of Wills, a down-at-heel
Melbourne suburb.
The government remains committed to opening Australia's economy through
tariff reductions, cuts in subsidies and deregulation. But the by-election
defeat showed how much the pain of economic restructuring is resented in
industrial seats like Wills, most of which tend to be held by Labor.
Wills also showed how much the government has been hurt by an 18 month
recession triggered by high interest rates. Mr Keating will get some credit
from voters for the recovery which is now under way, but many will also
remember that he was treasurer (finance minister) when the recession began.
Perversely, the recovery is also causing problems for the government because
it has been accompanied by a dramatic fall in inflation to a 30-year low of
1.7 per cent. Low inflation may be beneficial for the economy in the long
run, but falling interest rates have provoked squeals of anguish from the
large numbers of retired people living off the interest on their savings.
Low inflation has also put a question mark over the government's ability to
deliver substantial tax cuts promised after the next election, due by
mid-1993. The cuts were to be funded mostly from the proceeds of tax
indexation, commonly known as bracket creep. But the unexpectedly rapid fall
in inflation means the bracket creep windfall will virtually disappear.
The government cannot borrow to finance the cuts because the forecast budget
deficit for the year to June has already increased from ADollars 4.7bn to
ADollars 9.3bn (Pounds 3.97bn), leaving it little room to manoeuvre if it is
to achieve its target of returning to surplus by 1996.
Meanwhile, it looks as though an ADollars 2.3bn fiscal stimulus announced in
February may fail to reduce unemployment to below 10 per cent before the
election.
Mr Keating has had some success in distracting attention from the economy by
throwing his weight behind Australian nationalists seeking the abolition of
the monarchy and the removal of the British Union flag from the top left
quarter of the Australian flag.
However, he has been forced to drop the flag campaign in the face of signs
that it is proving counter-productive. In the latest poll in the Bulletin
magazine, support for change has fallen to 31 per cent, compared to 33 per
cent eight years ago.
Despite the setbacks, Labor remains better placed to fight the election than
it was under Mr Hawke, whose government had become directionless and
demoralised by factional infighting.
Party officials claim that most of the problems will be forgotten as the
economy recovers. If they are right, Mr Keating may yet pull off a record
fifth successive election victory.
But the danger for Labor is that he will be unable to dispel the image of a
government in turmoil. And that could permanently derail the party's
recovery.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920520

