FT921-11945

FT  29 JAN 92 / Iran backpedals on economic reform: Political pressures are
forcing Rafsanjani to raise subsidies


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


IRAN'S attempts to control inflation and introduce a free market economy are
taking a step backwards with political considerations forcing the government
to double subsidies to ease the plight of the poor.
The draft budget, being debated in the majlis (parliament) for the new
Iranian year starting on March 21, raises spending on subsidies to 1,200bn
rials (Dollars 17bn at the official exchange rate of 70 rials to the dollar
but Dollars 857m at the free market rate of 1,400 rials).
The proposals run counter to IMF plans to liberalise the economy and have
brought the central bank governor to the brink of resignation. He says the
budget will boost inflation and result in chaos.
President Hashemi Rafsanjani has conceded that the 12 per cent of the
10,000bn rial budget which will go on subsidies is 'a notable share'.
Although nominally committed to reducing inflation, Mr Rafsanjani said,
'even though we took utmost care in all areas to reduce or limit current
expenditure to the level of inflation, in this case (subsidies), we were
forced to endure this problem for the sake of the vulnerable strata.'
The 'vulnerable strata' is the majority of Iran's 57.8m people living on
subsidised food. Subsidies on chicken and eggs were lifted last summer, and
the price of chicken shot up from 150 rials a kilo to 1,900 rials.
Last year saw incidents of unrest and rioting prompted by economic
discontent. The government tried to appease the rioters by promising to
raise the annual bonus for workers to the equivalent of three months' pay.
Another 'vulnerable' group is the country's 2m or so public sector employees
whose fixed incomes have made them one of the hardest hit in Iran's
inflationary economy. Many take second jobs to make ends meet. The budget
calls for large increases in their salaries, costing 850bn rials or 8.5 per
cent of the budget.
These two measures contradict Mr Rafsanjani's stated aims of eliminating
price controls and reducing inflation. It also goes against the
International Monetary Fund's guidelines on introducing a free market
economy by devaluing the rial through eliminating the country's three-tiered
exchange rate system.
Iran and the IMF have been talking for two years on rebuilding the economy.
One issue is the practice whereby dollars are sold to some ministries and
affiliated organisations at the highly overvalued official rate for the
import of 32 'basic' commodities. The artificially strong rate is criticised
for acting as an import subsidy leading to distortions in the economy. It
makes it impossible for the private sector, which has to use the free market
rate, to compete with the government.
The privileged rate also exacerbates political and economic corruption. Last
November, Mr Mohammad Hossein Adeli, the central bank governor and proponent
of stricter monetary policies, said one government-affiliated institution
was being prosecuted for selling dollars obtained from the government at 70
rials, for 200 rials.
He said the rate encouraged political favouritism: 'We should not
discriminate between the state sector and private sector, between those who
have political connections and those who have not, those powerful and those
powerless,' he told the Tehran daily Ressalat.
The second exchange rate, the 'competitive' rate of 600 rials to the dollar
is also used by ministries and their affiliates. Mr Adeli and Mr Mohsen
Nurbakhsh, the economics and finance minister, have said they want to unify
 -the official euphemism for devaluing the rial - the exchange rate by next
year.
They hope the rial will settle to a single level of 1,000 to the dollar, 400
below the third rate, known as the floating rate which hovers 30 rials below
the black market rate. Only 10 per cent of foreign exchange dealing is
conducted at the floating rate even though it is the most realistic.
Mr Adeli reportedly threatened to resign when the budget proposals, which he
termed 'political', were unveiled. He was harshly critical of its
inflationary aspects, particularly as inflation has doubled in the past year
from 9 to 18 per cent. Mr Adeli warned: 'If this plan is put into force, it
will only result in chaos.'
The goal of unifying exchange rates next year now seems hopelessly
unrealistic. Mr Rafsanjani has, for the meantime, rejected suggestions by Mr
Adeli to abolish the official exchange rate as the first step towards
unifying exchange rates.
Mr Rafsanjani recognised subsidised prices as 'a very serious problem' last
year but has not found a way of cushioning the blow to the poorest - the
'barefooted' - in whose name Ayatollah Khomeini's revolution was carried
out.
'Because for years we acted wrongly, we cannot deliver a shock all of a
sudden and say that it will immediately be the real prices,' he said.
With majlis elections due on April 10, Mr Rafsanjani is in no mood to
alienate voters or to risk further unrest. He hopes the election will
strengthen his support in the majlis at the expense of the radical faction,
which is critical of his foreign and economic policies.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Graph (Omitted).

920129

