FT921-625

FT  28 MAR 92 / High tax payers start to scramble for an offshore haven


   By Our Financial Staff


IF CHANNEL shipping is heavy this weekend, it could just be caused by men in
rowing boats filled with Pounds 5 notes, fleeing the prospect of a Labour
government.
With 12 days to go before polling, accountants are beginning to report a
large increase in inquiries from taxpayers anxious about the prospects for a
Labour victory in the general election.
Many said yesterday that the demands from clients for tax-planning advice
far exceeded those in previous years at this time, and the interest was also
higher than in 1987 before the last election - when the prospects of a
Conservative victory seemed far more certain. Labour's tax proposals mean a
married man on a Pounds 100,000 salary is contemplating a loss of Pounds
13,000 a year, a fall in after-tax income of 20 per cent.
So far, much of the action is taking place within the UK. Many people are
taking 'tax-efficient' measures so that they receive income in the current
financial year. Some financial institutions, such as James Capel, have
brought forward the payment of bonuses to their employees.
On the other hand, some taxpayers are delaying expenditure to allow them to
take advantage of hoped-for high reliefs until the coming tax year.
But the real question is whether investors will be sufficiently panicked to
take their money offshore. A British citizen is liable to be taxed on all
his or her worldwide income.
Most accountants coughed indignantly at the suggestion they would be asked
to advise clients about placing money offshore where it might not be
disclosed to the Inland Revenue.
'It's certainly not the sort of thing they would consult us about,' said Mr
Tony Martin, a tax partner with Price Waterhouse. 'They would do it without
professional advice.'
Lack of exchange controls means that someone could conceivably take out wads
of cash in a suitcase, but they risk being noticed by the taxman when they
bring back the money. In offshore centres such as Gibraltar and the Isle of
Man, there were reports yesterday reflecting nervousness which stopped short
of capital flight.
One leading Gibraltar lawyer said yesterday: 'What we have been getting in
recent days is quite a number of accountants coming to us who are
anticipating capital flight and who want us to be ready for it. But the
capital from the UK hasn't arrived yet.'
Offshore jurisdictions close to the UK have received some inquiries about
moving assets offshore in the event of a Labour government, but have
certainly not been inundated. For the moment, investors may be waiting until
the opinion polls indicate a clear victor.
However, traditional havens such as the Channel Islands may not see the bulk
of the flight capital. Mr Geoffrey Bailey of Lloyds Private Bank, said: 'It
is not altogether clear what the standing of the Channel Islands will be.'
Mr Peregrine Banbury, head of the Coutts investment department, said that
other offshore centres such as the Bahamas, Caymans, Luxembourg and the Cook
Islands might benefit from any move of capital.
Offshore funds which allow investors to accumulate income and legitimately
postpone the payment of tax were reporting a growth in interest.
Fidelity, which recently launched a range of such funds, reports that
Dollars 2.3m (Pounds 1.32m) is flowing in every week and two prominent
managers in the field, Guinness Flight and NM Rothschild, noted increases in
inquiries and investment.
What about the prospect of UK-based businesses moving overseas during a
Labour government? Large London-based foreign banks say they would not
relocate if Labour came to powerbut one said the idea of a Labour victory
was 'too awful a prospect to contemplate'. Dresdner Bank said moving out of
London would be 'unthinkable' while Citibank said it was 'unlikely'.
Nor is there any hard evidence that foreign investors are delaying or
cancelling their investment plans. Development agency officials, who handle
foreign investment inquiries, say it is 'business as usual' and that there
has been no change in the level of inquiries.
For individuals, the safest way of avoiding British tax involves removing
oneself as well as one's money. Mr Keith Kerruish, chartered surveyor and
partner in Chrystals Royal Life Estates in the Isle of Man, estimates
between 20 and 30 people may have moved to the island in anticipation of a
Labour government.
In recent weeks, leading figures in the entertainment business such as
composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and rock star Phil Collins have declared that
higher tax rates as pledged by Labour could cause them to emigrate. Their
view is in the musical tradition of the Beatles, who satirically sang, at a
time of a 95 per cent top rate: 'If 5 per cent appears too small, be
thankful I don't take it all. Coz I'm the taxman and you're working for
no-one but me.'
Reporting by David Barchard, Jimmy Burns, Philip Coggan, Scheherazade
Daneshkhu, Andrew Jack, Ian Rodger, Sue Stuart and Paul Taylor
Revenue on alert, Page 6; Lex, Page 24; Finance and the family, Weekend II,
III and V

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920328

