FT922-3997

FT  08 JUN 92 / Solidarity meets social change: Union membership is falling
and the labour movement may be losing its 'critical mass'


   By DAVID GOODHART


Continental Europe has been experiencing a hot spring of labour unrest.
Workers in Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, France and Italy have been
taking industrial action over the past few weeks from varying positions of
strength and weakness.
If there has been any common factor linking the disputes it has been a
reaction to governments or employers trying to squeeze inflationary
expectations as European monetary discipline bites.
Government and employers in the UK have been trying to do the same. Yet
absent from the strike list are British workers, once famed for their
militancy, and still among the most highly unionised in Europe. This is no
fluke; in 1991 the number of days lost through strikes in the UK was the
lowest since records began 100 years ago.
The absence of strikes says something about how UK industrial relations have
changed, although it is not necessarily a sign of the terminal weakness of
organised labour. In Scandinavia, where unions are strong, strikes are rare.
In countries like the US and France, where unions overall are weak, they are
common in certain sectors.
Indeed, the reforms introduced by Britain's Conservative government in the
1980s, curbing the use of the strike weapon and making unions more
accountable to their members, not only improved industrial relations but
also, arguably, strengthened the support for apolitical trade unionism.
Contrary to much of the union rhetoric of the time there was no 'attack' on
trade unionism in the 1980s in the sense - well understood by American trade
unionists - of widespread derecognition of unions and refusal by employers
to continue collective bargaining.
Yet, after the failure of the Labour party to win the general election,
could the 1990s be the decade in which the unions start to lose that
critical mass which still makes them a force to be reckoned with in British
industrial life?
At the very least, they will face another five years of unfriendly
government, falling membership as jobs continue to shift from manufacturing
to thinly unionised services, and employers able to set the bargaining
agenda.
Some union leaders claim to detect a more conciliatory spirit in the new
Tory government - undogmatic Mrs Gillian Shephard at the Employment
Department and interventionist Mr Michael Heseltine at Industry - but they
may be confusing style with substance.
The leaders of the Trade Union Congress meet Mrs Shephard tomorrow and will
have a chance to find out. She has inherited an employment white paper more
openly opposed to collective bargaining and traditional trade unionism, and
more enthusiastic about re-establishing a direct relationship between
employer and employee, than any of the white papers from the Thatcher years.
She has also inherited legislative plans that could radically speed up the
decline in union membership. According to Professor Paul Willman of the
London Business School, the government plan to end the system by which
employers deduct union dues from employee pay packets could cut union
membership by up to 15 per cent, when it is introduced next year, so making
worse the financial crisis many unions face.
Furthermore, the government's plans to decentralise large parts of the
public services and introduce private sector management practices and local
pay bargaining could undermine the heartland of trade unionism. According to
the 1991 British Social Attitudes survey, 69 per cent of public sector
workers are in a union, compared with 27 per cent in the private sector.
The trend in the private sector is one of inexorable decline. Professor
David Metcalf of the London School of Economics says: 'By the end of the
decade, union membership will be below 20 per cent because of the growth in
services at the expense of manufacturing.'
Even in manufacturing industry, union density - the proportion of union
members in the total workforce - is down to about 40 per cent thanks to
union failure to recruit in growth sectors like electronics.
Yet the bleakness of the outlook for the unions should not be exaggerated.
There is no evidence that UK industrial relations is following the US
pattern, where unionisation has fallen from nearly 40 per cent of employees
in the 1940s to about 12 per cent today.
Even in UK service industries, supposedly a no-go area for unionism, there
are exceptions to the rule. Take the high street of a typical town in
south-east England: Midland Bank, Barclays Bank, the post office, the
railway station, W H Smith, and J Sainsbury are organisations that recognise
unions and bargain with them centrally.
The unions have lost 3.5m members since 1979, but they still have just fewer
than 10m members, including non-TUC affiliated unions. That is a respectable
38 per cent of all employees, excluding the self-employed.
Collective bargaining still covers more than half of all UK employees and
has an influence far beyond its formal boundaries with many non-union
employers shadowing union agreements. Decentralisation of bargaining in the
private sector, and the winding up of national agreements, has often played
to union strength at plant level.
Derecognition is slowly picking up but has been relatively rare over the
past decade apart from a few spectacular cases like Mr Rupert Murdoch's
shedding of the print unions at his Wapping plant and a trickle of less
prominent ones involving professional and managerial staff.
One reason deregulation has not gathered pace is the flexibility of the
unions - represented nationally by figures such as Mr John Edmonds leader of
the GMB general union and Mr Bill Jordan leader of the AEEU craft union.
Such unions have accepted much of the new 'human resources management'
personnel agenda with its emphasis on labour as a resource, not just a cost,
which needs to be trained, developed and communicated with - often
by-passing union channels.
And so rare has been the opportunity to acquire new members that unions have
competed to offer single union, no-strike deals, with complete labour force
flexibility on greenfield sites. Many established sites have started to win
similar changes, for example, the recent Japanese-style working practices
deal at Rover cars.
This new flexibility, which the unions have been forced to accept, has
helped to wipe out the historic productivity gap between union and non-union
companies and thus removed an important incentive to de-unionise.
Despite relative union weakness, and high unemployment, union negotiators
have comfortably protected their employed members' pockets since 1979. When
comparing similar jobs, union membership still benefits employees. The union
mark-up has fallen slightly in the past few years, but is still a 5 per cent
improvement on the pay of comparable workers not covered by collective
bargaining.
Pay rises are increasingly exchanged for productivity gains but,
nevertheless, unit labour cost increases over the past few years have
generally been markedly ahead of the UK's main competitors and average
earnings increases - currently 7.75 per cent on an annualised basis - have
remained at least two percentage points ahead of inflation.
This continuing pay problem prompted the National Economic Development
Council to speculate recently that the UK has the worst of both worlds in
industrial relations. Unlike the US, the UK has had sufficient collective
bargaining to push wages up but has not been centralised enough to follow
Scandinavia and Germany in co-ordinating pay in line with what the economy
can afford.
But following the US path may not help to keep wages down, as collective
bargaining is no longer the only, or even the main, culprit in high pay
deals. Between 1979 and 1990, the real earnings of manual workers, mainly
covered by collective bargaining, rose only 11 per cent, compared with a 33
per cent rise for non-manual workers, the vast bulk of whom are not covered
by collective bargaining.
So there is unlikely to be strong political or employer pressure for a
US-style solution, but the unions still face a slow dwindling of their
influence. Will they be able to halt that trend?
They will only by making better use of their meagre resources. Many unions
still do not know what a departmental budget is and many union leaders are
too preoccupied with politics to manage their organisations efficiently.
Breaking the links with the Labour party might help. So, too, could a
further concentration of functions at the TUC.
Labour's defeat makes more likely a historic merger between the two great
general unions, the GMB and the TGWU, to add to the other mega-unions.
Unison, the 1.4m strong mega-union planned for the public sector, should
make it easier for the highly centralised public sector unions to deal with
the challenge of de-centralisation by allowing them to fund bargaining
expertise at local level.
But in the longer run, as collective bargaining over pay withers, union
survival will depend on finding a role which complements the growing
importance of the law at work. Acas, the government conciliation service,
last year reported another record work-load for industrial tribunals.
One pointer to the future could be the attempts by the National
Communications Union, the main union in British Telecom, to expand outside
its dwindling base into the fast growing but mainly non-union communications
sector.
The NCU is unlikely to win traditional pay bargaining rights at Mercury,
BT's non-union rival, or in the small cable television companies where it is
recruiting. But it hopes to build up a substantial membership on the basis
of legal support in disciplinary and redundancy cases, health and safety
expertise, and the union discount services, such as cheap loans, insurance
and travel.
In smaller companies, unions like the NCU hope to play a quasi-personnel
role advising employers as well as employees on employment law. In larger
companies, the unions might also find a role dealing with the many
grievances that arise when collective bargaining is abolished and replaced
with individual performance measurement and individualised pay packets.
Advisory organisations providing services to individual employees may not be
a form of trade unionism that the movement's founding fathers would
recognise, but it is the best hope for British trade unionism in the 21st
century.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920608

