FT924-6335

FT  21 NOV 92 / Markets: Market tires of Clintonomics guessing game - Wall
Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


IF INVESTORS were hoping to use the immediate post-election period to pass
judgment on President-elect Clinton's policies to revitalise the economy,
they have been sorely disappointed.
In the nearly three weeks since polling day more has been learned about
Socks the cat, the soon-to-be First Pet, than about Clintonomics.
The Democrats' decision to keep their presidential plans under wraps has
left the stock market somewhat adrift. Investors have not even been able to
indulge in a favourite post-election game - giving the thumbs up, or down,
to new cabinet appointments.
Even trying to guess the names of the cabinet is no longer fun. The market
has ceased caring whether Paul Volcker, the former Federal Reserve chief, or
Robert Rubin, the Goldman Sachs supremo, gets the top job at the Treasury,
or whether Harvard scholar Robert Reich becomes the new White House economic
adviser.
To make matters worse, the market has also lost interest in monetary policy.
Since 1990 the direction of interest rates has been one of the most
important factors influencing the market, alongside corporate profitability
and economic performance. Speculation about whether, when, and by how much,
the Fed might cut interest rates has kept investors busy for the best part
of the last two years.
Today, however, interest rate policy appears locked in neutral. Although the
rash of positive economic statistics after the election has since been
undermined by fresh gloomy news about the state of the recovery (just this
week housing starts were reported to be down sharply and unemployment
insurance claims up sharply), the Fed appears to be in no mood to touch the
monetary accelerator again.
This week's meeting of the Fed's key Open Market Committee, normally an
occasion keenly watched by both stock and bond markets for signs of changes
in policy, passed almost unnoticed.
Operating in a political and monetary policy vacuum, the market has been
forced to look elsewhere for inspiration. Tax issues have been unusually
prominent this week. President-elect Clinton's campaign pledge to increase
taxes on the wealthy has raised fears that he may put up the capital gains
tax as well, and a desire to book profits now rather than later may have
been partly behind some of the recent profit-taking.
Investors may also have been indulging in some loss-taking. Late November is
usually the time when investors begin to sell stocks that have performed
badly in their portfolio as part of a seasonal plan to maximise the tax
benefits from their investment losses.
This tax-related trading is thought to have played a large part in the fall
in IBM's share price. On Thursday IBM fell to Dollars 61 1/4 , its lowest
level since July 1982. Analysts said that concern that the weakness of
European economies will hit overseas orders for IBM mainframes was also
behind the selling of the stock.
Corporate tax issues have also been at play in the wider market. Stocks of
small and medium-sized companies traded over the counter on the Nasdaq
market have been much in favour recently (the Nasdaq composite index has
risen almost 6 per cent since November 3, polling day), and one of the
explanations put forward by analysts for the buying is that investors are
focusing on the Democrats' proposal during the election to cut taxes on
capital gains from long-term investment holdings of small and mid-sized
companies.
Among individual corporate news, the news that telecommunications giant AT &
T and financial services combine Transamerica, are planning to take parts of
their operations public in 1993, suggested that some large companies are
confident the market will be in reasonably good shape next year.
Of the two deals, AT&T's looks the largest. The company wants to float 15
per cent of its equipment leasing and finance subsidiary, AT & T Capital.
The subsidiary earned revenues of over Dollars 1bn last year, and has assets
of over Dollars 7bn, and while the idea behind the move is to give AT & T
Capital a large measure of financial independence, the interesting point
about the partial spin-off is that it leaves AT & T free to concentrate on
its core businesses of telecommunications and computing.
Transamerica is also getting rid of non-core assets to focus on what it does
best. It plans to sell its property and casualty insurance business next
spring through an initial public offering of stock. The demerger will enable
Transamerica to apply all of its energies to its life insurance and finance
business.
Monday     3205.74 - 27.29
Tuesday    3193.32 - 12.42
Wednesday  3207.37 + 14.05
Thursday   3209.53 + 14.05
Friday     3227.36 + 17.83

The Financial Times


London Page II

921121

