FT921-1382

FT  24 MAR 92 / Nestle and Agnellis agree on Perrier


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


THE bitter battle for control of Perrier mineral water, the well-known
French brand name, ended yesterday when Nestle, the powerful Swiss food
group, and its allies agreed terms for a settlement with their opponents,
the Agnelli family of Italy.
Full details of the agreement, which was concluded at 2am yesterday, will be
announced in Paris today.
Speculation on the stock market suggested that Nestle has agreed to increase
its FFr13.42bn (Pounds 1.38bn) offer for Perrier in return for the Agnellis
raising their FFr5.6bn bid for Exor, the French property company that
controls Perrier. BSN, the French food group which turned against its old
allies, the Agnellis, to side with Nestle, its chief competitor, would then
drop its FFr6bn counter-bid for Exor.
The Agnellis stand to make a substantial profit from selling Exor's shares
in Perrier. The Agnellis may also retain control of Exor's extensive
property interests and Chateau Margaux wines. Meanwhile, BSN is expected to
exercise its prior agreement with Nestle to buy Volvic, one of the Perrier
waters.
'It looks as though peace has broken out although we're still not sure on
what terms,' said Mr John Graham, European food analyst at UBS Phillips &
Drew in London. 'The Agnellis seem to have decided it would be too expensive
and too damaging to drag out the battle any longer.'
The seeds of the Perrier fracas were sown last year when the Agnellis
accepted an invitation from Exor to become one of its minority shareholders.
This angered both BSN, previously the Agnellis' partner in France, and
Lazard Freres, the Paris-based bank that had orchestrated the partnership.
Their anger intensified last autumn when the Agnellis announced an agreed
partial offer for Exor. The Agnellis then agreed to make a full offer for
Exor.
Nestle, having failed to persuade the Agnellis to sell Exor's shares in
Perrier, prepared to mount its own bid.
The pressure on the Agnellis intensified when BSN mounted a FFr6bn
counter-bid for Exor. When Nestle scored two decisive legal victories, the
pressure to negotiate became intolerable resulting in the settlement.
Lex, Page 22;
Markets, Page 41

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920324

