FT924-6403

FT  21 NOV 92 / Windsor fire destroys historic hall


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


THE QUEEN'S art collection, most of which will have escaped destruction in
yesterday's blaze at Windsor Castle, is possibly the greatest private
collection in the world.
The castle holds the greatest concentration of items in the collection. As
well as the works of art there are collections of armour, furniture and
18th-century French tapestries.
Last night the Duke of York said he believed only six paintings had been
lost in the blaze, which spread from the Brunswick Tower to St George's
Hall.
Buckingham Palace said that all the works of art were safely removed from St
George's Hall - one of the main state rooms - and the long corridor, where
many of the most valuable paintings were hanging. The fabric of St George's
Hall had been 'very badly gutted'.
Fire incident commander David Harper said last night: 'It's such a
complicated building. You have to rely an awful lot on the people who work
in it. The structure is very weak in certain places.'
Mr Adair Lewis, manager of information services for the for the Fire
Protection Association, said: 'Blazes can spread quickly and undetected in
the nooks and crannies of large old palaces and castles.
'It was found after the Hampton Court fire that there were all sorts of
voids which were not known about.' The restoration of Hampton Court Palace,
which took five years, was completed last year.
The serious damage to the hall is a blow for the national heritage. The
original room was built in the 14th century as the banqueting hall of King
Edward III. It could have been there that he inaugurated the Order of the
Garter.
For more than 600 years it has been the site of the annual banquet of the
Garter Knights. Their coats of arms, now numbering almost 1,000, cover the
ceiling.
The walls are lined with sets of arms and armour and with portraits of
British sovereigns from King James I to King William IV, including works by
Van Dyck and Kneller. Among the special treasures is a bust of George II by
Roubiliac.
The hall in its present form was the creation of King George IV in the early
19th century.
George IV lengthened the hall to 185ft and made it a triumph of Regency
Gothic.
Many of the paintings had been taken down because of the electrical rewiring
in progress at the castle. That helped the rescuers when they formed human
chains to lift the paintings, vases, armour, tapestries, carpets and other
works of art to safety, but many works of art will have been damaged by
smoke.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921121

