FT922-453

FT  27 JUN 92 / Sport: Kite flies in the sea breeze - Golf


   By JOHN HOPKINS


TO THOSE who care about such matters, Tom Kite's victory in US Open last
Sunday maintained the scheme of things. If the weather had remained as
overcast and windless as it had been for the first three days, then we might
now be saluting Gil Morgan or Jeff Sluman. Morgan and Sluman are fine but
not outstanding players and Pebble Beach, an outstanding course, has always
produced a champion worthy of its setting. Pebble Beach has staged three US
Opens, won by Jack Nicklaus, Tom Watson 10 years later, and now Kite.
Kite, 42, does not diminish this category, for he has been a very good
player for a very long time, long enough to have racked up nearly Dollars 7m
(Pounds 3.7m) in prize money from the US tour, more than any other golfer.
He is also the professional's professional, hard-working and popular,
respected by his peers and a man who has a true sense of what golf is all
about.
He has competed in the Open for years, for example, realising that an
ability to cope with the seaside courses in Britain is essential for someone
striving to become a world golfer. Kite was one of the few Americans who
came to Royal St George's in 1985, a year when many of his countrymen gave
the Open a miss because they did not like what they had heard about the
course.
In 1972 and 1982 Nicklaus and Watson were the world's dominant golfers. Kite
is not their equivalent in the 1990s, but at last he has rid himself of the
tag that was beginning to drive him nuts - that of the best player never to
have won a major championship.
'I really felt good about Tom Kite,' Kite said. 'I felt good about my
career, my family. I felt so fortunate. I guess what bugged me was the only
thing that people wanted to talk about was why I had never won a major. It
was as if all the other things I had done did not count for anything.'
When I thought of Kite and major championships I always remembered a putt I
had seen him attempt in the 1986 US Masters. It was the year that Jack
Nicklaus won for the sixth time. Kite was vying for the lead in the fourth
round when he left an 8 ft uphill putt short on the 14th green. To miss was
forgiveable but to leave such a putt short was not. He will never win a
major championship, I thought. He has not got the heart for it.
This view seemed to be confirmed by other events in Kite's career. In the
Open at Royal St George's in 1985 he led approaching the 10th green of the
fourth round - only to pull an approach shot, thin a bunker shot and
under-hit a chip. He finished joint eighth. At Oak Hill in 1989 he led the
US Open by three strokes after 58 holes, only to triple bogey the 5th and
end with a 78. So there was some justification for doubting Kite's nerve in
a crisis.
Kite's nerve held well enough last Sunday to suggest that now he has won one
major, he could well win a couple more. He went from the 7th hole where he
took a three-stroke lead to the 18th playing the sort of golf I, for one,
did not think him capable of under pressure. He dropped shots at the 16th
and 17th but when it looked as though he might be beginning to wobble, he
gathered himself with one memorable stroke.
Even with a two-shot lead, the 18th at Pebble Beach is a nerve-wracking
hole. Fred Couples once took a nine there. Kite had driven with a three-wood
all week for safety and accuracy, but now, on the lip of victory, he chose a
driver. It could have been disastrous. The slightest hook and his ball would
have ended in the Pacific, next stop Tokyo. He could hit a long safe shot to
the right of the trees in the fairway.
Instead, showing his courage, Kite hit his drive down the daring left side
of the fairway, starting it out over the sea so that it would land safely to
the left of the trees. We saw a new Tom Kite at Pebble Beach last Sunday. He
did not do what kites do on windless days and fall to earth. Instead, he
soared high; he deserved to win.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920627

