FT924-8265

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Bonds: Focus falls on sterling ahead of Autumn
Statement


   By BRIAN BOLLEN


STERLING provided the talking points in the international bonds market
yesterday. The sector was in an optimistic mood ahead of the Autumn
Statement by the chancellor, Mr Norman Lamont. As one trader put it, people
appeared to be buying the top names whatever the spread.
Confirming the interest in sterling bonds from elite names, Barclays de
Zoete Wedd brought two triple-A rated issues to market.
The first was from European Investment Bank, which launched its first bond
in the currency since Italy withdrew its withholding tax exemption on
foreign bond investments.
Judging the pricing for the Pounds 200m 5 1/4 -year 7 per cent issue without
the support of Italian investors made life difficult for sole underwriter
Barclays de Zoete Wedd. It said demand was strong despite the very tight
terms, 17 basis points over the reference gilt which is also partly paid.
BZW said demand came particularly from overseas investors who get a hedge
against a further weakening of the pound if interest rates fall in line with
expectations. The indications are that the issue was swapped into
floating-rate sterling at around Libor minus 30 to 32 basis points.
The EIB says it has borrowed, or is committed to borrow, around
Ecu12bn-equivalent so far in 1992, and plans to borrow Ecu1bn to Ecu1.5bn
more before the end of the year. It hopes to tap the Portuguese market for
around Esc15bn, and raise the balance probably in US dollars, Japanese yen
and French francs.
BZW's second top-rated borrower of the day was National Grid, making its
debut in the Eurobonds market, also with a Pounds 200m 5 1/4 -year bond.
Sparks flew in some quarters over the pricing on this transaction, after the
spread was presented variously as 20 and 43 basis points over comparable
gilts. Both proved to be correct: two quite different gilts were being used
as benchmarks.
The higher level was the one on which the professionals based their
reactions, but the confusion underlined for many the drawbacks of using the
gilts market to set prices. None of the gilts is a perfect measure of value,
as yields have come down so sharply, although a new current coupon frame of
reference is being established in the five- to six-year maturities.
Some bankers described the issue as clearly mispriced. National Grid could
have saved itself up to a further 20 basis points, they argued, but it
appears to have been happy to pay a premium to ensure the success of its
debut issue. 'We're very content,' said treasurer Mr Martin O'Donovan.
The Guinness Pounds 150m issue launched on Tuesday by JP Morgan duly broke
syndicate but suffered from the launch of National Grid, its spread widening
by several basis points.
Set to continue the internationalisation of the D-Mark is a DM1.5bn bond to
be launched today on behalf of Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW). The
maturity will be five years and the spread between 21-24 basis points over
comparable government bonds.
The issue will represent the borrower's biggest yet and the first by a
German entity using the fixed-price reoffer system.
Deutsche Bank will lead the bond, which will be launched through KfW
International Finance, the Delaware-based vehicle used by KfW for more than
30 foreign currency bond issues so far.
'This has been created for investors who want Eurobond features in a D-Mark
investment,' said Mr Gunther Braunig for KfW, which feels it is important to
broaden investor demand for D-Mark product. 'We want to give them large
liquid transactions syndicated by banks with placement power and market
making capabilities.'
Dresdner Bank's shares fell back on the announcement of the DM750m five-year
equity-linked deal it led for itself.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921112

