FT923-6454

FT  25 AUG 92 / Import strength pushes trade deficit to Pounds 1.1bn


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


THE UK's trade gap widened in July as the recession failed to stem the
growth in imports. Rising imports outstripped flat exports, causing the
visible trade deficit to grow by almost Pounds 200m from Pounds 947m in June
to Pounds 1.1bn last month.
The current account deficit, which includes a projected Pounds 200m surplus
on 'invisible' goods, such as banking, and transfer payments, grew from
Pounds 747m to Pounds 934m.
In the three months to the end of July the visible trade deficit narrowed
slightly to Pounds 2.9bn compared with Pounds 3.3bn in the previous three
months.
However, this mainly reflected a bigger surplus on erratic items such as
ships, North Sea installations and precious stones, which rose to Pounds
538m from Pounds 6m in the same period. The underlying deficit, which
excludes oil and erratics, was almost unchanged at Pounds 3.7bn in the three
months to the end of July.
Although consumer confidence remains weak and retail sales have been flat
since the general election in April, import growth means the UK has been
unable to close its trade deficit with the rest of the world.
In the three months to the end of July, the value of imports grew by 5 per
cent compared with the same period a year ago, against exports which were
only 1.5 per cent higher.
A breakdown of the UK's overseas trade suggests that slower economic growth
in other European Community countries is the main hindrance to higher export
sales. The value of exports to the EC fell by 0.5 per cent in the three
months to July compared with the previous three months.
Mr Robin Cook, the shadow trade and industry secretary, said the rise in
imports was further evidence that the government's economic policies were
failing British industry. 'Only halfway through 1992 Britain has clocked up
a deficit larger than the whole of last year,' he said.
The Treasury said exports continued to perform well in July and that the
rise in imports, consistent with economic recovery, was not unexpected.
Mr Norman Willis, general secretary of the TUC, said: 'The government's
economic policy is in tatters. A monthly deficit of over Pounds 900m when
the economy is in the greatest slump since the 1930s is scandalous.'
Trade deficit worsens, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920825

