FT924-12175

FT  22 OCT 92 / Contractors wary of rule change on funding


   By ANDREW TAYLOR, Construction Correspondent


THE prime minister's promise to relax Treasury rules inhibiting private
investment in roads and railways may give contractors and bankers a feeling
of deja vu.
In 1989, Mr Major, then chancellor, used very similar language when
scrapping the so-called 'Ryrie Rules' used by the Treasury to determine
whether private finance was suitable for infrastructure investment. The
ending of the Ryrie guidelines was supposed to encourage investment in a new
generation of privately financed projects.
Three years later, Britain has yet to build a metre of privately financed
motorway. Plans to build a privately funded high-speed rail link to the
Channel tunnel are in disarray due to political indecision over proposed
routes.
The main complaint of potential investors is that Treasury guidelines that
replaced the Ryrie Rules remain too restrictive.
Ryrie stipulated private schemes should not proceed unless they could be
financed more efficiently than by the public sector.
The new guidelines are contained in a document entitled: Economic Appraisal
in Central Government; a Technical Guide for Government Departments - better
known as the 'Green Book' - published in April 1991.
That stresses that privately financed projects must provide better value
than the public sector. Officials, however, can make allowance for
construction and revenue risks that otherwise would have to be undertaken by
the taxpayer.
That should have allowed more leeway for financially hard-pressed government
departments seeking to maintain building programmes by tapping private
investors.
In practice, only one concession for a private motorway has been approved.
The Birmingham Northern Relief Road, proposed in 1989 as the country's first
privately funded motorway, has still to face a public inquiry next summer.
Trafalgar House, the UK construction, property, shipping and hotels group,
and Iritecna, Italy's biggest toll road operator, however, expect to have
spent Pounds 20m-Pounds 30m by the time construction starts in 1994.
Contractors are wary of paying millions of pounds to prepare innovative
schemes only to find that they are put out to tender, with no guarantee of
them winning the work.
The biggest obstacle, says Mr Patrick de Pelet of merchant bank Kleinwort
Benson, has been industry's failure to persuade Treasury officials that
public-sector grants might be used alongside private investment in marginal
schemes.
Another solution proposed by companies such as Trafalgar House and John
Laing, which is building a privately financed bridge across the River
Severn, would be to allow private investors to acquire public roads.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921022

