FT924-11299

FT  27 OCT 92 / Serbs shake UN hold on sector


   By LAURA SILBER


   DRAGALIC, CROATIA


THE United Nations protectorate in Sector West, central Croatia, is
considered a model among the UN's four peacekeeping zones in Croatia because
of the high degree of co-operation between the UN and the local authorities.
But attempts by Serb rebels at the weekend to destabilise the sector and
prevent refugees from returning have highlighted the UN's fragile hold over
even this small part of the former Yugoslavia.
UN attempts to reopen the motorway between Zagreb and Belgrade, the Croatian
and Serb capitals, were undermined on Sunday when 20 armed Serbs used
combine harvesters to throw up a road block on the route, 70km south of
Zagreb.
Local Serb officials said the motorway would be reopened only if Serbs had
the right to control the road, a move which would undermine the UN's
authority.
The road, named in the Tito era as the highway of brotherhood and unity, was
closed in August 1991 when Serbs in the area, backed by Belgrade, rebelled
against Croatian independence. Telephone links were also severed between the
two republics.
When UN peacekeepers were deployed in Sector West last May they moved
quickly to demilitarise Serb and Croat-held territories by July to allow the
return of refugees - many of them Croat - to this part of central Croatia.
Plans to reopen the motorway were agreed at the Geneva peace talks in
September.
But General Carlos Zabala, the UN sector commander, said that, in addition
to the roadblock, Serb paramilitaries were trying to reverse the
demilitarisation process by wearing military uniforms.
If the UN's hold over Sector West is further undermined - to the extent that
it breaks down - President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia could withdraw his
half-hearted support of UN operations in Croatia, western diplomats fear.
The Croatian government had originally opposed deployment of UN forces in
the republic on grounds that they would consolidate Serb gains.
Backing for the local Serb action is coming from President Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia, who is determined to prevent the refugees returning and
is playing on fears in the Serb community in Sector West that the Croat
authorities plan to assert control over the territory through force.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921027

