FT921-15239

FT  11 JAN 92 / The Long View: A glut of grandparents


   By BARRY RILEY


UPGRADING state pensions would be one of the immediate priorities of a
Labour regime in the UK, but all over Europe other governments are searching
for ways of reducing their pension commitments. Persuading people to accept
generous pensions is easy enough, and politicians have cannily noticed that
making such promises can win them votes; but finding other people to foot
the bill is another matter entirely, and it is getting much tougher.
In France the government last year issued a Livre Blanc or discussion paper
to find ways of heading off the imminent crises in the compulsory
pay-as-you-go retirement schemes. In Italy, which already spends 14 per cent
of GDP on state retirement provision, the perennially shaky regime seems
unable to impose an orderly reduction of benefits, implying that at some
point in the not-too-distant future the system will crash in a brutal
fashion.
There are simply going to be too many old folk. The UK, fortunately, will be
little affected for a number of decades, but countries such as Germany,
Belgium, Italy and France are grappling with the implications of a fertility
rate seriously below the level of 2.1 children per woman required to
maintain a stable population. The rate in Italy has slumped to just 1.3.
They say that the very last Bavarian will die in about 500 years time. His
pension book, alas, will not do him much good.
Quite why we Europeans have become reluctant to reproduce ourselves is a big
question, and may have many answers, but I shall just look at it from the
point of view of security in old age. In Third World countries a large
family provides the only reasonably reliable guarantee of comfort and
dignity in the declining years. Advanced Western countries have sought to
introduce retirement security systems which provide universal protection.
But such measures cannot obscure the basic truth that the old are dependent
for survival on the younger generations. We have collectivised pension
rights without considering that there may be a clash with the individualised
duty to go forth and multiply.
These issues were discussed at a fascinating conference run before Christmas
by the Brussels think tank, the Centre for European Policy Studies. The
primary concerns for Eurocrats arise from cross-border distortion; the
different pensions regimes obstruct the mobility of individuals, and can
also affect the competitiveness of industries (which is why the British
government is anxious to avoid some of the high Continental social security
costs).
However, the European Commission has abandoned for the time being its
attempt to harmonise the various pension systems because there is so little
scope for flexibility: nobody would pay into a near-bankrupt French scheme,
for instance, if he or she could possibly avoid it. The question is whether
national reforms will make harmonisation more practical.
Pay-as-you-go schemes, such as our own SERPS, pose the biggest immediate
problems. Starting them is like a political dream, because modest
contributions paid by many millions of workers can instantly fund pensions
for the retired. It amounts to a free gift from one generation to the
previous one. But strings are attached, because the contributors think that
the contract also guarantees their own pensions. That postdated cheque will
have to be honoured by a future generation which was not consulted and may
be much smaller in size. The required contributions could swell alarmingly.
But cutting back or terminating pay-as-you-go schemes is a nightmare for
politicians.
The dependency ratio, calculated as the ratio of people aged 65 and over to
those aged 15-64, will double to more than 40 per cent in Germany between
now and the year 2030. There is a similar problem in France, where the
prospect of a doubling in pension contribution rates from the current 16 per
cent or so over the next 30 years is causing the political alarm bells to
ring. As for Italy, the unsubsidised pension contribution rates for the main
private and public sector schemes could rise to 45 per cent of pay by 2010.
Obviously this will not happen in practice, but avoiding such disasters will
be messy. Mass immigration might be one answer, and indeed Germany has
already tried it. But it cannot be certain that immigrants will head for
countries with tottering social security systems and help to balance the
books. Within the context of a Single European Market there might be mass
emigration from such states instead, as workers seek a lower tax
environment. Excessive pension promises could destabilise whole economies.
A shift towards funded schemes, such as are common in the UK and the
Netherlands, but not elsewhere in the EC, may provide certain advantages,
such as in providing more capital where savings ratios are low, or in
diversifying risks. This week the French government proposed reforms to
encourage private pension funds.
If confined to domestic investments such funds cannot really solve the
problem of intergenerational transfer. However, it is possible for a
shrinking country to provide for its citizens' old age by investing abroad.
There are historical precedents, for instance a century ago when the UK
steadily built up external assets which by the eve of the first world war
amounted to 140 per cent of GDP (although these investments were not
formalised as pension funds).
But at that time the UK had the British Empire and the US, with their prime
development regions, to invest in; although there are plenty of investment
opportunities around the world today, few appear to offer comparable
political and legal security, of a quality which would be acceptable for
pension funds. You would not want to rely in your old age on an emerging
markets fund. So the idea that EC pension funds could be used to finance the
redevelopment of Eastern Europe, for instance, seems fanciful.
There is, fundamentally, no way in which the masses of future European
pensioners can escape the economic consequences of their own lack of
fertility. As the years go by people will have to retire later and take
part-time jobs to make their small pensions go further. And they had better
be very respectful to their grandchildren.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920111

