FT923-15406

FT  02 JUL 92 / Ceasefire strains both sides in city


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


THERE have been repeated breaches of the Sarajevo ceasefire agreement, even
yesterday as relief supplies started arriving in the besieged city, despite
assurances by both sides in the battle for the Bosnian capital that they
will honour any accord.
Both sides have different reasons for breaking it.
The Bosnian Territorial Defence units, under which the Moslem, Serb and
Croat defenders are grouped, believe that only military intervention from
outside will stop the Serb irregulars and Serbia's proxy Bosnian army from
dividing the city on ethnic lines.
They point out that the Serb forces, led by Mr Radovan Karadzic, and General
Ratko Mladic, already control large sections of western Sarajevo after
repeated bombardment.
The Moslems, who make up 43 per cent of Bosnia-Hercegovina's population,
also argue that outside military intervention alone will guarantee them
security and autonomy against moves by Serbia and Croatia to divide Bosnia
between them.
Croatia and Serbia control a third of Bosnia each. The rest is being
fiercely contested by Serb and Croat forces, with Moslem civilians and
fighters caught in the middle.
In these circumstances, Mr Alija Izetbegovic, Bosnian president, has
difficulty persuading his supporters to accept a lasting ceasefire. He
himself believes it would allow the Serb irregulars to consolidate control
of areas in and around Sarajevo they already hold.
The Serbs, for their part, have withdrawn their heavy artillery equipment
from the airport, after much United Nations pressure and US threats of
intervention. Mr Karadzic has ordered his men to honour another ceasefire.
Despite this latest promise, Serb units continued yesterday to bombard the
suburb of Dobrinja.
Dobrinja, an ethnically mixed complex of high-rise flats south-west of the
centre, is strategically important for the Serbs as it gives direct access
to the airport.
That is why Serb irregulars have besieged Dobrinja for the past 60 days.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920702

