FT921-14191

FT  17 JAN 92 / The Property Market: Bottom fishing for the brave


   By BARBARA DURR


In the US, property values are predicted to bottom out in 1992. That is
about the only good news from the Real Estate Research Corporation's recent
report Emerging Trends in Real Estate 1992*.
The report, a 40-page booklet published by Equitable Real Estate Investment
Management, is based on interviews with a large panel of property
professionals. It warns that 'conditions will get worse before they get
better'.
Property financed a few years ago, and still in the pipeline, is expected to
add to the glut this year, particularly in cities such Los Angeles and
Chicago.
Signs of recovery are not expected until 1993 or 1994. Meanwhile, property's
continued poor performance will hurt investors, including commercial banks,
pension funds, insurance companies, foreigners and wealthy individuals.
Returns, dismal last year, 'will remain disappointing,' the RERC report
says.
Values are predicted to drop 10 per cent in 1992. Only apartment-type
investments are expected to rise in value in the next two years by an
appreciable amount - 6.3 per cent on the forecast.
A modest increase in transactions is, however, expected this year, if only
because the principal issue for many investors now is how to exit. Since
1990, transaction volume has been gridlocked, in part because the bid/ask
gap was too wide. But pressures on investors have grown and some insurance
companies, pension funds, commercial banks and desperate developers may have
more reasonably priced offerings.
For those with courage, patience and deep pockets, the RERC suggests it may
be a good time to pick up bargains. It believes many of these deals,
especially those by wealthy individuals, are more likely to be done quietly
than through the open bidding that characterised the 1980s.
The Japanese and Europeans are not expected to want to increase their
exposure, though the British and the Dutch, who both have long experience in
the market, may go bottom fishing for bargains.
Farmland is a bright spot. The report says prudent, gradual investment by
institutional capital is likely during the next few years.
*Available from Equitable Real Estate Management, 787 Seventh Avenue, New
York New York, 10019.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920117

