FT922-13414

FT  11 APR 92 / Gardening: Why pigs perk up Parma violets - Robin Lane Fox's
thoughts turn again to manure


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


IN THE aftermath of an election, you will forgive me for returning to the
topic of pig manure. You may feel that enough of it has been distributed
metaphorically up and down the country for there to be no need for
discussing the availability of private heaps. However, so many of you have
written to ask for a source of urine-free, pre-crumbled pig dung after one
of my recent articles that I can only answer you collectively.
The topic seems to interrelate with this paper's other interests. Only one
of you was specific, saying that she wanted to send a bag of it to her life
insurance salesperson on learning, after the deal, about the level of his
commission. The rest of you are keeping its destination secret.
I fear that there is no single centralised source: transport would be
expensive and I am not sure about Datapost's rules on scent. My supplies
come from a pig farm six miles away which cannot deliver to a greater
radius.
The sensible course is to check where pigs are kept locally, find out if the
manure has stood and cooled for a while and then offer to collect it in
bags, equipped with rubber gloves as it can cause a rash when too fresh.
In spring, you may see some little tin pig-shelters out in the field: if so,
stop and think. They are not just a warning of the levels to which we might
have been reduced in another five years: where there is shelter there is -
well, you know what I mean, and probably the farmer will sell it to you.
Rotted manure is worth buying and I credit it with the two main consolations
in my post-electoral garden. Last year, I bought a replacement plant of the
double lilac-flowered primrose, Primula lilacina plena. It had entered my
life through a Weekend FT reader who kindly posted me a fragment of his
plant in a metal canister just at the time of a wave of terrorist letter
bombs. It was only after submersion in the village pond that the traces of
grit on the surface turned out to be nothing but compost: the plant
flourished for years, giving great pleasure until we moved house.
When the same primula eventually reached me from Wiltshire, I split it into
three parts, each of which now has more than 30 flowers. The cause is
simple: not shade, water nor green fingers, but an explosive charge of my
own devising: pure pig manure beneath it. Primroses seem to thrive on this
rich mixture: pack the animal explosion into the upper six inches of soil
because primroses never root very deeply.
This double lilac-flowered primrose has a particular charm. It is the oldest
garden form whose historical pedigree is certain. The same variety was
growing in the 18th century, at the latest: its double flowers are
distinctive, and in them we see a double primrose as gardening poets like
Pope or Shenstone.
Other double varieties are mentioned by the dozen in Tudor books on
gardening, but unless their illustrators are inaccurate, they cannot be
plants in modern circulation. Sometimes, we have taken over their names, but
the originals have probably died out.
If they had been fed more richly, perhaps they would have survived four
centuries.
Pig manure has not merely toned up the oldest form of primroses: it has also
worked wonders on those vanishing beauties, the violets. In the 1970s, named
varieties of sweet violet had almost become a lost cause, lamented by their
few private growers and apparently doomed in the general market.
The picture is better nowadays and certainly clearer, not least because of
The Plant Finder's annual listings. Down in Bridport in Dorset, C W Groves
and Son has been stocking some of the standard hardy varieties for years
without undue advertisement.
It also sells some of the double-scented Parma varieties, including Comte de
Brazza who seems to have been de-classed nowadays and renamed as Swanley
White.
Early this year, I made a raid on Groves where the violets are potted up in
a cold house behind a general garden store selling anything from bird seed
to large potatoes for baking. Among the young stock, I hit on old garden
friends such as Baroness Rothschild and John Raddenbury, among other
varieties in honour of the Grove family themselves.
Like primroses, violets seem to like a very potent soil. There have never
been such violets as those in the Edwardian era, and I now find that their
books on the subject insisted that the best violets needed a very rich diet.
In those days, richness meant cow, not pig, a preference which fits with the
violet's mythology.
The story goes that the god Zeus first created violets after wooing the fair
young Io, and turning her into a cow after the event, so that nobody would
suspect her and interrupt the affair. Nowadays, lovers become cows rather
later in the male imagination, but you can see that the lady needed
something good to eat: Zeus, therefore, created the violet in her meadow as
a sort of nutritional IOU.
Perhaps in the 1990s we would alter the myth anyway, and say that he was a
frightful pig. Pig-manure, certainly, has worked wonders under my plants
from Groves' good list. The Duchesse de Parma is up and running; the
Princess of Wales is a leggy variety but has quickly recovered her spirits.
The next hazard will be red spider, the violet's worst enemy in warm
weather. Meanwhile, if you want to keep it, manure it heavily, honouring the
animal strain in its origins.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920411

