FT922-720

FT  26 JUN 92 / Management: Milking profits by churning - The west is
learning the lessons of quick-fire product launches


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


If the pronouncements from Tokyo over the past six months were to be
believed, one would think that Japanese industry was about to drop one of
its most vicious competitive weapons: 'product churning'.
This is the practice of launching a bewildering flood of new and face-lifted
products at ever shorter intervals. Its advantages are that distribution
channels are kept full; consumers are constantly beguiled with novelties;
and - most important - the churner's competitors barely get a look-in.
The practice has been followed for at least a decade, with growing success
in markets around the world, by Japanese manufacturers of cars, consumer
electronics, computers, semiconductors, air-conditioners, and other
products.
At the most recent count, model changes in video cassette recorders and
air-conditioners have been coming through once every six months, and as
often as every three months in word-processors and cordless phones. The
result is a proliferation of very similar products and a rapid rate of
replacement.
The practice of churning has required not so much high expenditure on new
product development as the ability to design and develop new items at
remarkable speed.
Hence the rush by western companies to try to learn from Japan how to
shorten their new product development cycles by improving the productivity
of their design and engineering processes. This can be achieved partly by
getting groups of different technical specialists to work more effectively
together in integrated project teams.
A few leading western companies have gone a long way towards closing the
gap, notably Hewlett-Packard, Texas Instruments, Procter & Gamble and Xerox
in the US, plus Philips and Rover cars in Europe.
On product lines such as laser printers, HP is at least as fast as its
Japanese rivals. It is also as good at the classic Japanese strategy of
launching a string of 'new' products which are only slight variants of the
ones they replace or augment. Yet, at a time when most western companies are
still only starting to shorten their product development cycles, and to
speed up the rate of new product introduction, the Japanese are hinting that
they have overdone 'product churning', and will now rein it back.
Starting in January with Akio Morita, chairman of Sony and Japan's
unofficial trade ambassador, and quickly followed in February by the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti), there has been a series
of statements from Tokyo that this must be done for two purposes.
First, for corporate financial and marketing reasons: to cut development and
investment costs and thereby boost hard-pressed corporate profitability and
dividends; and to avoid aggravating incipient consumer resistance to purely
cosmetic product changes.
Second, for national socio-economic and international environmental reasons:
to reduce the over-use of 'resources'. By this is meant not only steel and
aluminium but also human beings: the Japanese government is under pressure
to reduce the average working week and no one works longer than a Japanese
development engineer.
Morita's ruminations were intriguing in their combination of micro with
macro arguments. Calling upon industry to behave more responsibly towards
all its 'stakeholders' - not just shareholders, but also employees,
customers, society and the environment - he said companies must give less
overwhelming priority than in the past 'to victory in the market-place'.
Various aspects of the Morita and Miti clarion calls have been echoed widely
by company bosses. A vice-president of Matsushita, the consumer electronics
giant, was quoted in a Japanese newspaper as declaring that 'the task for
manufacturers in the future is to make products that have added value and a
long life'.
In the motor industry, both Nissan and Toyota have expressed their intention
of stretching from four to five years the interval at which they make
significant changes in their mass-market models. To the western eye and ear,
all this seems like manna from heaven. But is it to be taken at face value?
And can western manufacturers now ease up on their panic-stricken rush to
learn how to 'churn' products themselves?
Common sense suggests that the answers to the two questions are negative.
Japanese companies (like German ones) have a habit of magnifying their
problems for foreign consumption, and waxing lyrical about the good of
mankind.
The most authoritative western source of expertise on product churning is
the consultant credited with inventing the term, Kevin Jones of McKinsey &
Company, who has lived in Japan for a decade. Jones confirms the
common-sense view. 'Product churning won't stop - it has become part of the
corporate woodwork and is now a necessary competitive tool,' he says. 'On
the other hand, it probably will not accelerate any further.'
Will it slow down, even temporarily, as companies struggle to rebuild their
profits? Will Nissan and Toyota, especially, turn their words into action?
'I hear their comments, but I'm not sure it's going to happen,' Jones
comments. As he says, the car-makers face quite a dilemma. If they do
stretch their new model launch cycle from four to five years, a sort of
peace pact could prevail for a while. But he points out that there would be
a constant temptation for one company to break ranks. 'So things will
probably stay as they are.'
Rather than dropping product churning, Jones forecasts that manufacturers
will keep it at its current level, and add three further weapons to it:
Still greater productivity in research, design and development.
The injection of more really new content and added value into their 'new'
products.
A smattering of western project evaluation techniques, at least at
relatively elevated levels in the corporate hierarchy. The absence of this
in most Japanese companies has been one of the main factors behind their
speed of product churning, explains Jones.
Except at a few companies, the middle managers involved in regular product
development and launch decisions tend not to possess the financial skills
necessary to calculate returns on investment in individual new products, or
even in entire product lines, he reports.
Development and launch decisions are based on simpler principles, such as
market leadership, beating the competition and supporting distribution
channels.
Because of this, Jones forecasts that it may take a decade for western
financial analysis techniques to permeate product development.
In other words, top Japanese managers like Sony's Morita may declare their
intent to convert to a more western style of decision-making, but many
decisions below them may continue to be made in much the same way as before.
For the time being, the wind of change apparently blowing in Tokyo is,
therefore, not at all warm for the majority of western companies. Only the
foremost leaders can feel at all confident. So the real message from Tokyo
is decidedly double-edged. Far from being reassured, most western managers
should be really churned-up about it.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920626

