FT922-4302

FT  06 JUN 92 / Delegates muff throwaway lines


THE less than environmentally aware behaviour of participants at the Earth
Summit does not bode well for the meeting's outcome. The Rio Refuse
Collection Authority complained yesterday that people were ignoring the
signs and 160 special bins prominently placed throughout the centre asking
them to separate their litter for recycling. 'I wouldn't trust him to save
the planet,' grumbled one refuse collector as he watched an Australian
ecologist throw a large piece of pizza into the bin for recyclable material.
                       *      *      *
Bill Reilly, head of the US Environmental Protection Agency, continues to do
a valiant job in leading the US delegation to Rio. On Thursday night,
however, having just had his suggestions for a summit compromise rejected by
the White House, he let the smiling mask down for a moment. Asked if he
planned some eco-tourism in Brazil after the conference, the former World
Wildlife Fund head responded: 'Actually, the idea of going off faraway
somewhere birdwatching has rather an appeal right now.'
                       *      *      *
Cellphones are probably the most concrete example in Rio of technology
transfer from the industrialised world. Throughout the conference centre, in
corridors, meeting rooms and bars, are people standing speaking into their
black boxes, occasionally emitting impolite expressions of irritation as the
batteries run out. Cellphone users have even infiltrated the meditation
garden.
The secret to success with a cellphone is all about striking the right pose.
To make other less well-equipped participants (such as the French
delegation) turn really green one needs to capture that jaunty walk and
serious expression indicating that one is talking matters of state crucial
for the future of the planet and not let them hear that it is really an
order for pepperoni pizza and cold beer.
                       *      *      *
When world leaders gather next week for the climax of the world summit, who
will chair the meeting? The Brazilians had to deal with this tricky
question. And they found an age-old answer.
A huge round table capable of seating 126 people has been installed beside
the main assembly hall. But what if this is not big enough to handle the 180
delegations? 'They can all shove up a bit,' says a Brazilian official.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

