FT923-6639

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: Cash in on Uncle Sam - How to make the
most of a weak dollar


   By PHILIP COGGAN


FANCY A three-bedroom Florida home with a view of the ocean for Pounds
67,000? With the pound worth almost two dollars at the moment, any Briton
who has visited the US for a holiday will have discovered how cheap most
things are - a decent double room in a motel can be had for Pounds 17 a
night, for example.
It seems unlikely that this can last for ever. In 1985, the pound and the
dollar were at virtual parity. And while the pound is tied to the D-mark,
its rate against the dollar is free to fluctuate. According to a survey by
Godwins Cityscope, 88 per cent of investment managers think that sterling
will have a lower value vis-a-vis the US dollar in 12 months.
So, are there ways for UK investors to benefit from the current cheapness of
the dollar, aside from taking the kids to Disneyland?
The first thing to realise is that investing in another currency inevitably
involves a gamble. There is no guarantee that the dollar will not decline
even further. When the time comes to convert your investment back into
sterling, it could fall in value.
A second important factor is that US interest rates are much lower than
those in the UK - indeed, this is one factor behind the dollar's decline.
Dollar bonds pay about 2 percentage points less than gilts and dollar
deposits pay 6 to 7 percentage points less than a building society account.
So buying dollar assets means sacrificing income in the short term in
pursuit of - far from certain - capital gain.
If they are prepared to take that chance, there are ways in which investors
can try to take advantage of a potential rise in the US dollar.
Currency funds. These are dollar deposit accounts and are normally based
offshore. Interest can be paid gross and 'rolled up' so that tax is
postponed until income is brought back into the UK. Most have no initial
charge, so represent quite a low cost way of backing a dollar rise.
But US interest rates are currently extremely low, as the Federal Reserve
attempts to stimulate the American economy. In consequence, the return on
currency funds is pretty meagre - the Fidelity US dollar fund, based in
Bermuda, yields just 2.4 per cent.
Bond funds. A higher return can be achieved by investing in US bonds. Funds
which do so tend to invest in bonds issued by the US government, or other
creditworthy institutions.
However, the extra return reflects an extra layer of risk. The US dollar
might move in the right direction, but a fall in bond prices could cancel
out the benefit for the international investor. Thirty year US treasury
bonds now yield 7.3 per cent, the lowest level for five-and-a-half years.
Five year bonds yield just 5.4 per cent. There is a real chance that yields
might rise (and bond prices fall) from this level if, say, the markets
became convinced that President Bush was not going to be re-elected.
Indeed, Kevin Colglazier, dollar bond fund manager at Guinness Flight in
London, says that one key factor which might lead to a dollar rebound - an
economic recovery - would also be likely to cause bond prices to fall.
Given the current low yield levels, US bond funds do not pay a great return
by UK standards. Guinness Flight's conventional dollar bond fund, for
example, yields 5.73 per cent. It also has a high yield fund, which invests
in riskier securities such as Latin American corporate debt and yields 8.03
per cent. The funds have a front end charge of 5 per cent and an annual
charge of 0.75 per cent.
Managed funds. One can gain exposure to the US dollar, without making a
whole-hearted commitment to US securities. So-called dollar managed funds
are denominated in dollars, but hold assets in many different classes of
currency. They still do not offer particularly attractive yields; the Old
Court fund, for example, based in Guernsey and run by Rothschild Asset
Management, currently yields just 2.28 per cent.
Equity funds. There are 126 unit and four investment trusts which offer
investors the chance of exposure to the US equity market. The problem is
that investing in another country's equity market is normally a much greater
bet on shares than it is on the currency.
Wall Street has survived the recession rather better than many other
markets, thanks to the low interest rates. But the consequence is that many
people think the market could be due to fall - according to Datastream, the
price-earnings ratio is over 20 and the dividend yield is below 3 per cent,
low by historical standards.
For those who do want to back the prospects for US equities, the best 10
year unit trust performance in the sector was produced by Fidelity American;
the best five year record was by Foreign & Colonial's US Smaller Companies.
Property. For the wealthy, this area offers the interesting opportunity of
combining investment and pleasure; many people own villas in Spain or
Tuscany, so why not a holiday home in New England?
According to Dr Sol Rabin, of TCW Realty in Los Angeles, there are three
reasons why US property might represent a historic buying opportunity: the
weak dollar, recent falls in US property prices and low interest rates.
The US real estate market is highly regionalised and individual areas have
their boom and bust periods. New England in particular has seen some
calamitous falls; California - which previously had held up well - is now
suffering from recession.
So, as with shares and bonds, there is the risk that any gain you make on
currency movements will be cancelled out by property prices. Nevertheless,
if you were thinking of buying an overseas holiday home in any case, this
could be the time to consider the US.
There are obvious dangers in buying a property on another continent. Joseph
O'Connor, president and chief executive of Copley Real Estate Advisors,
advises potential homeowners to 'never buy anything without seeing it.' If
you are buying from a corporation, O'Connor says you can check its
reputation with a local better business bureau, which most communities
possess. As a further safety measure, he favours using a local well-known
realtor (the American term for estate agent).
Prices vary enormously from region to region. The three-bedroomed Florida
home for Pounds 67,000 (Dollars 130,000) was mentioned by Alice Petty, of
Host Realty, in Melbourne Beach on the Atlantic coast. An average family
home (three bedrooms, two bathrooms) in Cape Cod, Massachusetts costs around
Dollars 150,000 (Pounds 77,000), according to the Massachusetts Association
of Realtors. If you want a beachfront condominium in California, prices
start from around Dollars 250,000 (Pounds 129,000), according to TCW
Realty's Rabin.
There are additional costs; the cost of air travel to the US is very
variable, depending on competition in the market and the time of year. The
US equivalent of the council tax - local property taxes - tend to cost 1 to
2 per cent per annum of property values, according to Copley's O'Connor.
Some states also impose transaction taxes on house deals. And when you come
to sell, you will find that the realtor's commission is about 5 to 7 per
cent, much higher than a UK estate agents fees.
However, if you are prepared to limit your visits to the spring and autumn,
you may be able to cover a significant part of your running costs by renting
out your home in the summer season. And a home in Florida does sound more
glamorous than a semi in Surbiton . . .

The Financial Times


London Page III

920822

