FT924-8206

FT  12 NOV 92 / Hongkong parent raises HKDollars 5bn


   By ROBERT PESTON and SIMON HOLBERTON


   LONDON, HONG KONG.


HSBC Holdings, the parent of Hongkong and Shanghai Bank and the UK's Midland
Bank, yesterday surprised investors by selling 80m new shares to raise
HKDollars 5.12bn (Pounds 435.3m).
The bank said the main reason for raising the money was to repay loans made
by Hongkong Bank Limited, the Hong Kong-based banking subsidiary, to other
parts of the HSBC group. These loans had been made primarily to help the
group finance the Pounds 3.9bn acquisition of Midland Bank, completed in
June.
HSBC said Hongkong Bank would use the loan repayment proceeds to 'develop
its traditional business, particularly in the expanding economies of the
Asia/Pacific region'.
Mr Bernard Asher, one of HSBC's directors who runs its investment banking
activities, said that HSBC had always maintained higher capital levels than
many of its international competitors. It was therefore keen to raise
additional capital by selling shares when there was strong demand for them.
The issue increases HSBC's ratio of tier one or core capital, an important
measure of its financial strength, from 6.4 per cent to 6.9 per cent, well
above the internationally agreed minimum of 4 per cent.
Mr Asher said Midland Bank had been performing much as HSBC had been
expecting when it bought the bank, though he described the UK banking and
industrial climate as 'dreary'. He said that the new capital was not needed
to compensate for high loan losses at Midland.
HSBC's share price has more than doubled since the beginning of the year and
its market value now represents 2.5 per cent of the entire stock market.
Most UK investment institutions have only relatively small HSBC
shareholdings, so they have not benefited from the great share price rise.
As a result, they were keen to buy the shares and around two thirds of the
issue was placed with them.
The brokers to the deal were Cazenove and two of HSBC's own subsidiaries,
James Capel in London and Wardley James Capel in the Far East.
HSBC's sterling-registered shares rose from 561p to 565p. Its Hong Kong
Dollar shares rose from 565p to 567p. New shares of both types are being
issued.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921112

