FT923-6624

FT  22 AUG 92 / Food: Bass, a sleek and simple fishy feast - Cookery


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


SLEEK and silvery with delicate flesh, sea bass is a fine fish for high
summer. While not cheap, it requires very little effort by the cook to make
a memorable feast.
Like most top-quality meats and fish, sea bass shows to the best advantage
if given very little embellishment. Cook it plainly and sauce it simply.
It seems a great pity to fillet such a handsome fish. For maximum effect,
cook and serve sea bass whole. If the fishmonger has not done so, cut off
the fins; these have sharp spikes, as do the gill covers. Then, gut and
scale it. Impeccable freshness is, of course, paramount.
Rick Stein, whose Seafood Restaurant in Padstow is one of the best reasons
to visit Cornwall, brushes sea bass with butter and roasts it on a thin
pallet of vegetables in a hot oven until the skin is crisp and the flesh is
tender. He serves it with Hollandaise sauce sharpened brilliantly with
sorrel.
Sea bass is suited equally well to oriental treatments.
SEA BASS WITH BLACK BEAN SAUCE (serves 6)
This party piece comes from a tome of favourite recipes from Prue Leith's
cookery school: Leith's Cookery Bible (Bloomsbury Pounds 20). Black beans
can be bought from Chinese supermarkets in tins or vacuum packs. Thicken the
sauce at the end, if you like, with 2 teaspoons cornflour.
Ingredients: 1 x 4 lb sea bass, cleaned and scaled; half a lemon; half a
dozen spring onions; 3 tablespoons fermented black beans; 1 garlic clove; 1
inch of fresh ginger root; 1 tablespoon sunflower oil; 2 teaspoons sesame
oil; 2 tablespoons each soy sauce and sherry; 1 teaspoon sugar.
Lay the fish on a large sheet of oiled foil. Sprinkle with sea salt and
pepper, cover with citrus slices, and crimp the foil to make a baggy (yet
securely-sealed) parcel. Cook on a baking sheet at 375F/190C (gas mark 5)
for 40 minutes.
Wash the beans thoroughly under a cold running tap. Chop finely the garlic,
ginger and half the spring onions.
Warm the sunflower oil in a small saucepan and cook the aromatics for 1
minute.
Add the beans, soy sauce, sherry, sugar and half a pint of cold water. Bring
slowly to simmering point. Cover and cook very gently for 15 minutes so
flavours blend and infuse. Then stir in the sesame oil.
Unwrap and slide the cooked fish on to a warmed dish and scatter with the
remaining spring onions, chopped finely. Hand round the sauce separately.
SEA BASS WITH SESAME & SOY (serves 2)
Here is a dish to which you can turn when you want a fast feast for two. If
times are hard, grey mullet can be used instead of bass.
Ingredients: 1 x 1 1/2 lb sea bass, cleaned and scaled; 1 heaped teaspoon
sesame seeds; 3 1/2 tablespoons peanut or sunflower oil; 1 1/2 -2 teaspoons
ginger root chopped very finely; 3-4 spring onions chopped very finely; soy
sauce.
Make two or three deep slashes obliquely down each side of the fish. Paint
very lightly with oil and season with sea salt and plenty of coarsely-ground
black pepper. Grill for about 15 minutes, turning the fish carefully at
half-time.
Alternatively, steam the fish. This is even quicker (7-8 minutes should be
enough) and is less smelly, making it a wiser choice when the weather is
such that leaving the kitchen windows and back door wide open to waft away
fishy odours does not appeal.
While the fish cooks, toast the sesame seeds in a fat-less pan and reserve
them. Put the ginger and oil into the pan and place over low heat until very
hot and aromatic.
Add the finely-chopped spring onions to the saucepan, cover, and set aside
for 2-3 minutes while you move the cooked fish on to a hot serving dish.
Then add the sesame seeds to the pan and return it to the flame until
bubbling hot. Add a good splash of soy, shake to mix the ingredients, and
pour the sizzling sauce over the fish.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920822

