FT922-4213

FT  06 JUN 92 / Sport: Stuffing two-back elegantly - Croquet


   By NICKY SMITH


CROQUET has always had immense style, but the fourth world championship,
held in Newport, Rhode Island, last weekend, raised the game to a new level.
It also showed that croquet in the US has a style all its own.
This is most immediately evident in the language of the game. The Americans
bring a vibrancy to croquet terminology that is altogether lacking in the
British game. They talk of 'stuffing two-back' or 'having no fear of
deadness.'
The Americans' traditional 'nine-wicket' game is a direct descendant of the
croquet played in England over a century ago. But while the British game
developed in line with the game in Australia and New Zealand, US croquet
stayed provincial.
In some respects it still is. None of the members of the eight-man US
contingent reached the quarter-finals. On the other hand, in spite of a bad
start caused by less than perfect lawns and weather which changed from
blistering heat to freezing cold wind in the space of a day, three of the
six-man English group made it to the semi-finals, and the event was won for
the second time by 22-year-old Robert Fulford, the champion in 1990. In the
final, Fulford beat last year's champion, John Walters.
Tactically, the British are undoubtedly leaders in the game. Fulford had
been finding it hard to shoot straight on lawns that dipped and rolled
alarmingly. Very early in the tournament he recognised that the eventual
winner would be the player who best adapted to the conditions, and he set
about turning them to his advantage.
The New Zealanders had a strong team, not least in 17-year-old Aaron
Westerby who is the man to watch for the future. The Australians also played
a creditable tournament with Blaise Northey, a lively 19-year-old, and Colin
Pickering, a former Englishman, both reaching the quarter-finals.
But the English swept away the opposition in the 32-man event to take their
third win in four years. The Americans were disappointed, but what they
lacked in expertise they more than made up for in style. Their approach to
croquet is refreshingly different. They still see the game as primarily
'fun,' and they partied in Newport as hard as they played.
The Newport Casino proved an elegant setting and Newport, which prides
itself on its social aplomb, threw its doors wide to croquet.
Many of the town's summer hostesses flew in early to open their homes to
croquet players. People like me, more used to sharing a cramped bed and
breakfast in some draughty English seaside town, found ourselves residing in
vast summer mansions.
My hostess was a perfect example of US hospitality at its best. Her
graciousness was matched by many others in Newport who hosted an impressive
round of cocktail and dinner parties of the kind not seen by the British
croquet set since the turn of the century when tea parties and balls were
all the rage.
Since then, British croquet has lost some of its social charm in the long
hard struggle for recognition. The game is constantly handicapped by the
indecision of its governing body as to the correct path for future
development. Croquet desperately needs sponsorship but sponsors like large
crowds and impressive coverage which, say the traditionalists, would spoil
the character of the game.
The languid pace of croquet in Britain is reflected in the slowness of its
growth. Croquet has been on the brink of 'discovery' for the last 100 years.
In contrast, the US game has made great strides in a decade, and proof of
the Americans' determination lies in their inclusion in the Macrobertson
Shield Test in Australia next year. Participation in this four-yearly event
will confirm the US as part of the international croquet scene, a result for
which USCA president Foxy Carter has worked extremely hard.
Ashley Heenan, the New Zealand president of the World Croquet Federation,
believes US entry into the Shield also signals a new era in croquet - one in
which players will increasingly move towards a new and tougher
professionalism dominated by what the Americans call 'purse play.'

The Financial Times


London Page X

920606

