FT921-11901

FT  29 JAN 92 / Accounts watchdog issues reprimands: Williams Holdings and
Ultramar said to have flattered earnings per share figures


   By ANDREW JACK


TWO LARGE companies were publicly reprimanded for their accounting policies
yesterday in the first significant actions of the Financial Reporting Review
Panel, the policing arm of the UK accountancy regulation bodies.
Williams Holdings, the industrial conglomerate, and Ultramar, the oil and
gas group which has since been bought by Lasmo, were criticised in
announcements released to the Stock Exchange and the press.
Williams' shares fell by 20p after the morning announcement and closed 11p
down on the day at 312p.
Mr Sydney Treadgold, secretary to the review panel, said both companies had
used accounting practices which 'flattered their earnings per share'
figures. The treatments contravened both accepted accounting standards and
the 1985 Companies Act. He warned that the accounting policies of 'one or
two' more companies were likely to be exposed in the next few days.
The statements represent the panel's first public actions since it was
established in February 1991 and are an attempt to tighten up the quality of
financial reporting. Williams calculated 1990 earnings per share after
excluding exceptional items, one-off costs incurred as part of its
continuing operations. This treatment, contrary to accepted accounting
practice, increased reported earnings per share from 21.2p to 22.3p.
Ultramar included unrelieved advance corporation tax, the charge against
dividends before they are distributed to shareholders, as part of the cost
of its dividends, rather than as a tax charge. That boosted reported
earnings per share from 28.9p to 32.2p.
In both cases, the companies had flagged their departure from standard
accounting practices in notes to the accounts, and stated they believed
their own treatment more fairly reflected the state of their companies'
performance.
Williams has agreed to comply with the official treatment recommended by the
panel in its 1991 accounts. 'It's a technicality, I accept it and it won't
happen again,' said Mr Nigel Rudd, chairman.
Ultramar's directors also accepted the panel's ruling, but the company has
since been taken over and so it will not be producing its own accounts for
the last financial year.
Attention may now turn to the auditors of the two companies. Ernst & Young
qualified its report in the Ultramar accounts to draw attention to the
divergence from accepted accounting practice.
There was no such qualification in the audit report by Pannell Kerr Forster,
auditor to Williams.
Consensus on brand names 'emerging', Page 7
Accused found guilty as charged, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920129

