FT921-1325

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: A golden opportunity for the gilts traders -
City Watch


   By BARRY RILEY


THE gilts market may have been quaking since the Budget, but every billion
pounds added to future borrowing spells lucrative extra business for dealers
in government securities.
Mr Robert Thomas, head economist at NatWest Treasury and Capital Markets,
has been projecting how far borrowing might jump. The starting point is the
official public sector borrowing requirement of Pounds 28bn for the
financial year 1992-93. On a more cautious economic growth assumption than
the Treasury's, Mr Thomas finds that even the Tories would be borrowing
Pounds 36bn by calendar year 1994. If Labour wins, the PSBR could hit Pounds
48bn in the same year, he believes.
'Labour needs to do something about confidence,' he observes.
At UBS Phillips & Drew, economist Mr Bill Martin thinks the PSBR could reach
almost Pounds 60bn by 1996. His colleague, gilts specialist Mr Chris
Anthony, also believes that whoever forms the next government will need to
provide reassurance. 'Investors will be reluctant to place money into the
market until a new economic package is unveiled,' he says.
Back in October, when investors thought the Conservatives were likely to win
the election, gilts were yielding only 1.3 percentage points more than
German bunds. Now the gap has widened to more than 2 points - a measure of
the extra risk perceived by foreign investors, who have recently been buying
half of the newly issued gilts.
Mr Roger Bootle, chief economist at Midland Montagu, says the market is
becoming worried about a hung parliament. Yields on long-dated bonds have
jumped from 9.2 per cent to 9.7 per cent in a month. But Mr Bootle says:
'Plenty of people are prepared to buy the ultra-longs at 10 per cent.'
Older traders look forward to gilts returning to centre-stage, where they
starred in the late 1970s. But as the Thatcher government paid off the
national debt in the 1980s, the gilts market was pushed to the wings.
For the moment, however, government bond prices are uneasy as investors face
up to the prospect of a huge increase in new issues. But the rise in yields
does not seem to reflect fears of inflation: index-linked gilts have also
become depressed and now offer a real yield of as much as 4 1/2 per cent,
suggesting that investors are upset by the sheer volume of paper in the
pipeline.
Mr Jeremy Alford of Whittingdale, a specialist bond investment house, is
trying to stimulate public interest. He warns that building society returns
could soon tail off. 'UK savers should invest in fixed-interest securities
which could provide significant returns as interest rates fall,' he claims.
But too many domestic investors - private and institutional - have simply
lost the habit of buying fixed-income securities. 'We will continue to rely
very heavily on foreign investors', Mr Anthony of UBS P&D predicts. It is
fortunate, he adds, that 'high-yield currencies are all the rage on European
Community convergence arguments'.
The big international bond houses which dominate the gilts market are
looking forward to a prosperous few years of marketing large volumes of
gilts to the world. Only signs that Britain's finances might go so badly
awry that it would be forced to abandon its commitment to the ERM could
seriously spoil the outlook. So far, none of the parties has put a foot
wrong on that score.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920325

