FT922-514

FT  27 JUN 92 / Trial by rabbit punch: The war of words between Ross Perot
and his presidential rivals is heating up


   By JUREK MARTIN


This week has been Ross Perot's compressed primary season. No longer
exclusively surrounded by the adoring and the bedazzled, no longer buoyed by
public opinion polls rising inexorably to the White House, the prospective
and populist independent candidate for the presidency has for the first time
found himself on the defensive. And, for the first time he has unsheathed
his sword, pointed it at his assailant and proclaimed that Republican 'dirty
tricks' orchestrated by George Bush will not prevail. It has been compelling
stuff.
If this year's political form means anything, he ought now to be in trouble,
and maybe he is. But form is dangerous to apply to Perot. Most candidates
painted by all quarters as paranoid, monstrous, demagogic, and a threat to
civil liberties and the US constitution in the space of a single week might
sense something was amiss. He does not, or at least does not admit it, for
the very simple reason that he is convinced that 'the people' can see
through the mud thrown at him for what it is: the last recourse of a corrupt
establishment fighting for its life before it is 'taken out of the barn with
the rest of the trash'.
But the bill of particulars against Mr Perot must be taken seriously. Its
common thread was first given political voice two weeks ago by
Vice-President Dan Quayle, not normally a consensus man. Mr Perot, he said,
was a 'temperamental tycoon who has shown contempt for the US constitution'.
For once Mr Quayle was not alone. Among his unlikely allies was the
neo-liberal New Republic magazine, which went so far as to invoke the
spectre of 'fascism' in an editorial about Mr Perot. Garry Wills, the
eminent writer and contemporary historian, concluded a devastating article
and Perot interview in the New York Review of Books with a one word warning
of the dangers to civil liberties of a Perot presidency: 'duck'.
Less polemically, virtually all the mainstream media have been digging into
the Perot woodwork. The Washington Post has found he ordered private
investigations of the Bush family and had, in 1988, even personally leaked
to the newspaper details of an oil tax break benefiting associates of Mr
Bush (Mr Perot insists he did so in the public interest). The Wall Street
Journal has highlighted another investigation into the private life of a
former Defence Department official whom Mr Perot allegedly felt was
frustrating his attempts to locate Americans held in Indochina.
The New Republic has chipped in with a long article on the history of Mr
Perot's involvement with the PoW issue. It accuses him of frequently
underwriting the missions of unsavoury soldiers of fortune to find Americans
in Indochina. It details the rebuffs he had received from administration
officials dating back to the Nixon era and up to General Colin Powell, now
chairman of the joint chiefs of staff.
Mr Perot, recalling his own conversations with the Pathet Lao 23 years ago,
puts it all down to a cover-up and got some support this week from a Senate
committee which concluded that there were 133 Americans unaccounted for in
Indochina.
Certainly he has a record of fascination with conspiracies and with Mr
Bush's rumoured role in them. He has admitted delving in to the 'October
Surprise' (the purported scheme whereby the Republican campaign of 1980
sought to prevent release by Iran of the US hostages before that year's
election) to see if Mr Bush was personally involved. This week, he cited Mr
Bush's presumed involvement in the Iran-Contra scandal, in the pre-war tilt
to Saddam Hussein and in the savings and loans debacle.
Next, there is the question of the carefully fostered Perot legend. Time
Magazine, nothing if not a weathervane publication, called its cover story
this week, 'Nobody's Perfect.' It questioned, as had Garry Wills, the myth
Mr Perot has fostered about the founding of Electronic Data Systems (EDS) 30
years ago. Far from being created solely on the back of a Dollars 1,000 loan
from his wife, it reported that it was financed by his then substantial
part-time employment contract with the very medical insurance company in
Texas from which EDS secured an early major contract.
Several publications have examined in detail the rigid lifestyle, rules and
regulations of EDS. Mr Perot preferred to hire young ex-soldiers to form his
corporate shock troops. Homosexuals and women were not in favour, though
whether to the extent of illegal discrimination is unclear. He flatly denies
everything and says he only hired private eyes three or four times when
employees were suspected of theft.
To Mr Perot this is all character assassination, curiously timed to coincide
with his birthday this week, when it was thought he would formally announce
his candidacy. To his opponents, it is the unveiling of a character aspiring
to be president who had not until now been subject to much scrutiny, similar
in purpose to that visited just as savagely on Mr Clinton earlier.
As with Mr Clinton, there has been a tendency to lose in the wash much of a
sense of what Mr Perot actually stands for, as opposed to against. He has in
truth spelled out little of his ideas so far and this week put off again the
exposition promised for early July. He also frequently claims that whatever
he did say was wrongly reported by the media which he patently loathes.
The most revealing interview was three weeks ago in the Los Angeles Times,
fleshed out off-the-cuff this week in unambiguous language. He stated that
the US must again become the world's greatest manufacturing power and that
the free trade agreement with low-cost Mexico and the 'tilted' trade deck
with Japan conspired against this.
Protectionism threatened to be a big issue in early primaries, but Jerry
Brown, Tom Harkin and Bob Kerrey for the Democrats and Republican Pat
Buchanan proved otherwise flawed advocates. Only last week, Mr Clinton felt
confident enough in his own free trade convictions to tell a car workers'
convention that he still supported Nafta - not least because it would raise
health and environmental standards in Mexico and thus, by raising costs,
discourage the loss of jobs to south of the border. 'Those jobs are moving
over there like crazy now,' he said.
Mr Perot does not consider himself a protectionist, but his is a
self-definition. He wants the US to consider Germany and Japan as
competitors and, if necessary, to learn from them. 'This is a tiny world,'
he proclaims, from which the US cannot withdraw. But it might change the
rules and it could start by turning all its embassies ('ambassadors are just
social, you know') into economic missions. It is also, he adds, time for the
Germanies and Japans to pay for their own security and for all foreign
lobbyists, especially those employing former US government officials, to be
expelled from Washington.
This is the sort of message his undoubtedly patriotic followers love to hear
and any departure from it might cost him support. But it also scares the
living daylights out of all those who believe that international relations
require frameworks, not all of which can be blithely discarded on a whim.
Sooner or later he may have to choose between the two.
He is also already suspected of waffling on the big issues, such as
taxation. As it stands, Mr Perot, who four years ago said a tax increase was
generally necessary and two months ago said could still be earmarked for
education, now says he would only authorise one in time of war. Also pending
clarification is his assertion that wealthier, older Americans should
voluntarily give up social security benefits. He has taken the idea back to
his computers for number crunching.
What nobody knows is whether this long litany is really beginning to hurt
him. He was obliged this week to interrupt his barnstorming national tour to
go on television and to hold a press conference to address all the nasty
things being said about him in the media.
There were glimpses of what a Perot presidency would be like; a cabinet of
all the talents, regardless of party, task forces on every important
subject, a rewriting of the banking laws to ensure that small business got
enough credit and capital, the White House once again 'a bully pulpit' but
inhabited by a man who would spend as little contaminating time in
Washington as possible. Even some of his handful of would-be friends in the
capital have taken to wondering exactly how this would work.
Yet the quote of the week, from the Washington Post article, was Mr Perot
telling Mr Bush 'the world is full of lions, tigers and rabbits, and you are
a rabbit'. The next stage of this remarkable presidential campaign, now that
the claws are really out, is which of the two of them bleeds most - and
whether the real beneficiary of this all-out war will not turn out to be the
man who knows what it is like to be bruised, Bill Clinton.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920627

