FT924-12138

FT  22 OCT 92 / Book Review: Down with hierarchy


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


The Ultimate Advantage. Creating the High-Involvement Organization By Edward
E. Lawler III Maxwell Macmillan Pounds 20.95
In the days before its industry was deregulated in 1980, America's Union
Pacific Railroad was a byword for bureaucracy. It then slid rapidly into
dire competitive and financial straits. New leadership took over in 1986,
dedicated to that holy grail of modern management: keeping costs minimal,
yet providing fast, high-quality service. It has since staged a remarkable
six-year recovery, with the help of just one-third the number of management
layers: three instead of nine.
Union Pacific is one of a growing band of American corporate practitioners
of what is becoming known as 'high involvement'. This is the latest term
coined to describe what is, in effect, the principle of 'subsidiarity' as
applied to business management: the pushing down, to the lowest possible
level in an organisation, of knowledge, information, and responsibility for
decisions and performance - together with performance-related rewards.
The coincidence of a shallow hierarchy and high involvement at Union Pacific
is really no coincidence at all. For low-overhead, shallow organisations can
only operate effectively if responsibility for many decisions is borne far
more by the people most closely associated with their effects than has been
traditional in most large American companies, that is, by middle-level and
low-level employees.
That message has been promulgated with growing noise and effect in the past
few years by many American academics and consultants. But many managements
have still been left wondering precisely what steps they should take to turn
concept into reality.
That is the main contribution of this addition to the literature, by a
long-established specialist in psychology, organisational behaviour and pay
who, as director of a California university's Center for Effective
Organisations, has had a considerable impact on the structures and
motivation systems of leading US companies, including Hewlett-Packard and
Digital Equipment.
Edward Lawler took the title for his book from the idea, increasingly
popular in the US and especially Japan, that traditional sources of
competitive advantage - location, access to markets and availability of
capital and technology - are unlikely to prove sufficient on their own
because of their near-universal availability to global companies. Instead,
management and organisational style, which because of their 'softness' are
much harder to emulate and implement effectively, may be 'the ultimate
advantage'.
The book covers the gamut of organisational issues, from overall corporate
structures to the design of work for individuals and teams, and from
information systems to personnel and human resources practices. Among other
things, it argues that high-involvement organisations operate best with pay
that is based on skill rather than rank, and with performance-related
approaches that emphasise teamwork and collective responsibility. Examples
include Digital, Procter & Gamble, and Motorola.
Apart from its degree of practical detail, one of the strengths of Lawler's
book is its readiness to confront directly the sort of questions that really
worry most top managers about allowing their subordinates more knowledge,
information, power and rewards. He claims that power is not a finite
quantity - a fixed pie to be divided up - but that it can be expanded.
He also advocates the idea, familiar to observers of Japanese management,
that top executives who involve others in decision-making enhance their own
power by increasing the speed and effectiveness with which decisions are
implemented.
To readers in northern Europe, used to the less autocratic style of the
leaders of some local companies, Lawler may seem to be indulging in
hyperbole at times - using a sledgehammer to crack an obviously hard
American nut - when he advocates 'high involvement'. In parts of Europe,
unlike the US (and France), consensus decision-making is by no means
confined to the leading edge of companies.
Lawler's reply would be that it is all too easy to underestimate the sort of
structural, attitudinal and process changes which an organisation needs to
introduce if it wants really to harness the enterprise of all its employees.
Europeans may also feel that he overstates his argument that 'high
involvement' is competitive with the doctrine of Total Quality Management,
which has probably gripped more western companies in recent years than any
other management concept.
Although the total quality approach stresses employee involvement, Lawler
claims this is limited 'to allowing employees to make suggestions and
control certain elements of the production and quality control processes'.
Thus an organisation using the total quality approach can often remain
hierarchical, he says.
Yet this does not apply to several of the quality programmes which he cites
himself at companies that have also embarked on high involvement, such as
Motorola and Xerox. In principle, the two approaches are not incompatible.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921022

