FT921-3673

FT  13 MAR 92 / Management: Car-makers drive a hard bargain with ease -
Nicholas Denton reports that western executives are finding unparalleled
freedom in Hungary


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


Ernst Hofmann, like many before him, has found crossing the line of the Iron
Curtain a liberation. But Hofmann, no refugee, is a senior executive with
General Motors and it is eastwards he travels every morning from his
Austrian home to run the US motor group's new factory just across the
east-west border in Hungary.
At GM's car and engine plant near Szentgotthard in western Hungary, which
turns out its first Opel Astra hatchback today, Hofmann is freer to manage
than he has ever been elsewhere. 'I have total flexibility,' Hofmann says
enthusiastically.
GM Europe, one of the three western car-makers leading a rush of foreign
investment into Hungary, has been pleased, too. Pleased enough to boost its
investment at Szentgotthard from DM250m (Pounds 86.8m) to DM350m even before
production has started.
GM knew that the plant's labour costs would be the cheapest in Europe and
tax treatment among the most generous. All-in labour costs are DM4 per hour,
compared with DM35 or DM40 in Germany, while Hungary has given GM a
five-year tax holiday. The happy surprise is productivity. Output per
man-hour - at the engine-making facility, at least - will be 'at the top' of
GM's European rankings, if Hofmann's reckoning proves right.
'We can introduce a different manufacturing system here,' explains GM
Hungary's managing director. 'To do it from scratch is so much easier.'
Szentgotthard has implemented the 'team concept' to an extent unparalleled
in GM's western plants and matched only by Eisenach in eastern Germany.
Teams of production workers are responsible for everything from safety to
quality assurance. In parallel, the layers in the organisational hierarchy
have been cut to four from the six or seven that GM averages. 'I have no
foreman,' says Hofmann in a tone verging on wonder.
All this has been possible because no rigid demarcation lines, trade unions
or established working practices cramp the managers' right to manage.
Workers cannot refuse a draft from car-making to engine-making. Nor is there
any segregation of salaried and hourly-paid staff, nor of skilled and
unskilled.
GM has been far from alone among western car companies in embarking on a
management revolution in Hungary. Ford, GM's US rival, is equally bullish as
it gears up for next month's start of production at its Dollars 83m car
components plant at Szekesfehervar.
There is one vital ingredient, neglected at a car-maker's peril, that makes
Hungarian workers amenable - pay. Japan's Suzuki Motor Corporation, on the
brink of completing a Dollars 235m assembly plant at Esztergom for Swift
cars, found that out the hard way.
Hungarian trainees sent to Japan went on strike and 10 per cent of them
returned home early, some sacked for smoking on the factory floor, refusing
to wear safety equipment and, in one case, working on only every other car.
Besides, a diet of rice and fish - innards and all - that both sickened and
starved the Hungarian meat eaters, compulsory overtime and the unremitting
pace of work, were grievances. What made the unpleasant unbearable, said
returnees, was mean pay that was only average by Hungarian standards.
Hungarian workers expect more of foreign companies.
Suzuki still thinks it will have a good workforce in the end. The Japanese
transplant is, in any case, the exception that proves the rule. GM and Ford
show that, handled carefully, Hungarian workers can be exceptional value for
money.
The irony is that the quality of the workforce, praised so much by the car
multinationals, was not the determining factor in their Hungarian
investments. The decisions were made to gain market access. The plants were
set up to satisfy the Hungarian government's requirement for countertrade -
to offset the balance of payments effects of selling cars locally.
That logic went out of the window when Hungary, in line with the rest of
eastern Europe, liberalised car imports. Hungarian consumers, strapped for
cash in a deep recession, bought second-hand cars from western Europe, if at
all. Investing car-makers have pressured Hungary, as they have its east
European neighbours, into tightening up car import quotas this year to
restore some of the lost local advantage. But sales remain disappointing.
GM sold only 2,200 cars in Hungary last year and is likely to fall into the
absurd situation of exporting some of the 15,000 Hungarian-assembled Astras
back to western Europe each year. The costs of transporting parts and cars
back and forth, and the uneconomic scale of the car-making facility,
outweigh the savings on labour.
But the car-makers are in too deep to draw back now. GM, Ford and Suzuki are
inclined to make the best of the situation, mainly because they are still
enticed by the long-term prospects for east European car sales. The belief
remains that Hungarians, who own 152 cars per 1,000 people, less than a
third of the western level, will buy cars as soon as they have the money.
In the meantime, the quality of the workforce is giving reason to hold on.
Car-makers may have come to Hungary for its consumers but they are staying
for the country's workers.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920313

