FT924-8123

FT  12 NOV 92 / Irish PM makes pre-poll pledge to increase spending


   By TIM COONE and ANDREW HILL


   DUBLIN, BRUSSELS


MR Albert Reynolds, the Irish prime minister, has promised to create a
IPounds 750m fund for road and rail investment if his Fianna Fail party is
returned to power in the election to be held on November 25.
He also said he would reform taxation, meet IPounds 350m in promised public
sector pay awards and maintain current levels of spending on health, social
welfare and education
In launching the party manifesto yesterday, Mr Reynolds stressed the
importance of infrastructure investment to counteract the effects of the
recession. He said priority investment projects include improvements to the
national road and rail network and a light rail transport system for the
capital, Dublin.
Mr Reynolds was emphatic, however, that it would not involve additional
borrowing costs for the government. 'We will be maintaining borrowing at the
present level or below and the overall targets for European Monetary Union
will be met,' he said.
The IPounds 750m capital fund is to be created by borrowing IPounds 370m
from the National Treasury Management Agency, which in turn will borrow
money abroad. The other half is to come from EC Cohesion Funds (the
availability of which will depend on full ratification of Maastricht).
As collateral, the NTMA will be given the government's holdings in two
semi-privatised companies, Irish Life and Greencore, as well as two
government investment banks - ACC Bank and ICC - which are due to be sold
off. These will be placed into a holding company, and sold off 'when market
conditions improve', said Mr Reynolds. According to Mr John Hogan, head of
research at Riada stockbrokers, the government's shares in Greencore and
Irish Life are currently worth IPounds 60m and IPounds 100m respectively,
while the two banks are together worth 'around IPounds 60-70m'.
The European Commission yesterday approved a scheme to help Ireland's small
and medium-sized companies suffering from the recent exchange rate turmoil,
but laid out strict conditions for its application, writes Andrew Hill in
Brussels.
The Commission said it had approved the IPounds 50m scheme only 'in view of
the unique and exceptional circumstances', and because the Irish authorities
had made it clear that it was of 'a strictly temporary nature'.
The Commission said companies operating in the steel and synthetic fibre
sectors would not be eligible for the scheme and there would be special
restrictions for the agriculture and fisheries sector. The scheme runs until
the end of March 1993, and will be reviewed at the end of this year.
Small companies in Ireland have been hit by the appreciation of the Irish
pound against sterling and the lira in the aftermath of the ERM crisis and
the increases in Irish interest rates.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921112

