FT921-3671

FT  13 MAR 92 / Arts: Ballet for Sax - Lilian Baylis Theatre


   By CLEMENT CRISP


There is room - there is need - for good chamber ballet, for work of quality
suited to small performing areas. The concert groups sent out by Scottish
Ballet and English National Ballet fulfil a very necessary function in
taking classic dance to audiences who might otherwise have no easy occasion
to see it. The Royal Ballet makes no such effort, and it was the enterprise
of former Royal Ballet artists, led by Jennifer Jackson,
which created Dance Advance a few years ago. The inspiration for the troupe
was to sustain new and adventurous choreography for modest 'concert'
presentation.
Dance Advance had notable dancers and gained one major piece in MacMillan's
Sea of Troubles: its failure to continue, for varied reasons, was a distinct
loss. Now Jennifer Jackson has revived the idea  - with different
collaborators - as Voltaire, a madly resistible title but a thoroughly
worth-while venture. Distinguished dancers, present and former members of
the Royal Ballet, are involved - Bryony Brind, Mark Silver, Laura Hussey,
Michael Corder - and even after one viewing I am tempted to suggest that the
Royal Ballet benefit from closer association with an ensemble which could
take good dancing and good dances to audiences who otherwise might never see
our national ballet.
Not that this first programme was all beauty and light. Jennifer Jackson
was, I believe, misguided in juxtaposing the work of the saxophonist John
Surman and the pianist John Taylor with Debussy's Trois chansons de Bilitis
in her Alter Ego. Sally Burgess sang these most exquisite melodies with
loving intelligence, and moved gracefully through poses plastiques with
Bryony Brind, Michael Corder and Mark Silver - her musical and dramatic
subtlety, Silver's intensity, making something memorably sensuous of La
chevelure. But the subsequent musical fantasies from John Surman and John
Taylor on Debussian phrases, as accompaniment for predictable dances, were
indefensible, philistine.
Music and dance were happily reunited in Michael Corder's new In the Mists.
Corder is a true craftsman as well as a true choreographer, and he judged
the small dance area of the Baylis Theatre
and the qualities of his interpreters exactly. Thomas Kaurich played
Janacek's four eponymous piano pieces very well indeed. Henk Schut provided
a mist-filled stage marked by three poles,
dressed the quartet of dancers (Brind, Silver, Laura Hussey, Michael
Rolnick) in grey leotards, and lit the piece brilliantly.
Corder produced dances as allusive, haunting, riven with fleeting emotions,
as his score. It was a pleasure to see dance so poetic, and so featly made
for close observation in a restricted area. It was no less a pleasure to see
the authority and distinction of manner of Bryony Brind and Mark Silver.
Here is a perfect example of how ballet of real worth may be made available
for the smallest stage. I hope funding and touring authorities take note.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920313

