FT924-6232

FT  23 NOV 92 / Japan's rice import ban row likely to escalate


   By STEVEN BUTLER


   TOKYO


JAPAN looked set for a confrontation with its trade partners over Japan's
ban on rice imports following remarks at the weekend by Mr Kiichi Miyazawa,
the Japanese prime minister.
Mr Miyazawa said Japan had no intention of easing the ban.
His comments came in response to the farm trade deal worked out last week
between the US and the European Community (EC).
The deal is likely to place renewed international pressure on Japan to
liberalise the import of rice.
Mr Miyazawa said that he welcomed the deal between the US and the EC, but
that this would not prompt Japan to change its policies.
Japan will shortly repeat its opposition to opening its rice market at
meetings connected to the trade negotiations under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt).
Government leaders in Japan had taken some comfort in private over the
squabbling between the US and Europe over farm trade issues.
This shifted attention away from Japan's trade policies and allowed them to
argue that Japan was not the main obstacle to reaching agreement at the Gatt
negotiations.
Japan has opposed the draft agreement submitted by Mr Arthur Dunkel, Gatt's
director-general, which would force Japan to introduce tariffs on rice
imports, rather than ban them outright.
Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party has been loath to open the market
because of opposition from Japan's rice farmers, who have provided the
backbone of support for the party for decades.
There is none the less widespread cynicism among Japan's farmers, many of
whom believe the ruling party is preparing to cave in to international
pressure and gradually open the rice market, as it has earlier opened the
domestic market for beef and oranges.
It is unclear whether Mr Miyazawa's remarks represent a firm position of the
Japanese government, or simply a stance for domestic public consumption.
The timing for a major change in government policy is in any case not ideal,
since Mr Miyazawa's cabinet has been weakened considerably by financial
scandal.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921123

