FT924-832

FT  22 DEC 92 / Rising premium for terrorism protection: The government's
scheme for last-resort cover


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE announcement yesterday of a new insurance scheme to cover damage caused
by terrorists represents a compromise after weeks of wrangling between
insurers and the government.
It may be an expensive solution for those businesses most exposed to
terrorist attack - they are likely to face a steep increase in insurance
premiums.
Last month, insurers announced that they intended to withdraw cover for
terrorism after their own reinsurers, such as Germany's Munich Re, backed
away from the market.
Reinsurers, which help insurers to offset the impact of losses, paid up to
75 per cent of the Pounds 800m claims arising from the IRA bomb attacks in
April in the City and at Staples Corner in north London.
Yesterday's deal, widely welcomed by insurance and business organisations,
involves the government in filling the gap created by the evaporation of
commercial reinsurance, becoming reinsurer of last resort.
Insurers will now offer insurance cover against terrorism, because they can
now limit the losses that might have damaged balance sheets and jeopardised
the security of other policyholders.
The main features of the new arrangements, details of which will be fleshed
out over the coming few days, are: Insurers will continue to offer terrorism
cover on all domestic and motor policies. A limited amount of cover under
five separate headings - buildings, contents, computers, engineering and
business interruption - will be available on commercial policies.
Insurers will exclude full terrorism cover from commercial policies, but
make cover available as a 'buy back' in return for substantial additional
premiums. Those will be channelled into a mutual pool managed by a specially
authorised insurance company and staffed by insurance company
representatives.
The government will meet 90 per cent of claims not covered by the pool -
insurance companies will collectively provide reinsurance for the remaining
10 per cent.
Lloyd's of London, the insurance market, may be involved in insuring or
reinsuring the pool. Underwriters from six syndicates will discuss possible
participation today.
Any surplus on the pool will either be carried forward to increase the size
of the available funds or distributed to insurance companies as a 'dividend'
to recompense them for the cost of administering the system.
Mr Tony Baker, head of public relations at the Association of British
Insurers, said it was impossible to estimate the size of the pool until
insurers had calculated the size of the 'buy back' premiums.
Insurers are expected to aim to build a pool of between Pounds 300m and
Pounds 800m compared with Pounds 2.7bn paid this year by policyholders to
protect commercial property.
Premium rates will vary according to the location and value of property, but
are likely to be expensive. For the foreseeable future, businesses will bear
the brunt.
Companies in less vulnerable areas might expect to pay about 10 per cent of
their commercial property premiums for the pool, but in areas such as
London, 'buy back' premiums may be equal to the cost of existing property
premiums, doubling insurance costs.
The Corporation of London, the local authority for the City, whose policy
will expire this month, says it will have to pay nearly 100 per cent of its
existing premiums to buy back cover against terrorism. Mr Baker accepted
that rate increases would be high but insisted that, in absolute terms,
premiums were still 'modest in view of the size of the risk'.
Mr Baker said the new scheme would cover all business interruption losses in
the same way as standard commercial insurance policies.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921222

