FT921-1336

FT  25 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Taiwan study into McDonnell Douglas stake
delayed


   By LUISETTA MUDIE


   TAIPEI


THE results of a study by China Steel, a state-owned Taiwanese company, of
the proposed acquisition by Taiwan Aerospace of a large stake in the
commercial aircraft operations of McDonnell Douglas of the US are expected
to be known by the middle of April, Mr Yang Shijian, Taiwan's economics
vice-minister, said yesterday.
China Steel, which could acquire a big interest in Taiwan Aerospace, is
leading a Taiwanese team examining the potential investment.
The two-week postponement of the study's conclusion - it had been expected
to be completed by the end of March - is a further blow to the deal, dogged
by delays and criticism on both sides of the Pacific.
Mr Denny Ko, Taiwan Aerospace president, said the delay was caused by
uncertainty over plans for McDonnell Douglas's new wide-bodied jet, the
MD-12, and that further assessment was necessary.
Under an initial agreement reached last November, Taiwan Aerospace, a
recently formed company, would buy a maximum of 40 per cent of McDonnell
Douglas's commercial aircraft business for Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.1bn).
Taiwan Aerospace has since indicated the stake acquired could be as low as
25 per cent.
McDonnell Douglas will retain a 51 per cent stake, but the US company is
already discussing, with other investors from south-east Asia or South
Korea, making up the shortfall in Taiwan's investment.
Faced with criticism in the Taiwanese media and Yuan (parliament), the
government in Taipei has denied it will be funding the deal.
It holds a 29 per cent stake in Taiwan Aerospace which, with a capital of
Dollars 200m, is not in a position at present to finance the deal alone.
The government says the money will come from the private sector, and from
some of the larger concerns which already hold a stake in Taiwan Aerospace.
These include Evergreen Marine, Tatung, Yueloong Motor, and Formosa
Plastics.
Critics in Taiwan fear that Taiwanese taxpayers' money will be wasted.
Opposition DPP legislators have attacked the proposals, playing recordings
of speeches made by Taiwan Aerospace chairman Mr David Huang in the US.
He is said to have asserted in the speeches that the government in Taipei
would continue to invest in McDonnell Douglas until it was successful.
Analysts said that, without government backing, the companies which have
invested in Taiwan Aerospace would be reluctant to increase their stake in
the venture, either individually or as part of the consortium.
If direct investment is not politically possible for the government, other
carrots might take the form of tax incentives, guarantees and investment
through the cabinet's development fund or state-owned banks.
Another question hanging over the deal is whether Taiwan will gain any
transfer of aerospace technology if the deal goes ahead.
The issue is sensitive in the US, where McDonnell Douglas has testified to
Congress that the company would make no such commitment.
But Mr Ko says the question arises from what is meant by 'technology'. 'What
we want is quality-control methodology, know-how which is automatic in the
US aerospace industry,' Mr Ko said. 'I think of that as technology.'
Mr Robert Hood, president of the Douglas commercial aircraft subsidiary,
said recently it was important for the company to secure a launch decision
for the 400 to 600-seater MD-12 programme this year so as to ensure first
deliveries in 1997.
The longer-term future of Douglas largely depends on securing financial
backing from investors to expand its product range.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920325

