FT921-558

FT  28 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee market goes into reverse
 -Week in the Markets


   By RICHARD MOONEY


THE COFFEE market's recent advance went into reverse this week, in spite of
a couple of distinctly bullish developments. The May futures position on the
London market had travelled hopefully from Dollars 795 to Dollars 886 a
tonne in response to signs the Brazil, the biggest producer, was at last
adopting a positive attitude to the revival of the moribund International
Coffee Agreement. But traders seem to have found the arrival of Brazil's new
policy something of an anti-climax. And they had already shrugged off
Brazil's forecast of a 28 per cent cut in its crop next season.
The upturn in prices began three weeks ago, after Brazilian coffee growers
voted in favour of the reintroduction of the agreement's export quota
scheme, which was suspended in July 1989. That was not very surprising;
growers are naturally more interested in encouraging higher prices rather
than in ensuring unfettered trade. Much more significance was attached,
however, to the following week's news that Brazilian exporters, concerned
about the impact of low prices on the prospects for the country's coffee
production, had abandoned their traditional opposition to export controls.
With both sides of the Brazilian coffee industry speaking with one voice for
a change the way was open for the government to formulate a clear policy for
price stabilisation. That policy was revealed on Thursday night and seems to
have been well enough received. Mr Jorge Cardenas, president of the
Colombian coffee growers' federation, described it as 'a very important step
in the process of negotiations towards a new International Coffee Agreement'
and London trade house GNI said it appeared to be 'a reasonable document,
agreeing on the need for a universal quota (covering all coffee exports) and
the establishment of a realistic price range'.
But the bullish trend had already run its course. On Thursday, as the market
awaited details of the Brazilian policy, the May futures price fell Dollars
14. And yesterday morning, as traders studied the proposals, it slipped
another Dollars 13. That fall was recovered in the afternoon, however, and
the price ended the day unchanged at Dollars 859 a tonne, Dollars 19 down on
the week.
The cocoa market fared still worse, with the May quotation ending Pounds 44
down on the week at Pounds 646 a tonne, an eight-month low. Some of the
fall, about Pounds 13, was explained by sterling's strength against the
dollar, but most of it simply reflected the deteriorating fundamental and
technical situations.
'Technically the picture looks terrible,' one London trader commented
yesterday. He said stop-loss selling orders had been triggered as prices
slipped following the May position's failure early in the week to break
through resistance near Pounds 700 a tonne.
Producer selling was also reported, and there was news of rain in West
African growing areas, which could benefit next season's crops.
This week's London meeting of the International Cocoa Organisation made
little progress towards a resumption of effective price stabilisation
efforts. But that was as expected and had no discernible market impact.
At the London Metal Exchange most interest was focussed on the zinc market,
which was boosted by hedge selling early in the week and surged to 15-month
highs yesterday on a reassessment of last year's demand situation by the
International Lead and Zinc Study Group.
The study group adjusted its figure for 1991 zinc consumption from 5.25m
tonnes, which would have been unchanged from the previous year, to 5.34m
tonnes. Mr Nick Moore, analyst at Ord Minnett, part of the Westpac banking
group, described the news as 'dynamite'. He said it showed that the zinc
market was 'much more robust' than had generally been thought.
Traders seemed to be similarly impressed. The three months LME price, which
had dipped to Dollars 1,255.50 a tonne at the lunch-time ring, closed at
Dollars 1,263.50 a tonne and moved up to Dollars 1,275.50 a tonne in
after-hours trading, taking the overall rise on the week to Dollars 41 a
tonne.
At the London bullion market the gold price staged a tentative rally
following last week's heavy fall. An early rise reflecting consumer buying
ran into producer selling at Dollars 340 a troy ounce, but that barrier was
breached on Wednesday, with the aid of US computer fund buying, and the
price ended the week Dollars 2.75 up at Dollars 341.80 an ounce.
LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
(As at Thursday's close)
tonnes
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Aluminium    +15,025  to  1,175,800
Copper        -1,725  to    300,775
Lead            -925  to    132,175
Nickel          +750  to     25,740
Zinc          +2,975  to    219,475
Tin             -180  to     11,840
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920328

