FT921-3932

FT  12 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Germany to block exports for arms


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BONN


THE German government is to open a new Federal exports office, increase
customs and inspection staff, and toughen legal penalties in an attempt to
block exports of goods which could be used for weapons manufacture.
In future, products which could be used to make or transport weapons will
require export licences from the new office, to open on April 1, the cabinet
agreed yesterday. The list of controlled goods includes machine tools,
components which could be used in rockets or uranium enrichment, low-loaders
and civilian plant which might be 'misused' to make chemical or biological
weapons. Licences will not be issued for such shipments to 'sensitive'
countries.
The cabinet also agreed that Chancellor Helmut Kohl would press for adoption
of a uniform international arms control policy during his chairmanship of
the forthcoming western economic summit in Munich. Breaches of the new
German controls or official UN embargoes will be punished by up to 15 years'
jail. German technicians working overseas will also be covered by the
legislation, according to an economics ministry paper presented to the
cabinet.
The paper said Germany must quickly introduce new rules to stop the country
being used as a staging post for suspect or illegal shipments from other
countries. It cited the example of parts for Iraq's 'supergun' sent via
Frankfurt airport. Several German companies have been involved in exports of
machinery and parts to Iraq.
Other measures include 100 extra people at the the customs crime bureau,
raising the workforce there to 370. The new department examining exports and
issuing licences will have a staff of over 400. About 18m export shipments
leave Germany a year, of which 0.3 per cent are officially described as
armaments.
Peru has introduced a system whereby all imports will be inspected before
shipment by an independent company. Four companies have been nominated:
Cotecna Group and SGS of Switzerland, Bureau Veritas of France, and SSI,
part of Britain's Inchcape group. Such inspections, now used by 29
developing countries, were originally meant to ensure an importing country
received value for foreign exchange in imports. Recently, the systems have
been used to help assess and collect import duties.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920312

