FT923-10694

FT  29 JUL 92 / Task forces to be set up with power over schools: Radical
changes in education


   By ANDREW ADONIS


EDUCATIONAL task forces with sweeping powers to shake up or even propose the
closure of failing schools will be set up under radical plans for reshaping
schools in England and Wales over the next decade.
Under the blueprint published by the government yesterday, elected local
education authorities, which control most of the 25,000 schools nation-wide,
will wither away.
In their place will be a government-appointed agency responsible for handing
out Treasury funds to grant-maintained schools and taking over planning the
future shape of the school system from local government.
Mr John Patten, the education secretary, said the proposals were 'radical,
sensible and in tune with what parents want'.
The Labour party, teachers' unions and local government organisations
condemned the plans. Ms Ann Taylor, the shadow education secretary, said it
was a 'recipe for chaos and further upheaval in our schools. There are no
new resources for our children's education'.
The white paper predicts that 4,000 schools, including a majority of
secondary schools, will have opted out of local authority control within
three years.
'Self-managing schools are the way for the future for primary as well as
secondary schools,' said Mr Patten. But he sounded a note of caution to the
Tory right, which favoured the outright abolition of local education
authorities, when he stressed that ballots would continue to be needed for
schools to opt out.
Mr Patten called for a partnership between local authorities and the
government in the long transitional period. However, he chose the launch of
the white paper to single out Birmingham as 'the worst education authority
in the country', a charge angrily rejected by the city's moderate Labour
leaders.
The financial regime for grant-maintained schools, the crux of the new
structure, will not be finalised until the autumn. But it appears likely
that the financial incentives for schools to opt out will be removed as the
number of grant-maintained schools rises above the present 250.
Among the most far-reaching proposals are those concerning failing schools
and surplus places. Mr Patten proposes that new task forces, which will be
called 'Education Associations', be sent into schools declared by the new
inspectorate to be 'at risk'. They will have broad powers to restructure a
school's staff and senior management.
Mr Patten also proposes to take powers to remove the estimated 1.5m surplus
places in schools in England and Wales. He will be able to direct local
authorities and the new Funding Agency for Schools to prepare schemes to
eliminate empty places, and also to impose his own schemes. These could lead
to the closure of grant-maintained schools.
Mr Peter Smith, general secretary of the AMMA teachers' union, said the
white paper 'represents a muddled policy which hints strongly that local
accountability will be replaced by remote Whitehall-controlled quangos'.
Local authorities responded bitterly to the proposals to wind down their
educational responsibilities. Privately, however, some county council
leaders expressed relief that the government had not decided on outright
abolition of the local education authorities, a decision which would have
largely pre-empted the work of the Local Government Commission in
determining the future of the existing two-tier structure in most of England
and Wales.
The Grant-Maintained Schools Centre welcomed the white paper as providing
'stability of funding' for grant-maintained schools'. Mr Bob Balchin, the
centre's director, accused local authorities of spending 'thousands' on
attempting to dissuade parents from taking their schools out of the local
authority system, a practice curbed by proposals in the white paper.
White paper stresses choice in schools Page 8
A lesson from the minister Page 16
Editorial Comment Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920729

