FT922-4040

FT  08 JUN 92 / Ian Davidson on Europe: End of the single gospel


   By IAN DAVIDSON


When the Danes voted against Maastricht last week, the other 11 member
governments sternly declared that there could be no question of
renegotiating the treaty. They would, wouldn't they? After so much sweat,
the natural reflex is to put the frighteners on the Danes, and hope they
change their minds later this year. If the 11 once open the door to
renegotiation, the treaty would unravel faster than Penelope's knitting.
In a situation of profound disarray, this is a reasonable improvisation:
doing nothing looks like standing firm, it is an easy basis for unanimity,
and it seems to gain time. But if the Danish people do not change their
minds, it is the 11 who will have to think again.
Some quick minds in the Community circuit have already started to think
again, and are touting various power plays to force through the
implementation of the Maastricht Treaty, regardless of the Danish verdict.
One such scheme is to drive the Danes out of the European Community: if they
do not want the new Europe, they should at least allow the rest to get on
with it. Alternatively, the 11 should denounce the Community's existing
Treaty of Rome, and set up house next door in a brand new structure which
just happens to be the Treaty of Maastricht.
I do not know if these muscular fantasies are seriously meant, but they will
not do. There is no legal basis for driving the Danes out of the Community,
nor for denouncing the Treaty of Rome. Even if the Danes could be bounced
into withdrawing, that would be a fearful omen for the new Europe, whose
central characteristic is that it is based on democracy and the rule of law,
not on ruthless intimidation by a gang of toughs. This would not be the kind
of Community any civilised country should want to join. If the Danes, why
not the Greeks? They are far more deserving of eviction. If it comes to
that, why not the British?
If the Danes do not quickly change their minds, the stand-pat position
announced last week in Oslo will lose all plausibility. For a few months,
perhaps, the French can push ahead with the revision of their constitution,
as if nothing untoward had occurred; but they will be running a fearful risk
if they then call a popular referendum to ratify a treaty whose legal
credibility is holed below the water line.
And yet: the 11 did not let the British prime minister, John Major, prevent
them from fixing the target of a single currency, nor from adopting a social
charter. The very idea that Danish voters should totally block the rest of
the Community from moving to a new phase in the integration of Europe is
clearly inadmissible.
The problem is that the Maastricht Treaty is not a self-standing agreement,
but a far-reaching modification of the Rome Treaty. Here is the crux of the
dilemma: is Maastricht a seamless gospel, perfect in all its parts, which
cannot be touched without destabilising the whole structure; or does it
contain discrete nuggets which can be dug out and encrusted in one or more
new Communities?
It is easy to see why the 11 refuse to appease the Danes in a renegotiation
of the terms of the Treaty of Maastricht: they would all then have to
renegotiate the treaty to appease their own anti-marketeers as well. The
attack would be led by the Germans; and before you could say Jacques Delors,
the Treaty of Maastricht would have disappeared in a cloud of smoke.
But a strategy of disaggregation of the treaty need not involve any
substantive renegotiation. All the provisions dealing with economic and
monetary union could be stripped out and incorporated in a self-standing
treaty; there could be another treaty for foreign policy, security and
defence; there would be a social charter; and each of these new Communities
might have different memberships.
This was the way of the world before the Community came along: Gatt was for
trade, IMF was for balance of payments, OECD was for the rich, Nato was for
the west. In the past, orthodox Community dogma was that all members must be
full members of everything. The central question facing the Community in the
wake of the Danish referendum, is this: does the old orthodoxy of a unitary
Community become more compelling in the projected new phase of more intense
integration? Or does it, on the contrary, become less compelling because not
all members are willing or able to keep in step, and because many new
countries want to join?
Not even The Economist could produce a sweeping one-word answer to this
dilemma; it all depends on what kind of Community you want, and how far you
want to go. Some, like Peter Ludlow of the Centre for European Policy
Studies in Brussels, see the Maastricht Treaty as an integral whole, managed
by a single institutional framework. But others believe the Community must
become multi-speed, with an inner political core, because 20 or 30 members
will stop it dead. Manifestly, there would be no point in a foreign and
security policy to which the Irish, Swiss, Austrians, Swedes and Finns could
subscribe; or the Danes, for that matter.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920608

