FT921-541

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Cautious societies are building solid
profits - The Bottom Line


   By DAVID BARCHARD


TIMES MAY be bad in the mortgage market, but those headlines about a few
building societies in trouble may not be the best pointer to what is
happening in the industry.
Most large building societies emerged from the results season with increased
profits and strong capital ratios. Only a few large societies  - Alliance &
Leicester was the chief example - suffered substantial falls in pre-tax
profits. Those that increased profits did so in spite of a huge increase in
their bad debt provisions.
Last Tuesday's profit figures from Halifax, the largest UK building society,
are a case in point. Pre-tax profits went up by 6 per cent to Pounds 628m.
This was achieved despite a jump in bad debt provisions from Pounds 107m in
1990 to Pounds 229m.
This was far from being the industry's best performance. Cheltenham &
Gloucester, the sixth largest society, reported a 27 per cent increase, from
Pounds 144.7m to Pounds 183.8m, in pre-tax profits in spite of a rise in bad
debt charges from Pounds 20.5m in 1990 to Pounds 108.4m.
Some societies based outside the south east did even better. Profits rose 29
per cent at Northern Rock to Pounds 54.5m.
Those societies whose profits plunged seem to have been punished for
straying from their tradition core business. The real problems at Alliance &
Leicester, where profits were halved after bad debt provisions of Pounds
215m, came from its large portfolio of commercial lending, a market from
which it has withdrawn.
The same was true at Skipton, a medium-sized society regarded until now as
one of the industry's stars. Even its competitors were discomfitted to watch
its profits plunge 64 per cent in 1991 to Pounds 11.5m. But Pounds 15m of
its Pounds 23m bad debt provisions were for commercial lending. It too has
stopped lending in that market.
Similar points could be made about those societies which have been forced to
merge after making a loss. The casualties of the last few years, Town &
Country, Leamington Spa, Lancastrian, Cheshunt, and Portsmouth were also
societies which experimented with risky forms of lending, such as
'non-status' lending to people without a guaranteed income, and in some
cases failed to insure their risks property.
This suggests that societies which stick to their knitting on their property
lending (losses on estate agency, credit cards and the like are embarrassing
but affordable) can be trusted not to go the way of the US savings and loans
associations.
Set against the results of the 'Big Four' clearing banks, those from Abbey
National (now a PLC and a bank but still operating in the building
societies' market) and Halifax look very healthy. They made pre-tax larger
profits than every bank but Lloyds in 1991.
So why did the typical building society do so well in such a miserable
market? Anyone who has been reading the personal finance pages of the
newspapers over the last year should have a good idea.
Societies were quietly cunning as interest rates fell, manipulating their
products and deliberately mis-matching their rates between savers and
borrowers, old customers and new. The savings accounts in which old
customers were trapped at a lower rate of interest are a good example of the
techniques employed.
Overall this sort of balance sheet management is probably to be welcomed
rather than frowned on. Everyone knows that the difference between saving
and borrowing rates widens when interest rates are falling. After 1988 the
societies narrowed the margin between lending and savings rates to an
unprecedented extent. They are holding prevailing interest rates for
borrowers at 10.95 per cent, within half a percentage point of the banks'
base rate of 10.5 per cent.
If societies had been prevented by law from widening their margins, they
would certainly have had to pass the cost on to their customers as higher
interest rates and the housing market would have fared even worse.
The endurance test for the societies is not over yet. The housing market is
even worse than it was a year ago, and after the election if Labour wins, we
could see a further house-price plunge. At the moment, the large societies
look well-capitalised and equipped to deal with anything short of an
extraordinary disaster in the market.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920328

