FT922-600

FT  26 JUN 92 / Texaco delays relocation to Canary Wharf


   By VANESSA HOULDER, Property Correspondent


TEXACO, the international oil company, threw its relocation to Canary Wharf
into doubt yesterday by announcing that its staff would not move to the
insolvent office project in London's Docklands in August as planned.
Texaco said it was delaying its move to Westferry Circus because of
uncertainty on several aspects, particularly the office environment and
services required inside and outside the buildings.
Its concerns are believed to include the future of the Jubilee Line
underground extension and the RiverBus service. Negotiations with Ernst &
Young, the administrators to the Canary Wharf project, are continuing.
Mr Glenn Tilton, Texaco chairman, said: 'I must emphasise that we are
determined to ensure our relocation is conducted at the right time, in the
right way and on the right terms. Nothing less will do.'
Texaco's 1,000 staff will remain in their existing offices at Knightsbridge
Green, central London.
Canary Wharf went into administration on May 28 to protect it from creditors
 -a move that followed similar action by O&Y in the US and Canada. The
beleaguered Canadian property giant is struggling to restructure debts of
Dollars 11.2bn (Pounds 5.98bn).
Texaco is the second prominent tenant to reconsider its move to Canary
Wharf. Last week American Express said it would not move there unless
Olympia & York met its contractual obligations. Documents filed in a US
bankruptcy court showed that O&Y owed American Express Pounds 22m on May 28.
American Express's position differs from that of Texaco in that its lease
agreement is complicated by incentives, notably the financial responsibility
for former premises.
Texaco's lease, which it signed in September 1989, was relatively
straightforward, as its leases on its Knightsbridge offices are due to
expire shortly.
Texaco was the first large company outside the City to sign up for Canary
Wharf. Like American Express, it is one of Canary Wharf's most illustrious
tenants.
Work on the Jubilee Line extension failed to start in March when a Pounds
40m payment from O&Y to the government was not made. The money was to have
been the first instalment of O&Y's Pounds 400m contribution to the Pounds
1.5bn project.
The government still expects the money to be put up by whoever buys Canary
Wharf.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920626

