FT924-12014

FT  22 OCT 92 / South Africans rule out early return to single currency: Why
the financial rand is here to stay


   By PHILIP GAWITH


THE gyrations in the financial rand, which earlier this month slipped to a
six-year low and a discount of over 40 per cent against the commercial rand,
are clear evidence South Africa will not be making an early return to a
single currency.
Dr Chris Stals, governor of the Reserve Bank, underlined the point yesterday
when he saidthe large discount 'proves again that we still need the
financial rand to protect the foreign reserves and make a relatively stable
commercial rand possible.'
He went on to stress that, although the bank had announced in March that it
would be intervening in the financial rand market, this was not a commitment
to stabilise the currency.
The intervention, he said, was mainly aimed at draining excess liquidity
from the money markets caused by large increases in foreign reserves.
Stabilisation, achieved during April and May when the financial rand
discount fluctuated between the narrow margins of 15 to 18 per cent, was a
beneficial adjunct of intervention, not its aim.
'We just cannot commit ourselves as the Reserve Bank to support this
exchange rate at all times,' Dr Stals said.
At least two conditions would have to be met for the bank to be in a
position to stabilise the financial rand: 'much higher' foreign reserves
than the current level of R11.5bn, and a 'more stable political situation
where the financial rand exchange rate will be determined more by economic
considerations than by political considerations.'
The financial rand has strengthened somewhat since its precipitous fall on
October 5, which saw it close at R4.83 to the dollar, a discount of 41 per
cent to the commercial rand.
At one stage that day, the financial rand traded at R5.11, having last past
R5.10 in October 1986. Yesterday, it closed at R4.36 to the dollar, a
discount of 33 per cent to the commercial rand, which closed at R2.92 to the
dollar.
Analysts ascribe the widening of the financial rand discount to two main
factors: continued negative political sentiment, and a perception that South
African companies are increasingly being allowed to invest abroad. There
have recently been a number of foreign acquisitions by South African
companies, mainly financial institutions, and these are conducted through
the financial rand.
Dr Stals says that the recent volatility is partially attributable to
worldwide nervousness in foreign exchange markets. He downplays the
importance of South African companies investing offshore, saying: 'The
initiatives were taken more by the foreign investors who wanted to sell than
by South African investors who wanted to buy foreign exchange.'
The financial rand was introduced in 1985 as a means of protecting the
balance of payments. It is a barometer of foreign investor sentiment: when
the rand is in demand, the discount to the commercial rand narrows, and vice
versa.
Until this year, there had been a steady narrowing of the discount, which
fell from 53 per cent at the end of 1986 to a low of 7 per cent in November
1991. Since then, events like the Boipatong massacre and the breakdown of
constitutional talks have caused the discount to widen.
The sharp weakening in the currency over the past two weeks is a mixed
blessing for foreign investors, who are thought to hold as much as 45 per
cent of the South African government bond market.
One the one hand, it makes returns more lucrative. Syfrets, a Cape-based
investment institution, says that its Income Fund was yielding a return of
more than 20 per cent for non-residents compared to the 14.1 per cent return
on gilts available to local residents. On the other, a weak financial rand
can make the repatriation of funds a costly and difficult process.
Indeed, while the Reserve Bank can take comfort from the protection afforded
to foreign reserves by the financial rand, it will be acutely conscious that
this stability was not achieved without a price. Foreign investors for one,
many of whom have suffered large losses on the financial rand, have not been
slow in making their displeasure felt.
Speaking at a financial conference in Johannesburg yesterday, Dr Stals told
his audience of the letters that he had received from these investors,
variously describing the country as a 'banana republic' and unfit to invest
in with such a volatile currency.
For a country anxious to attract foreign investment, those words will have
found their mark. Insofar as it can, the bank will certainly be striving to
avoid a repetition of the recent volatility.

The Financial Times


International Page 8

921022

