FT922-7416

FT  19 MAY 92 / Leading Article: Thai generals out of time


FOR THE PAST 25 years in Thailand, politics has not been allowed to get in
the way of business. Few countries in Asia have rivalled its dedicated, if
blinkered, pursuit of profitable development. For the past two and a half
decades, the country's annual average increase in gross domestic product was
close to 9 per cent, accelerating to an extraordinary 11.7 per cent from
1988-90. Thailand can claim to be the world's fastest growing economy.
There has inevitably been a price to pay, but just how big the bill would
eventually be has not been the subject of intense internal debate. The
latest political manoeuvring by the army and outbreaks of violence in
Bangkok suggest that those assessments must assume greater urgency.
Thailand's problems stem, in common with other rapidly developing nations in
Asia, from the unwillingness of the ruling elite to appreciate the enormous
changes wrought in the economy and society since the mid-1960s.
Traditionally, Thailand has been governed through the interaction of the
monarchy, the military, civilian politicians and the higher ranks of the
civil service. Disagreements between them, including military coups, were a
matter of limited popular concern and did not interrupt economic
development.
Politics transformed
The system worked while Thailand remained primarily a rural and agricultural
nation. But the transformation of the economy into one dominated by
manufacturing and services and centred on metropolitan Bangkok has also
transformed politics. In February last year, the elected government headed
by General Chatichai Choonhavan was removed from office by a military
takeover led by General Suchinda Kraprayoon. Although there was
international concern over the interruption to the democratic process, few
tears were spilled over a government which, even by Thailand's immodest
standards, had brought exceptional financial rewards to its leading members.
General Suchinda promised that he had no political ambitions, arranged for
elections, did not stand as a candidate, then found himself invited by the
majority parties to become prime minister. His first cabinet included
several of the men whose removal he had engineered a year earlier.
Such a cynical manipulation of the system might not have raised many
eyebrows a couple of decades ago when communism threatened south-east Asia
and the west's view of the region was dominated by domino theories. But
today the too-long ignored HIV virus and the destruction of the environment
both pose a far greater threat to the Thai people than Vietnam. The role of
the army as the nation's protector has massively diminished but not, it
seems, its perception of itself.
Emphatic message
That message is now being more emphatically brought home to the army by the
people of Bangkok. In the March general election, the capital voted
massively for the Palang Dharma party headed by another ex-general and
former governor of Bangkok, Mr Chamlong Srimuang. The party took 32 of the
35 seats in the capital. Mr Chamlong is a devout Buddhist who refuses to
countenance the purchase of votes as widely practised by other parties. As
such, he is a distinctively new force in politics. His campaign against the
non-elected General Suchinda's assumption of the premiership has been the
catalyst of the present crisis.
The killing of demonstrators in Bangkok yesterday is not the background
against which General Suchinda can hope to build an effective government. He
initially offered to support an amendment of the constitution which would
allow only an elected MP to become prime minister. But together with the
main political parties General Suchinda has since backed away from the idea
and the prime minister's stance has become more confrontational.
In the short-term, such tactics might allow General Suchinda to hold on to
power. But he will have drawn the lines for a future confrontation that will
be very much more serious. Thailand has reached the point of economic
development where education, political awareness and a series of critical
social issues demand greater popular participation. To pretend otherwise
would be to put at risk what has been achieved in the past 30 years.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920519

