FT924-8141

FT  12 NOV 92 / Big shake-up urged on Clinton: Commission wants three White
House policy-making agencies


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT-ELECT Bill Clinton should create new White House agencies to
oversee economic and domestic policy as part of the biggest shake-up of US
government since the Truman administration, a bipartisan commission of
former officials said yesterday.
It urged Mr Clinton to place responsibility for policy formulation and
co-ordination in three councils of equal standing: the existing National
Security Council; an Economic Council, which would handle domestic and
international economic issues; and a Domestic Council, which would handle
all other domestic issues.
Each council would be modelled on the National Security Council and would be
comprised of the relevant cabinet officials.
Reflecting this new tripartite policy-making structure, the president should
appoint three co-equal assistants to the President - for national security,
economic affairs and domestic affairs. Each would be supported by a lean
staff within the White House.
The changes were recommended in a memorandum delivered to Mr Clinton on
November 4 by the Commission on Government Renewal, a committee of 30 senior
officials drawn from the past eight US administrations and sponsored by the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and the Institute for
International Economics, two Washington think-tanks.
The commission said an overhaul of White House policy-making machinery was
overdue following the end of the Cold War and the increased priority now
attached to economic and social policy.
The creation of the new White House agencies was the only way to ensure that
economic and social policy in future received as much presidential attention
as foreign affairs and defence policy.
Mr Clinton, however, would still need a chief of staff, senior to the three
assistants, to serve as an overall co-ordinator of policy and 'honest
broker' within the White House.
The commission also called for clarification of policy-making machinery
outside the White House, especially in trade, competitiveness and the
environment. In each case a single government department should be made
responsible for policy.
The US Trade Representative should become the president's sole trade
negotiator and the administration's sole spokesperson on trade.
The Commerce Department should give up trade functions and concentrate on
promoting US economic competitiveness.
A new Department of the Environment should assume the responsibilities of
the Environmental Protection Agency and other scattered environmental
duties.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921112

