FT924-11329

FT  27 OCT 92 / DTI admits company chief worked for MI6


   By JOHN MASON


A TOP Whitehall official yester-day admitted that the managing director of a
UK machine tools exporter worked for MI6, the intelligence service, to
gather information on Iraq's nuclear programme.
Ministers also approved the continued export of equipment by Midlands-based
Matrix Churchill to one of Iraq's main defence procurement agencies a year
before the invasion of Kuwait in order to preserve the intelligence link, he
said.
Giving evidence at the trial at London's Old Bailey of three former Matrix
Churchill directors, who face charges of breaching export regulations, Mr
Eric Beston, an assistant secretary at the Department of Trade and Industry,
agreed that one reason ministers approved an export licence for Matrix
Churchill in early 1989 was to maintain an intelligence source within the
company.
He did not know at the time the source was Mr Paul Henderson, then managing
director, and only learnt this when Customs officials began to gather
material to bring the prosecution, he said.
Mr Beston's admission followed an earlier revelation by Mr Henderson's QC
who said that the former head of Matrix Churchill worked for MI6 and helped
gather information about President Saddam Hussein's attempt to develop a
nuclear bomb.
Mr Geoffrey Robertson, QC, said that the approval by ministers of the export
licences of machine tools destined for military use enabled Matrix Churchill
to survive as a company and Mr Henderson to continue acting for MI6. The
Iraqi-owned Matrix Churchill went into receivership earlier this year.
Mr Henderson, Mr Peter Allen, the company's former sales director, and Mr
Trevor Abraham, the former commercial director, all deny four counts of
breaching export regulations between July 1988 and August 1990. The
prosecution has alleged the three men deceived the DTI by pretending machine
tools and computer software exported to Iraq were for civilian, not military
use.
Some of the equipment exported by Matrix Churchill was sold to the Iraqi
company Nassr, which the government knew played a major role in the Iraqi
defence procurement programme, Mr Robertson told the court.
The two companies were connected, with Dr Safa Al Hobobi being the chairman
of Matrix Churchill and a director of Nassr. This connection was known to
the DTI, Mr Beston agreed.
According to a secret Foreign Office memo, evidence existed linking Dr
Hobobi with the Iraqi nuclear programme, the court heard.
Mr Robertson asked if the main reason for ministers granting the export
licences was so the intelligence service could continue to have access to Dr
Hobobi's intelligence network through Matrix Churchill. 'That was one of the
considerations,' Mr Beston said.
Mr Beston also agreed that it was known both within the DTI and by ministers
that the goods to be exported would be used in Iraqi munitions factories. He
also agreed that Mr Abraham had told DTI officials that most of the machine
tools exported would be used for munitions production.
Earlier, Mr David Bryars, a senior principal with the Export Credits
Guarantee Department, agreed that his department had known that Industrias
Cardoen, the Chilean intermediary in an earlier transaction, was an arms
manufacturer.
He had also got the impression that Customs officials were well aware of the
type of transactions Matrix Churchill was involved in. Press reports also
linked Matrix Churchill with the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro affair in the US
and Industrias Cardoen with the death of a British journalist, he agreed.
The trial continues today.
Super Gun link, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921027

