FT924-11471

FT  26 OCT 92 / Arts: A bridge to fame - Architecture / Colin Amery admires
the work of Calatrava


   By COLIN AMERY


Santiago Calatrava is hardly a household name in England, but he deserves to
be much better known as one of the most inventive and influential
engineer/architects currently practising in Europe.
He is famous principally for his bridges. He leapt to fame in the UK with an
elegant design for the East London River Crossing which was rejected in
favour of the unexceptional design that recently opened.
Calatrava was born in 1951 in Valencia where he qualified as an architect.
He went on to study engineering at the distinguished Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology in Zurich. In 1981 he established his office in Zurich and his
work is to be seen in many major European cities.
There is a marvellous opportunity to see almost his entire opus and some of
his extraordinary sculptures at a major exhibition that has just opened at
the Royal Institute of British Architects, 66, Portland Place, London, W1.
until November 14.
The exhibition has considerable drama and excitement because that is the
nature of this man's brave designs. There is something of the
single-mindedness of another famous Spanish architect in the work of
Calatrava - the Barcelona architect Antonio Gaudi.
I was reminded of that weird display in the crypt of the unfinished church
of the Sagrada Familia of Gaudi's models and structural experiments for his
incredible cathedral. Looking at the almost primitive, whitened bones of
Gaudi's experiments was a powerful experience. There is something of that
sudden draught of potent originality about this display of Calatrava's work
in London.
Calatrava's structures are much more skeletal than Gaudi's. Gaudi put
putrescent and colourful flesh on his twisted bones. Calatrava's powerful
structural exercises are not so organic. He does create beautiful curves
and, like all great engineers, sometimes achieves feats of balance that look
impossible but work.
I have seen two of his recent works, both of them in Seville. As part of its
Expo '92 plans, Seville wanted eight new bridges over the River
Guadalquivir. Not all of these were built, but the Alamillo Bridge by
Calatrava now stands like a giant, stringed boomerang spanning 200 metres
across the Meandro San Jeronimo.
The bridge is an exercise in counter-balance, the rearing pylon on one side
of the bridge balancing the weight of the actual level traffic deck.
Thirteen pairs of steel cables act as stays and give the bridge the
appearance of some giant ancient stringed instrument.
The other creation of Calatrava at the World Expo '92 in Seville was the
pavilion for the Kuwaiti Government. Here he created an angular crown of
intersecting curved and pointed ribs around the pavilion. The effect was of
a giant opening flower - with an illusory but almost tangible sense of
movement.
The design of this pavilion demonstrated the inspirational power of nature
in Calatrava's work. The exhibition demonstrates that he draws beautifully -
from the live model and from nature. He is an engineer with an eye.
Calatrava is young to have achieved so much and has clearly benefitted from
the recent Spanish modernisation and building boom. There is a lovely simple
pedestrian bridge he designed for a small town near Barcelona and the very
remarkable tower known as, the Montjuich Communications Tower, which was
built as part of the preparations for the Barcelona Olympic Games.
It stands next door to the enormous indoor sports arena designed by Arata
Isosaki and is a somewhat surreal object, looking like a giant tuning fork
above the town. I was reminded of a very similar, angled communications
tower designed by the British firm Future Systems for a hypothetical site in
London's Hyde Park.
In Zurich his major work is the new Stadelhofen Railway Station - he won the
design competition for this in 1983. The station occupies a prominent site
next to the Opera House Square, at the foot of the hilly park that marks the
edge of the old city's fortifications.
Highly sculptural in form the station platforms and canopies curve around
the foot of the hill like a bony snake; on the lower level curved concrete
structures suggest the inside of some giant rib cage.
Calatrava also collaborated on the new station in Lucerne which replaced the
great 19th century station that was burned in 1971. In Lyons the TGV trains
now connect with the airport and the dramatic winged station is almost the
largest of Calatrava's works. It promises to be extremely elegant -
developing, as it does, the familiar Saarinen design for Kennedy Airport's
TWA building.
One thing comes out very clearly from the RIBA exhibition: the skill with
which Calatrava has developed a unity between architecture and engineering.
His buildings and structures are refined works of art. They have a coherence
and completeness which is the mark of a highly skilled designer.
It is a joy to sense a great visualiser at work - someone who utilises the
third dimension in a sculptural and functional way. There is something
Gothic about his creations - because they have a structural drama without
any unnecessary high-tech razzmatazz.
The fact that his work is now scattered across Europe in a style free of
nationalistic restraints also makes him like a Gothic master. Calatrava is
definitely a man with beauty in his bones.
Sponsored by Generalitat Valencia. (There are special guided visits to the
exhibition that last 40 minutes that can be booked by telephoning the RIBA
Events Office 071-580 5533 extension 4335.)

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921026

