FT924-822

FT  22 DEC 92 / Business and the Law: Five years of Sunday trading -
European Law


   By BRICK COURT CHAMBERS


   BRUSSELS


Last week, five years after it was first asked to rule on the the
compatibility of UK Sunday trading laws with European Community law, the
European Court of Justice finally gave an unequivocal ruling. The Rome
Treaty's prohibition of national legislation restricting the free movement
of goods between Community countries does not apply to the 1950 Shops Act
which bans retailers in England and Wales (though not in Scotland) from
Sunday opening.
HISTORY
In the mid-1980s retailers in England and Wales began opening on Sundays,
arguing that the ban on Sunday trading in the 1950 Shops Act reduced imports
from other EC countries and thus infringed Article 30 of the Rome Treaty.
In the 1989 Torfaen case the ECJ ruled that Article 30 'does not apply to
national rules prohibiting retailers from opening their premises on Sunday
where the restrictive effects on EC trade which may result therefrom do not
exceed the effects intrinsic to rules of that kind'.
That ruling left it to the national courts to determine as a question of
fact whether the effects of those rules actually exceeded such intrinsic
effects (a proportionality test). Following that judgment, however,
different UK courts reached different conclusions on how to apply these
principles to the Shops Act.
In 1991 the ECJ held, without any qualification, that Article 30 did not
apply to national rules prohibiting the employment of staff on Sundays
(Conforama case) or on Sundays after 12pm (Marchandise case), as the
restrictive effects of such rules 'did not appear to be excessive in
relation to the aim pursued'.
Three English courts referred further questions to the ECJ seeking further
guidance on how to reconcile and apply the three rulings.
CLARIFICATION
The ECJ has now clarified the position by extending its rulings in the the
two 1991 cases to all national legislation prohibiting retailers from Sunday
opening and by answering itself the question which in the Torfaen case it
had left to the UK courts to decide.
The first two parts of the Court's reasoning followed its earlier rulings.
First, Sunday trading rules were 'measures of equivalent effect to
quantitative restrictions' that could be caught by Article 30. While
legislation enforcing Sunday closing was not intended to regulate the flow
of goods, it may still have an adverse effect on the sales volume of certain
shops which affect the sale of both domestic and imported products. But the
Court said the marketing of imported products was not made more difficult
than the marketing of domestic goods.
Second, the Court confirmed that national rules restricting the opening of
shops on Sundays pursue an aim justified under EC law if they reflect
'certain choices relating to particular national or regional socio-cultural
characteristics'.
However, EC states must make those choices in compliance with EC law and, in
particular, the principle of proportionality. Provided therefore the
restrictive effects of EC trade did not exceed the effects intrinsic to such
rules, the prohibition in Article 30 would not apply.
The Court stressed that assessments as to proportionality 'cannot be allowed
to vary according to the findings of fact made by individual courts in
particular cases'. Appraising the proportionality of national rules which
pursue a legitimate aim under EC law involved 'weighing the national
interest in attaining that aim against the Community interest in ensuring
the free movement of goods'. To verify that the restrictive effects do not
exceed what is necessary to achieve that aim, it must be considered whether
those effects are direct, indirect or purely speculative and whether those
effects do not impede the marketing of imported products more than domestic
products.
In the Conforama and Marchandise cases the Court had applied those
considerations in holding that the restrictive effects on trade of national
rules prohibiting the employment of workers on Sundays in certain retailing
activities were not excessive in relation to the aim pursued. It followed,
the Court said, that the same finding must be made with regard to national
rules prohibiting Sunday opening.
Cases C-306/88, Rochdale Borough Council v Anders; C-304/90 Reading Borough
Council v Payless DIY and others; C-169/91, Stoke-on-Trent and Norwich City
Councils v B & Q, ECJ FC, December 16, 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921222

