FT923-9619

FT  04 AUG 92 / Letter: Earth Summit sceptics miss the point


   From Mr ERIC ORTS


Sir, The prevailing dismissals of the Earth Summit, reconfirmed by David
Lascelles ('Hot air in Rio sows green seed', Business and the Environment,
July 29) disserve the business readership.
The summit's most lasting achievements are not the biodiversity and global
climate treaties, but agreements on foundational principles to guide future
international environmental initiatives.
Sceptics ignore two documents establishing these principles: the Rio
declaration and Agenda 21.
Notably, Agenda 21, a consensus statement of more than 500 pages, emphasises
the 'crucial' role business must play in attaining 'sustainable
development'. (The suggestion that sustainable development is 'a flawed
concept, if not an actual contradiction in terms' itself assumes a
contradiction: the long-term viability of non-sustainable development.)
Environmental concerns are no passing fancy (witness Senator Al Gore's
selection as US vice-presidential nominee).
Instead of simply listening complacently to reports of weak treaties, while
remaining deaf to an increasing volume of evidence which indicates a global
consensus on the urgency of environmental issues, prudent businesses should
instead adopt appropriate, well-considered, proactive environmental
policies, in advance of fast-changing national and international regulatory
regimes.
Those businesses that do not adapt are likely to find themselves quickly
disadvantaged in competition with other companies ahead of the game (for
example members of the Business Council for Sustainable Development).
The inevitability of growing environmental controls, coupled with increasing
consumer demand for environmentally friendly products and production,
renders exclusive focus on short-term financial costs of new environmental
regulation anachronistic.
Agenda 21 directs business to join affirmatively with government, academia
and international organisations to provide flexible, workable solutions to
environmental issues that do not, in the end, only affect someone else, but
instead affect us all. Business should heed the call.
Eric Orts,
department of legal studies,
Wharton School of the
University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, US

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920804

