FT923-9498

FT  05 AUG 92 / Business and the Environment: Fuel cells' chance to take
charge


   By HILARY DE BOERR


The battle by the London Regeneration Consortium to gain planning permission
for its redevelopment project at London's King's Cross could hold an
unexpected silver lining for the environment. The long delay means
alternative energy technologies will be available for incorporation when the
project gets under way.
LRC is looking at fuel cell technology to provide at least some of its
projected power needs of about 80MW. Fuel cells would be suited to running
its articulated bus network, and possibly even provide some of the
buildings' electricity, said Hugh Delap, LRC infrastructure manager. 'It can
be cheaper, more efficient and its pollution levels are a fraction of that
arising from current means of producing electricity.'
Fuel cells produce electricity from the electrochemical reaction produced
when hydrogen and oxygen combine to make water. Oxygen comes from the air
and hydrogen from such fuels as natural gas, methanol and coal gas.
New research shows fuel cells can be used in about 90 per cent of cases
where conventional energy sources are employed, according to consultants
Arthur D Little. Their use would reduce carbon dioxide emissions by up to 60
per cent, and noxious emissions by between 50 and 90 per cent.
The environmental benefits of the alternative energy source are therefore
many, say proponents. Emissions of sulphur and nitrogen oxides cause acid
rain; those of hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide cause pollution and related
health problems; carbon dioxide emissions contribute to global warming. All
would be reduced significantly.
The efficient nature of fuel cells would also mean lower demand for
non-renewable fuels like coal and oil, with the additional environmental
benefit of reduced risk of oil spills. In the longer term, hydrogen for use
in fuel cells could itself be derived from renewable energy sources, like
landfill gases.
Finally, fuel cells can be sited within cities and near load centres,
reducing the need for electricity transmission and distribution equipment,
which are criticised for health concerns related to electromagnetic
radiation and for marring the countryside.
The big drawback with fuel cells - as with many other alternative sources of
energy - is the high start-up costs. Generation currently costs about
Dollars 2,500 (Pounds 1,300) per kilowatt for a 200kW plant, making it too
expensive for most applications. The largest plant currently operating is
11MW, supplying electricity for up to 5,000 homes in Tokyo. But production
levels would have to approach 200-300MW a year - when the cost would fall to
about Dollars 1,500/kW - before they are economically viable, says Arthur D
Little.
The World Fuel Cell Council, which is busily promoting the technology, is
therefore campaigning for government subsidies such as tax credits to help
kick-start the technology. Japan, which imports almost all of its energy
resources, has taken the lead with a national goal to install 2,250MW by
2000 and 8,300MW by 2010.
In Britain, the Department of Trade and Industry has set up a programme
aimed at accelerating the development of fuel cell systems for early
applications in the UK. California, meanwhile, has introduced a requirement
that 2 per cent of each motor manufacturer's sales should be zero emission
vehicles by 1998, rising to 10 per cent by 2003.
Several companies in the US are developing fuel cell powered vehicles, with
Ballard Power Systems, for example, due to demonstrate its hydrogen-operated
bus later this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920805

