FT921-1383

FT  24 MAR 92 / Re-engineering the Paris stock market: A new wave of changes
to French securities rules


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


The brightest brains in the French civil service, it is often said, end up
at the finance ministry. Their brainpower is now being put to the test as
they tussle over a series of reforms of France's stock markets.
Over the next few months the ministry will finish proposals on issues with
important implications for the market's future. A forthcoming reform of the
French pension system and a series of share sales in large state-owned
companies should provide a new influx of investment and equity. Other
reforms in the pipeline include an overhaul of France's complex takeover
laws and measures to halt the drift of 'block' trades in large numbers of
shares from Paris to London.
'Clearly there is a political will to complete the modernisation of the
French financial system,' said Mr Micha Spierenberg, president of Bacot
Allain Warburg, the French arm of the SG Warburg securities group. 'All in
all these reforms are very encouraging and should make the market more
modern and more efficient.'
The first wave of French stock market reform was in the mid-1980s when Paris
followed the precedent set by London in opening up its financial markets in
preparation for the 1990s. The pace of change was frenetic: old monopolies
were abolished, closed markets opened and state-of-the-art technology
introduced.
But some old practices, such as a right to make a 'partial' bid for two
thirds of a company and a bourse tax on share transactions, survived. Paris
banks and brokers have long complained about them, arguing that they
reinforce international investors' suspicions about the inbred nature of the
French market and make it difficult for Paris to compete.
Recently these complaints have been reinforced by the rows over the partial
bid for the Printemps retail group by Pinault, the property company, and the
battle for Perrier mineral water.
As a result the French government and the regulatory authorities are now
amenable to the prospect of reform. The finance ministry is reviewing the
takeover laws and is expected to abolish partial bids in favour of forcing
investors to make full offers.
The stock market authorities are also reviewing the procedure for executing
block trades in Paris, which has lost much of such business to London where
the system is more flexible. This review could result in a more flexible
disclosure system and, possibly, a new cadre of market makers.
These changes may make little practical difference. So many large French
companies are controlled by friendly shareholders that there are relatively
few hostile bids. And it is probably too late for Paris to recapture the
block trading business already lost to London. But, said Mr Rene de la
Serre, managing director of Credit Commercial de France, one of the larger
banks, these were 'important refinements which should enhance the standing
of the French market'.
But these technical changes pale beside the more important issue of the
future size and structure of the stock market. The overwhelming problem for
the French market is its shortage of equity and investment, largely due to
the all-pervasive nature of government involvement. The state controls many
large French companies, which restricts the number of publicly quoted
groups. It also dominates the pension and savings systems, so that France,
unlike the US or the UK, does not have a steady influx of securities
investment from private sector institutions such as pension funds.
This is where the most significant changes are taking place. The socialist
government recently announced a programme of sales of minority stakes in
state-controlled companies. The first of these issues, the FFr2bn (Pounds
200m) sale of 2.3 per cent of the Elf Aquitaine oil group, is under way.
'These partial privatisations should provide a steady source of new equity,'
says Mr David Finch, director of the stockbroking subsidiary of Finacor in
Paris. 'They ought to continue whichever party wins the next general
election. In fact if the right wins, they will probably accelerate.'
The reform of the pension system should also help address the lack of
investment. French pensions are administered by the state, which pays them
on a pay-as-you-go basis from money received from those in employment. This
system is coming under strain as the population ages and there are
proportionately fewer workers to support the pensioners. The solution, as Mr
Pierre Beregovoy the finance minister has acknowledged, is to increase the
use of private pensions.
So far Mr Beregovoy has not gone as far as the financial community had hoped
with pension reform. Last week he announced plans for a new FFr60,000
tax-efficient personal equity plan, although he did not specify whether the
tax benefits would be realised throughout its six-year lifespan, or at the
end. But he also dashed the market's hopes by refusing to introduce
corporate pension funds, presumably because of opposition from the trade
unions.
'The PEP initiative is a step in the right direction, but without upfront
tax advantages, it is unlikely to have a major impact,' said Mr Spierenberg.
'The creation of pension funds would be the single most important step, but
it looks as though we may have to wait a little longer for that.' Mr
Beregovoy is expected to wait until after next year's elections before
returning to the issue.
Corporate pension funds would not only provide new investment but also
create a new breed of powerful investment institutions, instilling greater
discipline in the market. But the unions are not the only obstacle.
The brains in the finance ministry must also work out a way of persuading
the French electorate to shell out for private pensions at the same time as
they are supporting those already in retirement - an intellectual puzzle
which will really test their ingenuity.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920324

