FT921-14173

FT  17 JAN 92 / Leading Article: A Gulf war balance sheet


ONE YEAR ago today, a great international military force, led by the US,
with substantial British and Arab participation and acting under the mandate
of the United Nations, went to war to free Kuwait from its occupation by
Iraq. Forty days later, its mission was complete. The venture was judged
worthwhile then and hindsight has not altered the judgment. But not all its
consequences were foreseen or calculated, which is often the case with
victory. An audit is therefore in order.
The legitimate government of Kuwait was restored and the country is in the
throes of reconstruction. It has, however, not been transformed into a
democratic model for the Gulf, although parliamentary elections are planned
for later this year. Nor have similar fond hopes for structural changes in
Saudi Arabia materialised, although it may have a consultative council soon.
However Saudi Arabia has reasserted its hegemony over Opec. With one third
of all output, it dictates production and pricing policies. This is
satisfactory to the US and the leading western oil-consuming countries.
Barring the unpredictable, security of supply and stability of prices will
remain the goals for the 1990s. The secondary war objective of securing Gulf
oil supplies has thus been achieved.
On the broader international economic front, it is clear that the war was
little more than a blip on any graph, contrary to the fears of a year ago.
The global economy remains vulnerable to disruption and inflation in raw
material supplies, above all oil, but its essential problems are much more
related to public and private indebtedness, labour market rigidities and
trade obstruction. In the US and Britain, it was shown that guns do not put
butter on the table.
In the Middle East, it is a sad fact that Saddam Hussein still rules Iraq.
This alone has brought great grief to its citizens, especially Kurds and
Shi'ites. Now, as then, it would be better if he were not there - but it
would be wrong to seek to overthrow him purely for reasons of vengeance or
political gain. It remains preferable that the Iraqis do it themselves - and
be rewarded by an end to commercial and diplomatic ostracism - than have the
US implement its plan to remove him by even covert force.
Arms bazaar
This does not mean that the international community is powerless to restrain
Saddam from violating his own people or that it should ease in any way the
pressure to root out all Iraq's offensive military and nuclear capability
and to deny it more. This task is made more urgent with the potential entry
into the arms bazaar of former Soviet weapons and nuclear expertise. Indeed,
all the fine words about controlling the arms trade and promoting regional
security have to date produced little. The only clear gain is the
recognition in Iran, a beneficiary of the war, that the US is more than 'the
great Satan'.
The western political fall out has been unpredictable. Both George Bush and
John Major have found war's benefits ephemeral, demonstrating that, in
election years, their respective publics tend to respond to more prosaic
domestic issues. Today, the continued presence of Saddam in Baghdad may be
an electoral liability for Mr Bush. Less so for Mr Major, although his
admirable initiative on safe havens for the Kurds in Iraq has had a
distressingly short shelf life.
Desirable change
Although Germany, like Japan, was vilified for contributing only money, not
troops, the war had a generally stimulative effect on the drive towards a
common European foreign and defence policy; Maastricht was an advance, if an
incomplete one. That the first test of EC resolve came in Yugoslavia was
unfortunate, but also salutary on the learning curve. If it comes, the
desirable change in the German constitution, allowing for the participation
of its forces in any collective security operation outside the Nato area,
may be said to have had its roots in the Gulf war. Equally, although
constitutional change in Japan is less desirable, both domestic and
international attention is now properly focused on the most effective ways
in which it can contribute to global security.
The war was unequivocally good for the UN system. Its security council
worked as never before, thanks, in part, to Mr Gorbachev. It is also right
that the international community, acting through the UN, increasingly
considers it legitimate to intervene in the internal affairs of a country on
humanitarian grounds. This would be the best justification for any future
active intervention in Iraq.
It is true, however, that no new world order, as promised by Mr Bush, has
been put in place, partly because of the disappearance of the Soviet Union.
But the lessons of the war point to that order's essential ingredients. They
are that no country, not even the world's remaining superpower, can do it
all on its own; that the UN, an effective European Community and a more
outward-looking Japan, must all play important roles. If, as we wrote a year
ago today, 'war is the result of miscalculation', (in this case by Saddam
Hussein) peace and security should not be.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920117

