FT922-4423

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (18): Crisis year for farmers -
Agriculture has been hit by possibly the worst drought this century


   By PHILIP GAWITH


ASKED whether he thought he would survive the political transition process,
Mr Kraai van Niekerk, the minister of agriculture, answered: 'No.
Agriculture is the most dispensable portfolio.' In any event, he added, he
would take the first opportunity to return to his farm in the northern Cape.
The first comment displays political acumen. The second, many would say, is
almost perverse. Following a decade of inclement conditions and
deteriorating finances, the agricultural sector has now been hit by possibly
the worst drought this century. Many farmers, given the choice, would
happily swap the notional benefits of their lifestyle for the security of
city life. Certainly, there is no stream on to the land. Last year the Land
Bank, the parastatal lending organisation, repossessed 326 farms and could
only resell 70 of them.
To minimise the economic and social impact of the drought, the government
last month announced a R3.8bn rescue package, billed as the 'most
significant rescue bid in the history of South African agriculture'. There
was little alternative but to act in this way. Although comprising only 4.1
per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), the commercial agriculture sector
provides employment for about 1.2m farm workers, or 13 per cent of the
economically-active labour force, who in turn support about 5m dependants.
Given that South Africa already faces severe unemployment, and urbanisation
on a scale which it is manifestly failing to handle, the arguments for
trying to alleviate the crisis in the agricultural sector are clearly
powerful. While the measures taken - effectively a one-off subsidy of R375
per hectare for all crop farmers operating in the 33 disaster drought areas
 -will go a long way towards minimising the social impact of the drought,
the macro-economic implications are inescapable.
The South African Agricultural Union says provisional crop estimates
indicate that only 22.9 per cent of the normal volume of agricultural
production will be achieved in the summer rainfall areas. This varies from
45 per cent in the eastern region to 19 per cent, 18 per cent and 10 per
cent in the northern, central and western parts respectively. Whereas in
January economists were predicting real GDP growth of 2.5 per cent, the
likelihood is that South Africa will have its third successive year of
negative growth.
The impact on the balance of payments will also be significant.
Traditionally South Africa is a net exporter of agricultural products to the
tune of between R1.1bn and R3.7bn a year during the period 1985-90. This
year, though, the country will have to import more than 5m tonnes of maize
and probably 1m tonnes of wheat. The import bill for maize alone is likely
to be R3bn.
The explanation for the agricultural sector's difficulties goes deeper than
sheer malevolence on the part of the gods. Indeed, Mr Van Niekerk has been
brave enough to admit that 'mistakes' by government contributed to the
present malaise. The background is that during the mid-1980s, when there was
a succession of poor crops, the state provided a guarantee to farmer
co-operatives to enable them to provide credit to farmers who would
otherwise have found it difficult to continue. A total of R2.4bn was
involved in this guarantee. Therefore, had the state simply walked away from
farmers in the present drought, they were already committed to the tune of
R2.4bn.
The R3.8bn scheme, spread over four years, effectively allows the state to
buy out of its guarantee scheme. The state's assistance to the farmers has
not been without controversy. Some argue: why only agriculture? Why not, for
example, ailing marginal gold mines? Others argue that, within the
agricultural context, the state is preventing marginal farmers from being
weeded out while hampering better farmers through controls and restrictions.
Mr Van Niekerk has a twofold answer for his critics. First priority, he
says, is to ensure food self-sufficiency. 'The government's aim is to supply
good quality food at a reasonable price. But in the end the availability of
food can only be ensured by the profitability of production for the farmer
and not the consumer price, because if there's no food available, then the
price is irrelevant.'
The second part of his reply is that the drought relief scheme, by removing
state guarantees, 'guides agriculture back to free market principles with
regard to dealing with agricultural debt'. Although the trend in recent
years has been towards making farmers' decisions more market-driven, the
government has clearly adopted a very timid approach to reform in this area.
Asked to what extent government has sought to actually encourage this
process, Mr Van Niekerk replies: 'If government is too prescriptive you run
the risk of failure. It comes back to you. The farmers must decide. I'm not
willing to decide."
There have, however, been some minor successes with the privatisation of
meat inspection, seed inspection, quality inspection of export agricultural
products, the deregulation of dairy regulations, the freer movement of meat
and the abolition of wine quotas.
Mr Van Niekerk accepts that the marketing boards, which still wield
considerable regulatory and price-setting powers in South African
agriculture, especially in the key areas of maize, wheat, milk and meat,
should alter their functions. He is critical of the fact that they not only
formulate policy, but act as agent, too. He believes they should change
function and become purely advisory bodies, with the actual marketing being
left to the farmers, collectively or individually as they see fit. A
successful precedent along these lines already exists in the deciduous fruit
industry.
Deciduous fruit, together with citrus, is one of the few bright spots on the
agricultural scene at the moment. One reason for this is that being situated
in the winter rainfall areas of the western Cape and eastern Transvaal,
these industries have escaped the drought. They also export large portions
of their crop and have profited considerably from the end of the sanctions
era.
Although the drought has dominated the policy agenda for the past six
months, agriculture has not been left behind in the dash for the new South
Africa. Moves are under way to rationalise the existing 14 agriculture
departments into one, and increasing attention is being given to the
question of how to assist black subsistence farmers to progress to the point
where they become viable commercial farmers.
If the government really wanted to be useful, though, it would address the
question of profitability. Real farming profits fell at an average 5.5 per
cent per annum over the period 1980-1991. Unless that trend can be arrested,
one must assume that future generations will prefer to import their food and
play golf on the land instead.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
ESTIMATED CROP SIZES COMPARED TO LOCAL DEMAND
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Crop                  Local        Total      Estimated     % change
                     demand      production   production
                    (000 tonne)    1990/91      1991/92
                                 (000 tonne) (000 tonne)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Maize: white          3,600        3,810         907          -76.2
       yellow         3,200        4,016       1,195          -70.2
Grainsorghum            240          240          94          -60.8
Sunflower seed          590          589         117          -80.1
Groundnuts               85           78          85           +9.0
Soyabeans               126          126          73          -42.1
Dry beans               100          100          31          -69.0
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: South African Agricultural Union
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920605

