FT923-6438

FT  25 AUG 92 / Swedish short-term money market rates up


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


   STOCKHOLM


SWEDEN'S money markets yesterday reacted to a growing lack of confidence in
the government's economic strategy with a rise in short-term money market
rates. The equity market also responded negatively, with the general share
index dropping by 4 per cent.
Mrs Anne Wibble, the finance minister, said there was no reason for the
government to resort to crisis measures to restore confidence. But the main
opposition Social Democrats called on Mr Carl Bildt, Sweden's Conservative
prime minister, to break the country's political deadlock and start talks
with them on a broad-based economic programme to reduce interest rates and
the burgeoning budget deficit.
Forecasts suggest the budget deficit could rise as high as SKr140bn (Pounds
13.7bn) this year because of rising unemployment, a crisis in the banking
and insurance sector and falling tax revenues due to stagnant domestic
demand.
'The problem is political. There is declining confidence in the market that
the government will be able to get its policies through,' said Mr Nils
Lundgren, chief economist at Nordbanken.
A weekend summit conference of Sweden's four-party, non-Socialist coalition
government appears to have done nothing to lift the pessimism. But Sweden's
main trade union organisation, the LO, has accepted Mr Bildt's invitation to
discuss next year's wage round on 15 September, in a move designed to calm
the markets.
Some observers, however, believe the government will have to take early
action to head off a full-blown economic crisis and a massive outflow of
capital.
Yesterday the central bank reported a capital outflow of SKr9.976bn last
week, the largest weekly amount since last autumn. The bank can be expected
to maintain a tough monetary policy to stem the outflow.
Further cuts in government spending might be announced soon but the markets
are not convinced that ministers will stick to their strategy. 'Confidence
is something you have to earn and not just proclaim,' said Mr Sten
Westerberg, one of Sweden's leading investment bankers, yesterday.
In the current financial year the government agreed to make SKr14bn worth of
cuts but has not yet succeeded in carrying through all of them. It had been
hoped to save as much as SKr4.5bn by denying Swedes benefit for their first
two days' sickness absence from work but ministers are uncertain whether
this can gain the majority support in parliament.
The government relies on the maverick and populist right-wing New Democrats
to get its programme through but that party's leaders remain hostile to what
it is being proposed.
'What worries me is that the pressures on the government are all to spend
more money, not cut their programmes,' said Mr Ulf Jacobson, chief economist
at Sweden's industrial federation.
The country's labour market board says it wants a further SKr8.8bn from the
government, mainly to provide places on work preparation programmes and
training for young people.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920825

