FT923-15717

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Britain digs in its heels on
border checks


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
THE REAL trouble for the British government may start the day after its EC
presidency ends.
On January 1, 1993, it is a fair bet that some publicity-seeking federalists
 -possibly led by a posse of continental European MEPs - will try to enter
the country without passports.
If they are stopped at immigration, that could mark the beginning of a long
and potentially embarrassing legal challenge to Britain's refusal to lift
border-checks on people - just two weeks after an Edinburgh summit at which
Mr John Major is certain to proclaim the European market open for business.
Britain's position is simple. It says the 1986 Single European Act does not
oblige the UK to lift its border controls on non-EC citizens. Consequently,
it must maintain at least enough checks to ensure that unwanted
non-Community travellers do not slip through the EC passport lane at sea and
airports.
The European Commission maintains that the Act requires an end to all
controls from next January 1, and believes the European Court would uphold
that opinion.
To the great irritation of the Commission, that difference of opinion has
been easily finessed by politicians and journalists into a simmering row
between Brussels and Britain, spiced with the emotive issues of compulsory
identity cards (essential if controls are dropped, the sceptics claim) and
illegal immigration.
In fact, the position is more subtle. Broadly speaking, all continental
members except Denmark - the members and associate members of the 1990
Schengen free travel zone - back the Commission's legal interpretation. But
most are worried it will be impractical and imprudent to lift border
controls at the beginning of the year unless certain 'compensating measures'
are introduced.
They would include a database linking customs, tax and immigration
authorities, a convention on asylum (signed but not yet ratified by all
member states), and a convention aimed at strengthening external frontiers.
This last measure would be the easiest way of encouraging national
immigration authorities to trust one another, but signing has been held up
for more than a year by the Anglo-Spanish dispute over Gibraltar.
Denmark and Ireland are in a slightly different situation. Denmark disputes
the Commission's interpretation and intends to maintain controls, but it
might eventually be persuaded to drop them if sufficient safeguards were
brought in. Ireland is worried that if it joins the Schengen bloc, Britain
will reinstate passport checks for Irish travellers, 70 per cent of whom
pass through the UK.
In May, when the Commission published its hardline interpretation of the
Single European Act, it looked as though the dispute was bound to end in
tears. But since then, the Danes have voted down Maastricht - partly, it is
said, because of worries about open borders - and the atmosphere has
changed.
Three weeks ago in Lisbon, Mr Kenneth Clarke, the British home secretary,
told fellow interior ministers they should not underestimate the all-party
opposition to lifting border controls in the UK. With ratification of
Maastricht uppermost in governments' minds, that warning seems to have had
an impact, and a full-scale confrontation now seems unlikely.
More likely is a postponement of the January 1 deadline - the Commission
prefers to say that 'the clock will be stopped' - while concerted efforts
are made to bring in the compensating measures.
It is at that point that the boatload of passport-less federalists comes in.
But short of instructing immigration officers to wave through any litigious
MEPs on New Year's Day, British officials admit there is not much they can
do about that.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920701

