FT924-1060

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: Fragonard inspired by La Fontaine - Elizabeth Mortimer
enjoys scenes from a libertine age


   By ELIZABETH MORTIMER


THE PETIT Palais has just completed an operation which has never been done
before, and which it confidently claims will never be done again: the
restoration of its set of 57 pen and wash drawings by Fragonard illustrating
a splendid handwritten copy in two volumes of La Fontaine's Contes et
Nouvelles. Since they had to be unstuck from the albums, it was decided to
put them on show, setting them in the context of contemporary drawing and
book illustration using the museum's own resources. The result is both
delightful and startling.
These stories started their published life under royal disfavour. Their
subject matter, inspired by Ariosto and Boccaccio, with a strong dash of
Rabelais, is lewd, satirical, anti-clerical and funny. But once the pious
reign of the Sun King came to an end, it became increasingly clear that La
Fontaine's Contes provided a canon of instantly recognisable scenes for a
more libertine age (just as Ovid's Metamorphoses had provided culturally
correct licence for artists to paint high-brow hanky-panky on Mount Olympus
or in Arcadia in the preceding century). Paintings were made to hang in
salons and boudoirs, and several illustrated editions were brought out in
the course of the 18th century, including one with no text.
It is not known who commissioned the Petit Palais Fragonard illustrations,
nor when they were made. They first came to light in 1840, more than 30
years after the artist's death. Some of the same compositions had been
tidied up for engraving in an edition which was announced in 1789, but was
overtaken by events. Scholars now believe the drawings were probably made
around 1765-75.
Fragonard's dated works are scanty, and his drawings much copied by forgers,
but these are clearly genuine, and of exquisite quality. The technique is
the same throughout: a drawing is made in pierre noire, then a counterproof
made by pressing it against a new sheet on which the image appears in
reverse. The artist them elaborates it in bistre (a brown pigment made of
soot, water and gum), using pen and brush to produce the final version.
Of course they were made to be looked at from close to, as you turned the
pages of the book. What strikes the viewer at once, seeing them hanging at
eye level at regular intervals in a series of fairly large rooms, is the
pictorial quality of the compositions. The masses of light and shadow and
the proportions of the figures in their settings make them seem like small
paintings rather than drawings yet they are sketched and painted with such
freedom that they seem completely spontaneous. The effects of light -
lamplight, firelight and daylight, direct and reflected - are both subtly
observed and deliberately theatrical. Sunshine filters through leaves and
surrounds a pair of reclining lovers in an airy haze, as their badinage is
interrupted by a peasant on a branch above, asking if they have seen his
lost calf. The glum hunched figure of a husband, sitting moodily in bed
after being caught on the point of seducing a supposed serving maid (really
his wife's lover in disguise), is lit by a flash of light, while the
successful conspirators head for the door discreetly wrapped in shadow.
Beds feature largely, and come in all shapes and sizes, from the hermit's
pallet to the canopied four-poster. Their curtains half conceal countless
substitutions and subterfuges - including the administering of an enema to a
long suffering lover by his mistress's governess - while their swinging
draperies give rhythm and weight to the design.
The poses of the protagonists are varied and expressive. Modest ingenues
undress at the bidding of corrupt clerics. Parents walk in on incautious
lovers. A youth crowns himself with rushes to seduce a bathing beauty by
claiming to be a river god. Perrette scares off the Devil by raising her
skirt; and an abbess, summoned to rebuke an erring sister, coifs herself
with her lover's breeches by mistake in the dark.
Many of the stories deal with that sadly declining sport, cuckolding jealous
husbands - preferably with their unwitting connivance. They are not for the
prudish. The relevant extracts are quoted in full on the labels, but just as
La Fontaine never quite spells it out, Fragonard is always erotically
suggestive rather than obscene.
The exhibition includes illustrations to the same stories and others by
minor artists, who although charming are completely outshone by Fragonard.
Among them are some curiosities, in particular several picture sales
catalogues and a couple of guide books to Paris - prototypes of the modern
illustrated version, crammed with marginal sketches of architectural detail
and street scenes. They are fascinating source books for art historians,
giving a clear idea of lost paintings known to have been in famous
collections.
There are also are finished pen and wash compositions by Greuze and David;
but an unexpected discovery is a fine group of drawings by Joseph-Marie
Vien, future neo-classicist and teacher of David, done while he was studying
at the French Academy in Rome in 1748. They are the record of a sumptuous
masquerade or costumed procession which the French students devised as their
contribution to the Roman carnival that year, on the theme of the Sultan's
Caravan to Mecca. The Grand Vizir, the Aga of the Janissaries, the Mufti,
the pashas, eunuchs, sultanas and ambassadors are set down in all their
finery, a tribute to the students' powers of invention and also to the
excellence of their drawing masters.
Indeed, it was thanks to the solid founding of all art on drawing at the
Academy in Paris and at its offshoot in Rome that the artists of the 18th
wielded chalks, pens and brushes with such unequalled distinction.
Fragonard et le dessin francais au XVIIIe siecle dans les collections du
Petit Palais, Paris. Ends February 14 1993

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

921219

