FT923-15761

FT  01 JUL 92 / All roubles are free, but some freer than others: Leyla
Boulton on a very Russian convertibility


   By LEYLA BOULTON


TODAY was the magic date set by the Russian government to begin a decisive
march towards a convertible rouble and achieve a central goal of its
ambitious market reforms. However, as is often the case in Russia, the facts
on the day look somewhat different.
Internal convertibility, one of the most seductive yet elusive goals of the
reforms, was supposed to begin with the introduction on July 1 of a single,
free-floating exchange rate for all current transactions. This was to be
followed a month later by attempts to defend the rouble at a fixed exchange
rate - with the support of a Dollars 6bn rouble stabilisation fund provided
by the west. The latter part of the timetable has since been recognised as
over-ambitious and will only happen some time next year.
But only yesterday, the Russian authorities were locked in last-minute
arguments, among themselves and with the International Monetary Fund, over
whether to let the market decide the new rate today despite an announcement
by the foreign economic affairs ministry only last week that a market rate
would be applied.
Mr Igor Knaziev, head of the Russian Central Bank's exchange rate
department, said yesterday he had received orders to post not a market rate
 -which was Rbs144 to the dollar on the Moscow inter-bank currency exchange
yesterday - but the weighted average for last month's trades on the exchange
 -calculated at Rbs125.26.
Such a move, prompted by official fears that the market would not generate a
'correct' exchange rate, will mean that more than one exchange rate will
remain in place, postponing a central goal of reforms planned by the
government and desired by the IMF.
It also illustrates the chaos and temptation of half-measures as the
government attempts to push through reforms which will attract both foreign
support and appease domestic critics at home.
It would also mean that the main changes to come into effect today would be
ancillary measures on taxation - which were supposed to go hand in hand with
a single rate.
These include an obligation for all exporters (and not just exporters of key
raw materials) to sell half their foreign exchange earnings to the state.
But the whole point of the reform was to encourage enterprises to sell their
foreign exchange at a market rate - rather than at a less favourable
controlled rate.
The other changes will be a re-introduction of an import tax of 5 per cent
for all goods except medicine and food which will remain tax free, and
luxury goods such as cars which will be taxed at 10 per cent. State
organisations will have to receive additional subsidies to enable them to
continue to buy imports after the specially subsidised exchange rates for
imports disappear.
Mr Knaziev said he was not sure whether the controlled rate would be
maintained beyond today but he thought it likely that it would be kept for
the foreseeable future.
Furthermore, the government has not yet spelled out at what rate foreign
investors will be able to convert rouble profits into hard currency,
although they are likely to continue to use the currency exchange.
The row over convertibility also illustrates the difficulties for the IMF as
it tries to hammer out concrete assistance for Russia. A visiting IMF team,
which is trying to finalise an agreement granting a Dollars 1bn loan to
Moscow, was yesterday attempting to persuade the Russian authorities to
stick to their original idea of floating the rouble so that market forces
would come to play. One possible outcome was that nothing would change today
to give the authorities more time to sort out a final decision.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920701

