FT924-11387

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (4): New discipline
for decisions - Is currency overlay just a fad? Peter Montagnon examines the
theory


   By PETER MONTAGNON


IT IS DIFFICULT to believe that as recently as early September sterling was
worth nearly Dollars 2. Since then, there has been Black Wednesday. Sterling
and the lira are out of the ERM and, quietly in the background, the yen has
strengthened against just about every other principal currency.
It all adds up to a nightmare for international fund managers. Assuming they
have managed to pick the right equity or bond, they risk seeing their return
destroyed by a seemingly unpredictable lurch in the currency markets. Or,
conversely, such a movement can compensate for and disguise what was
otherwise a foolish investment decision.
The response of some fund managers, particularly those based in the US, has
been to adopt a new approach to investment: the currency overlay theory
which involves an attempt to separate out currency from other investment
decisions and then hedging the currency risk as appropriate. Such an
unbundling adds a new discipline to investment decisions, but UK fund
managers remain sceptical - which prompts the question whether currency
overlay is just another North American fad.
The attraction of currency overlay is perhaps particularly strong for a
dollar-based investor in the present market constellation. In recent times
the US currency has been weak. So currency movements have tended to enhance
return. Now, many economists feel the trend could be reversed with the
dollar strengthening as German interest rates decline and the extent of the
European slowdown becomes apparent.
If that does happen, US funds could pay a high price for an international
diversification which gathered pace during the second half of the 1980s.
Some large funds now have 15 to 20 per cent of their assets offshore and in
one or two cases the proportion could be as high as 30 per cent.
In the US, some 15 funds have appointed separate managers to handle currency
exposure in the belief most international equity managers do not have
adequate currency expertise. According to Ms Margaret Waller, who
specialises in currency overlay advice at Pareto Partners, the share of
currency gain in total return has been 27 per cent for a dollar-based fund
over the past 10 years.
More important, perhaps is the way the picture shifted at the time of the
Plaza Accord on the dollar in 1985. In the early 80s investors who had
failed to hedge their overseas equity portfolio would have suffered a
currency loss of some Dollars 49 for every Dollars 100 invested, Ms Waller
says. As the dollar fell, those who were fully hedged would, by the end of
the decade, have suffered an opportunity cost of Dollars 98 on every Dollars
100.
Currency overlay may also have some appeal for Australian institutions who
are confronted with a volatile currency and the need to diversify away from
a relatively small home market. Continental investors who have traditionally
tended to concentrate more on bonds than on equities and then also more in
their home markets may also find it useful as they diversify. By contrast UK
investors have some strong reservations.
One reason, according to Mr Robert Schwob of Quorum Capital Management, is
the fear among institutions that they might lose their tax exempt status if
an active policy of currency management prompted the Inland Revenue to
reclassify them as currency traders. More important are probably the
pragmatic objections of fund managers.
'With equities, for most of the time, the decision that you like an equity
and you like the currency goes together,' says Ms Caroline Burton of GRE.
Not all investors want the currency risk to be hedged, she adds.
Some fund managers such as Mr Tom Crombie, of Scottish Equitable, admittedly
believe the UK is, as he puts it, 'ducking the issue'.
'In the past year US bonds have been a good investment, but the dollar
hasn't. You should have detached the bond from the currency,' he says. Even
Mr Crombie, however, is doubtful about the systematic approach called for by
overlay theory. 'There is a spurious precision in having this great matrix,'
he says. Separating out currency risk requires 'a particularly strong
currency view', adds Mr Robin Garrow of Scottish Widows.
Among objections to hedging currency risk in equity investments is the
possibility that the company whose shares are being bought may itself derive
much of its earnings abroad. Investors may not know whether that exposure is
hedged or not.
Even the so-called experts frequently misjudge the market. 'Currencies don't
respond to any rules. We're not aware of any academic evidence that suggests
you can do good forecasts,' says Mr Terry Prideaux of Kemper Investment
Management. In theory it should be possible to judge whether a currency is
correctly valued on the basis of its purchasing power parity, but experience
shows that, if this measure is relevant, it only works over long periods.
In the short run, the currency markets are vulnerable to all kinds of shock.
After last year's attempted coup in the Soviet Union, the dollar soared by 4
per cent when US markets were closed.
Then again, this type of objection may ascribe more to currency overlay
theory than its practitioners would themselves claim. 'We aren't forecasting
direction but volatility,' says Mr Schwob. Simil-arly, for Pareto Partners
currency overlay involves first and foremost assessing the degree of risk in
a portfolio based on the volatility of thecurrencies involved and then
hedging that risk so that it is reduced to an acceptable level.
The process should minimise large-scale losses arising from currency
fluctuations. Those who adopt it can at least claim that they have a system
in place for protection. That may provide considerable comfort in the event
that they are called to account when things go wrong. Whether their funds
will outperform in the longer run is another matter. After all, currency
overlay also reduces the scope for gain, and places much greater onus on
international managers to pick the right stock in markets that can never be
as wholly familiar as their own.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921026

