FT924-773

FT  22 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Lucas sells division to Danish group for
Pounds 30m


   By ANGUS FOSTER


LUCAS Industries, the car and aerospace components maker which plans to
raise Pounds 100m through disposals by next August, yesterday announced the
sale of its fluid power systems division to Sophus Berendsen of Denmark.
The division is the largest of four put up for sale by Lucas in October in
an effort to focus on core businesses, following a sharp fall in profits and
mounting bid rumours.
It has net assets of Pounds 20m-Pounds 25m and the sale price, although
subject to final due diligence, is thought to be about Pounds 30m.
Mr Bernard Carey, director of communications at Lucas, said the company was
talking with other potential buyers for the outstanding three divisions. 'We
are finding interest in all the nominated businesses,' he said.
Lucas' fluid power systems division distributes hydraulic and pneumatic
equipment such as valves and pumps to the construction and agricultural
sectors. It employs nearly 1,000 people with annual sales of more than
Pounds 100m.
Berendsen is best known for its 55 per cent stake in environmental services
company Rentokil. It has been involved in fluid power distribution since the
late 1970s and is one of Lucas's main competitors in the important US
market. Berendsen also has interests in the textile rental and laundry
market, especially in Denmark.
Mr Hans Werdelin, chief executive officer, said the two companies' fluid
power divisions fitted well together. The acquisition would strengthen
Berendsen's value added distribution network, he said. The US and Canada
accounted for about 70 per cent of Lucas's fluid power sales last year,
while Berendsen saw the US as its most important market outside Scandinavia.
The consideration was cautiously welcomed by analysts, although one pointed
out that Lucas was selling at the bottom of a recovering market. The shares
fell 1p to 131p; ahead of the October announcement, which coincided with
news of 4,000 job cuts and an uncovered dividend. the shares fell below
100p.
The three remaining businesses for sale are Lucas Autocentres, a specialist
car repairer, as well as an aircraft windows factory and a missile casings
manufacturer.
Mr Carey said negotiations for one of the sales 'were progressing faster
than the others', but he said no sales were imminent.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921222

