FT921-542

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: In the black under the red menace -
Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


IF OPINION polls are a reliable guide, then there seems to be a fighting
chance that Labour will form the next government, if only with Liberal
support.
After 13 years of Conservative rule, many may be suddenly panicking about
what a Labour government will do to their savings. Savers really fall into
two categories.
Those retired and living off their savings will only be affected by John
Smith's alternative budget if their investment income is over Pounds 40,000.
(Of course, they may well suffer in later years if Labour has to increase
taxes to finance its spending plans.)
The main difficulties will be faced by those saving while in high-paid
employment. First, the abolition of the 9 per cent national insurance
threshold, and the new top rate of 50 per cent, will reduce their net income
 -and thus their ability to save. Secondly, those on over Pounds 40,000 a
year will find that savings income will be taxed at 50 per cent. They will
be very lucky, after inflation, to see any real return at all.
What should such people do to reduce the tax burden on their savings? Many
will be tempted to break the law and hide their money offshore; however,
there are plenty of legal ways of cutting tax bills.
The first principle may well be to emphasise capital gains rather than
income. Given the fact that many Britons keep the bulk of their savings in
the building society, and that only 165,000 paid CGT last year, it seems
likely that few make use of their current CGT threshold.
Labour repeated this week that it would not be lowering the CGT threshold to
Pounds 1,000, as Tory-supporting newspapers have been suggesting. Margaret
Beckett, a Treasury spokeswoman said that the CGT exemption would be indexed
for inflation and the top rate would be 40 per cent.
In the longer term, the plan seems to be that the threshold would come down,
however, probably to the level of the personal income tax allowance (which
would be Pounds 3,625 under Labour in 1992-93). This would be part of a
reform in which capital gains were taxed on a sliding scale, with lower
rates for long term holders. (A good idea in theory, but in practice, one
suspects, a bonanza for accountants).
The upshot is that, in the short term, capital gains under Labour will be
taxed at a lower top rate (40 per cent) and with a higher starting threshold
than income.
The second principle is deferment. If you are really saving for the long
term, then you do not need to take return in the form of income. The snag
with building society interest is that, even if you only let it roll up in
your account, it is still taxed as if you had received every penny. Any
investment that defers the return is a good deal, provided your own, or the
country's, taxes will be lower then.
The third principle will be tax efficiency. Transferring money between
spouses could save a great deal of tax if one is paying 50 per cent on
investment income and the other 25 per cent.
Which investments could achieve these objectives? Individuals needing
specific recommendations would do best to consult an independent (and
ideally fee-charging) adviser, but here are some suggestions:
Low risk
Tessas offer tax-free income if held for five years. A husband and wife who
have not already opened Tessas could put in Pounds 6,000 this year; those
who started in 1991 can add a further Pounds 3,600.
National savings certificates. The 36th issue offers 8.5 per cent tax free
for a top rate Labour taxpayer. The fifth index-linked issue offers 4.5 per
cent plus inflation. Both need to be held for five years to achieve quoted
returns. Husband and wife can put Pounds 40,000 in total in these issues;
more if held in trust.
Index-linked gilts. Most of the return comes as tax-free capital gain. The
current real yields of 4 per cent (assuming 5 per cent inflation), will
still be 3 per cent real after tax.
All the above can be realised reasonably quickly with small risk of capital
loss (though loss of investment return), which could be important if
Labour's taxes require you to eat in to your savings.
Medium risk
Offshore roll-up funds. These funds allow you to accumulate income, which is
only taxed when realised. There is a risk, however, that Labour could find
some way of withdrawing this privilege.
Zero coupon shares of investment trusts. These offer steady growth till
maturity and profits are treated as capital gain for tax purposes. There is
a risk, however, that they will not be repaid in full, if markets or the
trust's managers perform badly.
High risk
Personal equity plans. Many readers seem dissatisfied with their PEPs to
date. But if the top rate is 50 per cent, the tax benefit/charges equation
should look better. Labour says it has no plans to abolish PEPs immediately,
so it might be worth waiting and letting the market fall after a Labour
victory before investing. The risk of capital loss is obviously there,
especially if you cash in your plan early. Up to Pounds 6,000 can be placed
in a general PEP (this will include both unit and investment trusts in
1992-93) and Pounds 3,000 in a single company PEP in a tax year (see page
V).

The Financial Times


London Page II

920328

