FT923-10653

FT  29 JUL 92 / 'Insulted' Birmingham leads the opposition


   By ALISON SMITH


OPPOSITION from local education authorities to the white paper was
predictably led by Birmingham, which had been singled out by Mr John Patten
as 'the worst education authority in the country'. The education secretary
claimed that Birmingham had 'kidnapped' Pounds 55m earmarked for education
and used it for other purposes.
Sir Richard Knowles, leader of the Labour-controlled authority, said Mr
Patten's remarks were 'a gross insult' to the city's governors, teachers and
pupils.
He pointed out that the performance of Birmingham pupils in GCSE
examinations had improved recently, and he also drew attention to government
praise for the city's training service for school governors.
Sir Richard also criticised the size of the education grant Birmingham
received. He said the latest teachers' pay award would cost the council
Pounds 2.6m in the current year, even though the government had said it
would bear the whole cost.
If reaction from other local authorities to the government's white paper was
more restrained, it did reflect deep unease that government seemed so ready
to dismiss the role of local education authorities.
The Conservative-controlled Association of County Councils warned that there
was a gap between the document's high aims and the organisational changes it
envisaged. 'Everything to which the white paper aspires could be delivered
through responsible local government,' it said.
The Labour-dominated Association of Metropolitan Authorities accused the
government of 'continuing dogmatic antagonism' towards the education
authorities which had been 'the engine room behind innovations and diversity
in education since the war'.
Regret was expressed that such an important policy paper was prepared
without consulting the local authorities. Some local-government figures also
expressed concern about the process of change in the system that will be
needed as more schools become grant-maintained.
They are concerned that the need to make sure the new arrangements fall into
place properly may divert money and effort away from classrooms.
There are doubts, too, about the more impact the government's plans will
have more generally on local government. The Association of County Councils
believes the government has not taken properly into account the link between
the reduced role in education local authorities will play and the work of
the commission on local government in reviewing the structure of local
government in non-metropolitan areas.
The commission, which started work at the beginning of the month, will have
to plan the reorganisation of the existing district and county arrangements
without knowing definitely how much of the education function will be left
to the new authorities.
Local authorities believe, too, that as more schools become grant-maintained
there will be greater pressure on their budgets, both on education and on
other areas such as social services.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920729

