FT924-8024

FT  13 NOV 92 / Technology: Firing shots at the influenza virus


   By DELLA BRADSHAW


A shot in the arm could prevent a week in bed according to the proponents of
influenza vaccinations. But in the UK, this particular dose of preventive
medicine has found few takers in the corporate world.
Of the 4m to 4.5m doses of 'flu vaccines administered in the UK this year,
most will be to elderly people or others at high risk - those with breathing
difficulties, for example.
Yet vaccination at Pounds 5 a dose could, in many cases, save a company
major disruption and a temporary staff bill of hundreds of pounds, should
the virus strike.
One theory as to why 'flu vaccinations have been overlooked in corporate
Britain is that the drug companies are geared up to selling to family
doctors or hospitals, not corporate medical departments.
But companies that do offer vaccination have often found little interest
from employees. Individuals are often sceptical about whether vaccinations
work and many have painful memories of 'flu jabs in the past.
As to the latter, manufacturers scoff. Gone are the days when the vaccine
was given on a Friday afternoon so that employees could recover over the
weekend - outside office hours, says Tom Dick, marketing director at Merieux
UK.
The latest vaccines are surface antigens where the parts of the virus that
promote the immune response are extracted for use. Whole cell vaccines,
where virus cells are killed to produce the vaccine, are also used.
As to the efficacy of the vaccines there is widespread debate. The
Department of Health claims that 70 per cent of people who have the vaccine
will be able to shrug off the virus. More important, the vaccines are more
than 90 per cent effective in preventing the life-threatening complications
associated with 'flu, such as pneumonia.
The problem, says Douglas Fleming, director of the Birmingham Research Unit
of Royal College of General Practitioners, is that people want complete
immunity following vaccination. 'Because 'flu is such a common disease a lot
of people who have been vaccinated will still get the illness,' he says.
One reason for this failure is that the virus changes as it spreads. As a
result, says Mike Herrity, medical affairs manager at Evans Medical, part of
Medeva, manufacturers are always chasing the disease. The vaccine to be
administered in the autumn has to be prepared over the summer months
following recommendations by the World Health Organisation in February.
The WHO tracks the spread of viruses from the Far East through Australia and
the US, in order to guess which vaccine strains will give best protection
against the illness in western Europe. This year the three strains
recommended are the same as last year - A Singapore, A Beijing and B
Yamagata.
The chances of catching 'flu if not inoculated are impossible to calculate.
The WHO and the drug makers admit themselves at a loss when predicting
severe 'flu attacks, although the A strains are more serious than the B
strains.
One reason for this difficulty is that once every 10 to 20 years the virus,
instead of altering character as it spreads, changes its character quite
radically. This altered strain of virus catches the medical world unprepared
and can result in thousands of lost working hours and even deaths. That
said, even in winters where the incidence of the virus is low, between
3,000-4,000 deaths are attributed to 'flu in the UK alone.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921113

