FT922-3958

FT  09 JUN 92 / Ireland weighs sixfold EC cash bonus: Pre-referendum efforts
to highlight the economic gains of Europe


   By TIM COONE


JUST A FEW blocks away from Dublin's famous O'Connell Street and its
bustling nightlife of cinemas, theatres and bars, there is a very different
image of Ireland's capital which never appears in the tourist brochures:
run-down tenements, scruffy streets and pinch-faced children cleaning
windscreens at traffic intersections.
Office workers who take short-cuts through to the new International
Financial Services Centre on the dockside walk briskly past, carefully
avoiding the gazes of men languishing on streetcorners or at the entrances
to bookmakers' shops. Ireland's unemployment rate now stands at just over 20
per cent, the highest in the European Community. On June 18 the country will
vote in a referendum to ratify or reject the Maastricht Treaty. Unemployment
is increasingly becoming the focus of the Maastricht debate.
Mr Albert Reynolds, the prime minister, spelt out the significance of the EC
for the Irish economy when he addressed a conference organised by the Irish
Congress of Trade Unions last month. 'The community takes three-quarters of
our total exports. Exports to our partners represent 42 per cent of our
national output. More than half the jobs in the state depend on our
continued access to the community market. Stronger growth in our community
partners, the removal of economic frontiers and Emu (European monetary
union) will therefore yield considerable benefits to this country,' he said.
He emphasised that the government attached 'the highest priority' to
cohesion in its proposals on the draft treaty. This is the principle that
the poorer member states, namely Spain, Portugal, Greece and Ireland, should
be net beneficiaries in the distribution of EC funds, to bring their living
standards gradually into line with the rest of the community.
For every pound that Ireland puts into the EC budget, it gets six back. In
1991, IPounds 2.2bn (Pounds 2bn) was transferred to Ireland under the Common
Agricultural Policy and the structural fund. Together they represent 6 per
cent of national income.
Since Ireland joined the EC in 1973, gross domestic product per capita has
risen from 59 per cent of the EC average to 69 per cent today. A recent
econometric study by the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) in
Dublin estimates that by the year 2000 participation in the single market,
Emu and the structural fund will increase GDP to between 7 and 8 per cent
above what it would have been. The study assumed that structural and
cohesion funds remained at their current level.
Under the new Delors budget proposals, which would almost double the
structural and cohesion funds available to the four most disadvantaged
states, Ireland hopes to receive IPounds 6bn for the 1994-1998 period
compared to IPounds 3bn for 1989-1993.
But while these arguments are being used in an effort to convince the
Euro-cynics in the lead-up to the Maastricht referendum, many of the experts
also doubt whether cohesion funds are sufficient in themselves to create
economic convergence.
Mr Kieran Kennedy, director of the ESRI, says that Emu's emphasis on
institutional arrangements to control monetary policy, without a fiscal
authority of comparable weight, creates an inherent danger for Ireland.
'The outcome could be a macroeconomic policy that would weight the balance
excessively towards price stability at the expense of employment and output.
Protracted unemployment poses a more severe threat to the cohesion of our
own society, and to our role in the EC than to the gap in average income
between Ireland and the EC,' he says.
Mr Maurice Doyle, the central bank governor, said recently: 'Ireland would
seem to be vulnerable to country-specific shocks in that the structure of
the economy is quite different from the average European economy.' He
pointed to Ireland's high dependence on agriculture, the domination of the
industrial sector by foreign investment which is internationally mobile, and
a service sector strongly oriented towards domestic demand, making it
vulnerable to shocks in other sectors. 'I mention these factors to emphasise
the importance of economic cohesion for Ireland and the need for
community-wide policies and adjustment mechanisms to cope with the
inevitable shocks that the union will encounter.'
The Irish government's own resources are extremely limited. According to the
ESRI, in Ireland every 10 workers have to support on average 22 dependants,
whereas in Denmark, at the other extreme, every 10 workers have to support
only nine dependants. This gives it limited room for manoeuvre, either to
find the resources to deal with the existing level of unemployment, or the
effects of any shocks resulting from the single market and Emu.
Ireland has placed itself in the fast-track to Emu. This requires strict
fiscal and monetary discipline to keep down inflation, reduce borrowing and
cut government expenditure. Ireland is well on target for Emu but is
suffering rising unemployment and growing labour unrest. The government is
simultaneously attempting to reduce taxes to harmonise Ireland's tax regime
with that of its EC partners.
The EC structural and cohesion funds are thus vital to Ireland in order for
it to harmonise its economy with those of its 11 EC partners.
The dilemma is that the funds themselves are unlikely to be sufficient to
resolve Ireland's severe unemployment problems, but the alternative - to opt
out of Maastricht altogether - is even bleaker.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920609

