FT924-11422

FT  26 OCT 92 / International Company News: Birmingham Post group at Pounds
3.47m after buy-out


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MIDLAND Independent Newspapers, publishers of the Birmingham Post and Mail,
will announce today that it made a healthy profit, despite the recession, in
its first report since the management buy-out from Ingersoll Newspapers.
In the six months to the end of June, the group which also publishes the
Coventry Evening Telegraph, reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 3.47m.
Trading profits rose almost four times to Pounds 7.3m.
The Pounds 125m buy-out, with the support of Candover Investments and
CINVen, the venture capital group, was completed on November 14 last year.
The management team, led by Mr Chris Oakley, the chief executive, and Mr
John Whitehouse, finance director, were widely believed to have paid a full
price.
Despite the decline in recruitment and property advertising total
advertising revenue increased by 2.7 per cent, mainly through attracting new
business.
A trading profit for the group's dominant newspaper activities of Pounds
6.98m, compares with Pounds 1.72m. Return on turnover was 21.5 per cent at
the trading level and 10 per cent at the pre-tax.
Apart from attracting new business the main reason for the company's
strengthened position seems to have been a substantial reduction in
operating costs from Pounds 29.6m to Pounds 25.5m.
The new management team have been looking at every aspect of the company's
operation. The results have included a reorganisation of the press room and
drivers moving to contract employment.
Sir Norman Fowler, chairman, believes the company has made an impressive
start following the change of ownership.
Since the buy-out the company has acquired the Nuneaton Tribune and Hinckley
Journal titles and launched County, a new Country Life style magazine for
the counties of Warwickshire, Hereford and Worcestershire.
Trading profits of about Pounds 14m are expected for the full year.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921026

