FT923-15752

FT  01 JUL 92 / Fears grow over pace of US recovery


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


   WASHINGTON


US CONSUMER confidence stalled in June, adding to fears that the recovery's
momentum is flagging, a New York business analysis group reported yesterday.
The Conference Board's widely-followed confidence index registered a
disappointing 71.7 last month, fractionally lower than in May and far below
the 100 plus level normal in a vigorous recovery.
Separately, the Commerce Department said its index of leading indicators
rose 0.6 per cent in May, in line with expectations.
The figures were released as Federal Reserve governors and regional
presidents met in Washington to review monetary policy. The meeting
continues today. The Fed is under strong political pressure to lower
interest rates.
Mr Nicholas Brady, Treasury secretary, said it 'mattered a lot' that the Fed
had allowed the money supply to undershoot its targets 'week after week'. If
the Fed was uncertain about the significance of weak money numbers, the
prudent course would be to 'over-insure'.
Mr Brady said the Fed should heed President George Bush's explicit call last
week for lower interest rates.
The Fed's decision on rates is likely to be heavily influenced by employment
figures for June, due out tomorrow. But even if the figures are bad it may
delay a rate cut to avoid the impression of bowing to political pressure.
Mr Fabian Linden, for the Conference Board, said the levelling off in
consumer confidence after increases in the preceding three months indicated
the recovery was 'still quite feeble'. He said consumers' buying plans had
weakened between May and June.
The number of respondents reporting bad business conditions outnumbered
optimists by a margin of more than three to one. On employment prospects,
the negative margin was even greater.
The index of leading indicators rose 0.6 per cent in May following increases
of 0.3 per cent and 0.4 per cent in April and March.
The May increase was led by gains in commodity prices and an extension of
the average factory work-week. Six of the 11 components of the index,
however, made negative contributions, including orders for consumer and
capital goods and the money supply.
The leading index's reliability is widely doubted. Last year it rose
steadily from February to July, failing to give early warning of a sharp
economic slowdown in the autumn.
An index of coincident indicators designed to gauge the economy's current
health failed to rise in May, having been flat in both March and April. This
points to sluggish growth in the second quarter.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920701

