FT924-12128

FT  22 OCT 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Bundesbank checks dollar rally


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR'S recent rise against the D-Mark was checked yesterday after the
Bundesbank's operations in the German money market signalled a smaller
easing in policy than had been expected, writes James Blitz.
On Tuesday, the Bundesbank caused excitement by saying that it would revert
to a variable rate repurchase agreement in its weekly money market
intervention, allowing the market some say in the cost at which it borrows
funds.
However yesterday's operation caused widespread disappointment. The
Bundesbank drained funds to the tune of DM2.7bn, and the accepted market
rate fell by only 15 basis points to 8.75 per cent.
The operation was accompanied by comments from Mr Reimut Jochimsen, a member
of the Bundesbank council, who said that the belief that interest rates
could only go lower was exaggerated. After peaking overnight in Asia at
1.5240, the dollar fell more than 1 1/2 pfennigs in Europe to close at
DM1.5070. The longer term outlook for the dollar is still disputed. The
gradual easing of German policy may soon be accompanied by higher interest
rates in the US, forcing the dollar up. Mr Bill Clinton's election as
President in a fortnight's time may bring public spending growth, and the
Federal Reserve could check this with tighter monetary policy.
However, Mr David Cocker, chief economist at Chemical Bank in London, said
that a Fed tightening of policy could be a more distant prospect than
expected because Mr Clinton's policies could not be in place before the
spring at the earliest.
Mr Jim O'Neill, head of research at Swiss Banking Corporation in London,
says the dollar will be weighed down next year by high US bond yields and
the possibility that the Fed will ease rates again after the election. In
his view, the market fails to realise that Mr Clinton, if elected, will
exacerbate the prime reason for dollar weakness: the US budget deficit.
Sterling was partly undermined by the Bundesbank's 'repo' operation, falling
nearly 4 pfennigs to close at DM2.4330. But the bulk of the fall was
triggered by the British prime minister's suggestion that his government had
opted for a policy of 'going for growth.'
However, Mr Neil Mackinnon, chief economist at Citibank in London, believes
that sterling's weakness will be cushioned by similar cuts in German rates.
He sees a far sharper fall in the sterling/dollar rate, predicting a low of
Dollars 1.45 over the coming year.
Fears of a realignment of the Exchange Rate Mechanism at tomorrow's meeting
of the European Monetary Committee weakened ERM currencies against the
D-Mark earlier in the week. Those fears faded yesterday: the peseta closed
at Pta70.94 to the D-Mark from a previous Pta71.13.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

921022

