FT922-7347

FT  19 MAY 92 / German pay pact averts threat of more strikes


   By QUENTIN PEEL and DAVID WALLER


   BONN, FRANKFURT


THE threat of a long hot summer of strikes in Germany was lifting yesterday
as engineering workers across the country backed the last-ditch pay deal
agreed at midnight on Sunday.
Trade unions and employers agreed that the 21-month deal, providing in
effect a pay rise of 5.8 per cent this year and 3.4 per cent in 1993, with
an hour's cut in the working week, would reduce the chances of prolonged
strikes in other industries.
But cautionary words on the engineers' deal came from Chancellor Helmut
Kohl, who said it would be 'economically difficult'. Mr Hans-Peter Stihl,
president of the German chamber of commerce and industry, said the award was
still excessive, and would hasten rationalisation and job cuts in the
industry.
Mr Edzard Reuter, chief executive of Daimler-Benz, Germany's biggest
industrial group, also criticised the settlement. He said Daimler would make
it clear to employees that the agreement would harm Germany's status as an
investment location.
Generally, however, the deal was greeted with relief for avoiding a damaging
and possibly prolonged strike, at a time when the German economy is poised
between recession and recovery.
However, hopes that the deal would prompt a rapid relaxation in the tough
monetary policy of the Bundesbank were firmly rejected last night by Mr
Helmut Schlesinger, Bundesbank president, who warned that the agreement
followed a pattern of excessive awards in recent months.
He noted that even if the present 4.6 per cent inflation rate were reduced
to between 3.5 and 4 per cent by the end of the year, it would still be too
high. Money supply was growing at an annual rate of 8 per cent, much faster
than the central bank's target of between 3.5 and 5.5 per cent.
'Monetary policy cannot allow scope for passing on increased costs through
increased prices,' he told bankers in Frankfurt.
His words are likely to disappoint the financial community and the Frankfurt
stock ex-change, where the DAX index rose almost 2 per cent yesterday in
reaction to the pay settlement, and on hopes of lower interest rates.
The immediate effect of the deal, however, was to lift the cloud hanging
over the engineering industry, and raise hopes of similar deals in other
sectors.
An arbitration recommendation for the country's 1.5m building workers is due
to be announced today having been held back from Saturday, apparently to
await the outcome of the negotiations on the engineering workers' claim.
A similar recommendation will be made today for the printing industry. The
IG Medien union, representing print workers, is demanding an 11 per cent pay
rise, and is conducting token strikes in protest at a 3.3 per cent offer.
The textile workers' union GTB yesterday also called for token strikes among
its 160,000 members in support of a 9.5 per cent claim. Their employers have
made no offer.
Reaction to settlement, Page 2
Back from the brink, Page 18
Lex, Page 20
Currencies, Page 31
World stock markets, Page 37

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920519

