FT923-6603

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: Playwright, actor and scholar - Man of the theatre
Harley Granville-Barker


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


SOMEONE should write a play about Harley Granville-Barker, the dramatist
whose works are being celebrated at this year's Edinburgh Festival. The
trouble is that hardly anyone would believe it and, like most of
Granville-Barker's own plays, it would have a dying fall.
To anyone who did A-level English, he is probably known mainly as the man
who wrote the Prefaces to Shakespeare. Yet those came later. Like EM
Forster, another English writer whose influence spanned a large part of the
century, Granville-Barker did most of his creative work before the first
world war.
Anyone who reads the Prefaces, however, must realise that they are the work
of a professional man of the theatre. When John Gielgud was playing King
Lear in 1940, Granville-Barker was called in briefly to coach him. The 10
days that the old pro gave to the production, Gielgud wrote afterwards,
'were the fullest in experience that I have ever had in all my years upon
the stage'.
Before the first world war, Granville-Barker was actor, writer, director,
manager and innovator par excellence. He did not actually discover George
Bernard Shaw, but he certainly brought him on. Shaw was rumoured (falsely)
to be Granville-Barker's natural father; his real, very obscure, father was
almost exactly Shaw's age.
At the Court Theatre in London's Sloane Square, Granville-Barker acted in
and directed Shaw's early and (some would say) best work. As an actor, Dover
Wilson, another Shakespearean scholar, wrote of him that he had 'the finest
voice that I have ever heard, on or off the stage.'
He also wrote himself. The Voysey Inheritance, his only work to have been
repeatedly revived over the years, was first performed at the Court in 1905,
the same month as Shaw's Major Barbara, and was again on show in Edinburgh
this week. Initially it was compared unfavourably. 'GB is simply GBS minus
S,' wrote one critic. With hindsight, however, we can see that that some of
Granville-Barker's output, though less prolific, was superior. It omits
Shaw's windyness.
The talent spread everywhere. Granville-Barker brought the best of
contemporary continental plays to the Court. In other theatres, he took a
fresh approach to Shakespeare. 'There is no such thing as a Shakespeare
tradition,' he wrote, 'only a text and a few stage directions.' He put on
the first full production The Winter's Tale in London for almost 50 years.
His direction of A Midsummer Night's Dream was as controversial in its time
as those subsequently by Peter Brooke and, this year, Robert LePage.
As a director, he resembled Stanislavki in his intensity, though that was
coincidence: the pair only met later. He insisted on the importance of
repertory theatre to give the actors variety. 'No man can act Hamlet eight
times a week; he can only repeat the performance.'
Along with the critic William Archer, he also developed a plan for a
national theatre which is remarkably close to the one that finally came into
being, even down to the site on London's south bank.
Yet something went wrong with this glittering career. One explanation was
the outbreak of the war, which severely hampered the London theatre. Another
was that arguably his best play, Waste, was censored. It was not performed
publicly until 1935. About a reforming politician who in a night of passion
produces a pregnancy leading to an abortion, it was too much for Edwardian
London to take. 'Waste has wasted me,' Granville-Barker wrote. Sadly, it is
not included in this year's festival.
There was also the problem of money - it kept running out - and disillusion
that his ideas for a national theatre were not more widely supported. The
commercial theatres were against it on the grounds that it might harm their
box office. Early in the war he went to America, touring Euripides at Yale.
He met, and fell in love with a woman 10 years his senior, called Helen
Huntington. She was already married into the railroad family of that name.
Granville-Barker was married to the actress Lillah McCarthy, whom he had
directed and starred with in the early Shaw plays at the Court.
There were divorces all around. Granville-Barker married Helen, Archer
Huntington made a remarkably generous financial settlement and the one-time
playwright-director was never poor again. He wrote two more plays, one of
which, His Majesty, will be performed for the first time in Edinburgh next
week. Gradually he turned his attention to the Prefaces.
His defection, if such it was, gave rise to a remarkable denunciation by the
actor, Lewis Casson. 'He was a hero who gave up the struggle, threw off the
dust of battle, and became a mere professor.'
In fact, there is evidence that he had long wanted to get down to academic
writing. In a little known work, Farewll to the Theatre, which had a
rehearsed reading in Edinburgh this week, he puts into the mouth of the
actress Dorothy words that could be his own. Dorothy has been a great star
and a great beauty in her time and is still going strong, but her debts are
catching up with her, and her lawyer is advising her that she should retire.
'But visions do come,' she says, 'of better things than we are. . . of a
theatre not tinselled. . . and an office not dusty with law. . . all
rustling with quarrelsome papers.' She goes on dramatically: 'Oh, my poor
theatre] Keep it for a while then to patronise and play with. But one day it
shall break you all in pieces. And now my last curtsey's made. . .'
That is what Granville-Barker has done. He came back to break (in the sense
of astonishing) us in two ways. One: his national theatre came into being.
Two: his plays are now being appreciated for the masterpieces that some of
them are.
In Edinburgh he has had the posthumous good fortune of The Voysey
Inheritance seeming more topical than ever because of its similarities to
the Maxwell affair. It is just possible that when Waste is revived again it
will coincide with a political scandal, for it, too, is remarkably fresh.
Granville-Barker died in 1946, just before the national theatre became a
real possibility. The best book about him is written, appropriately, by an
American, Dennis Kennedy.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920822

