FT923-11033

FT  27 JUL 92 / Spending: a new try


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Two out of every five pounds spent in the UK come from central and local
government. Sixteen years ago the proportion was Pounds 5 out of every
Pounds 10. You do not have to be a rugged opponent of all collective
spending to realise that the present proportion is high enough, or to
realise how easily we could drift back to the proportions of the mid-1970s,
or even higher. You only have to listen to the large number of claims by
pressure groups un-critically reported on BBC Radio 4 and Radio 3 every
morning saying that this or that worthy cause needs to have much more spent
upon it.
There is no uniquely right method of controlling the public purse. Since the
Plowden committee reported in the early 1960s, there have been periodic
shake-ups in the system. As spending departments have become adept at
working one control system to their advantage, the Treasury has devised new
systems which they may not immediately be able to exploit. Thus, most of the
reforms are welcome; but there is no point in going over the top and
disparaging the previous system whenever a new one is introduced.
Just as predictably, the popular media become excited by talks of 'cuts',
when there have been no overall cuts since the Labour government negotiated
with the IMF in the mid-1970s. The so-called cuts are simply reductions in
planned rates of increase. If there are cuts in specific programmes - such
as unpledged social security benefits - it will be to make room for larger
increases elsewhere, eg in health and education.
Ever since Plowden, public spending plans have been based on rolling forward
looks. The problems arise in translating these projections into hard plans
for the year immediately ahead. In recent years, the cabinet has tended to
take the tentative cash total in the projection for the year immediately
ahead and ask ministers to stick as close to it as possible. Bids for up to
Pounds 14bn more have been made in most years, as a matter of political
virility, and the Treasury has usually managed to cut down these excess bids
by about two-thirds, sometimes with the aid of a group of senior ministers
called the Star Chamber.
Public spending will always be a compromise between a top-down and bottom-up
approach. The new system announced by the British chancellor, Norman Lamont,
on Thursday is a round in favour of top-down. The cabinet will agree every
year on a firm ceiling; and the bargaining between the Treasury and
departments will be about the allocation of an agreed total. The Star
Chamber will be put to sleep - until it is reformed in a new guise - and the
allocation will be made earlier in the year than the customary autumn by a
committee headed by the chancellor.
A more detailed change is that unemployment-related social security benefits
will be removed from the Control Total (up to now known as the Planning
Total) which will then cover about 85 per cent of General Government
Expenditure. This move seems sensible to help avoid the opposite errors of
cutting dole payments in a slump and using recession as an excuse to give an
upward ratchet to public spending.
There is a further and more vulnerable element in the new approach, which is
to take more seriously the second and third years of the projections.
Indeed, supposedly firm decisions have been announced for three years ahead;
but we do not know exactly what they are, as the definitions of the new
Control Total are still being negotiated in Whitehall.
The adjoining table gives, however, the picture as seen in terms of
percentage increases. The idea is that, with a trend rate of growth of GDP
at 2 to 3 per cent per annum, the trend growth of public expenditure must be
less. The aim is an average 1 1/2 per cent annual rise in the Control Total.
Adding in other elements, General Government Expenditure is expected to rise
by an average of 2 per cent.
But within the overall aim, the specific profile still looks like the
hump-backed bridge characteristic of spending plans. There is a more
generous real increase in 1993-94, the first year of the new system, owing
to a drop in the Treasury's inflation projection. The reductions in planned
increases are in the two subsequent years.
Clearly, the chancellor will not be able to stick to both his real and his
nominal spending projections, unless he has miraculous good luck in
predicting inflation. Faced with a conflict between the two, there has been
a shift of emphasis towards real terms for the medium term, while using the
cash total as a short-term weapon of control.
Whether all this will actually reduce the growth of spending in the medium
term depends on political and economic pressure groups and the firmness of
ministers, rather than on the technicalities of the control system.
 ---------------------------------------------
                PUBLIC SPENDING
                Control  Total
                 (% increases)
 ---------------------------------------------
           Nominal      Real    Inflation*
 ---------------------------------------------
1993-94     5 1/2      2 3/4      2 3/4
1994-95     3 3/4      2 1/4
1995-96     3 1/4      1          2 1/4
 ---------------------------------------------
*GDP deflator
 ---------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920727

