FT921-15274

FT  11 JAN 92 / Men in the News: Jewellery innovator and the textile veteran
 -Gerald Ratner and Jim McAdam


   By JOHN THORNHILL


You can never be quite sure with Gerald. Whether it is the occasional glint
in his dark eyes that betrays him or the faintest traces of a smile that
persistently play around the corners of his mouth, you never know whether
the chairman of the ailing Ratners jewellery group is making a serious point
or gently skewering you with his irony.
But Mr Ratner's humour deserted him yesterday as he announced that his
company had experienced a disastrous Christmas trading period and that he
would be stepping down as chairman.
Although he remains as chief executive of the company that he built up from
a loss-making family firm into the biggest jewellery company in the world,
he will now share executive responsibilities with the 61-year-old Mr Jim
McAdam, the former deputy chairman of Coats Viyella.
These developments have come as a severe blow to a man who, until last year,
had tasted nothing but glittering success in his business career. And the
normally effusive Mr Ratner was in subdued mood yesterday. It clearly hurt.
Perched on the corner of his desk with his striped shirt hanging out, a
weary Mr Ratner, 41, mouthed all the proper words expected of him. After
finishing a listless telephone conversation with his cousin and fellow
director, Victor, about how to explain the news to his staff, Mr Ratner
turned and said: 'I am very happy about the decision.'
The unconvincing words hung in the air as he continued: 'I shall continue to
have responsibility for the running of the business on a day-to-day basis as
any chief executive would do, but there will be a load of things that Jim
will be able to deal with. It is more stable.'
Stability, of course, is now the desired order of the day. After swallowing
Pounds 45m of exceptional costs, Ratners is heading for a total loss of
about Pounds 72m and the continuing support of the company's banks is
clearly crucial.
Mr McAdam's immediate role will be keep the bankers sweet, and he has
already begun to have an effect. His very appointment helped clear the way
for the banks to issue an unusual statement of support for the company, but
there will no doubt be tense weeks of talks ahead as the company tries to
straighten out its tangled web of debts.
Mr McAdam will also be intimately concerned with helping to implement the
company's rationalisation plan, which will involve stringent cost control
measures including the possible closure of some of Ratners' branches.
A tough-speaking Scot, he says he is well-suited to such a role, having
spent most of his career working in clothing companies in a highly
competitive market. 'I am battle-hardened from the textile industry in just
this sort of exercise. We have been doing it for a hell of a long period of
time,' he says in his soft accent.
Mr McAdam is a big company man who gained some retail experience from
running the Country Casuals clothing chain. A sincere but jovial Mr McAdam
says he has already developed a 'chemistry' with Mr Ratner, a businessman
for whom he says he has the greatest respect.
But it will not be easy to work at a company which has been moulded in the
image of the Ratner family since Gerald's father opened the first store in
Hendon in 1951.
How the two men work together will be a source of endless fascination. By
temperament, background and outlook they could hardly be more different.
Mr Ratner is very much the self-made man who spotted a market opportunity
and seized it with a vengeance. When he became managing director of Ratners
in 1984 - ousting his father, Leslie, in the process - the jewellery company
had 130 stores and made an annual loss of Pounds 350,000.
But by means of aggressive marketing skills and a hectic Pounds 800m
acquisition spree, Mr Ratner built up the business into an international
group with annual sales of Pounds 1.1bn employing 20,000 people. Last year
he sold more than 27 tonnes of nine-carat gold - sufficient to build three
double-decker London buses.
Mr Richard Hyman, director of the Verdict research consultancy, says that Mr
Ratner himself changed the whole 'body language' of jewellery shops. 'Prior
to his arrival on the scene most jewellers' body language told people: 'Do
not come in unless you really want to buy something. We are only interested
in serious customers'. But Ratner made it accessible to the mass public.'
The ruthless way he ate up the jewellery market could have served as a model
textbook example of how to corner a market and exploit it for all its worth.
But the way he financed his expansion could also serve as an example of what
to avoid.
Mr Ratner had long been regarded as something of an enfant terrible in the
City. Institutional investors had never known what to make of him. Initially
impressed by his persuasive manner and streetwise marketing skills, the City
tended to overlook the brasher sides of his impetuous nature. But by the
late 1980s, shareholders had begun to tire of the seemingly ceaseless rights
issues used to fund the company's dash for growth.
As recession struck, Mr Ratner was left friendless in the City and the
company's share price collapsed.
Mr Ratner's plight was worsened by a now notorious speech he gave to the
Institute of Directors last April in which he disparaged some of his
company's products. He was badly rattled by the furore surrounding his
remarks and has since retreated into a sullen shell. 'I feel very sorry for
my family and especially my cat,' he said after presenting a disappointing
set of interim results earlier this year.
In the same way that Mr Ratner lost faith with the City by making too many
extravagant promises, he has seemingly also lost the confidence of his
shoppers by offering them a series of ever-greater discounts. He will be
hard pressed to woo customers back to his stores - a skill at which he was
previously supreme.
Mr Ratner was yesterday left pondering his strange fate in the company's
ornate office building in Mayfair, surrounded by the fantastic Zales silver
collection and a host of glamorous secretaries.
But his huge office, dominated by a picture of one of Napoleon's generals,
has recently been chopped in half to provide a meeting room for Mr McAdam.
In more ways than one, it seems, the world has now closed in on Gerald
Ratner.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Illustration (Omitted).

920111

