FT922-634

FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (4): Riding the crest of a wave - Politics:
Centre Party on the move


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


THE Centre Party is riding on the crest of an electoral popularity it has
never known before. In the latest IMM opinion poll earlier this month it
secured 14.9 per cent support, the biggest rating recorded in the party's
history.
This is even better than the 12.1 per cent the Centre Party won in last
September's local government elections. If repeated at next year's general
election the Centre would at least double its 11 seats in Parliament and
this would provide the party with a formidable blocking force.
Mrs Anne Enger Lahnstein, the party's young leader, is in no doubt why the
Centre is doing so well. 'We are the main anti-EC force in Norway,' she
argues. A good deal of her time is spent campaigning around the country
against what she sees as the threat of an over-mighty European state to
Norwegian independence.
'I am an internationalist and I don't want to isolate Norway,' she insists.
'I support our membership of the United Nations and of Nato. I favour closer
co-operation with Europe on issues like the environment. But I do not
believe decisions affecting our lives should be taken by bureaucrats in
Brussels. We are a small, special country and we must make the decisions
that affect our lives.'
However, Mrs Lahnstein is not just opposed to any suggestion that Norway
should seek EC membership. Mrs Lahnstein is hostile to Norway"s
participation in the European Economic Area EEA. She intends to fight all
the way against ratification of the EEA agreement that is expected to win a
clear majority in Parliament in September and will not be subject to a
national referendum.
Pointing to the bulky volumes of EEA rules and regulations Norway piled on
her office table, she asserts that the people do not realise what is going
on in their name. 'I am not giving up hope we can prevent it,' she declares.
At times Mrs Lahstein can sound far to the left in her denunciation of what
she calls the dominance of money power in the EC. But she is sensitive to
any suggestion that the Centre Party might collaborate more closely in a
joint anti-EC campaign with the populist Socialist Left party which is doing
well in opinion surveys at the moment.
In fact, there is little doubt that Mrs Lahnstein's gut feelings are more
sympathetic to Labour than the Conservatives. After all it was her
mobilising of the centre parliamentary group in October 1990 that signalled
the downfall of the right-centre government of Mr Jan Syse that held power
for just over a year. Mrs Lahnstein says the moment had come to put a stop
to the government's efforts to create the European Economic Area.
Her view carried the day and the Centre Party was forced to leave the
coalition. It was thanks to Mrs Lahnstein's efforts that the party went on
to accept that it should support the return of Mrs Brundtland to office at
the head of a minority Labour government.
The fact that Mrs Brundtland is as pro-EC as Mr Syse was does not appear to
bother Mrs Lahnstein who remains an admirer of the prime minister. After
all, she points out, the Centre Party is at least free of any association
with a pro-EC policy in government and as a result is building up a larger
electoral mass base.
The Centre Party was founded in 1920. In Norway, like others of the same
name in the Nordic region, it was for a long time little more than a
pressure group for farmers and fishermen. Its main pockets of support still
come from the central rural areas of the country. But the party is
attracting voters from a much wider spectrum because of its robust line on
Europe. Mrs Lahnstein, who has a seat for Oslo, argues that the party's
organisation can hardly keep pace with the influx of new recruits.
In her opinion the Centre has been helped by a revival in Norway of older
values. 'I think that around the mid-1980s there would have been much less
opposition here to joining the EC at a time when people were more concerned
with money and materialism,' she argues. 'The recession in 1986 and the bank
crisis have made many Norwegians think again. Now there is much more hard
work and a belief that we should take care of each other.'
Mrs Lahnstein wants to put people and the environment before economics. She
believes Norway will lose its gentle and comfortable way of life if it joins
the EC. Her feelings reflect the widening gender gap - noticeable elsewhere
in the Nordic region - with a large majority of women opposed to the EC
compared with men.

The Financial Times


London Page III

920626

