FT923-6345

FT  25 AUG 92 / Rothschilds to inject fresh capital into Zurich bank


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


SHAREHOLDERS of Rothschild Bank in Zurich (RBZ) will inject new capital into
the bank following the discovery of larger loan losses than previously
reported.
Sources close to RBZ also confirmed yesterday that loans made by the bank to
companies in the troubled York Hannover property group led by Mr Karsten von
Wersebe infringed a Swiss Banking Commission regulation.
The regulation requires that no more than the equivalent of 20 per cent of a
bank's own capital be lent to a single creditor on an unsecured basis.
Some RBZ loans to York Hannover companies were secured, but the security
turned out to be without value.
The loans are believed to total Dollars 54m (Pounds 28m).
The source said that Mr Jurg Heer, a former RBZ senior executive who was
arrested in Zurich early this month on charges related to his conduct at the
bank, knew that the loans to these companies were being made, in essence, to
one group.
Last month, the bank revealed that a recent credit review had found that
some loans were not fully covered and so it quadrupled its annual provisions
in the year to March 31, 1992 to SFr99.8m (Pounds 39m).
It also dissolved its SFr63.5m in hidden reserves 'as a safety measure'.
The source would not reveal the level of the bank's capital or the amount of
the loans made to York Hannover companies.
He denied reports in Zurich that the total of RBZ's bad loans was in the
vicinity of SFr325m.
Even if all questionable loans turned out to be bad, the total would be
'considerably less' than that.
He acknowledged that the bad loans total was higher than the amount provided
for in the 1991-92 accounts, but it was less than the level of the bank's
total capital.
Nevertheless, new capital would soon be put in to the bank by its
shareholders, the source said.
A majority of the shares in RBZ is held by Rothschild Continuation, the
Swiss holding company which is controlled by the London Rothschild family.
The Paris Rothschild family and Mr Edmond de Rothschild of Geneva also hold
minority stakes.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920825

