FT921-382

FT  30 MAR 92 / Kravchuk adopts mantle of economic reform: Capitalism creeps
into Kiev


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND


THE shops of Kiev, Ukraine's capital, are undergoing a quiet metamorphosis.
Take the Hastronom Podil, in the heart of the old city. Beautifully packaged
Austrian jams, juices and cakes are on sale alongside locally produced jugs
of discoloured vegetables topped with lard. These new goods can be bought
with coupons, the Ukrainian quasi-currency which is scheduled to entirely
replace roubles next month.
Creeping capitalism at the consumer level received a boost last week, when,
for the first time, economic reform was pushed to the top of the Ukrainian
political agenda. A fierce debate in a closed session of parliament obscured
more than it revealed of the details of Ukraine's reform programme, but it
had one important result. After nearly four months of official lethargy, the
Ukrainian government, led by President Leonid Kravchuk, is now publicly
committed to formulating an independent economic reform plan.
'The president has become a new man,' said Mr Oleksandr Iemelianov, the
architect of the economic programme discussed last week. 'He supports
radical economic reform.'
Observers at least week's parliamentary session said the president
threatened to replace foot-dragging cabinet ministers and overrule the
parliament if it sought to block reform.
The overall theme of Mr Iemelianov's programme is, in his own words, the
realisation that 'apart from our flag and our trident, our independence is
nothing. Although the centre no longer gives us orders, today the chief
commandant has become the rouble.'
Ukraine, like all of the former Soviet republics, is struggling to find a
way to transform its state-dominated economy.
But everything in the economic reform package is contested and ambiguous. Mr
Iemelianov's draft reforms were criticised at home as anti-market. He has
since fleshed out the package in response to this criticism.
His latest proposals, which he hopes the president will sign today or
tomorrow, call for rapid privatisation, a sharp reduction in the budget
deficit, and tightening of government lending policies, further
liberalisation of prices and the complete replacement of the rouble with the
coupon - and all of this by the end of April.
In an unsigned policy paper, New Ukraine, a liberal political grouping with
ambitions to spearhead Ukraine's economic reform, makes three key criticisms
of the Iemelianov plan.
First, it argues that Ukrainian banks are technically unprepared for the
introduction of the coupon as the sole currency in the republic. Second, it
charges that the rapid pace of privatisation proposed by Mr Iemelianov would
allow the ex-Communist apparatchiks to grab the best property. Third, they
argue for co-operation with Russia, Ukraine's main trading partner, as
opposed to Mr Iemelianov's go-it-alone course.
Any market obstacles to implementing the reforms are compounded by a bitter
power struggle in the Ukrainian leadership.
But fighting in the cabinet 'shows that the political will for reform has
finally developed,' according to Mr Bohdan Krawchenko, a western adviser to
the government. 'I hope that when the dust settles, Ukraine will have a
real, viable reform plan and a team able to implement it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920330

