FT924-8157

FT  12 NOV 92 / Public spending system set to change


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


THE TREASURY is to include an important area of cash spent by local
authorities in its new system for controlling public spending, due to be
unveiled in today's Autumn Statement.
The move indicates a new determination by Whitehall to impose financial
constraints on local government.
In another change, the Treasury is to exclude privatisation revenues, which
are expected to fall off rapidly over the next few years, from its new
control system, which may dilute its efforts to damp overall spending
growth.
This new control total will take over from the so-called planning total from
1993-94 as the main figure used by the Treasury in to project public
spending.
The Treasury aims to limit rises in the control total to about 3 per cent in
cash terms in both 1994-95 and 1995-96, as part of a Whitehall initiative to
limit rises in public spending.
The Treasury will have a notional planning total of Pounds 244.5bn in
1993-94 and will indicate today how this translates into the new control
total, which seems likely to be set at around Pounds 240bn.
The planning total accounts for about 90 per cent of all government spending
and excludes local authorities' spending which they finance themselves.
A breakdown of how this will be split between the different areas of
government spending will be issued later today.
In a break with the past, the control total will include local authorities'
self-financed spending, which includes cash raised from local taxation.
In the past the Treasury argued that to frame the planning total in this way
made sense as it was not always easy to control the spending of councils.
The change indicates that the Treasury is keen to bear down heavily on all
elements of local-authority spending, via measures such as capping.
In 1992-93 local authorities' self-financed spending is projected at Pounds
9.5bn, a figure due to increase to Pounds 10bn in 1993-94.
In the past the planning total has included privatisation revenues, which
count under Treasury convention as negative spending or saving.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921112

