FT924-11469

FT  26 OCT 92 / Arts: Blues for Mister Charlie - Theatre


   By ANDREW ST GEORGE


JAMES Baldwin (1924-87) wrote his first novel, Go Tell it on the Mountain in
1953, and the book that made him famous, Another Country in 1962. He also
wrote drama. His play, Blues for Mister Charlie, comes from the mid 1960s
and is based on the facts surrounding the death in August 1964 of Emmet Till
in Mississippi.
It makes a long evening at the Royal Exchange, energetically acted, good in
parts, everywhere suffused with deep southern atmosphere.
Baldwin ranks between Chester Himes and Derek Walcott, having the edge of
one and the soul of the other. But he was no dramatist. Blues recasts the
real-life murder. Here, Richard Henry is shot by Lyle Britten. Henry is
black gospel stock, his father a minister; Britten is white trash, stupid
and dangerous. The murder sets the town's blacks against the whites as
Britten comes to trial.
The major players are Parnell James, a white-shoe southern newspaper
proprietor with liberal - 'communistic' - tendencies, and Richard's father,
Meridian. James filters white opinion, and Meridian black, but neither are
just spokesmen. Gradually, through flashbacks and confessions, a pattern
emerges proving none to be as good or as bad as they seem. Britten has wife
and family, and somewhere, a rough decency. The man he kills turns out to be
a heroin addict, pimp, and troublemaker.
The ending, like Spike Lee's impeccable film Do The Right Thing (1990),
offers the violence of Malcolm X and the amity of Martin Luther King.
Meridian keeps his son's gun under the bible, and might use both one day.
The issues remain tangled, Baldwin eager to write about everything at once.
His broad grasp of misery works in Another Country, but not on stage. So
race, class, sexuality, individual liberty and collective action find
themselves jumbled together, not picked out for each scene.
The protracted action gets brisk treatment from director Gregory Hersov and
designer David Short. The clean stage allows lighting (Ace McCarron) to
define scenes, particularly when the trial testimonies are intercut with the
witnesses' lives. The acting looks authentic, although some of the
Mississippi accents migrate to Maine.
Wyllie Longmore as Meridian and Nicholas le Prevost as Parnell make their
characters fit the situation. There are good contributions from Guy Gregory
as Papa D, a black chorus on events, and Charlotte Fryer as a sharp trial
lawyer. But Baldwin scripted 24 characters, and the indistinguishable should
be merged or cut; some of the dialogue sounds dated, too.
The music (Luke Smith and the Manchester Community Gospel Choir) is an asset
and delight. It spills over into the second interval; so there is Southern
Gospel at the Exchange, sung under the board which used to record the
commodities prices.
Manchester Royal Exchange (061 833 9833) until November 14

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921026

