FT923-6622

FT  22 AUG 92 / Travel: Past glory of a parched land - The Karoo, north of
Cape Town


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


FROM Cape Town the road to Graaff-Reinet winds north and east. For 100 miles
it runs through the lushest land on earth, through vineyards and pine
forests, alongside fruit orchards and alleys of oaks, over clear rivers and
green mountain ranges.
But somewhere around the town of Montagu, where I stopped for a late
breakfast on the edge of the Little Karoo, the richness starts to give out.
From here on the land takes on a desiccated look. Rainfall diminishes. High
mountain ranges cut off coastal moisture and the valleys bake in clear,
bone-dry air. The earth becomes poorer and flinty. The vegetation is sparse
and hugs the ground.
Near Barrydale, spiky green cactus appeared. Outside Calitzdorp, flocks of
tall ostriches sprinted along in the dry dust beside the car. Seventy miles
past Oudtshoorn the road veered north and entered the Great Karoo. A vast
area of empty skies and sun-struck plain, it is lonelier and more arid still
than the Little Karoo.
On I sped down a flat, die-straight highway, the distant conical hills known
as kopjesshimmering in the late afternoon heat. There were no trees, no
towns, no irrigated vineyards, just a sparse, endless carpet of spiky,
aromatic Karoo bush burned brown by the sun. Here a lonely farmhouse hid in
a kopje's long shadow; there a slowly-turning windmill signalled a water
tank and herd of heat-dazed sheep. For 50 miles before Graaff-Reinet I saw
nothing.
As I rolled into the wide main street I threw sideways glances at the shops
on either side: Peter's Home-Made Pies, the Massey Ferguson tractor repair
shop, the Maison Capri Beauty Parlour, the Ela-Gant Gift Shop, the Reinet
Billiard Hall, the Graaff-Reinet Men's Club, the Salt and Pepper Cafe.
Beyond, down tree-lined side streets, I could see simple white-washed houses
and the spires of half-a-dozen churches.
Graaff-Reinet looked like a stylised dream of small-town life several
decades ago, a place where the clocks tick more slowly than elsewhere. And,
as I discovered over the next few days, appearances are not deceiving - more
than most out-of-the-way places, Graaff-Reinet is not about to be rushed
into the future without thinking twice.
Graaff-Reineters say they like the town for its wide open feel, for the huge
spaces and leisurely rhythms that fill it. Money matters less. Success
matters less. Haste matters less. What does matter is remembering the
lessons of the past.
That the town has reasons for looking to its past became clear when I met
Johann van Zijl at the Drosdty Hotel, a magnificent building of
high-ceilinged, polished-plank reception rooms and flowery courtyards.
Sitting on a shady terrace in 40`C heat, van Zijl, a proud Afrikaner and
elder of the nearby Dutch Reformed Church, told me it was more than just a
hotel.
Built in the early 1800s as the residence of the Dutch landdrost - a
magistrate and chief administrator - the Drosdty stood as a symbol of white
civilisation, the headquarters of a vast, wild frontier district where life
was precarious and encouraged caution and conservatism at every turn. It
still does.
Graaff-Reinet's history is a long dirge of struggle, conflict and death. If
the Boers who brought their sheep to graze here in the 1770s were able, in a
few decades, to destroy the bushmen and hottentots who claimed the land,
their confrontations with more formidable black Xhosa tribes made this
eastern frontier a hostile place.
Nor was it just conflict with black Africans that brought insecurity and
bitterness. When the Cape colony was handed over to the British in 1806,
Afrikaners in Graaff-Reinet found their almost Biblical lifestyle threatened
by another enemy: a new group of white Africans determined to anglicise
them.
In the 1830s many sold their land to English farmers, who hold it still, and
in that great epic of Afrikaner lore, the Great Trek, marched north. Even
today, old rivalries resurface. When the town's Afrikaans and
English-speaking students compete each year on inter-school sports day, the
Boer war is thrashed out all over again.
But history is not the only element that provokes conservatism in the soul
of white Graaff-Reinet; there is also the on-going battle for survival with
the land itself.
Usually life in town revolves around home and family, but on Friday nights
the focus shifts to the Graaff-Reinet Men's Club, a bastion of English
tradition and male camaraderie. It is here, amid mounted game trophies and
the clicking of billiard balls, that sheep farmers from the outlying
districts come to drink and to relieve the loneliness of a week spent miles
from the nearest neighbour.
For most of its 100 years the club's bar-room has been a lively place, as
the bullet holes in its wooden bar suggest. But on the night I wandered in
and began chatting to farmer David Luscombe, the talk among these burly,
sun-burned men in worn khaki was of drought, bankruptcy and hard times.
Even in the best of times the Karoo is a place where merino sheep and angora
goat farming is risky. But farmers have learned to live with regular cycles
of drought. The key to survival, I heard from Luscombe with no surprise, is
to take no chances: make as little investment as possible, keep overheads
low, put food stock aside in the rich years, eke it out in the lean.
In the end, Graaff-Reinet's profound traditionalism may not be of great help
in coming to grips with the inevitable: creating a multi-racial society. The
town is not what it first appears to be: a small, all-white town of about
4,000.
On the other side of the dried-up Sunday's River, only a mile or so away,
are two large and dusty townships, one mixed-race, one black, totalling
24,000 people. Just how, under multi-racial rule, these landless masses will
regard individually-owned 100,000-hectare farms is an issue anticipated with
great anxiety.
In the meantime, there are signs that even Graaff-Reinet knows it cannot
slow the clock for ever. On a Saturday afternoon I went out with John
Luscombe to the township of Kroonvale. Here, on the very edge of the
sun-burned desert, in a brilliant green oval of well-watered grass, the
white farmers were taking on a township cricket team.
Multi-racial sport may be new in Cape Town; here it is revolutionary -
proof, after all, that even in the arid, unchanging Karoo, there is, from
time to time, something new under the sun.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920822

