FT924-11519

FT  26 OCT 92 / Last-ditch plea to Canadian voters: Leaders warn of dangers
if constitutional reform package rejected


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


CANADA'S political leaders have made a last-ditch appeal for a disgruntled
electorate to endorse a landmark package of constitutional reforms in a
referendum today. They warn that rejection could lead to years of
uncertainty and, possibly, the break-up of the country.
Although support for the proposed reforms appears to have solidified in
recent days, almost every opinion poll suggests the No vote will win by a
comfortable margin in at least two key provinces, Quebec and British
Columbia.
The referendum question asks voters whether they agree that the constitution
should be 'renewed' on the basis of the package known as the Charlottetown
Accord.
The overall outcome will be less important than the vote in individual
provinces, as the Charlottetown deal requires ratification by all 10
provincial legislatures.
A No vote in one or two small provinces could probably be overcome, but
political observers agree that the agreement must be approved by Quebec,
Ontario and a clear majority of the other eight provinces to have any chance
of implementation.
Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney insisted over the weekend that the
government's private polls still showed a large number of undecided voters,
especially in Quebec.
The Yes side was helped - although probably only slightly - by a frenzy of
Canadian patriotism unleashed by the Toronto Blue Jays victory in the World
Series baseball championships on Saturday night.
Mr Mulroney said that a No victory would encourage Mr Jacques Parizeau,
leader of the separatist Parti Quebecois, 'to stir up divisiveness and
turmoil about Canada, here and abroad, thereby affecting investment
decisions'.
Mr Donald Getty, premier of Alberta, added that rejection of the agreement
could also, in the long run, encourage Canada's western provinces to break
away from the rest of the country and strengthen their ties with the US.
The Charlottetown agreement provides, among other things, for constitutional
recognition of Quebec's 'distinct' francophone identity, greater
representation for western and Atlantic provinces in a revamped Senate, and
the transfer of some powers from federal government to provinces.
The carefully balanced deal is backed by a wide spectrum of the country's
political, business and labour leadership, including the heads of all three
leading political parties and the 10 provincial premiers.
Its critics range from Quebec separatists who say the agreement gives too
little autonomy to the province, to western Canadians who object to 'special
status' for Quebec, and staunch federalists, such as former prime minister
Mr Pierre Trudeau, who say the agreement will weaken the central government.
In addition, many voters are expected to use the referendum as an
opportunity to vent their unhappiness over the state of the economy and the
performance of Mr Mulroney's government.
Many of those voting No, especially outside Quebec, are not convinced that
rejection of the deal will lead to the break-up of the country or to
anything more than short-term volatility in financial markets.
Unity frays, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921026

