FT922-577

FT  26 JUN 92 / Arts: Women's view of Weimar - Fine Arts


   By PATRICIA MORISON


An excess of candour can be bad for one's health. Be sure, then, that there
is a reason why your reviewer will admit that she previously knew the work
of only one artist, Kathe Kollwitz, in the major exhibition of German art in
the 1920s and '30s now at the Leicestershire City Museum and Art Gallery.
Largely made up of loans from German museums and private collections,
Domesticity and Dissent is a highly unusual exhibition. It features prints,
paintings, photographs and sculptures by no less than 26 artists associated
with Neue Sachlichkeit, or New Objectivity - the realist movement dominated
by the figures of George Grosz and Otto Dix.
No one interested in art and society in the Weimar Republic should miss
Domesticity and Dissent. Two individuals deserve credit for making this
ambitious venture succeed - which is not to overlook a bold first step into
sponsorship by Hormann UK Ltd, who make garage doors. The idea for the
exhibition was put up by Marsha Meskimmon, an American postgraduate student.
Leicester is already well-known for its collection of early 20th-century
German art, and Meskimmon found a ready supporter in Amanda Wadsley, the
museum's fine arts curator.
Meskimmon wrote hundreds of letters to German museums and collectors, then
went dredging through their records and the public archives in search of
information about 26 artists she had selected for the show. Reunification
came a little late in the day, but it certainly helped. Many paintings have
been loaned from museums formerly in the East, hence some atrocious frames
and the poor state of conservation of certain works.
But with Hedwig Huschke, for example, the determined Ms Meskimmon drew a
blank. The public gallery at Weimar has lent two paintings by Huschke; a
view of village-houses near Weimar (1924) and a large, quiet-toned yet
arresting self-portrait (1932). Now in the case of a 15th-century painting,
it is never a surprise to find nothing is known about the artist. A scholar
dubs the artist Master of the Man in Striped Hose, and suddenly he exists.
But in the century marked above all by the Triumph of Bureaucracy, it is a
shock to find an artist's catalogue entry stating 'no biographical
information available.' Huschke existed, but who was she?
By now, of course, attentive readers will have smelt a rat. The subtitle to
the exhibition is 'The Role of Women Artists in Germany 1918-38.' Which, of
course, changes the whole picture and lets me, and I dare say you too, off
the hook.
Small wonder that, except for Kollwitz, none of these women artists was
selected for the Royal Academy's 1985 conspectus show of German 20th-century
art. More tellingly, none of them was shown at the 1978 Arts Council
exhibition which for the first time put Neue Sachlichkeit before the British
public. Gerta Overbeck and the Jewish artist Lea Grundig were merely names
in the text.
So, on one level, the Leicester exhibition is a particularly well-researched
example of feminist art-history managing to salvage women artists from
l'oubli. It is amusing to find that Whitney Chadwick's Women, Art and
Society, published only two years ago and billed as a 'comprehensive'
account of women's involvement in the fine arts, also came up only with
Kollwitz, plus Paula Modersohn-Becker.
One of the best things in Domesticity and Dissent is the self-portrait
bronze made in 1936 when Kollwitz was nearly 70 - the year in which she was
unofficially banned from exhibiting by the Nazis. Obviously it was tempting
to include this great artist who has come to enjoy cult status. However, she
makes an odd member of Neue Sachlichkeit, and what gives Domesticity and
Dissent its cogency is the focus on the contradictions, ironies and
undoubted achievement of these women realists.
Central to the Neue Sachlichkeit tendency was the image of the artist as a
man of unflinching vision, focusing his lens on whatever was banal,
repulsive, cruel. We think, of course, of Grosz and Dix, of their shocking
images of prostitutes and cripples. Many artists of Marxist and anarchist
sympathies wanted to flay bourgeois society in their work, to express
sympathy for the sufferings of the industrialised proletariat.
Traditionally, women artists were expected to prefer domestic images. But in
an era when everyone was talking about the problem of the New Woman, who had
the vote and campaigned for abortion, many women artists naturally embraced
the cause of public 'dissent'. There are images of domesticity. However, it
is a home which is a place of suffering, where poverty is least visible yet
most cruel.
In Lea Grundig's etchings for the 'Women's Life' series, a child is dead, a
mother sits like a prisoner and the streets are for women a place of
exclusion, gazing at consumer goods in shop windows. 'A Children's
Playground at Night' is a place beneath smoking factory chimneys where men
and women make love on the benches: in a Grosz scene, we would know the
women were prostitutes, but here, both sexes are victims.
However, there is a great variety in the work of these artists. Grete
Jurgens's portrait of a little girl represents another facet of Neue
Sachlichkeit, the nostalgia for Bedermeier sweetness. In Eva Schulze-Knabe's
heroic self-portrait, there is conscious defiance of the anti-female
stereotype which kept women - and women-artists - in their place. Other
personal 'discoveries' I earnestly hope to be seeing more of include the
sculptors Lucie Prussog-Jahn and Rene Sintensis, and the painters Gerta
Overbeck and Kate Diehn-Bitt (there is a fascinating neo-Renaissance
self-portrait).
Domesticity and Dissent ends on the July 5. However, I am told there is a
'90 per cent' chance it will transfer to the Kelvingrove Museum and Art
Gallery in Glasgow. I hope so: this is an exhibition after which our view of
German art of the inter-war years ought never to be the same again.
Leicestershire Museum and Art Gallery (0533-554100). Exhibition sponsored by
Hormann UK Ltd: additional support from Goethe Institut

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920626

