FT921-3701

FT  13 MAR 92 / Germiston swallows its fear of black domination: Patti
Waldmeir visits a 'house meeting' to hear South Africans debate the
whites-only referendum


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


'IN MY heart, I'm right wing. But if I use what's between my two ears, I
have to vote yes and face the future.' Oom Hannes Booysen commits himself to
vote 'yes' in South Africa's white referendum, with a deep sigh and an
abiding anxiety.
None the less, he - a branch chairman of the ruling National party in the
Johannesburg suburb of Germiston - is about the best the National party can
hope for: a voter who swallows his reservations, suppresses his economic
grievances against the government, and casts a vote for reason.
But Oom Hannes's support for the 'yes' campaign - like that of so many other
'yes' voters - depends crucially on a vision of the future in which the
National party retains a huge share of political power, at least equal to
that of the African National Congress. It depends on a belief that standards
will not fall substantially in white education or health care.
For President F W de Klerk will not succeed in gaining the landslide victory
he has demanded from whites unless he can convince them that he can prevent
reverse apartheid - the domination of whites by blacks.
On Wednesday night, in the dormitory suburb of Germiston, his plan was put
to the test before a group of National party voters gathered in the home of
Oom Hannes for a 'house meeting', the traditional tool of the white South
African politician.
Mr Derek Christophers addressed the meeting; he is National party MP for
Germiston, which he describes as the Pittsburgh of South Africa, a
metal-bashing centre down on its luck, where 60 per cent of the 110,000
residents are working class and suffering deeply from a three-year
recession. Mr Christophers is an English-speaker (35 per cent of Germiston
speak English) but everyone gathered in Oom Hannes's sitting room was
Afrikaner.
Mr Christophers was adamant on the question of domination: 'There is not a
chance that we are going to be dominated, not a chance. By the time we vote
in 1994, there will be 13m voters: 3.5m whites, 3m Zulus, 1m coloureds and
3/4 m Indians. Taken together, that's already more than the voters of the
ANC.'
Rank and file National party supporters believe fervently that such a
multi-racial coalition can be formed at the centre of South African politics
 -and that the country's black tribes are too fractious to unite outside it.
This is the logic of apartheid: that blacks are terminally divided against
themselves, and must be kept separate from each other as well as from
whites, just to keep the peace. But National party voters believe it will
still operate to their advantage in the new South Africa.
Still, Oom Hannes and his more liberal neighbour, Mr Chris Geyer, a retired
dentist, agree they are very worried about domination. 'What's going to
happen if they (a black government) tear up the constitution and the bill of
rights?' asks Oom Hannes, echoed by Mr Geyer, who adds: 'There's no
constitution that can prevent domination'.
Pieter, a businessman, consoles them by assuring them that blacks are so
divided they could not even agree to tear up a constitution, let alone to
govern. He believes that whites need not fear the threat of communism from
the ANC - the biggest bogey of most white voters - arguing that only the
ANC's rhetoric is socialist. He, along with the others in the room, make the
big leap of faith to believe the National party will defeat the communists
in the ANC.
Oom Hannes does not seem so sure. But of one thing he is certain: white
sportsmen will succeed, against the odds, in persuading blacks to accept the
Springbok as the country's national sporting symbol. Some of the company
seem to believe the South African flag might also survive, possibly even the
national anthem, Die Stem - seemingly unaware of the obvious anger these
symbols provoke in blacks.
But Mrs Sonet Jordaan, young mother of a four-year-old son, sums up the
feeling of most of Oom Hannes's visitors: 'The referendum is in God's hands
now. He will decide. He knows what is best for South Africa.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920313

