FT924-8345

FT  11 NOV 92 / International Company News: Chinese communism's capital
steel project - Simon Holberton on how Shougang Corporation has exploited
its new autonomy


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


Last summer Shougang Corporation, the Chinese steel company also known as
Capital Steel, played host to an important visitor.
Deng Xiaoping, China's 88-year-old leader, paid a visit to the company's
headquarters on the outskirts of Beijing. Today, photographs, some 15ft by
5ft, adorn the company's premises commemorating his visit.
But Shougang, China's third largest steel maker, got much more out of Deng's
visit than just a photograph. Company officials lobbied him for greater
autonomy from China's central planning bureaucracy and won.
On October 10 the state council, China's cabinet, gave Shougang full
autonomy over capital investment, power to conduct its own foreign trading
relationships and approval to set up its own bank. From the beginning of
next year it will not have to fulfil state-determined production targets and
may sell all its steel products on the free market.
Shougang has not been slow to make the most of its new autonomy. In the past
month it announced three acquisitions and, according to the company, more
are to come.
On October 23 it joined with Cheung Kong, Mr Li Ka-Shing's Hong Kong
property and investment company, to acquire a 77 per cent interest in Tung
Wing Steel - a Hong Kong steel trader and distributor of steel products for
the construction industry - for about HKDollars 240m (Dollars 31.05m). The
deal leaves Shougang holding a 51 per cent stake in Tung Wing. On November
2, Shougang said it had bought, for an undisclosed sum, the Number 2
converter steel-making plant of California Steel Industries. The company
plans to send 300 workers to California to dismantle the plant and ship it
to Shougang's Qilu Steel Works in Shandong province.
The US deal was followed on November 5 with the announcement from the
Peruvian government that Shougang was the successful bidder for Peru's
state-owned iron producer, Hierro Peru. Shougang topped the competition  -
from Switzerland, Chile, Mexico and Japan - with an offer of USDollars 120m.
It has pledged to invest a further USDollars 150m in plant and assume
Hierro's debts of USDollars 41.8m.
These announcements are likely to be followed by Shougang establishing a
larger presence in Hong Kong. Mr Pan Huayuan, the company's vice-president
and senior economist, said recently the company planned to establish its
international headquarters in the colony because of its role as a centre of
finance, information and communications.
He also said the Shougang planned to buy a bank in the Hong Kong. This would
complement the bank it has just been given approval to establish on the
mainland.
He said the company had looked at Overseas Trust Bank - which was rescued by
the Hong Kong government in the early 1980s and has been put up for sale -
but would not be drawn on whether it had made an offer. Whatever bank
Shougang buys in Hong Kong 'it all depends on price', he said.
Shougang is at the centre of China's plans to modernise its steel industry -
one of the only steel industries straining to grow rather than suffering the
pain of retrenchment.
China produces about 70m tonnes of steel a year and plans to increase
capacity to 100m tonnes by the end of the decade. But much of the industry
uses outmoded production equipment; according to mainland Chinese reports,
60m tonnes of current capacity is in need of retooling.
Shougang produces 10m tonnes a year and has an ambitious programme to double
capacity in seven years. It has two main sites - one in Beijing and the
other in Shandong, for which the Californian mill is destined - and has
introduced fairly modern blast furnaces from Belgium. Recently it
commissioned its number 4 blast furnace at its Beijing works at a capital
cost of Yn410m (Dollars 73m).
The company employs about 200,000 workers, but only a quarter are directly
engaged in the steel-making business. Shougang - like many of China's large
state-owned industries - is a large vertically integrated organisation that
provides cradle-to-grave welfare for its employees.
It owns and operates iron ore and coal mines in China, although it is
importing some Australian iron ore for its blast furnaces; it owns
mechanical engineering businesses, which make the machinery it uses; a
construction company which builds its plant; and a shipping line. About 60
per cent of retained earnings - equal this year to Yn1.2bn - is used for
business expansion.
Shougang, however, devotes 20 per cent of its retained earnings to welfare -
which this year will amount to about Yn400m.
According to Mr Pan, employees at Shougang pay just 1 per cent of their
wages - which across the work force average Yn324 a month in 1991, including
bonuses - for housing. That comes to 62 US cents a month for rent, at
current official rates of exchange.
He is particularly proud of the company's record in providing new housing
for employees. 'Over the past 13 years we have built 1.93m square metres of
housing for employees,' he says. 'That is twice the area of housing we had
built before the reforms were started.'
And there is the rub. A lot has been made in the Chinese press of breaking
the cradle-to-grave employment system in Chinese state industry. There is
talk of hiring and firing employees, demoting those executives who do not
perform, while paying all on a performance-related basis.
Such ideas were written into Communist Party policy at its 14th congress in
Beijing last month. But, even in one of China's showcase enterprises, these
ideas meet resistance.
Mr Pan balks at the idea of redundancies. He finds the idea repellent and
would prefer to deal with non-performing workers by cutting their bonuses,
not jobs. Like a latter day Micawber he has faith that growth will pay the
bills.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

921111

