FT924-8131

FT  12 NOV 92 / Hong Kong's legislature backs Patten reforms


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


CHINA WAS last night dealt a significant rebuff when Hong Kong's local
legislature gave Mr Chris Patten, the colony's governor, solid backing for
his proposals to increase democratic representation in Hong Kong.
The endorsement from the colony's political leaders - which is bound to
anger China - follows opposition to the governor's plans from the colony's
influential business community earlier this week.
Before leaving for Canada and the UK yesterday, Mr Patten reaffirmed his
willingness to discuss with China alternative proposals to those he unveiled
a month ago.
To date, Beijing has refused to discuss alternatives and instead has
reasserted its determination to revoke any changes which are introduced
without prior agreement.
But, by a margin of 32 to 21, the members of the Legislative Council (Legco)
voted to give the governor 'general support' for his blueprint for electoral
reform. The strength of Legco support for Mr Patten - though never in doubt
 -was much greater than expected.
The council's highly charged debate lasted six hours.
Ms Christine Loh, a recently appointed member, gained much support for her
opposition to Britain agreeing a deal with China simply to achieve
'convergence' with Beijing's plans for Hong Kong after the colony reverts to
Chinese sovereignty in mid-1997. She said that convergence was a false
doctrine and 'is a device introduced by China to serve China's ends'.
She was opposed by Mrs Selina Chow, a senior member of the Co-operative
Resources Centre, Legco's main conservative grouping, who again called for a
referendum if Britain and China fail to agree terms. She said it was not in
Hong Kong's interest to adopt a package of reforms which had no hope of
surviving the change of sovereignty.
Legco members from both camps expressed their dismay at the way in which
Britain and China had, in the past, gone behind the people's back to strike
secret deals.
Last night's vote, however, is just the beginning of a process. Mr Michael
Sze, secretary for constitutional affairs, said that legislation would have
to be presented to LegCo early in the New Year and voted on in the spring.
Although Beijing has given no indication that it is prepared to discuss the
governor's ideas, some in Hong Kong hope that a breakthrough can be achieved
when Zhu Rongji, a senior Chinese politician, visits Britain next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921112

