FT921-3844

FT  12 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Chile gives freer hand to
copper corporation


   By LESLIE CRAWFORD


   SANTIAGO


THE CHILEAN parliament has approved a long-awaited law that will allow
Codelco, the state-owned copper corporation, to form joint-ventures with
local or foreign mining partners or sell off surplus mining property.
The law won a clear majority at a joint session of the senate and chamber of
deputies late on Tuesday night. The session was disrupted by a group of
copper miners who threw 'Judas' coins at the law-makers and taunted them
with giving away Chile's national wealth. The powerful Copper Workers Union
has threatened to go on strike over the controversial law, but union leaders
are unlikely to find support among the rank and file.
Codelco, the world's biggest copper producer, sees the law as a key plank in
its long-term development strategy. 'It will put us on the same footing as
mining multinationals by allowing us to seek partners when we do not have
resources to develop mines on our own,' says Mr Jorge Bande, Codelco's
planning director.
The corporation owns one-third of the registered mining property in Chile,
but Treasury restrictions on the state company's investment budget have
limited exploration and development work.
The law states that Codelco will continue to run its four divisions:
Chuquicamata, El Teniente, Salvador and Andina, which together produced
1.12m tonnes of copper last year. In addition, Codelco will probably develop
adjacent ore bodies on its own. But there are other prime deposits which
have been targetted for joint ventures. Top of Codelco's list is the El Abra
copper deposit, 50 km north-east of Chuquicamata in the Atacama desert. El
Abra has 500m tonnes of proven reserves with an ore grade of 1 per cent.
Codelco estimates about Dollars 250m would be needed to develop the open-pit
mine, which could produce 150,000 tonnes of copper a year.
Mr Bande says Codelco has held 'informal contacts' with several potential
partners who are interested in the project. Under the new law, Codelco will
not be required to hold a majority stake in future joint-ventures. If it
decides to sell surplus mining property, it will have to do so via Enami,
the state-owned metals refinery.
Endesa, Chile's biggest electricity company, is studying plans to build a
Dollars 1.5bn aluminium smelter in the far south of Chile together with
Comalco Aluminium of Australia and Marubeni, the Japanese trading house.
Endesa said this week that the three companies had ordered a pre-feasibility
study that will be ready by November. The announcement comes four months
after Noranda Aluminium, a subsidiary of the Canadian mining and forestry
group, revealed its own plans for an aluminium smelter in southern Chile.
Noranda has completed its feasibility studies and is searching for financial
backers for the project.
Chile has no bauxite, the ore from which aluminium is made, but the fjords
and rivers of southern Chile have a vast potential for providing cheap
electricity - the biggest single cost in producing aluminium - through
hydro-electric generation.
Endesa owns crucial water rights in the region. Its plans include a 380 Mw
hydroelectric plant and an aluminium smelter which would produce 220,000
tonnes a year. The bauxite would come from Australia.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920312

