FT921-3950

FT  12 MAR 92 / Shevardnadze starts old job a new man


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


PURSUING one of the most extraordinary career paths in the former Soviet
Union, Mr Eduard Shevardnadze, former communist party boss of Georgia, has
settled into his old office in Tbilisi as the unelected leader of the
post-Communist republic.
On the surface, Mr Shevardnadze's abrupt return to power may lend credence
to the claims by Mr Zviad Gamsakhurdia, the ex-Georgian president, that his
removal in January was masterminded by the former Soviet foreign minister.
But more likely, Mr Shevardnadze's nomination as chairman of a newly created
state council to run the country until elections in June, is a sign of the
desperation gripping a nation reduced to civil strife, poverty, and
international isolation.
Mr Georgy Volsky, deputy chief of the Georgian mission in Moscow, said the
Military Council which has disbanded to make way for the State Council, had
consulted various parties and public opinion before picking Mr Shevardnadze.
He also claimed that the latest opinion polls showed 70 per cent support for
the charismatic 64-year-old leader, up from 30 per cent before his return.
Mr Volsky said the council included 35 members plucked from various
political groups, as well as Georgia's national minorities, including the
South Ossetians who had been under siege by Mr Gamsakhurdia's nationalist
guerrillas.
As Mr Gamsakhurdia yesterday desperately tried to convene some kind of rump
parliament in the city of Grozny, capital of Russia's rebellious autonomous
republic of Chechnya, Mr Shevardnadze was getting to grips with his new job
in the offices from which he ruled Georgia until 1986.
In a front page article headlined 'Shevardnadze's last mountain-top',
Izvestia newspaper summed up what is expected of him: 'Under Shevardnadze,
Georgia will quickly receive international recognition . . . economic
contracts and credit, acceptance by the Commonwealth of Independent States
 .UN membership. Under Shevardnadze, it goes without saying that there will
be no restrictions on the press, on creativity, political activity, entry
and exit (from the republic) and all other freedoms.'
If anybody can achieve all that, it is Mr Shevardnadze, who enjoys
unrivalled prestige abroad, possesses unquestioned political skills, and has
recouped his past as a Communist party faithful with his outspoken support
for fledgling democracy in the former Soviet Union.
Two years ago, when Mr Gamsakhurdia was running for office on a ticket
promising total independence from Moscow, Mr Shevardnadze was best
remembered in Georgia as a satrap of Moscow's Communist power. He was
personally responsible for jailing Mr Gamsakhurdia for dissident activities,
before leaving his native Georgia to become President Mikhail Gorbachev's
foreign minister.
Instead of total independence, Mr Gamsakhurdia's rule brought authoritarian
rule, ended only after weeks of fighting ruined the historic heart of the
Georgian capital. And although it was one of the first former Soviet
republics to try to restore independence lost in the early years of
Communist rule, Georgia today is the only former Soviet republic not to have
a seat at the United Nations.
'Now people believe that Shevardnadze is the man who will save Georgia.
History will show which of them will have been able to do what for the
people.' said Mr Volsky.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920312

