FT921-14365

FT  16 JAN 92 / Israeli party quits Shamir's fragile coalition


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   JERUSALEM


ISRAELI Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's government appears likely to lose
its parliamentary majority next Sunday after an extreme right-wing party
formally decided last night to pull out of the coalition and the leader of
another said he would recommend his faction do likewise.
The withdrawal of the two, in protest at Mr Shamir's willingness to offer
autonomy to the Palestinians of the occupied territories in the Middle East
peace talks, could precipitate an early general election, ahead of the due
date in November.
A meeting of the policy-making body of Tehiya, a three-MP party led by Mr
Yuval Ne'eman, the science minister, decided to resign from the 20-month old
government following the first steps towards substantive talks on
Palestinian self-rule taken by Israeli and Palestinian negotiators in
Washington this week.
'Our party secretariat has decided I will present my resignation on Sunday,'
said Mr Neeman.
The two-MP party Moledet is almost certain to follow suit at a meeting
today.
Like Mr Shamir's Likud party, Tehiya and Moledet believe Israel should never
give up the occupied territories. But they bitterly oppose Likud's
acceptance that a measure of self-government should be given to the
Palestinians.
Only a collapse of the peace talks is likely to reverse their move to quit.
The departure would leave the Likud-led coalition with just 59 supporters in
the 120-member Knesset.
Opposition parties who support the peace process have expressed a
willingness to allow a minority Shamir government to continue, as long as
the peace negotiations make progress. But Mr Shamir has made it clear he
does not want to rely on opposition backing for his survival.
His aides say he would prefer elections, but he might seek a delay before
confronting voters in the hope of securing a deal with the US on the Dollars
10bn (Pounds 5.5bn) in loan guarantees Israel has requested to help finance
Jewish immigration from the former Soviet Union. Most commentators predict
an election in May or June.
Bank of Israel officials said yesterday the IMF had agreed Israel met the
criteria for a Dollars 250m loan to compensate for economic losses estimated
at Dollars 1bn caused by the Gulf war.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920116

