FT922-4463

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Company News: IBM sets up offshoots to compete
with PC clones


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO and LOUISE KEHOE


   LONDON, SAN FRANCISCO


IBM has set up independent, wholly-owned subsidiaries in the UK and Canada
to sell low-cost personal computers that will compete directly with cheap
clones.
The new UK company, Individual Computer Products International, will market
a range of PCs under the Ambra brand name to target the low end of the
European market.
The Canadian subsidiary, ExperComp Services, will also offer the Ambra PC
products. UK prices will start under Pounds 1,000 (Dollars 1,800) while in
Canada Ambra PCs bundled with several software programs will sell for
CDollars 1,600 (USDollars 1,333). The first Ambra products will go on sale
in the UK today. In Canada, Ambra will make its debut in August.
The move reflects IBM's new willingness to break with past practices and
give its business units greater freedom to use innovative approaches to
increasing sales. 'Today's announcement is another step in our
transformation to a federation of focused business units,' said Mr Bill
Etherington, president and chief executive of IBM Canada.
Through the new units, IBM aims to gain entry to highly price-sensitive
segments of the PC market in which its own brand name products cannot
compete.
IBM is addressing this market on a country-by-country basis as PC prices,
distribution channels and buying patterns vary widely in different parts of
the world.
In the US, where PC clones are selling for well under Dollars 1,000 through
computer superstores, IBM may take a different approach. One option said to
be under consideration is to acquire an equity stake in an existing clone
manufacturer.
Many leading participants in the computer industry, including IBM, have seen
their PC market shares fall over the years in the face of fierce competition
from manufacturers of cheap clones.
'IBM saw a market place segment that had grown to significance in which they
did not participate,' said Mr Bill McCracken, general manager of IBM Europe
Personal Systems Business Unit, the parent company contact for the new
subsidiary. 'We want to be in that market place.'
In Europe, the bottom end of the market has been growing at about 45 per
cent compared with 21 per cent forecast for the entire computer market.
Rather than try to compete by launching a series of clones itself, IBM,
which already has a joint venture clone company in South East Asia, decided
it needed a separate company that would have the flexibility of a smaller
organisation and the benefits of a fresh corporate image.
Ambra products will be made in Asia by an unnamed third party supplier. They
will use 386 microprocessors manufactured by Advanced Micro Devices,
breaking with IBM's own close ties with Intel, the leading
microprocessor-maker.
The Ambra products will not be handled by IBM's own sales force, but will be
sold through dealers, retailers and direct response.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920605

