FT923-15367

FT  02 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Poised for a Euro-googly - David
Gardner takes nets with the players in Major's team


   By DAVID GARDNER


JOHN MAJOR, manager of the British cricket team which yesterday started
hosting the sixth-monthly Euro test series, is likely to enjoin his players
to pitch the ball up and play the straightest of bats.
He wants an efficient rather than a flashy team - the spiv element in UK
cricket largely excludes itself because it doesn't like playing Continentals
anyway. He believes that dogged pegging away will win the Maastricht Ashes,
and make the UK part of the heartland of Euro cricket.
The shock decision by the Danes, the only Nordic cricket players, to
withdraw from the event has raised real doubts about its future. It has also
meant postponing the UK team's objective to widen the competition by
teaching cricket to other Norse and Alpine people, who they think will want
to play by UK rules, thereby tilting the competition Britain's way.
The British team thinks that if they ban bouncers and beamers - under the
'subsidiarity' rule change which says the ball should be bowled at the
lowest level possible - then the Danes will be back.
Douglas Hurd, the captain, will set the tone. Nobody observing his
head-prefect-like, slightly owlish air could doubt that he knows a sticky
wicket as well as a Balkan quagmire. Or that he knows the value of a dead
bat in these long-drawn-out Euro games, which invariably end in draws.
The stolid and solid Hurd has as his counterpoint the virtuosity of Tristan
Garel-Jones, his vice-captain. A tricky fast bowler, moving the ball both
ways in the air and seaming it off the pitch, Garel-Jones then comes on as a
spinner, dishing up right-handed googlies. These are so well disguised that
his own side have trouble reading them.
Norman Lamont, the well padded wicket-keeper, will be a lugubrious presence
behind the stumps during the series. He stands up to the wicket to prevent
them from grinding up his free-market pitch with their French-made studs.
Very few extras will get by him. When batsmen from Spain, Ireland, Greece
and Portugal are at the crease they can expect Lamont and Hurd to crowd them
with fielders and give little away. These so-called 'cohesion' teams get up
the British nose - they want to start games with their score already opened
to help them catch up with the better established teams. Watch Lamont's face
when he discovers that, as host, he will probably have to lump this.
One of the fielders crowding the bat will be Michael Howard. He has put in
some astonishing performances at silly point, his permanent grin distracting
batsmen's concentration. He supplements this by bowling an inflexible line
at leg stump, and bringing up the tail end with a dead bat.
Another close fielder will be newcomer Gillian Shephard, given Employment in
the slips, where Howard was such a star. She shows promise but is inclined
to say 'howzat' and fling the ball in the air before she has it safely in
her hands.
In the middle order comes John Gummer. He is what is known in the trade as a
good, solid rubbish bowler, so-called because since they do not know which
way the ball will bounce, neither does the batsman, who may get out carting
long-tosses to square leg. Gummer will provide some needle in the series:
his crease-side manner makes the hair stand out on the neck of the Irishman
in the all-Europe team, the agricultural slogger Ray MacSharry.
Michael Heseltine, finally, a gentleman rather than a player who fields
languidly, could also provide some sparks. Some team mates suspect he
fraternises too much with the adversary, muttering in Franglais about Le
Plan and so on.
Spectators will watch closely the change in the British team's attitudes
towards Jacques Delors, captain of the Euro all-stars. Previously they
blamed him for succeeding bodyline series which they claim brought the game
into disrepute, provoking Danish withdrawal from this series.
Cricket writers in the UK have accused Delors of all manner of other
infringements: taking a guard of three legs at the crease with a
suspiciously big bat they call Federasty, wearing double-width pads known as
Competences, and using a runner, usually Helmut Kohl or Francois Mitterrand
of the German and French teams.
But after the Viking team decided that any more bouncers would tear their
helmets off, Delors has ordered his team to bowl at the lowest possible
level. Nonetheless, only those new to Euro cricket think that is the end of
bodyline.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920702

