FT922-4127

FT  06 JUN 92 / Damage control in the housing market: The limited scope for
revival in the fortunes of the property sector


   By JOHN PLENDEr


THIS WEEK'S meeting between government ministers and building society
leaders was not a notably joyful affair. The good news, for want of a better
phrase, was about damage limitation.
Since the beginning of the year there has been a modest improvement in the
rate of repossessions - largely because of the payment of income support
direct to building societies, but also because the societies are keeping
more people in their homes through counselling and renegotiation of mortgage
terms.
Yet the housing market remains obdurately weak, even though mortgage
interest rates have fallen from 15.4 per cent in 1990 to less than 11 per
cent today. Although house prices look more affordable than for many years,
Halifax, the biggest society, has just reported a seasonally adjusted fall
in prices for the seventh successive month. The continuing rise in
unemployment is doing nothing to help.
A more technical explanation for the state of the market is the fact that
many people have mortgages larger than the value of their homes, leaving
them, in the jargon, with negative equity.
This week's UBS Phillips & Drew estimate of 2m home owners with negative
equity is regarded by some building society chiefs as too high. Yet there is
no doubt that the inability of this group to move up the housing ladder
without incurring losses acts as a brake on the market.
An additional handicap for the market is that many second-mortgage lenders
who have seen most of the security for their loans wiped out are waiting for
an upturn before foreclosing on troubled borrowers. That might take some
bounce out of a price recovery.
All that helps to explain the weakness of the wider economy, since so much
consumer spending is related to house purchase. And after the first
significant fall in nominal house prices since 1945, there is a wider
question to be asked about values.
The recent spectacular price booms - two in the 1970s and one in the late
1980s - were a by-product of inflation. With house prices rising faster than
interest rates and mortgage debt eroding in real terms, homeowners made
profits out of borrowing. Even when prices stopped rising, borrowers were
cushioned because real interest rates were negative at the crucial moment.
Today everything is different, because the government has embarked on
severely disinflationary policies, reinforced by the European Exchange Rate
Mechanism.
Inflation is much lower than in the mid 1970s or the early 1980s, while
interest rates are positive in real terms. Hence the huge fall in nominal
house prices in the south of the country, where the boom was most out of
hand.
The government's difficulty is that in spite of such high real rates of
interest, earnings growth in the economy is still well above the ERM
average.
The rate of interest that the Treasury regards as appropriate to deal with
inflationary pressure in the labour market is thoroughly deflationary for
the housing market. And if earnings are going to have to rise much more
slowly, house prices, which tend to increase in the long run with average
earnings, will rise more slowly.
Nearly a third of householders under the age of 25 are owner-occupiers,
because people fear being left off the housing ladder and want to make an
effortless profit. But if potential homeowners conclude that another house
price spiral is unlikely, the investment element of the demand for houses
may disappear.
Other factors pushing in the same direction are the erosion of mortgage
interest relief in real terms and a more cautious approach by lenders.
That caution may soon be reinforced as insurance companies review
loss-making mortwith lenders. In the past, insurers have covered building
societies on an absurdly imprudent basis. Although they were at risk on the
first 20 to 30 per cent of the loss on the value of a home, they did not
assess the value or the borrower's creditworthiness for themselves.
Such practices are unlikely to be repeated, since the resulting losses to
the insurers will, on some estimates, be as high as Pounds 3bn in 1991, 1992
and 1993. That means it will be harder to borrow 95 or 100 per cent of the
value of an asset with a price that can go down as well as up.
Unless the government abandons its disinflationary policies - which looks
unlikely - housing seems likely to underperform other types of investment
over the present decade.
Weekend II

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920606

