FT921-11987

FT  29 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Investors fall foul of market
turbulence - Unwelcome precedent created by a Japanese equity fund


   By ROBERT THOMSON


WHEN Daiwa Investment Trust and Management launched its New Stage stock
investment trust fund four years ago, the company and the fund's investors
had few doubts that the irrepressible Tokyo Stock Market would provide
profits for all.
Those expectations appeared to be confirmed in 1989, when the market swirled
ever higher and there was a rush by other investment trust companies to
launch funds to satisfy stock-hungry investors. But instead of generating
profits, the New Stage has created an unwelcome precedent.
Japan's Ministry of Finance has just allowed Daiwa to extend the life of the
fund for another three years because the plunge in stock prices has pushed
it below par value. New Stage was apparently the first to be given approval
because, unlike some other equity funds likely to be extended in coming
months, that fund was not far below par value - about 2 per cent.
The ministry and the industry have agreed on the extensions in an attempt to
slow a rush of redemptions by investors, the threat of which has put
downward pressure on Japanese stock prices. At the same time, according to
Daiwa, many investors asked for an extension because to cash-in now would
mean a loss of money and a loss of face.
'A lot of our investors preferred to wait for a better result than to take
what is available now. We, Daiwa, also want to prove our sincerity to our
customers,' Daiwa Investment Trust and Management said.
Having reached a high of 38,915.87 in late 1989, the Nikkei stock average
has been languishing at around 21,000 in recent weeks. Market weakness has
had three damaging effects on equity investment trusts: it has eroded the
net asset value of the funds, slowed the flow of fresh funds and increased
the rate of redemptions.
The net asset value of equity and bond investment trust funds fell 9.8 per
cent last year, with the net assets of stock funds down from Y35,077.2bn
(Dollars 279.7bn) at the end of 1990 to Y28,562.4bn. The value of new stock
funds launched was down 43 per cent to Y8,640bn, the lowest level in six
years, while the net assets of bond funds rose 18.2 per cent, reflecting the
strength of the bond market.
Meanwhile, there was a 2.4 increase in redemptions of stock funds, with
pre-maturity redemptions the vast majority. With that trend in mind, the
Finance Ministry, which likes to see markets conducted in an orderly manner,
allowed Daiwa to postpone the redemption date, the first extension of its
kind since 1965.
In the early and mid-1960s, cancellations of investment trust funds pushed
stock prices lower in a troubled market which almost claimed Yamaichi
Securities - one of the big four brokers - as a victim. In 1965, investment
trusts accounted for about 7.7 per cent of shares traded, compared with 3.7
per cent in 1990 - the funds' market influence has lessened, but fears of
instability remain.
The name 'stock investment trust' is slightly deceptive as at the end of
November only 49 per cent of their total monies were invested in stocks,
with 17.4 per cent in bonds and most of the remainder in cash accounts.
The equity funds are particularly attractive to individual investors, who
are unable to afford to trade directly in shares, which, even in a depressed
market, is still expensive in Japan.
Individuals accounted for about 75 per cent of purchases in the late 1980s,
though that figure was closer to 90 per cent last year, reflecting the great
reluctance of financial institutions and industrial corporations to invest -
in 1990, the former accounted 13.5 per cent of purchases in unit type
trusts, and the latter 8.5 per cent.
While the weakness of stock prices has been a good reason not to buy, the
securities industry scandals last year also encouraged individuals to stay
away. The 16 Japanese investment trust companies are tied to securities
houses, many of which were shown last year to have favoured corporate
clients by compensating them for trading losses.
Mr Stephen Barber, president of MIM Investment Trust Management, one of four
foreign concerns granted investment trust licences at the end of 1990, said
the scandals were the 'final nail' last year. However, if the stock market
surges, he expects 'self-interest would cause people to forget the scandals
pretty quickly'.
The Investment Trusts' Association of Japan admits the scandals have an
effect, but a spokesman said the market turbulence of the past two years has
taught investors a valuable lesson: 'I don't think people really understood
that prices could go down and that they could lose money. Maybe its partly
the fault of sales staff, but both investors and salesmen forgot that there
was a risk involved.'
Another association official believed that some funds are at between 60 and
70 per cent of their par value, and investors in open funds will have to
decide whether to cut their losses or ride out the weakness in the market.
Much depends on the course of Tokyo stock prices over the next few months,
as signs of a recovery will encourage investors to stay with their funds,
while indications of enduring weakness are likely to prompt increased
redemptions.

The Financial Times


London Page 27 Chart (Omitted). Chart (Omitted). Chart (Omitted).

920129

