FT921-15195

FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: Dybbuk comes to town


   By CLAIRE ARMITSTEAD


SHALOM ANSKI'S A Dybbuk for Two People is a classic of the Yiddish theatre,
a marvellous, archetypal story of doomed love and demoniac possession
wrapped in the rituals of the Jewish Sabbath. It has become a speciality for
Bruce Myers who, created this English version for the 1980 Avignon festival
and has been performing it with a succession of consorts ever since.
His latest partnership, with Corinne Jaber, a companion from Peter Brook's
Paris company, touched down at the Edinburgh Festival last summer and
arrives at the Hampstead Theatre rather disappointingly set in its ways.
When Myers performed it at Islington's Almeida Theatre with Josianne Stoleru
in 1986, the emphasis fell much more heavily on the thumping good yarn of a
young girl possessed by the spirit of her dead lover. In this incarnation,
the horror has receded, giving pride of place to the sacramental formality
with which the story is framed. The Sabbath rituals are painstakingly
observed by an actor who seems to have become increasingly rabbinical
beneath a shock of grey hair which gives him the look of a slightly batty
Old Testament prophet.
It is as if Myers has become so immersed in the protocol of the piece that
the balance between narrative and ritual has been distorted. So we have a
lengthy preamble of domestic propriety and theological debate, the
intricacies of which are lost on anyone unfamiliar with the doctrines of the
Talmud and the Cabala.
The theatrical meat of the piece - the haunting of a bride on her wedding
day and a failed attempt at exorcism - is relegated to the status almost of
a sub-plot. Jaber has a creepy ability to show the whites of her eyes and
walk like a marionette controlled by a drunken puppeteer; Myers is at his
best when he drops his earnestness to impersonate a queue of wedding
revellers or deliver a rambling nuptial speech.
Part of the problem is that the show does not seem to have found a rapport
with the difficult space of Hampstead Theatre, which allows for no dimension
beyond the small, drab square of family dining-room. Though comparisons are
odious, I cannot help remembering how the lofty brick arc of the Almeida
created a sense of the great beyond, into which ordinary people venture at
their peril. Here, the struggle of the bride and her grandmother to the
cemetery, where dead and living lovers are reunited, is merely a journey a
across dining-chairs. It remains a terrific story, but with too much back
and not enough beyond.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920111

