FT923-10993

FT  28 JUL 92 / Israel 'well placed' to take on big foreign debt burden


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   JERUSALEM


ISRAEL is well positioned to cope with the big burden of foreign debt it
intends to take on to help absorb mass immigration from the former Soviet
Union, Mr Jacob Frenkel, the governor of the Bank of Israel, said yesterday.
The government is confident it will shortly get US government guarantees to
back Dollars 10bn in foreign borrowing after taking steps to meet
Washington's condition that it cease expansion of Jewish settlements in the
occupied territories.
Left: Mr Jacob Frenkel, Bank of Israel governor, who backs borrowing to help
absorb an influx of immigrants
The guarantees are also seen in Israel as the key to winning a further
Dollars 10bn in loans from international markets over the next five years.
Mr Frenkel rejected suggestions that Israel, which relies heavily on US aid
to help service existing debt, could not afford such a heavy load.
He said the ratio of foreign debt to Gross National Product had been reduced
from 80 per cent in the mid-1980s to 27 per cent now.
'Israel has positioned itself in the best possible starting point for a
borrowing enterprise,' he said.
In an interview with the FT, Mr Frenkel said Israel needed such large
amounts of foreign capital because domestic sources were not sufficient to
match the investment required as a result of immigration, which has totalled
around 400,000 in the past 30 months.
'The alternative to borrowing abroad will be less investment today, and less
investment today misses the entire point of a successful absorption of
immigration in the private sector in the most effective way,' Mr Frenkel
said.
But he reiterated his insistence the new Labour-led government must use the
loans to back a comprehensive programme of market reform, to increase
investment in infrastructure and to reduce fiscal deficits, thus ensuring
the productive growth that in turn would facilitate debt servicing. He said
he was optimistic the government would do so.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920728

