FT924-6195

FT  23 NOV 92 / Management: Exploring new construction contracts - BP is
seeking to cut the cost of gas exploitation


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


BRITISH Petroleum is pioneering a new type of contract that could
significantly cut the cost of construction work in the North Sea.
The new contract heralds much closer co-operation between North Sea
contractors and their oil company customers at a time when rig orders are
thin on the ground.
BP has entered into partnership with two contracting companies, UIE Scotland
on Clydeside and Glasgow engineers, Kvaerner HG Offshore, to share the cost
of building a Pounds 50m rig to develop the Hyde gas field.
The three companies have created an alliance that aims to get away from the
traditionally adversarial relationship between contractor and client.
By clubbing together, the companies are hoping to eliminate any overlap in
the work of designing and building the gas rig.
This should cut down on excess costs which often build up when a contractor
is working on a project.
The idea of a partnership between oil operators and contractors is driven by
the changing needs of the North Sea where future developments will be small
and extremely cost-sensitive.
Brian Divers, managing director at UIE Scotland, estimates that the Hyde rig
should be completed 20 to 30 per cent below the budgeted figure.
'The common objective is to come out below target, whereas contractors often
boost costs in order to make a profit,' he says.
The design, engineering and construction team working on the Hyde contract
consists of around 30 people when, typically, a similar project would have
employed three times that many.
Layers of inspectors and supervisors have been eliminated although the
project managers stress there is still a fine balance to be struck between
cutting costs and maintaining quality and safety.
If the rig is completed below cost, the cash left over will be used to pay
out pre-set profit levels to the two contractors. Once that has been paid,
any remaining funds will be split on an agreed percentage basis between all
three partners.
This means the contractors stand to earn higher profit margins than on
traditional contracts, but since they carry part of the risk they could also
end up with nothing.
If the project is subject to any cost overrun, additional funds are provided
by all three companies on an agreed percentage basis up to a certain cap.
Chris Rhodes, manager of the southern North Sea exploitation and development
at BP, explained the necessity of cutting costs: 'Maybe for the Forties
development (one of the first flagship North Sea fields) you could afford a
bit of gold-plating and still make money, but you can't do that on these
smaller fields.'
The partnership idea also builds a closer, more long-term relationship
between contractors and oil operators in the current uncertain climate.
'There is a growing recognition that if we continue to do things as we've
always done in the North Sea, the life expectancy of contractors and
operators is limited,' said Rhodes.
BP is applying the general principles behind a partnership deal in its
negotiations with other contractors and other North Sea operators are
looking at the concept with interest.
But some oil executives believe the idea works only with smaller, less
complicated construction projects and will take some time before it can be
applied to large-scale deals.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921123

