FT921-11982

FT  29 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Producers and traders welcome
milk board plan - The monopoly buyer's first step along the road to becoming
a co-operative


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


AFTER TWO years of debate the UK Milk Marketing Board has this week taken
the first step along the road to becoming a voluntary co-operative, ending
nearly 60 years of a statutory monopoly on milk supplies.
The plans have been welcomed by both the Dairy Trade Federation, which
represents dairies and processors, and the National Farmers' Union. Both
organisations, however, were quick to point out that there was a still a
very long way to travel.
The MMB's reluctance to reform itself was underlined by Mr Bob Stevens,
chairman, who prefixed the announcement of the changes on Monday by saying
that the board would have preferred to maintain the old scheme, amended
within a European context.
But the pressure on the MMB has been steady, unrelenting, and from all
quarters - the dairy industry itself, the UK agriculture ministry and the
European Commission included. Signs that things were at last beginning to
move emerged late last year with the threat of a European Court action over
the board's insistence that it held the right to buy and sell low fat, or
skimmed, milk. The board legally holds the right of first refusal on all
liquid or whole milk produced in the UK. But farmers and dairies were
circumventing the scheme by tapping into the demand for skimmed and
semi-skimmed milk, which has grown to take about one third of the UK market.
While Mr John Gummer, minister of agriculture, rejected the European
Commission's 'reasoned opinion' against the board, he made it clear that he
was only doing so in order that the board would negotiate with the DTF
reforms to the whole milk marketing system.
In November Mr Charles Runge, chief executive, resigned, complaining that
the pace of change had been too slow. This was quickly followed by the
surprise appointment of Mr Andrew Dare, a former president of the DTF, as a
special adviser to the board. Mr Dare is seen as the man who facilitated the
co-operative plan.
The board's proposal to become a single voluntary co-operative with pooled
prices has hardly come as a surprise. The crucial change in thinking has
been the decision to hive off Dairy Crest, the wholly owned subsidiary with
a 25 per cent stake in the UK's manufactured dairy product market. Shares in
the company, thought to be worth about Pounds 300m, will be issued to milk
producers on the basis of milk supplied over a given period in the past.
Mr Dare said that the shares would be tradeable among dairy farmers, but he
stressed that full details of the share issue had not yet been worked out.
The plan will put Dairy Crest on an equal footing with its competitors,
appeasing the main objection of the Dairy Trade Federation. 'The trade don't
like the milk board owning a dairy company - they think it's getting all
sorts of favours,' Mr Mark Thomas of the NFU diary committee said yesterday.
However, industry analysts point out that the statutory monopoly enjoyed by
the dairy farmers, who have been guaranteed a buyer for all the milk they
produced, has also been cushioning the dairy trade. The trade has always
been able to get its milk, and always at the same price as any competitor.
While the MMB has acted as a shield to the milk producers, it has also
prevented them from setting up their own processing arrangements to compete
with the big dairies.
The MMB has sent letters to its 30,000 dairy farmers who will have to vote
on the proposals. But it is thought that the great majority of them will
back the plan and join the new co-op.
'We would like to see a large take up,' said Mr Thomas, pointing out that
the suppliers needed the muscle of size in an industry that featured four
major dairy companies supplying half a dozen large supermarkets. Even big
dairy farms with 300 cows or more would find themselves very exposed if
linked to a supermarket purchasing contract, he said.
Industry observers also believe that the conservative instincts of most
dairy farmers will keep them in the co-operative. 'Milk is a fresh product,'
said one. 'The farmers are used to someone picking it up and sending a
cheque at the end of the month. Initially you will only find the more
commercially minded and ambitious staying out.'
The board is proposing that milk prices will be set by 'an industry-agreed
pricing system to be discussed with the dairy trade, Maff (the agriculture
ministry) and the European Commission.' Such a system would very likely be
similar to the board's 'New Ways of Buying Milk,' scheduled to start from
April 1 this year. Milk, which has been priced high for liquid consumption
and low for cheese making, will then be priced according to its supply
profile, with a premium being charged for regular deliveries.
This will get rid of the MMB's much criticised present pricing system under
which 24 different levels are set according to the use to which the milk is
put.
At the same time further rationalisation is expected in Dairy Crest's butter
and cheese production plants, which have undergone two retrenchments already
but are still working well below capacity.
The Ministry of Agriculture yesterday repeated its position that it wants
detailed proposals from the MMB by Easter. Once past the ministry the
proposals will go before the European Commission. Mr Dare said that whoever
won the coming election would be unlikely to find time in the legislative
timetable until 'the back end of this year at the earliest'.
Once the co-op was established it would not last unless it was efficient and
flexible in responding to the market, he said. 'There is no hiding place.'

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920129

