FT924-11969

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (1): Don't go back
to the old ways yet - Keynote / Equities and houses may again look tempting.
But beware - the recession still has some way to go


   By BARRY RILEY


AT THE beginning of July, you could buy 2.90 Deutsche Marks or nearly 9.8
French francs for your pound, and in a speech on the tenth of that month
chancellor of the exchequer Norman Lamont fiercely attacked proponents of a
'cut and run' policy for interest rates and the exchange rate. The
credibility of the UK's anti-inflationary policy, he insisted, 'would be in
tatters'.
Well, by the end of the quarter the tatters were flapping noisily in a gale
force wind. On Black Wednesday, September 16, the pound was forced out of
the European Community's exchange rate mechanism. By the end of the month
the sterling exchange rate was falling through DM2.50 and FFr8.50, declines
of some 13 per cent over the three months, and it has dropped further since
then.
It has been a traumatic time for investors, who have been faced with violent
fluctuations in the markets and have had to decide hastily whether to make
fundamental shifts in their portfolio structure.
A portfolio designed for the ERM would have been heavily defensive and
geared towards fixed-income securities, which promised to pay off well in
conditions of declining inflation. Government long-dated securities, for
instance, yielded just over 9 per cent in early July, against underlying
inflation of little more than 4 per cent. That inflation rate appeared
likely to fall to between 2 and 3 per cent within a year, and prime minister
John Major was rashly holding out the promise of zero inflation in due
course.
News of a further slight contraction in the economy during the previous
quarter, however, dashed the one-time hopes of a post-election revival, and
served to put pressure on the stock market. It also began to undermine the
whole credibility of the government's economic strategy in the opinion of
foreign exchange traders.
Events moved surprisingly quickly as a classic summer foreign exchange
crisis began to engulf the whole of Europe. The trigger was the setting by
the French government of September 20 as the date for the referendum on the
Maastricht Treaty.
Fundamental misalignments within the ERM - notably, overvaluation of the
lira and the pound - had been tolerated by the markets for some time, but
the developing political crisis began to encourage banks and corporate
treasurers all around the globe to reassess the risks and to shift their
positions towards the safety of the DM.
In London, share prices, already depressed by the crumbling of the economy,
began to retreat at the prospect of a battle to save sterling. The Footsie
index fell from 2521.2 on June 30 to hit the year's low of 2281.0 on August
25, a drop of almost 10 per cent. The day before Black Wednesday it was
little higher, but as it became clear that the government could not save the
pound share prices began to rally. Temporary threats of 15 per cent interest
rates made no difference, because they were regarded as incredible. As
sterling was cast adrift, share prices jumped and by the end of September
the Footsie was back up to around 2550, actually a 1 per cent advance over
the three months.
Shares have a long tradition as hedges against devaluation, and against the
domestic inflation that nearly always follows along behind. But on the other
hand, bonds, such as the government's gilts, are highly vulnerable to
inflation. Thus gilts, which had been making gains right up to the middle of
September, were suddenly in headlong retreat. As Norman Lamont had unwisely
spelt out two months earlier, it began to look ominously like 'the end of
the battle with inflation'.
Institutional investors rushed to adjust their portfolio structures into a
post-ERM mode, buying foreign currency bonds and, at home, diving rather
clumsily into index-linked gilts, the only corner of the gilt-edged market
that offers protection against inflation.
Index-linked gilts tend to be traded only on a small scale, and in the past
year or two there has often been more interest from private investors (for
whom they offer great security and tax efficiency) rather than the big
institutions. By mid- September the real interest rate (the return over and
above inflation) offered by index-linked gilts had drifted up to an amazing
4 3/4 per cent. But in the next two weeks that real yield tumbled by more
than half a percentage point, and in fact index-linked gilts turned out to
be the best-performing of all the significant domestic investment categories
in the third quarter - which was not, however, saying a great deal.
As the government opted, however reluctantly, for the 'cut and run' option,
investors obviously had to adjust their views on future inflation. Just
before Black Wednesday, the gap between the yield on fixed-coupon and
index-linked gilts (which is the best available measure of the market's
expectation of inflation) narrowed to about 4 per cent. It subsequently
widened to 5 1/2 per cent.
With sterling crashing, better pickings were naturally available to
investors overseas. A simple D-Mark deposit account would have given a
return of 17 per cent or so to a UK domestic investor. Returns of about 20
per cent were available in some of the overseas bond markets. However,
overseas stock markets were often moderately weak, and so local share price
losses offset part of the gains in terms of sterling. For example, the
FT-Actuaries world index, in sterling, showed only a modest capital gain of
8 per cent during the July-September quarter (but spare a thought for German
investors, who saw the world index fall by 6 per cent in D-Mark terms).
Still, the world's sickliest major stock market, Tokyo, picked itself up
from the bottom in mid-August with the help of a Japanese government
economic rescue package. The FT-A Japan index was up 8 per cent during the
third quarter in yen, and by 21 per cent in sterling.
At home there was a glimmer of light in the gloom. Amidst all the currency
mayhem, sterling interest rates eventually fell by a percentage point on
September 22, giving a modicum of relief to millions of mortgage borrowers.
Cheaper money - together with the potential boost for exporters from
devaluation - gave some hope that the economy might begin to recover. It has
to be said, however, that the evidence emerging in the third quarter
indicated that the economy was slipping further into recession.
Certainly, house prices were continuing to fall steadily. But should
investors nevertheless re-embrace their old 1970s and 1980s philosophy and
concentrate their resources in houses and equities, in the belief that these
assets have proven value in an inflationary economy?
It is beginning to look that way, but first the bottom of the recession has
still to be weathered. Until it becomes clear exactly how bad it is going to
be, asset prices, like Norman Lamont's reputation, could continue to look a
little ragged.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921023

