FT922-13468

FT  11 APR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Base metals finish on bullish
note - Week In The Markets


   By RICHARD MOONEY


WHILE THE Tory election victory gave a psychological boost London Metal
Exchange traders yesterday, news of a 0.25 per cent cut in the US Federal
Reserve's discount was seen as a more convincing explanation for widespread
gains in base metals prices.
The biggest mover was zinc, which closed at Dollars 1,304 a tonne in the
cash position, up Dollars 40 on the day and Dollars 31 on the week. The rise
was also influenced by covering against options granting and concern about
the apparent tightness of supplies available for nearby delivery, the latter
factor being reflected in a widening in the cash premium over three months
metal to Dollars 16.50 a tonne from Dollars 8.50 at Thursday's close.
Zinc's growing 'backwardation', as the cash premium is known in the trade,
had prompted the LME board to warn traders on Thursday that it was closely
monitoring the situation and had at its disposal 'courses of action which
would be introduced should circumstances dictate the necessity of such
actions'.
Mr Martin Abbott, the exchange's director of marketing, described that
statement as 'a warning shot across the bows of anyone who might be thinking
of playing any games in the zinc market'. In normal circumstances cash
prices are quoted at discounts to the forward prices, the development of a
backwardation being associated with supply shortage. So its appearance when
zinc stocks in LME registered warehouses stand at a recored level is bound
to cause suspicion, especially among industrial users, who feel they are
being forced to pay inflated prices to close out hedging positions.
Last week, when a moderate backwardation appeared in the tin market Mr David
King, the LME chief executive, let it be known that that market was one of
those being watched 'more closely than others'. And by the end of the week
the cash premium had disappeared. But it returned this Thursday and at
yesterday's close stood at Dollars 32.50 a tonne. Dealers explained that
demand for quality brands had prompted increased 'borrowing' (buying cash
and selling forward) on the exchange, which has mostly ordinary high grade
metal in its warehouses. The cash tin price closed yesterday at Dollars
5,915 a tonne, up Dollars 155 on the week.
The other significant advance yesterday was in the aluminium market, where
the cash position put on Dollars 14.75 to close at a nine-month high of
Dollars 1,338.50 a tonne, up Dollars 39 on the week. The advance was
reported to reflect option-related and speculative buying encouraged by the
announcement on Tuesday of a smaller-than-expected rise in LME stocks and
yesterday of an unexpected fall. In addition the International Primary
Aluminium Institute reported yesterday that western world smelter stocks,
excluding finished products, fell by 62,000 tonnes in February to 3.323m
tonnes.
The only LME metals to show losses yesterday were copper and lead, which,
being denominated in sterling, were casualties of the UK currency's
post-election rise. Copper was also hit by an unexpected rise in LME stocks
as the cash price fell Pounds 18.25 on the day to Pounds 1,252.50 a tonne,
down Pounds 37 on the week.
At the London bullion market platinum prices were hit by forecasts of
further substantial Russian shipments and by bouts of Japanese selling,
believed to result from investors' need to cover equity market losses. But a
rally in Tokyo share prices yesterday cheered platinum traders and the
London price regained Dollars 4.30 at Dollars 349.50 a troy ounce, showing a
net fall on the week of Dollars 6.25 an ounce.
The attention of coffee traders was mostly engaged this week by the London
council meeting of the International Coffee Organisation, where delegates
were attempting to agree arrangements for negotiations on a new
price-supporting International Coffee Agreement.
Price movements on the coffee futures market tended to reflect the somewhat
spasmodic progress made at those talks. Traders were encouraged by Tuesday's
approval of a working group recommendation to proceed to negotiations on a
pact based on universal quotas. But then the meeting appeared to become
bogged down over how many delegations should participate in the negotiations
and how soon they should begin. As last night's scheduled end of the council
meeting approached the market was depressed by the delegates' apparent lack
of urgency and London's May robusta futures position ended the day Dollars
10 lower at Dollars 864 a tonne, down Dollars 5 on the week.
 --------------------------------------------
        LME WAREHOUSE STOCKS
 --------------------------------------------
(As at Thursday's close)
tonnes
Aluminium -3,000 to 1,199,925
Copper      +325 to 292,050
Lead        -125 to 131,600
Nickel      -102 to 26,100
Zinc        +350 to 223,100
Tin         -105 to 11,675
 --------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920411

