FT921-11957

FT  29 JAN 92 / Yeltsin in Black Sea fleet talks


   By REUTER


   MOSCOW, KIEV


RUSSIAN President Boris Yeltsin yesterday brushed aside speculation about
his health, flying to the south Russian port of Novorossiisk for talks on a
cruiser with leaders of the Black Sea Fleet, Reuter reports from Moscow.
The president, accompanied by Commonwealth forces Commander-in-Chief Yevgeny
Shaposhnikov, met military leaders to discuss nuclear arms ahead of the
president's visit to the UN this week.
The fate of the fleet, with its nuclear weaponry, has emerged as a big
source of tension between Russia and neighbouring Ukraine, which is trying
to wrest the bulk of its ships from the command of the 11-nation
Commonwealth of Independent States.
Mr Yeltsin faced close questioning aboard the 19,300-tonne cruiser Moskva
from fleet commander Admiral Igor Kasatonov and Commonwealth naval chief
Vladimir Chernavin.
They have insisted that the fleet must stay under united command.
Mr Yeltsin's appearance on the Moskva, a ship western naval experts say is
overdue for scrapping, could help dispel uncertainty in the west aroused by
his failure to take part in this week's Middle East peace talks in Moscow.
The president cancelled meetings with officials connected with the
conference on Monday and a spokesman said he was busy with domestic matters.
Mr Yeltsin's visit to the United Nations on Friday will mark his first
important venture abroad as a world leader. Western leaders will be seeking
reassurances the Commonwealth will survive and the future of the former
Soviet forces will be settled.
This raises important questions of sovereignty for Russia as well as vital
economic questions as the country comes to rely increasingly on foreign aid.
The Ukrainian president, Mr Leonid Kravchuk, yesterday asked parliament for
sweeping powers to help him push through rapid economic reforms, Reuter
reports from Kiev.
'The foundation of our state is taking place in difficult times. The
economic downturn is continuing. . . People are losing faith in our ability
to improve the situation,' Mr Kravchuk told parliament's opening session.
He said that he had faith in Mr Vitold Fokin, his unpopular prime minister,
who has been widely criticised for excessive caution in starting a
privatisation programme which would speed the country's move to a market
economy.
Mr Kravchuk said he was seeking wider powers to enable him to form a new
government after consulting other parties.
It was not immediately clear when parliament would decide on his request
which, if granted, would give him decree-issuing powers similar to those
obtained by the Russian president, Mr Boris Yeltsin.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920129

