FT922-4031

FT  08 JUN 92 / Tory rebels to renew push for Maastricht referendum


   By RALPH ATKINS and DANIEL GREEN


TORY MPs opposed to the Maastricht Treaty yesterday said they would keep
pressure on the government as weekend opinion polls showed strong backing
for a UK referendum on closer European union.
Amid clear differences among Conservatives, including in the Cabinet, Mr
Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, will try to soothe the row at Westminster
today when he reports to MPs on last week's emergency discussions by
European Community leaders.
Euro-sceptics will take heart at a hint from Mr Gerald Kaufman, Labour's
foreign affairs spokesman, that the opposition might support a UK
referendum.
'If we had a clear treaty which the country knew was going forward, then one
could not necessarily argue that there should never at any time be a
different way of getting popular approval,' Mr Kaufman said on BBC radio.
Tory backbenchers organising opposition to Maastricht are expected to cause
further embarrassment to the government by collecting signatures for a
motion opposing the reappointment of Mr Jacques Delors as European
Commission president.
The rebels have put forward amendments to the Maastricht bill calling for a
referendum. They have been encouraged by a Sunday Times-Mori poll showing 75
per cent in support of such a move. A Gallup poll for the Sunday Telegraph
showed 69 per cent backing a referendum.
'We are not going to cool off,' Mr Michael Spicer, Tory MP for
Worcestershire South, said.
Lord (formerly Mr Norman) Tebbit, former Cabinet minister, joined calls for
a referendum, saying Maastricht was about 'whether we should give away our
power to govern ourselves'.
The Maastricht bill's passage through parliament has been postponed until at
least the end of this month, following last week's Danish rejection of the
Maastricht treaty. Labour now plans to vote against the bill if the
government brings it back to the Commons without clearing the confusion
created by the Danish referendum result.
Privately some Tories warned at the weekend that ministerial resignations
could follow if the government attempted to bring the Maastricht treaty back
to the Commons in its present form.
'If resignation, as a means of giving leadership to others who needed to be
encouraged, was necessary, I have no doubt that some people would be
prepared to make that gamble,' said one minister.
Financial markets are hoping for a more settled week after the referendum
last week hit shares and bonds while boosting the D-Mark.
Markets were already relatively calm by the end of last week as analysts
concluded that, even if Maastricht might be dead, institutions like the
European Monetary System were more or less intact.
Reports and reaction, Page 2
EC ministers to pursue single market, Page 3
Ministers hopeful on EC hours rule, Page 9
Editorial comment, Page 14
Lex, Page 16
Dealers shrug off Maastricht factors, Page 20
Ian Davidson: End of the single gospel, Page 30

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920608

