FT921-12059

FT  29 JAN 92 / Management: Sell-off generates heat and light - A look at
how regional electricity companies are changing their corporate cultures


   By DAVID LASCELLES


It was the most wrenching privatisation of all. Last year's sale of the UK's
electricity industry drove no fewer than 17 companies from the protected
pastures of state ownership out into the jungle of the private sector.
Each of these companies had to undergo a sweeping cultural transformation to
deal with its new existence, stripping out ingrained practices and replacing
them with new ones that served the demands of the stock market and
competition.
'All of them have a long way to go,' says Terry Neill, a consultant with
Arthur Andersen who specialises in utilities. 'Their thinking is conditioned
by fact that it took 10-15 years to build a power station. It was very
engineering focused.'
Nonetheless, all the electricity companies have put cultural change high on
their agenda. The goals are clear enough. Management must learn to drive the
business to satisfy the market and shareholders rather than bureaucratic
requirements. Staff need to be made more aware of customers, of the bottom
line, and the need for quality.
'Our advice to management is to recognise the scale of the issue,' says
Neill. 'The winners will be those that can execute to the tightest
timetable.'
But there is no obvious route to these goals and companies have adopted a
variety of tactics. Two which illustrate this are Northern Electric and
Yorkshire Electricity, both of them regional distribution companies (RECS)
based in the north-east of England.
For Northern Electric, based in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, the key point is to
drive an awareness of quality into staff. This means teaching each employee
that he or she has a customer, even if that customer is another member of
staff.
'We were not in a British Telecom situation' says Neil Midgley, the quality
improvement manager, referring to the telephone utility's poor reputation at
privatisation. 'We were generally perceived by customers as giving a
reasonable service. But we felt we'd have to improve that service and that
would lead to greater efficiency.'
Northern hired Crosby Associates, a consultancy which specialises in quality
management, to design a plan. This entailed putting 112 key managers through
a four-day course. They in turn trained others throughout the company. Over
a 15-month period, the entire 5,500 staff clocked up some 50,000 hours of
training.
The training has been backed up by team briefings to involve staff in the
company's affairs and keep them abreast of its prospects. 'The bottom line
emphasis is much stronger in management lines,' says Midgley. 'Previously it
wasn't the done thing to talk to the sharp end about the accounts.'
Although Northern expects that it will be several years before the full
effects of this training come through, it already claims to see improvements
in attitudes. Staff have become more responsive to clients, more willing to
suggest ways their work could be improved, and they are displaying a closer
interest in the company's fortunes. The fact that most of them became
shareholders at privatisation helped.
The company's senior management has focused on improving asset utilisation
and cost control, and on refining systems to measure company performance.
David Morris, Northern's chairman, says: 'We are aiming for the biggest
involvement of troops making the maximum number of decisions. It's all about
delegation and motivation.'
At Leeds-based Yorkshire Electricity, they decided to lead the changes by
opening up as many parts of the business as possible to commercial
pressures. This, it was hoped, would produce the desired changes in staff
attitudes as they became aware of the demands of their markets. The
consultants they hired were Hay MSL, specialists in management structures.
The key to the Yorkshire plan was to break the company up into its component
business parts and cluster them beneath a holding company. Each part thus
became more conscious of its identity and its performance. 'We wanted to
know what the contribution was from each business and each had to be driven
by its own markets,' says Malcolm Chatwin, the commercial director who will
shortly be taking over as chief executive.
This involved setting up an internal pricing system so that individual
departments could charge each other for their services.
This, according to Chatwin, 'had a very testing effect'. For example, the
contracting departments which dig holes in the road or install wiring were
made aware that these services could also be supplied by outside
contractors. But departments also became aware that they need not just work
for Yorkshire Electricity, but could supply their services to other
companies as well.
'Commercial and customer pressure has far more effect than management
pressure' says Chatwin.
Yorkshire found these changes easiest to introduce into the non-traditional
parts of the business, like contracting, where time-honoured practices are
less entrenched. But it has also been painful because staff have learnt they
will have to accept swingeing pay cuts to remain competitive or risk having
their business closed down.
The traditional electricity distribution side of the business is proving
more resistant to change, partly because trade unionism is more established,
partly because it remains a monopoly sheltered from competition. But this
year's centralised union pay negotiations for the power industry should be
the last, Yorkshire believes, paving the way to more flexible practices next
year.
Also, as time goes by, the monopoly will be eroded by the reduction in
protection under the timetable established by Offer, the industry regulator.
Although this will add to pressures, it makes it essential that Yorkshire
adjust in time to deal with the new competition.
Of the two approaches chosen by Northern and Yorkshire, the more rigorous is
Yorkshire's - at least in the view of the stock market. There is a sense
that Yorkshire has got most firmly to grips with its business, and that its
strategic decisions must therefore be sound.
On the other hand, the rigour has also created internal strains which could
prove troublesome. For example, the 'market price' imperative which imposed
wage cuts on uncompetitive segments of the business also dictated huge
increases in salaries for top management. James Porteous, the chairman,
received a pay boost of more than 150 per cent last year. The fact that
Yorkshire's profits also soared added to the sense of injustice among staff.
By contrast, Northern is perceived by the stock market to have less
hard-nosed management and to be less certain about the direction in which it
is heading. On the other hand, its emphasis on quality at the point of
contact with the customer has put it at the top of the industry league with
the least number of complaints made to Offer.
John Dean, the electricity analyst at Wise/Speke, the Newcastle stockbroking
firm, points up a further difference between the companies. Northern, he
says, was one of the first to embark on change, in the early 1980s. So it
has been evolving for many years and needs less shock treatment than
Yorkshire. The emphasis it has put on financial controls has also reduced
customer bad debts to the lowest in the industry.
'Yorkshire's approach is the more high profile,' says Dean. 'But both
companies are producing strong results. It's too early to make definitive
judgments about their strategies.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12 Illustration (Omitted).

920129

