FT924-8034

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Property Market: Under fire from both sides - Landowners
and environmentalists object to new rules on contaminated land


   By VANESSA HOULDER


Back in 1989, when concern about the environment began to gain a firmer grip
on the UK, there was widespread support for new government proposals to
identify contaminated land. This was seen as an important step towards
protecting future generations from the legacy of the country's industrial
past.
But the Department of Environment's first set of proposals, issued in May
1991, were withdrawn after a barrage of complaints from landowners. Now the
DoE is fleshing out a second set, and it is once again coming under fire.
One one side, the environmental lobby believes the proposed regulations are
ineffectual. On the other, the business lobby believes they will depress
property values, trigger a flood of legal claims and set back efforts to
regenerate derelict land.
The thinking behind the proposals is that landowners should be held
responsible for pollution on their land (even if they did not cause the
contamination or if it took place before they owned the land) because the
owners would benefit from any increase in land values when it was cleaned
up. But in the interest of fairness, prospective buyers of land should be
protected by the provision of information about any contamination.
So far, so fair. But working out the details of implementing these proposals
has proved unexpectedly difficult for the DoE (which ironically would see
its own headquarters, on the site of a former gas works in Marsham Street,
caught in the net of the new proposals).
The problem is that drawing up a precise register of contaminated land, and
of what is required to clean it up, would involve extensive testing which
would be too expensive and time-consuming. Instead, local authorities are
expected to consult old maps and documents to identify areas where there was
a possibility of past pollution - a process that will take about 15 months.
The DoE's first set of proposals set out more than 40 contaminative uses
that should be registered, including the obvious polluting industries, such
as oil refineries and gas works, as well as less obvious candidates, such as
dry cleaners and demolition sites. Landowners feared that these proposals
would result in registering whole swathes of the country. It was, they said,
a case of taking a sledge-hammer to crack a nut.
The revised proposals, circulated this summer, made significant concessions
to landowners. They required local authorities to notify owners of the
intention to register land and gave owners the right to challenge intended
entries. The register will be split into two parts: one to record land which
has not been investigated or treated and the second to record land where
remedial works have been undertaken.
Most important, the revised scheme reduced the area of land covered by the
register to 10-15 per cent of that envisaged by the previous proposals. The
list of contaminative uses - which may be extended in the light of
experience - is confined to those 'where there is a very high probability
that all land subject to those uses is contaminated unless treated'.
But these revised proposals triggered just as much complaint as the earlier
version. The only consolation for the DoE is that opposition to the
proposals has come from both sides of the environmental debate.
Environmentalists think the scope of the new proposals is far too narrow. It
highlights the government's 'out of sight, out of mind' approach to
contaminated land, says Friends of the Earth, the environmental pressure
group.
The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution says the restricted scope of
the proposals will be 'an obstacle to the difficult task of carrying out
remedial work needed to protect water resources from contamination'.
But the proposals have come under just as much fire from industry,
particularly landowners. The Association of British Chambers of Commerce
wants the government to cancel plans for the register, which it says has
'serious implications for the economy' because of its likely impact on land
values.
The property industry was not impressed by the government's proposal to
split the register into two parts. 'A two-tier system will be not be
understood by the public and will simply add to the confusion,' says Mr
Christopher Jonas, president of the Royal Institution of Chartered
Surveyors.
Nor did the industry relish the prospect of applying to the local ombudsman
or seeking judicial review to challenge the inclusion of their land on the
register. 'We believe that there should be a suitably qualified inspectorate
appointed to deal with such cases and whose powers should be extended to
deal with sites included on the register unjustifiably,' says Grimley JR
Eve, a London-based firm of chartered surveyors.
But the most serious problem for landowners is that contaminated land cannot
be removed from the register after it has been treated. The government's
logic is, first, that information on the site's history will be necessary
when any future change of use is proposed. Second, contamination from the
site may have migrated to adjacent sites. Third, treatment rarely removes
all contamination, while new hazards may be discovered over time.
The new proposals will affect houses and commercial property alike. Already,
the prospect of the new registers has scuppered deals. The collapse of an
agreement to sell the Merry Hill shopping centre in Dudley in the West
Midlands earlier this year was partly blamed on its likely appearance on a
contaminated register.
The Merry Hill centre is just one of numerous sites in the Black Country, a
heavily industrialised area, which will be affected by the new regulations.
The Black Country Development Corporation, which is responsible for 10 sq
miles between Birmingham and Wolverhampton, admits to 'a catalogue of
stability and contamination problems, which can have few rivals in the UK
and probably further afield'.
However, the corporation insists that all these sites can be reclaimed. 'It
is physically possible to deal with these sites,' says Mr John Nicholls, its
development director. 'The concern is not whether the sites can be
physically repaired but the perception of the property industry and the
banks.'
Indeed, it remains to be seen whether lenders and investors will take a
flexible attitude to financing deals on contaminated land. A straw poll
conducted by Drivers Jonas, the chartered surveyor in London, found that
banks and financial institutions would need a considerable amount of
persuasion to fund projects on land appearing on the register. The
respondents feared that contamination would spread beyond the site and that
the clean-up requirements for land on the register would increase.
If investors and lenders do react in this fashion, it will damage land
values and blight land, particularly in the inner cities. Critics, such as
the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, detect a certain irony in the
publication of the revised proposals on contaminated land in the same month
as the Urban Regeneration Agency was launched with a brief to bring
development to 150,000 acres of vacant land in towns and cities.
'The recent hard-won success in bringing back some development to cleared
urban sites will be reversed,' says Mr Michael Pattison, chief executive of
the Royal Institution.
The controversy generated by these proposals shows that there are no quick
fixes when it comes to cleaning up the country's industrial heritage. Unless
the proposals for a contaminated land register are substantially amended, it
seems that a heavy price will be paid in an effort to improve environmental
standards.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------
RENTAL GROWTH (%)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------
                     Retail   Office   Industrial   All Properties
 -----------------------------------------------------------------
Year to Sep 92        -1.8    -14.6       -7.2          -7.9
Quarter to Sep 92     -0.7     -4.2       -2.5          -2.4
Month of Sep 92       -0.2     -1.3       -1.3          -0.9
 -----------------------------------------------------------------
Investment Property Databank
 -----------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921113

