FT923-15506

FT  02 JUL 92 / Mitsotakis wins Greek applause on Macedonia


   By KERIN HOPE


   ATHENS


IN the eyes of most Greeks, Mr Constantine Mitsotakis, the prime minister,
pulled off a Herculean feat at the Lisbon EC summit.
By finally winning Community support for the Greek view that the ex-Yugoslav
republic of Macedonia must change its name before it can be recognised
internationally, Mr Mitsotakis has silenced rebellious rumblings in his
conservative party and left the opposition in disarray.
The Macedonian government, recognised so far only by Turkey and Bulgaria,
has not yet made clear whether it will accept the decision, though Mr Denko
Maleski, the foreign minister, has resigned in protest.
Greece now feels in a strong enough position to offer friendship to its
northern neighbour, including financial assistance and a cross-border trade
package that would be channelled through Salonica, capital of the Greek
province of Macedonia.
But Mr Mitsotakis's next task is likely to prove more difficult. He wants to
reverse almost 20 years of official antagonism and sign a treaty of
friendship with Turkey.
'We can live with the Turks today. As far as the east is concerned, we can
feel safe, nothing will happen,' he said last week, referring to the Defence
Ministry's conviction that Turkey, Greece's eastern neighbour and partner in
Nato, is the main threat to Greek security.
Mr Mitsotakis has now made two trips to Turkey to exchange ideas with Prime
Minister Suleyman Demirel on the proposed treaty. According to Greek
officials, it would outline principles for resolving a group of
long-standing bilateral disputes, from rival claims on undersea oil in the
Aegean and delineation of airspace to treatment of the Greek and Turkish
minorities in Istanbul and Thrace respectively.
He has also come under British pressure to adopt a more conciliatory
attitude towards Turkey, as developing closer EC relations with Ankara has
been spelled out as a priority of the British presidency.
Even before the Lisbon meeting, Greece agreed to drop a two-year-old veto
imposed on the Community's redirected Mediterranean policy, which provides
for Ecu2.05bn (Pounds 1.43bn) in loans and grants for co-operative projects
between Mediterranean countries, because it would make funds available to
Turkey.
But signing the friendship treaty will depend on whether current efforts to
reunite Cyprus, being sponsored by the UN secretary general, are successful.
Mr Mitsotakis had originally intended to push ahead with the treaty
regardless of the Cyprus issue. But he found himself obliged to make the
linkage following angry reactions from both Greek Cypriot politicians and
public opinion at home.
Although last month's round of high-level talks on Cyprus in New York
produced few tangible signs of progress, it brought together the leaders of
the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities for the first time in over two
years.
Now that President George Vassiliou, the Greek Cypriot leader, has managed
to persuade most of his community that not all those driven from their homes
in 1974, when Turkish forces occupied the northern third of the island, will
be able to return, it is up to Mr Rauf Denktash, the Turkish Cypriot leader,
to make the next move.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920702

