FT922-3973

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (15): Reflections on the
Cold War dinosaurs - Industry


   By DAVID GOODHART


INTERNATIONAL LABOUR AND THE ORIGINS OF THE COLD WAR by Denis MacShane
Clarendon Press, Pounds 37.50, 324 pages
ONE OF the side effects of the collapse of communism has been the triumph of
the western International Confederation of Free Trade Unions over the
Soviet-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions.
Few people have heard of either. Most of those aware of their existence
probably assume that they provided an excuse for senior trade unionists from
the respective blocs to eat and drink at their members' expense in exotic
locations.
But co-operation between unions across national borders is, especially
inside the European Community, an increasingly serious business. Indeed, one
of the reasons for the UK's 'opt-out' from an extension of EC employment
policy at last year's Maastricht summit was the fear of Europe-wide
collective bargaining between the European Trades Union Congress and UNICE,
the European employer's body.
Denis MacShane's book about the trade union internationals and the start of
the Cold War was completed too soon for reflections on the end of the Cold
War, and is too narrowly focused for a discussion of current developments in
the EC. But a good polemical journalist like MacShane, who has spent much of
the last decade working for the International Metalworkers Federation, might
have been expected to tell us what the union internationals are for and what
they have ever achieved.
Instead he serves up a mass of detail which seeks to overturn various
supposed orthodoxies of international trade union history, and swipes
unpleasantly at his fellow trade union historians for their myopia,
arrogance, or 'essentialism' in the Cold War debate.
His main, unremarkable, thesis is that the Cold War was not 'external' to
the unions and that the split in the WFTU after 1945 stemmed from an older
split between communist and socialist unions going back to 1917.
The same could be said of the Cold War itself. It was the co-operation
between the Allies and the Soviet Union between 1941 and 1945 that was the
exception. The east-west, or communist-capitalist, contest became more
menacing after 1945 only because the Soviet Union had become a super-power
and occupied a larger part of the globe.
MacShane fails to show that the internationals ever had any effect on
anything or had a class dynamic of their own transcending the nation state.
But after all those years rummaging in the trade union archives he has
convinced himself that organisations such as the WFTU and the ICFTU were in
fact major historical actors, and might even have started the Cold War
themselves. 'The confrontation within trade unions domestically and
internationally was one of the causes rather than a consequence of the Cold
War', he claims.
The discussion of French and German trade unionism just after the war is
more diverting. German trade unionists still seethe when they hear the
self-congratulatory British story about how the British occupiers
established west Germany's model system of industrial relations. In fact, as
MacShane points out, both works councils and industrial unionism had roots
in the Weimar Republic and the TUC had no blueprint and not much influence
over what was established in the late 1940s.
But MacShane undermines his thesis that the Germans did it all for
themselves by pointing out that the most influential German union leaders
wanted a single trade union for all workers and it was only the opposition
of the British, including the TUC, that prevented that and allowed the
creation of industrial unions. The opposition was based on the
unsophisticated argument that the Germans were inherently authoritarian and
would slavishly obey the orders of a mega-union.
Occasionally MacShane allows a touch of humanity to slip through the turgid
detail. During the First World War, for example, the International
Metalworkers Review continued to appear printed in three parallel columns of
English, German and French. 'While troops died in the trenches, metal union
officials could read of British or German legislation or union initiatives
to protect workers in the home factories.'
MacShane has also done his footwork, locating men like Eddie Frow, a leading
communist in the UK's Amalgamated Engineering Union in 1946. But the only
man who briefly comes alive is Jack Tanner, president of the AEU from 1939
to 1954, and the only member of the TUC General Council in the 1940s and
1950s to have attended the second congress of the Communist International in
Moscow in 1920, the founding moment of the world communist movement.
It is a pity that MacShane allows himself to get bogged down in heaping fact
on meaningless fact, in support of an uncontroversial thesis, instead of
telling us more about men like Tanner.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920609

