FT922-592

FT  26 JUN 92 / Accountants accused of slow response to change


   By ANDREW JACK


THE accountancy profession has been slow to react to change and still
provides a service of variable quality, the new president of the Institute
of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales said in his inaugural speech
yesterday.
In an outspoken address at the institute's annual conference in Eastbourne,
Mr Ian Plaistowe defended self-regulation in the profession but also
identified flaws in the existing system.
He said its speed of reaction to recent issues had at times been 'glacial'
and had come only after prodding from the government.
He said that 'the best offices of the best firms are world beaters', but
that quality assurance mechanisms elsewhere among firms were 'patchy'.
Mr Plaistowe said the profession must be more responsive to the needs of the
public and ensure genuine accountability. He argued that, in the past,
professional institutes had remained too secretive, defensive, elitist and
liable to assume that professional status justified privilege.
He said that regulation was essential to modify the effects of market
forces, but that it was best achieved through self-regulation, which he said
was more flexible and sensitive than laws. Otherwise the profession would
become 'just any other business'.
He cast suspicion on calls for legal regulations for the accountancy
profession along the lines of the Securities and Exchange Commission in the
US, which he said represented introducing an 'isolated chunk of a different
corporate culture'.
Mr Plaistowe emphasised that no system of regulation would stop a determined
fraudster and any attempt to design such a system would be 'daft'.
He admitted that the British system of self-regulation had been increasingly
called into question by the fact that professionals are held in less awe
than formerly and by calls for government involvement.
Self-regulation should never be concerned with restricting the access of
non-professionals to the market. Professionals should succeed through
superior quality of service.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920626

