FT921-12073

FT  29 JAN 92 / Consensus seen on valuing of intangibles


   By ANDREW JACK


INTANGIBLE ASSETS such as brand names and patents are increasingly being
identified and valued, according to a report by Arthur Andersen, the
accountancy firm.
It suggests that there is growing consensus about how to value intangibles
and that such attempts are no more subjective than many other aspects of
valuation.
The research was sponsored by a number of companies which already place
values on their brand names.
Its findings stoke the debate about whether valuations of intangible assets
should be permitted in balance sheets - a controversial approach which has
been criticised by some users and regulators of accounts.
The Andersen report classifies intangible assets under four categories:
Brands including consumer goods brands, trademarks and corporate names.
Publishing rights such as book titles, copyright, and film libraries.
Intellectual property including patents, trade secrets, software and
blueprints. Licences including television franchises, landing slots for
airlines, import quotas and distribution rights.
It suggests that the most common approach to valuing intangible assets
attempts to quantify the value of cashflows or earnings attributable to
ownership of the asset.
The report argues that a 'considerable consensus' on valuation methods has
emerged over the last few years, and that earnings from intangibles can
often be identified and quantified effectively.
It says attempts to value intangibles 'involve a degree of subjectivity',
but stresses the uncertainties are no worse than in other areas, such as
valuing unquoted companies or pension funds.
The report's publication comes just ahead of tomorrow's meeting of the
Accounting Standards Board, the UK accountancy regulator, which will discuss
the treatment of goodwill and intangibles in financial reporting.
Mr David Tweedie, board chairman, welcomed the report as one of several
documents which are helping to stimulate debate. He said the board was
likely to issue preliminary draft statements on the definition and
recognition of assets by Easter, and another on the valuation of assets
later this year.
The Valuation of Intangible Assets, Economist Intelligence Unit, 40 Duke
Street, London W1A 1DW. Pounds 95

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920129

