FT923-6497

FT  24 AUG 92 / Panic faces challenge from militant Serbs


   By LAURA SILBER and IVO DAWNAY


   BELGRADE, LONDON


MR MILAN PANIC, the Yugoslav prime minister, was on a collision course with
militant Serb leaders in the northern Serb province of Vojvodina yesterday
over his pledge to halt 'ethnic cleansing'.
Ultranationalist Serbs in the village of Hrtkovci threatened to set up
roadblocks if five of their leaders were not released from prison today. The
five were arrested on Friday night for 'endangering the freedom and rights
of citizens of other nations' after spearheading the expulsion of some 5,000
Croats from Hrtkovci, formerly a predominantly Croat village.
The arrests appear to be timed to coincide with this week's London
conference on the former Yugoslavia, in an attempt to improve the west's
image of Yugoslavia. If the Serbian radicals remain in jail, it will signal
that Mr Panic has enough power to back up his pledge.
The confrontation could destroy the fragile co-existence between Vojvodina's
Serbs, who make up 55 per cent of the population, and its ethnic Hungarians
and Croats. The wars in Croatia and Bosnia began when militants set up
roadblocks, claiming territory as their own, and took up arms against their
ethnic rivals.
Mr Ostoja Sibincic, the village's mayor, was one of the five men detained.
He joined a group of Serb refugees from Croatia in ordering streets be
re-named and demanding the name of the farming village be changed from the
Croat-sounding Hrtkovci into Serbislavci, meaning 'the place of Serbs'.
Croat inhabitants of Hrtkovci last month complained to Mr Panic about being
forced to abandon their homes. They told of escalating harassment if they
refused to accept offers to swap their homes for the houses of Serb refugees
from Croatia.
One Croat was found murdered after Mr Vojislav Seselj, an ultranationalist
Serb leader who visited the village in July, read out a black-list of 17
people who he said had to leave the village.
If Mr Panic caves in and frees Mr Sibincic it would set an ominous precedent
for minorities in Serbia, where Serbs make up two-thirds of the population.
Meanwhile, fierce fighting continued in the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo
yesterday. Sarajevo radio said 22 people had been killed in the city since
noon on Saturday.
Ivo Dawnay in London writes: Mr John Major, the prime minister, will open
the London conference on Wednesday with a speech as European Community
president. His address, expected to condemn Serbian human rights abuses and
press for tighter sanctions against Belgrade, is also intended to build
bridges between the EC and the UN, whose relations have been strained by
poor co-ordination.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920824

