FT921-517

FT  28 MAR 92 / Cookery: The licenced Lenten binge


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


TOMORROW is Mother's Day, a commercial bonanza spawned by the gift and
greeting card trades to take over from what was once celebrated as Mothering
Sunday.
In medieval Britain, Mothering Sunday was a day when the Christian faithful
flocked to their 'mother' church, the cathedral of their diocese for special
services.
Later, Mothering Sunday celebrated human as well as spiritual aspects of
motherhood. It became the day on which servants were released from domestic
service to go home to their families. The young women took cakes to their
mothers which were baked in their employers' kitchens using fine ingredients
from the larder.
Mothering Sunday falls on the fourth Sunday of lent, mid-lent Sunday or
Refreshment Sunday as it is also called. This was the day on which the
lenten fast was lifted briefly. Time for a mini binge. The little feast came
as a welcome reward to lenten penitents. Also the relaxation of the fast
conveniently allowed use to be made of the eggs, cream and other fresh
produce that had accumulated since the beginning of lent.
Simnel cake, rich with fruits and heavily marzipanned, was a favourite
choice for daughters to bake and take home. Very practical: it was solid,
easily portable, and once the ingredients were baked the cake would keep
until Easter Day.
I am afraid I do not care for marzipan, not even the real home-made stuff.
In fact, I am generally not much of a cake eater. So, perversely, I offer a
couple of pudding suggestions instead.
OAT AND ALMOND TREACLE TART (serves 8)
A modern twist on an old favourite, this should appeal to today's trendy
young wholewheat society. The filling is as chewy as muesli and the
sweetness of the syrup is sharpened by a generous dash of lemon.
Shortcrust pastry made with 6 oz flour (preferably half wholewheat and half
plain white flour); 4 oz porridge oats; 2 1/2 oz flaked almonds; the finely
grated zest of 2 lemons and the juice of 1 lemon; 1 x 1 lb tin of golden
syrup.
Use the pastry to line a deep 8-in flan tin, fluted or plain. Blind bake it
until well cooked and crisp. This is important, particularly if you do not
plan to eat the whole of the tart at one sitting. Few things are sadder than
a soggy - bottomed tart with pastry which collapses as you serve it.
Crush the almonds with your fingers to break them up a little, then mix them
with the porridge oats and lemon zest.
Tip the golden syrup into the top part of a double boiler. Place over
simmering water and heat until the syrup is warm and runny. Add the lemon
juice, stir and warm again briefly.
Away from the heat tip the oat and almond mixture into the syrup and stir
vigorously for at least one minute to mix everything well.
Turn the filling into the prepared pastry case, levelling it gently. Slip it
onto a pre-heated baking sheet and cook at 350`F-375`F (180`C-190`C) gas
mark 4-5 for 40-45 minutes or until deep golden and set.
Serve tepid or cold, alone, with cream or with a bowl of lemon syllabub as
sauce.
ENGLISH CUSTARD PIE (serves 8-10)
This, on the other hand is decidedly old fashioned, the kind of very rich
pudding that was made with gay abandon in those happy bygone days before the
word cholesterol had entered common parlance. It is the sort of pie that
clowns might have chucked at one another (whence the expression 'egg on your
face', maybe) but it is far too good to waste on pranks - a pie to savour
occasionally in slow and appreciative mouthfuls.
Shortcrust pastry made with 8 oz flour; 6 eggs;  3/4 pt single cream; 1 1/2
 2 oz sugar (cubes for preference, granulated will do); 2 oranges; 1/2
teaspoon cornflour; 1 teaspoon triple distilled orange blossom water; whole
nutmeg or ground cinnamon.
Use the pastry to line a deep 9 1/2 -10in flan tin, fluted or plain, and
blind bake it until well cooked and crisp. Be sure to cook it very
thoroughly and do it well ahead as the crust is best baked at fairly high
heat, whereas the filling needs to be cooked at a very gentle temperature or
the texture of the custard will be spoiled by bubbles and the taste will be
eggy instead of delicately creamy and silky smooth.
Rub the sugar cubes over the oranges to pick up the fragrant oils from the
skin (or grate the orange zest and whizz it with the granulated sugar in a
coffee or spice mill). Then crush with a fork and cream together until
smooth the orange-scented sugar, cornflour and orange blossom water.
Scald the cream and pour it onto the sugar mixture. Stir well until the
sugar is melted. Then mix the sweetened cream into the lightly beaten eggs,
pouring the liquid in a thin stream and beating the eggs with a wire whisk
all the while.
Pour the creamy concoction into the pastry case and bake at 275`F-300```F
(140`C-150`C) gas mark 1-2 for 45 minutes or until set.
Dust the top of the pie lavishly with freshly grated nutmeg or ground
cinnamon as soon as it emerges from the oven, and cool to tepid, or leave to
become completely cold before serving.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920328

