FT921-15351

FT  10 JAN 92 / Steel closure will cost Clyde Pounds 4.4m revenue


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent and IVOR OWEN


THE DECISION to close the Ravenscraig steel plant in Lanarkshire was
described yesterday as a 'very serious blow' by the Clyde Port Authority,
which gains a third of its Pounds 12m revenue from steel-related business.
The announcement has affected the bid to acquire the port which is being
submitted today by a management-employee team under the privatisation
procedure for trust ports.
Mr John Mather, Clyde Port's managing director and leader of the team, said:
'If we had finalised our bid before we heard the news we would have had to
amend it. We only completed it today.'
Mr Mather said he was shocked by the 'speed and swiftness' of British
Steel's decision which came a year earlier than he had anticipated. It had
created a 'very serious situation'.
Part of British Steel's closure of Ravenscraig will be the shutdown of the
ore and coal unloading terminal at Hunterston on the Firth of Clyde, which
contributes Pounds 2.4m revenue to the port authority. Also to stop is the
exporting of steel slabs from Glasgow, which is worth Pounds 2m in revenue.
The future of the port's Pounds 1.2m-a-year dredging programme for the river
Clyde is uncertain because of the expected fall in revenue.
Mr Mather said: 'We will have to change the dredging pattern to see if it
can be done more economically.'
Today is the last day for submission of indicative bids for the port, which
covers the Clyde estuary where traffic has fallen drastically in recent
years. No other bidders have declared their hand.
The closure of Ravenscraig will also affect British Rail's freight
operations in Scotland. The 35 trains which run to and from the plant every
week earn its Trainload freight business about Pounds 20m a year, and
directly and indirectly employ about 200 people.
Ravenscraig accounts for 40 per cent of all Trainload operations in
Scotland. The trains carry coal and ore to Ravenscraig, bring other raw
materials from England and transport steel slabs to south Wales.
British Rail said: 'It is too early to say what will happen to the jobs
involved. We were thinking Ravenscraig would close in 1994.'
ScottishPower, the electricity company, will lose further custom from
British Steel as a result of the closure but says it has already obtained
alternative business.
In 1990 British Steel plants in Scotland accounted for 561GWh (gigawatt
hours) or 8.1 per cent of ScottishPower's industrial unit sales. However,
that was expected to be cut by 60 per cent to about 225GWh with last year's
closures.
ScottishPower's flotation prospectus said further steel closures could
reduce unit sales by up to a further 150GWh a year, but because of discounts
to British Steel the fall in revenue would be less. Lord Williams of Elvel,
deputy Labour leader in the Lords, yesterday accused the government of
'hiding behind' privatised British Steel while it took difficult decisions,
Ivor Owen writes.
He asked if British Steel would be required to offer to sell the Ravenscraig
plant to another private-sector operator as an alternative to closure.
He urged that such an offer should be kept open until after the coming
general election so that an incoming government could 'explore the
possibilities'.
Lord Strathclyde, Scottish Office junior minister, said designation as an
enterprise zone would bring significant economic benefits to north
Lanarkshire, with estimated net additional expenditure of Pounds 50m over 10
years bringing 7,500 extra jobs.
He added that British Steel's undertaking to keep the Ravenscraig complex
open had been 'subject to prevailing market conditions'.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920110

