FT921-14308

FT  16 JAN 92 / Peace, but no plenty: The growing calm in Central America


   By STEPHEN FIDLER and DAMIAN FRASER


In the splendid setting of Mexico City's Chapultepec Castle, one of Latin
America's last 'dirty wars' will formally end today. The government of El
Salvador and its rebel opponents are to sign a treaty to end a 12-year civil
war that claimed 75,000 lives, most of them civilian.
Country by country, a sort of peace is reclaiming Central America. Only in
Guatemala is a civil war still being fought. Elected civilian governments
rule in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua; a decade
ago there was only one, in Costa Rica.
In the past 12 years, close to 200,000 people in the region have died
violently and 2m to 3m central Americans - as much as 15 per cent of the
population - have been displaced from their homes.
In part, these countries were victims of the Cold War. President Ronald
Reagan's secretary of state, Mr Alexander Haig, once declared that he would
'draw the line' against communism in El Salvador, a country the size of
Wales with a population of 5.1m. President Reagan himself saw the left-wing
rebels there as attempting to destabilise the whole region and moving 'chaos
and anarchy toward the American border'. The US poured more than Dollars 4bn
into El Salvador during the 1980s, one quarter of it military aid.
The end of the Cold War has sharply reduced America's fears. At the same
time, funding for the extreme left from outside the region has ebbed away,
as has its intellectual raison d'etre. The once bitterly divided isthmus is
now ruled by like-minded centre-right politicians. When they meet (which is
often) they talk about economic integration, market-based reforms and the
struggle to raise living standards to the levels of the 1970s.
Peace in El Salvador should help to reinforce this process, and reduce the
still huge influence of the military on governments in the region. It will
increase pressure on the Honduran army to cede more power to the civilian
government. Foreign attention will turn to the Guatemalan government in a
bid to force it to reach agreement with its rebels, with whom it has been
fighting for 30 years. The Nicaraguan army, still under the command of the
left-wing Sandinistas, who lost control of the government in elections in
1990, is expected likewise to be reduced in size.
Beyond its effects on the military, the peace accord reflects and reinforces
a genuine narrowing of once sharp ideological differences in Central
America. The guerrillas in El Salvador, once the hardest-line Marxists in
the region, changed their tune after witnessing the collapse of Nicaragua's
economy and its Sandinista government, and the fall of communist eastern
Europe. For the most part they now support a mixed economy; many talk
approvingly, for example, of privatisation.
The 18-month negotiations between the Salvadorean government and the rebel
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front were thus mainly over political,
rather than economic, rights: the reduction of the size of the army and
redefinition of its role, and the admission of the rebels into the national
police force, in particconcluded, Mr Abraham Rodriguez, a distinguished
Salvadorean Christian Democrat, said of the rebels' negotiating position:
'There is not one point dividing them from us.'
The traditional ruling oligarchies and the right-wing businessmen who
support them have conceded many of these political rights, in part because
of a fear that continued war would leave them behind in Latin America's rush
to open itself politically and economically.
President George Bush's pragmatic approach to Central America could hardly
contrast more with the ideological stance of his predecessor. The Bush
administration has shifted the emphasis of relations with the whole of Latin
America towards one of economic partnership. It has actively and faithfully
supported the UN-mediated negotiators in the Salvador talks.
The chief UN mediator, Mr Alvaro de Soto of Peru, hails the willingness of
the US to take a back seat in the Central America peace talks as the end of
the Monroe doctrine - the rationale for US intervention in the western
hemisphere first enunciated in 1823 by US President James Monroe.
The Mexicans, who have long been at the centre of efforts to resolve the
regional conflict, are similarly complimentary. Mr Sergio Gonzalez Galvez,
head of the Americas section in Mexico's foreign service, says Mexico has
not had a single difference with the US over the Salvador peace talks - in
marked contrast with their bitter disputes over Central America in the
1980s. 'The US,' says Mr Gonzalez Galvez, 'is convinced that actions taken
in Central America must be co-ordinated with countries like Mexico,
Venezuela and Colombia, and not alone.'
As the US withdraws from Central America, the Mexicans, and to a lesser
extent the Venezuelans, will partly fill the vacuum. After spending their
time in the 1980s proposing peace plans, they are now concentrating on
economic aid and advice. Mexico hopes to have free-trade agreements with
each of the Central American republics by 1996.
Both Venezuela and Mexico sell oil to Central America at a discount,
channelling money received into development projects in the region.
According to the Mexican Commission for Co-operation in Central America,
Mexico has signed 1,451 agreements with Central America in the past three
years, covering matters such as transport, customs clearance, education,
cultural exchanges and border issues.
The region has a long way to go to become a model of reformist zeal. Despite
the peace agreement, to be monitored by 1,000 UN observers, violence seems
unlikely to end soon. The ethnic divisions between Indians and people of
Spanish origin, the great inequalities of wealth and income, the hate
between former enemies are not going to melt away overnight.
In El Salvador, even if, as Mr Gonzalez Galvez suggests, the bulk of the
army supports the treaty, death squads - right-wing groups within the army
that killed thousands during the 1980s - may well return.
The treaty could also come unstuck in its implementation. The provisions for
handing over to the rebels the large swathes of territory they control are
messy, and reflect a last-minute compromise.
To make matters worse, the economic and social problems across the isthmus
remain huge. The war-ravaged economies of the region are heavily dependent
on exports of a few commodities such as bananas, sugar and coffee. Yearly
incomes per head of the population range from Dollars 830 in Nicaragua to
Dollars 1,800 in Costa Rica.
Two years ago, an international commission reckoned that the region would
need Dollars 2bn a year in economic assistance over five years for
reconstruction and to set in train sustained economic recovery. The
Salvadorean government has estimated that it alone needs Dollars 1.8bn over
five years for reconstruction. The World Bank is to convene a conference
within the next few months to co-ordinate foreign aid for El Salvador. But
will the money be forthcoming?
On the face of it, the expected presence in Mexico today of Mr James Baker,
the US secretary of state, and the leaders of Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela
and Spain bodes well. But as Central America loses the world's attention,
total foreign aid is likely to fall. That fall will be sharper if, as some
observers fear, the US disengages from the isthmus economically as well as
politically.
The US emphasis on economic co-operation with Latin America notwithstanding,
Mr Kenneth Carter of the Council for Foreign Relations in New York says he
senses a mood in the US that Washington should 'wash its hands' of Central
American governments.
The region is no longer on anybody's front line. Economically, it carries no
great importance: the combined gross national product of the five countries
in 1990 was just over Dollars 23bn, less than that of Wales. Politically, it
may remain significant only to its Latin neighbours - whose ability to pump
in money is limited. Despite El Salvador's hope for better prospects, the
region may be forced to rely on its own limited resources, along with a
trickle of foreign investment.
For the people of Central America, the peace has been long enough in coming;
emerging from the economic and social troubles will take substantially
longer.

The Financial Times


London Page 20 Map (Omitted). Photograph Mexico, Carlos Salinas (Omitted).
Photograph Guatemala, Jorge Serrano (Omitted). Photograph El Salvador,
Alfredo Cristiani (Omitted). Photograph Honduras, Rafael Callejas (Omitted).
Photograph Nicaragua, Violeta Charmorro (Omitted). Photograph Costa Rica,
Rafael Calderon (Omitted).

920116

