FT921-1253

FT  25 MAR 92 / International Company News: Ciba-Geigy tests its formula -
The company's attempt to shed its secretive image


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


WHEN Dr Alex Krauer, Ciba-Geigy's chairman, stands up to present the group's
year-end results tomorrow, it will signal two significant steps in his
attempt to transform this conservative Swiss chemicals company.
By announcing the figures in London - the first time one of the three
Basle-based chemicals groups has unveiled results outside its home town  -
he will reinforce his efforts to end the company's Swiss secrecy. And he
expects to demonstrate the first benefits of a fundamental reorganisation he
launched two years ago.
Dr Krauer hopes the location of today's presentation will demonstrate his
commitment to foreign shareholders after a decision two years ago to make
the company's shares available to non-Swiss nationals. This was done, said
Dr Krauer, because the Swiss market was no longer large enough to sustain
the group's share price. More than 25 per cent of Ciba-Geigy's shares are
held outside Switzerland.
The requirements of foreign investors forced Ciba-Geigy to divulge
information previously considered secret. This coincided with restructuring
of the group by Dr Krauer.
When he took over in 1987 he compared the group to a supertanker, providing
synergies of scale, but difficult to manoeuvre. The group, which dates back
to 1758, had become complacent, said Dr Krauer.
'We were spoilt for far too long,' he said. 'Everything was too obvious and
easy, and this had to be changed.'
Dr Krauer launched his reorganisation, known as Vision 2000, in July 1990.
It aimed to cut bureaucracy, make the organisation more commercially
flexible - by giving the operations greater independence and encouraging
entrepreneurial behaviour from employees - and open the business to the
public.
Relations with the public had suffered after a fire at a neighbouring Sandoz
plant led to 30 tonnes of dangerous agricultural chemicals, including 200kg
of mercury, being washed into the Rhine.
Dr Krauer said Ciba-Geigy also needed to be more flexible in its response to
the increasingly competitive commercial environment. Bulk chemicals
producers, for example, were moving into the Swiss company's traditional
high-margin niche businesses and Dr Krauer said that every significant
chemical group, apart from Dow of the US, was entering its markets.
The need for change was also internally driven, said Dr Krauer. 'All big
companies have a tendency towards bureaucracy and fat. Ciba-Geigy was no
exception,' he said.
The organisation consisted of about 140 subsidiary companies, split into
business divisions, geographical operations and other functions with
expertise, for example, in finance and legal affairs.
'The functions had too much weight. Their motivation was to do a
professionally good job - a laudable ambition, but one that led to
perfectionism. The object of business is results, and if you are
over-perfect you don't achieve the best results,' said Dr Krauer.
He launched a programme to cut 10 per cent of the 24,000 staff in
Switzerland, where personnel costs had been rising.
He has also tried to make the organisation more flexible by persuading
senior managers to delegate under a system he described as 'directed
autonomy'.
Dr Krauer admitted implementation of Vision 2000 had not been completely
successful. 'You never reach your objective 100 per cent. Although
performance is dependent upon other elements, there is no doubt that we will
see the benefits of the changes on the bottom line when we announce our
results.'
Many managers resented losing power. However, Dr Krauer said, they
previously only had a form of 'pseudo-power' based on a hierarchical set-up.
He said their task was now more demanding because they were being asked to
influence people through personality and professional competence.
Dr Krauer said: 'Quite a lot of the people further down the organisation had
been asking loudly for greater responsibility, but when we gave it to them
they didn't use it. A number weren't willing to take risks and kept ringing
Basle to cover themselves. In 80 per cent of the cases, it was a question of
training and leadership. We must allow people to make mistakes - though not
too many.'
Dr Krauer has set up a reward system for about 1,000 managers world-wide
based on performance. Basle-based managers can increase their salaries by 20
per cent if they reach their targets, or lose 10 per cent if they fail. In
1990, when profits fell 30 per cent, most managers' salaries fell. 'This was
certainly the case of the executive committee of which I am a member,' said
Dr Krauer.
'I can't say we're perfect. But the momentum is building up and we are
moving in the right direction,' he added. How far in the right direction and
whether his own pay-packet increases, he will demonstrate on Thursday.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920325

