FT922-4312

FT  05 JUN 92 / World Trade News: Italy agrees Qatar LNG deal


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


ITALY has made a preliminary commitment to go ahead with a major deal to buy
liquefied natural gas (LNG) from Qatar's extensive off-shore North Field.
Under a contract signed yesterday in Doha by the Qatar General Petroleum
Corporation (QGPC) and Snam, the gas development and transportation
subsidiary of ENI, Italy's state oil group, the Italians will study the
purchase of 8bn cubic metres of LNG a year, rising to 13bn cu. m. Some gas
could be sold on to other customers in Europe.
'This is just the beginning,' a SNAM spokesman said yesterday. 'However, our
track record shows when we initiate something we intend to finish it,' he
added.
The agreement yesterday envisages the creation of a joint company 65 per
cent-owned by QGPC and the remainder split between Snam and Enel, the
Italian state power-generating concern. Snam will be responsible for the
design, development, transport and sale of the LNG.
No price tag has been put on the deal but an agreement involving the sale of
similar quantities of LNG to Japan's Chubu Electric has been costed at over
Dollars 5bn at current prices. Of this, Dollars 2bn would go on a
liquefaction plant and Dollars 1.7bn on the construction of seven LNG
tankers. However, the liquefaction plant could also handle the processing of
Italian LNG exports.
Attempts by Qatar to develop its North Field have been handicapped by long
arguments over price.
Similar considerations aborted efforts by Iran in the 1970s to sell LNG to
Spain. Other problems concern transit through the Suez canal.
The Japanese originally envisaged exports to begin in 1997. but this target
has now slipped to at least 1999. Even so, the Italian project yesterday
talked of sales beginning in 1997.
Qatar last September awarded a Dollars 770m contract to Italy's Condotte
d'Acqua for the construction of a port at Ras Laffan, as part of the LNG
sales project.
Until now, Italy has been relying principally on Algeria for the supply of
gas and LNG. ENI decided recently to proceed with the construction of a
second gas pipeline under the Mediterranean, between Sicily and Tunisia, to
carry increased purchases of Algerian gas. There has also been talk of a
deal with Libya.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

920605

