FT923-6577

FT  24 AUG 92 / US warns citizens to avoid Mideast as hostility grows


   By ROGER MATTHEWS and TONY WALKER


   WASHINGTON, CAIRO


THE US has warned its citizens to stay away from the Middle East, especially
Jordan, and from north Africa and south Asia, amid mounting Arab hostility
to its agreement with Britain and France to impose an air exclusion zone
over southern Iraq.
Details of the plan, under which Iraqi aircraft flying south of the 32nd
parallel will be threatened with destruction, are expected to be announced
in the next 48 hours.
Most of Iraq's neighbours, in spite of their hostility to the regime of
President Saddam Hussein, have warned that the exclusion zone will increase
tension in the region and threatens to dismember a sovereign state. Iran,
Yemen, Syria, Jordan and Algeria have issued statements in support of Iraq's
territorial integrity and opposing the allied plan.
Egypt is also known to be concerned at the US action, and even Gulf
countries such as Bahrain, where Britain based its Tornado aircraft during
the Gulf war, have sought to head off further US involvement in Iraq. Only
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait are believed to be fully behind renewed military
action.
Mr Kamel Abu Jaber, Jordan's foreign minister, appeared to sum up Arab fears
when he said: 'Any measure that aims at curtailing the unity of the Iraqi
people and its territorial safety will lead to destabilising the region's
security and subjects its states and people to dangerous options.'
Iraqi opposition groups and reports from Iran said yesterday that Shias in
the south had come under fresh attack from President Saddam's troops who
were using heavy artillery and tanks.
The aim of the allied air exclusion zone is to protect the Shias from
persecution by Baghdad in defiance of the regime's obligations imposed by UN
resolutions after the Gulf war ceasefire.
There is also a US threat to bomb other targets in Iraq if the regime
refuses to permit UN inspectors to enter government buildings to search for
evidence of weapons of mass destruction. An inspection team is expected to
return to Baghdad next week.
The US said last week that Mr Saddam was planning 'genocide' against the
Shia population.
Israeli concessions, Page 3
Peace hopes, war fears, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920824

