FT921-631

FT  28 MAR 92 / Books: Come back Indiana Jones]


   By AC GRAYLING


THE SIGN AND THE SEAL: A QUEST FOR THE LOST ARK OF THE COVENANT by Graham
Hancock Heinemann Pounds 16.99, 600 pages
MANKIND'S weaknesses are easily turned into money. Among the most
convertible is credulity, a close third to the human relish for sex and
violence. Credulity explains the success of books about religion,
particularly the sort alleging discoveries about the Turin Shroud, the Holy
Grail or the Dead Sea Scrolls. Take the barrels of salt required when
reading any such book and multiply them tenfold: you will need no less for
Graham Hancock's account of the present whereabouts of the Ark of the
Covenant.
Neither Hancock nor his publisher mind admitting that the film Raiders of
the Lost Ark influenced the genesis of this book. Hancock duly attempts to
inject a little excitement into his account; but he is no Indiana Jones, and
not even meeting a Harrison Ford look-alike helps to make the book remotely
rousing.
The Ark of the Covenant is the gold-covered box in which the Israelites kept
Moses's stone tablets, brought down from Sinai with the Ten Commandments
upon them. Until Solomon's time it stood in the Holy of Holies in
Jerusalem's temple. It then disappeared. Hancock's claim is that it was
taken via Egypt to Ethiopia, where it has remained ever since, now lying in
a chapel in a little town called Axum.
But this is the least of it. Hancock further claims that The Ark and the
Holy Grail are the same thing. Indeed, the Grail is a cypher for the Ark,
whose whereabouts was discovered by the medieval Knights Templar, who wished
to keep the secret from their contemporaries while passing it to posterity.
They therefore hired the poet Wolfram von Eschenbach to write Parzival to
encode the secret of the Ark as a story about a Grail quest.
The Knights Templar, in the meantime, excavated the mount in Jerusalem where
Solomon's temple had stood, and discovered blueprints containing the basic
principles of Gothic architecture. Tipped off by the carvings in the porch
of Chartres cathedral, Hancock spotted the ruse and unravelled the secret of
Chartres, of the Templars, of Parzival, and therefore of the Ark itself.
There is much more in this vein, involving everyone from President Mengistu
and the Queen of Sheba to the deity himself in an engulfing mire of
improbabilities. The book is 600 pages long, but it would be a mere 60 if
one removed all sentences containing the words 'perhaps' and 'possibly' and
all such rhetorical phrases as 'could it not be the case that'. The logical
structure of the book's argument has the classically tendentious form,
'perhaps ..perhaps ..if so ..therefore'.
The book is complete rubbish. From beginning to end it is a cobbling-up of
invention, speculation and guess-work, draped like a tarpaulin over a
rickety frame of second-hand erudition and third-rate sophistry. I suppose
one should be indignant about this almost fraudulent attempt by author and
publisher to part as many people as possible from their money, but in truth
the book is so exceedingly awful that it is funny. It is a surreal parody of
a book, a fictional work of non-fiction in the tradition of Jorge Luis
Borges but without the quality. It rides the coat-tails of a film made for
teenagers, but the film at least was honest: it did not claim to be other
than fiction.
Clearly Heinemann scents lucre. Whether or not the result is commercially
worthwhile, I think they would do better by coming clean and giving the book
a decent burial in their Humour list.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920328

