FT924-6288

FT  21 NOV 92 / Property: Georgian's enduring appeal / A look at the
continuing demand for houses with that classical touch


   By GERALD CADOGAN


WHY DO the British love Georgian? Was the 18th century special, as the
estate agents and Prince Charles demand we believe (despite many houses of
that age having been jerry-built?) Or is it a desire that shows more about
20th century yearnings than the buildings themselves?
These questions are pertinent. Fine Georgian houses are on the market. And
the crisis of national identity, that has been worsening steadily since the
first world war and is now acute, bestows a powerful appeal on the rational,
confident certainty of 18th century architecture.
Georgian was not always popular. The Victorians had little time for it. With
their pinnacled, neo-Gothic buildings, they strained to reflect their
prowess in technology and trade while also leading the conscience towards
God. The ubiquitous nooks and recesses symbolise, in buildings that looked
like medieval churches, a culture that dispensed the same justice in Bombay
as in the Strand.
In the universal loss of faith of the 20th century, this Victorian power
play of crockets, pinnacles and polychrome brickwork looked dangerous.
Sensible Georgian came back to fashion, and the Georgian Group was founded
in 1937 to ensure that it was looked after.
With Georgian, large and well-lit rooms leave no space for private scheming
and fantasies. Life is in public. You know where you are, and how you relate
to everybody else. The Georgian drawing room is a microcosm of an ordered
world. No wonder the British like them.
In the 17th century, Inigo Jones propounded the ideas of a 16th century
Italian, Andrea Palladio, who wrote of the need for great men to have grand
country houses in which to rest and recover from the city's roar - and built
them. Palladio's so-called villas in the Veneto are metropolitan splendour
and classical style transposed to the country and married to a barn, as they
all live off the land.
But the English civil war, and the arrival of Dutch styles with William and
Mary, stopped the clock on British Palladianism until disorder ceased in the
18th century. Then the British invested with gusto in grand buildings in the
country, transforming swathes of landscape, moving villages for lakes,
decking the houses with pictures and furniture bought on the grand tour,
importing Italian plasterers, and commissioning a galaxy of brilliant
architects to create the nation's stately homes.
Georgian today has an aura of pre-Industrial Revolution nostalgia, when all
knew their place. That combines with the clean lines of rooms designed to
make the English (who have shyness problems the Irish, Scots and Welsh do
not) lose their inhibitions and start to behave as public people. (The roots
of Georgian are, after all, in the Mediterranean). And it carries memories
of classical education.
So, people want Georgian. It is the paradigm of the civilised, ordered life,
uncluttered by the demands of religious superstition (in which they do not
believe now and hardly did in the 18th century). Live in a Georgian house
and you are breathing a better lifestyle.
Even in the recession, Georgian sells, beating its guide prices. The
splendid Old Rectory at Amersham, Buckinghamshire, has just gone for more
than Pounds lm and the Grade I-listed Ven, near Sherborne, Dorset, for over
Pounds 1.1m (both through Knight Frank & Rutley). At the easier guide price
of Pounds 475,000, Lane Fox (0285-653101) offers Brook House in Painswick,
between Cirencester and Cheltenham, a 17th century house lurking behind a
Georgian front - as many apparently Georgian houses turn out to be. (You hit
your head on the beams in the back part).
Buy Georgian in Hampshire and you are close to where Jane Austen lived.
James Harris (0962-841-842) has several attractive houses near Winchester
and Petersfield, well placed for getting to London by the M3.
A few miles from Lady Thatcher's Lincolnshire birthplace of Grantham, the
Pounds 210,000 guide price for the substantial George IV old rectory at
Great Ponton is far cheaper than it would be in the south-east. Carter Jonas
(0733-68100) is the agent and hunting is with the Belvoir.
A century older is the old rectory at Otterden, Kent, where the porch and
gables still show Dutch influence. With four acres of serious gardens, it is
being offered by Strutt & Parker (0227-451-123) at Pounds 475,000.
Brockhampton House in Herefordshire, built in 1765 and listed Grade II, is
an unusual opportunity. The red brick house and gardens, including a secret
grotto, have a lease running to 2083. (The freeholder is the National Trust,
which owns the estate).
Thomas Farnolls Pritchard, best known for designing the Iron Bridge at
Coalbrookdale, near Telford, Shropshire, was the architect. He put in rich
ceilings and fireplaces and the designs include an emblem with a sheet of
music including the then newly-written national anthem. The whole house has
been restored in a way that matches its patriotic and comfortable heritage.
The asking price is Pounds 550,000 from Andrew Grant (0905-24477), or try
the agent's two other substantial brick houses: Kyrewood House at Tenbury
Wells and Morton Hall near Redditch.
Going north produces two important houses. One is the 1720-1840 Rusland Hall
in Cumbria, which has permission for conversion to a country house hotel -
an unlikely event at present, probably, but there are 11 bedrooms and eight
bathrooms - and is offered by Cluttons (0228-74792) at more than Pounds
850,000.
Scotstoun near Peebles, Scotland, is a most handsome late-18th century house
with a classic, pedimented facade. The painted centrepiece of crossed wheat
sheafs on the library ceiling depicts 'harvest.' This epitome of food,
learning and wealth, with 125 acres of parks and woods, is on offer at over
Pounds 650,000 from Knight Frank & Rutley (031-225-7105).

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921121

