FT922-13422

FT  11 APR 92 / Wine: Cheap, but much more cheerful - Low-priced wines have
rarely been better value for drinkers on a budget


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


THE TIMING could hardly be better for wine drinkers determined to tighten
their belts without being bullied into reducing their consumption. Major
retailers are discounting madly, with the fruits of a run of lovely ripe
vintages on the shelves.
The effect of a revolution in winemaking and, increasingly, grape-growing
expertise has been to make expensive wine very expensive, medium-priced wine
twice as good value as it ever was, and cheap wine at least 10 times better
value than it was 15 years ago.
When modern technology invades a region's wineries, the first casualties are
heavy, flat whites and reds redolent of carelessly-washed vats and old
socks. They are replaced by oceans of fresh, crisp whites, often with traces
of the tropical fruit smells conjured up by low-temperature fermentation;
and light, crimson reds that might be a bit short of fruit and impact but
are indisputably clean.
They may not have that much character - but then, nor did Dr Jekyll in
comparison with Mr Hyde.
Most of the world's cheap wines today are competently-made liquids entirely
lacking the evils of the past, while also lacking many distinguishing marks.
But some producers at the bottom end of the market are now crafting wines
that have character as well as cleanliness.
This is great news for everyone, other than those who depend on selling
wines that cost twice as much but taste only 10 per cent better.
France, especially southern France, can offer the greatest range of flavours
with its host of idiosyncratic vins de pays. Cheap French wines tend to
taste rather drier than their counterparts from the New World, although
often this is because they are higher in natural acids and lower in ripe-
tasting alcohol than because they actually contain less residual sugar.
The great French saviour of the dry white wine market, for example, is so
tart that it usually needs the softening influence of a little unfermented
grape juice. Although the 1991 crop of Vin de Pays des Cotes de Gascogne was
much reduced, this is typical of a region managing to inject more and more
flavour into its once-anodyne whites. Domaine de la Hitaire 1991 (Pounds
3.99 at Davisons, which still stocks the 1990) actually shows good Sauvignon
and Manseng flavours while Oddbins White, from Domaine du Joy, exhibits
remarkable fruit for Pounds 2.99.
But France also can offer characterful reds with full Appellation Controlee
status for under Pounds 3 - such as Paul Boutinot's supple, spicy La
Falaise, Cotes du Ventoux 1990 (Pounds 2.75 Waitrose).
Eastern Europe is, however, now a much more varied challenger to France
under Pounds 3.50 with full, spicy Czech wines at Victoria Wine and
Hungarian Sauvignon and Chardonnay at Thresher/Wine Rack/Peter
Dominic/Bottoms Up. And Bulgarian reds are being seriously upgraded (try
their original importer, Bordeaux Direct of Reading).
Australia will continue to cook up special deals such as Killawarra pink
fizz (amazingly, only Pounds 3.99 at Oddbins) and still manages to pack much
more punch into a bottle than South Africa, however hard it tries to win
favour with foreign wine drinkers.
And then, of course, there are the huge Hispanics of the wine world . . .
they need to export, too.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920411

