FT922-7099

FT  20 MAY 92 / Croats face Serb military show trial: Seven civilians seem
to have already been judged guilty


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


SEVEN Croat nationals, accused by the Yugoslav army of war crimes and taking
part in an 'armed uprising against Yugoslavia' went before a military
tribunal yesterday in what looked destined to turn into a show trial.
The seven Croats from a village near Vukovar, the devastated city in eastern
Croatia, are accused of crimes committed last autumn at the height of the
army siege of the town, set on the banks of the River Danube. The crimes
range from murder to 'endangering the security of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia'.
The trial in the first floor courtroom of Belgrade's main military
courthouse is quickly turning into a Kafkaesque parody. The defendants, who
face the death penalty, are being tried by a military court although they
are all civilians.
The five defendants filed into court looking bewildered, while one was
obviously mentally disturbed. They sat facing five military judges, whose
uniforms were decorated with from two to five stars.
The main witness, who was present at the hearing, cursed and jeered:
'Ustashe (Croat fascists) animals'.
A guilty verdict seems inevitable in a trial where most of the defendants
have not been allowed to choose their own lawyers. Instead 'defence'
counsels from the ranks of embittered Serb refugees from Croatia have been
imposed upon them.
Mrs Nadezhda Danilovic, an attorney from Belgrade, yesterday objected to the
military tribunal, arguing that the court was not authorised to try Croat,
now foreign, citizens. She added that the reconstituted state of Yugoslavia
had not been internationally recognised.
A western diplomat yesterday said: 'We are not questioning the right of
Serbia to try war criminals if it is based on real evidence. But there is
also a legal and moral responsibility to try criminals from their own side.'
Mrs Danilovic fears the trial may mark the beginning of a wave of show
trials. She said the defendants were being tried for heinous war crimes,
although Yugoslavia was never officially at war with Croatia.
Defence lawyers fear that Serbia's state-controlled media will use this and
other trials to pump up hatred of Croats in order to provide an outlet for
popular resentment at the collapsing economy.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920520

