FT921-12046

FT  29 JAN 92 / Leading Article: The wrong escape route


CONGLOMERATION, that unfashionable left-over from the managerial thinking of
the 1960s, has acquired a second wind in continental Europe. Or so it would
seem, in the light of recent corporate manoeuvres in Sweden and France.
First there was Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar's proposed merger, unveiled at the
weekend, of the Volvo vehicle group with Swedish food and pharmaceuticals
concern Procordia - a deal that was yesterday savaged by the Swedish
government's advisory privatisation committee as devoid of industrial logic.
Then came the French plan to merge Hachette with Matra, which would result
in an outlandish-sounding combination of missiles, electronics, vehicles and
publishing. The synergy here, for want of a better word, appeared to lie
chiefly in the presence on both boards of Mr Jean-Luc Lagardere.
The two deals came close on the heels of earlier plans hatched by French
prime minister Mrs Edith Cresson for a three-legged state conglomerate built
around France Telecom, the industrial division of the French nuclear
industry and the consumer electronics arm of Thomson. Precious little
industrial logic there. So why the outbreak of horizontal merger activity?
One common feature, apart from the presence of powerful political or
business figures in the driving seat, is that these deals offer new homes or
partners for troubled companies. A large question mark hangs over future
strategy and operations at Volvo, for example, where the car business has
been deep in the red. Hachette faces heavy losses at La Cinq, the bankrupt
television station. The limping partner in Mrs Cresson's visionary high-tech
grouping, meantime, is Thomson's loss-making electronics business.
Nationalistic sentiment
There is also a powerful defensive and nationalistic strand running through
these deals. Part of Mr Gyllenhammar's case for putting Procordia together
with Volvo lies in the protection it would afford against foreign predators
following the lifting of restrictions on foreign ownership of Swedish
companies.
As for Mrs Cresson, her fascination with 1960s-style conglomeration no doubt
reflects a fondness for that other outmoded beast from the 1960s menagerie,
the heavily subsidised national champion. Profits from the French nuclear
and telecoms industries will presumably now provide a life-support system
for French electronics in such a way as to avoid running foul of European
competition policy.
Difficult trick
The first snag in all this is that the conglomerate trick is an
exceptionally difficult one to pull off. Companies that seek to diversify
away from troubled core businesses all too often botch the takeovers and end
up with more weak businesses. British Aerospace is a classic case in point.
The initial falls in the share prices of Procordia and Matra at the prospect
of having to absorb the respective problems of Volvo and Hachette eloquently
spelt out this risk.
As far as the case for national champions is concerned, the focus of the
argument has now switched from the United States to the Far East. Yet this
ignores the fact that some of Asia's highest-growth economies have achieved
their success precisely by inviting foreign multinationals to generate the
lion's share of the growth. And the payment of subsidies, whether explicit
or hidden, usually proves to be a debilitating distortion for the domestic
economy in question.
Not all of the recent wave of takeovers and mergers in continental Europe
have been devoid of industrial logic. Nestle's bid for Source Perrier can
readily be rationalised as the expansion of a portfolio of international
brands. Krupp's approach to German steel-maker Hoesch was clearly driven by
industrial logic.
The trouble with an active market in corporate control is that it offers an
all-too-tempting escape route for industrialists driven to distraction by
the problems of their core business and an equally tempting playground for
the power-hungry. Shrewd de-conglomeration is a harder game to play and so,
not surprisingly, rarer.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920129

