FT921-3938

FT  12 MAR 92 / White is right in this land without servants: Patti Waldmeir
visits a latter-day Boer republic set up as an alternative to a multiracial
South Africa


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


WE ARE not here out of hate. We are not racists. It's a matter of
self-preservation,' explains Nico van den Bergh, 35, as he proudly conducts
a tour of South Africa's only all-white 'homeland', Orania.
Mr Van den Bergh and 360 other Afrikaners have already fulfilled the
ultra-right dream of white hegemony in a pure white state - a prototype of
the white homeland which the right is demanding as an alternative to the
reform process the white electorate is being asked to endorse in a
referendum next week.
They live in racial isolation on the banks of the Orange River in the
forbidding northern Cape, where the bush is stunted by heat and a drought
which never really breaks and where the roads are straight and flat and
shimmer on, apparently forever.
'It might look racist,' Mr Van den Bergh concedes; and at first glance it
does. No blacks are allowed to live or work in Orania, where even the most
menial tasks are performed by whites. Residents made a rare exception
recently when the Post Office insisted on sending a 'coloured' (mixed race)
engineer to install phone lines. The rest of the time, they keep to
themselves in their fenced, 280-hectare town.
Orania was set up a year ago, the kernel of an Afrikaner Volkstaat which
residents hope will eventually cover a huge area of this inhospitable
region. They have already purchased 2,300 further hectares for sheep
farming.
They see themselves, without irony, as modern-day Voortrekkers, pioneers
like their forefathers who set out from the Cape in the 1830s to settle what
later became the independent Boer republics.
Professor Carel Boshoff, the Afrikaner theologian who set up Orania, says a
white homeland is essential for the survival of the Afrikaner.
'For an individual to survive when he is not in his own cultural
circumstances, that is possible,' says Prof Boshoff, in the soft and
measured voice of the clergyman, referring to the prospect of black rule in
South Africa. 'But for a nation to survive, for what we call a volk, to
survive, it is necessary to have a geographical as well as political
circumstance in which . . . the institutions, the values, the way of living,
the world view of the nation are established.'
Prof Boshoff (who is the son-in-law of the late Hendrik Verwoerd, architect
of apartheid) draws a parallel with Israel, arguing that the existence of a
Jewish state is crucial to the security of Jews in the diaspora.
'I feel it is possible for Afrikaners to survive in the new South Africa on
condition that we've got a stronghold, a state where Afrikaners are in
charge of the political and different structures. The condition is that
there is a motherland.'
Orania is a harsh, Calvinist motherland, far from the swimming pools and
verdant gardens which most residents have left behind in white suburbia.
Built to house workers who constructed a nearby dam, the homes are flimsy
and dilapidated, the roads cracked and buckled. And there are no servants.
There are labourers, yes: white municipal workers maintain the town, which
was purchased as private property by a group of Orania residents for R1.6m
(Pounds 320,000) last January; some of their wives char for other residents.
But shortage of labour is a problem: some paid labourers have refused to do
what they consider kaffir work, and they resent living in the town's old
servants' quarters.
Prof Boshoff concedes that Orania cannot be self-sufficient without black
labour. (The ultra-right Conservative Party, which demands a much larger
white state, envisages a homeland where blacks would be admitted as
'foreign' labourers). He proposes that Orania would be part of a
constellation of regional states, a 'good neighbour' to bordering black
states, trading high-tech goods and services for the necessities of life.
In the short term, Orania will aim to provide high quality education and
health care for whites from 'across the border' (South Africa). It will earn
its keep by educating Afrikaner children in the Calvinist values of the volk
(saving them from segregated schools), and treating sick Afrikaners after
hospital integration leads to an inevitable decline in government spending
on whites-only health care.
Prof Boshoff does not fool himself that hundreds of thousands will flock to
his homeland - at least not yet. He acknowledges that mortgages and car
loans will keep most Afrikaners in urban areas.
But Nico van den Bergh sees no future in the new South Africa. 'Blacks need
the vote and they must have their human rights. It's only fair,' he argues.
'So the only solution is to come and establish our culture here.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920312

