FT923-6498

FT  24 AUG 92 / Accord likely in Eurotunnel dispute


   By ROBERT PESTON and ROLAND RUDD


THE long-running dispute over the cost of building the channel tunnel may be
close to settlement.
Its resolution hinges on the manner of financing the cost over-run, rather
than the size of the additional costs.
Eurotunnel's building contractors, which are grouped in the Transmanche Link
(TML) consortium, indicated over the weekend that they are within a few
weeks of settling the dispute, which in the past has threatened to bring
work on the project to a halt. The size of the settlement is likely to be
the maximum permitted without Eurotunnel making a serious breach of its
banking covenants.
That would mean Eurotunnel could make a cash payment to TML of no more than
Pounds 1bn, in historic prices as opposed to today's prices.
However, the eventual settlement is likely to be some Pounds 1.2bn. So
Eurotunnel is offering Pounds 200m - equal to about Pounds 300m in today's
prices - in some form of equity, probably a convertible debenture.
Eurotunnel has stressed that any equity issued to TML will not be equal to
more than 10 per cent of its existing equity. But TML's UK members - BICC,
Taylor Woodrow, Costain, Wimpey and Tarmac - do not want so much equity.
Once the deal between TML and Eurotunnel is agreed, it must be approved by
Eurotunnel's 206 banks. If the settlement is no more than Pounds 1bn in cash
and Pounds 200m in equity, 65 per cent of the banks as measured by the value
of their loans would have to vote in favour.
If TML were promised more, 90 per cent of the banks would have to give
approval. One of Eurotunnel's leading bank creditors said 90 per cent
approval would never be won, because a number of banks were disenchanted
with the project.
'We would hope to get 65 per cent approval,' he added. Without bank
approval, Eurotunnel would run into serious financial difficulties.
On the question of how much TML should be paid to take account of increases
in the costs of building the tunnel since its initial contract was
negotiated, the two sides are still Pounds 150m apart. However, an executive
with a close knowledge of the talks said that 'serious arguments' were
focusing on just Pounds 50m.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920824

