FT924-11398

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (13): Carmakers under pressure - Vehicle
companies are either shedding staff, cutting back production, putting
workers on short time, or doing all three


   By ANDREW FISHER


GERMANY'S motor industry, a vital part of its export-oriented economy, is
slowing down in more ways than one. Not only do more vehicles on the roads
mean more congestion and more tailbacks, thus decreasing drivers' ability to
hurtle along as fast as they please, but world markets are coming under such
severe pressures that German carmakers are having to take drastic action to
remain competitive.
German car companies are either shedding staff, cutting back production,
putting workers on short time, or doing all three. Mercedes-Benz, part of
the Daimler-Benz concern, is reducing its domestic workforce by 10,500
people this year and is producing fewer cars.
At the volume end of the industry, Ford-Werke (owned by Ford Motor of the
US) is cutting production at its Cologne plant as part of a Europe-wide
retrenchment by the group.
Volkswagen, Opel (part of General Motors of the US), and BMW are also
reducing labour and trying to overcome the high-cost burdens suffered by
German producers.
Struggling the hardest, however, is Porsche, the maker of luxury sports cars
which is finding the combination of weak foreign markets and the extra
pressures imposed by the latest currency turbulence almost impossible to
bear. It is cutting its workforce by nearly 2,000 people this year, having
sold only 22,000 of its expensive models in the financial year to July.
None of these developments come entirely as a surprise. It has long been
recognised that German producers' costs are too high in relation to
competitors in the rest of Europe and Japan. Labour costs in Germany are
among the highest in the world. They are around a third higher than in
Japan, the gap being accounted for by the high level of social security and
welfare costs met by employers rather than by wages, which are similar in
the two countries.
Compared with France, Italy, and the UK, the difference is even greater;
wages are lower in these countries and social benefits worth much less.
In past years, German companies could rely on superior productivity to
offset the impact of high labour and other costs. But this has now become
almost impossible as competitors have cut their labour forces, in contrast
to the employment increases now being reversed in Germany, and have striven
to become more productive by investing heavily and introducing new
production methods.
Moreover, the supremely efficient Japanese are now making cars at plants in
Europe, notably in the UK.
Productivity in France and Britain rose much faster in the 1980s than that
in the German motor industry.
At the start of the 1990s, Germany still topped the European productivity
table. France's productivity was 91 per cent of that in Germany, with Italy
at 74 per cent, and the UK (before the full effect of Japanese investment)
at only 61 per cent.
But the German industry was about 50 per cent behind Japan's productivity.
German trade unions recognise the severity of the situation, but there is no
way that they can prevent more job losses.
Moreover, the trend towards shorter working weeks impinges further on German
companies' profitabilty.
According to the German motor industry association (VDA), a Japanese
automobile worker puts in an average 800 hours a year more than his German
rival, while a US worker puts in 550 hours more; and one in the UK works 350
hours more.
The Spanish employee notches up 250 hours more than in Germany, the Italian
150 more, and the French 100 more.
Against the gloomy background of rising costs, stagnating sales at home and
abroad, and gyrating currencies, it is small wonder that the German media
has been carrying dire prognistications of things to come.
'The auto goes downhill' was the headline on a commentary in Suddeutsche
Zeitung, the serious daily newspaper. It chided German motor companies for
being too late with the introduction of lean production methods and for
concentrating too much in boom times on expensively-equipped models 'as if
customers were prepared indefinitely to spend more and more money on cars.'
Clearly, they are not. Recession in foreign markets, intense competition
from the Japanese, and the slackening of domestic demand after the powerful
impetus provided by unification have subjected German car manufacturers to
extreme pressures. Hence the pessimistic title of an article in Stern, the
popular weekly magazine: 'The decline of Germany's showcase sector.'
After several years of steadily rising sales, topped off with the turnover
gains produced by German unity, the car companies and their workers are
bracing themselves for an unfamiliar phase of austerity.
Since the motor industry in its widest sense - including suppliers, dealers,
repair, and other activities - accounts for about a fifth of gross national
product, the consequences will be felt throughout the economy.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921026

