FT924-6296

FT  21 NOV 92 / Travel: St Augustine's claim to fame


   By TIM BURT


TOMORROW, the US marks the assassination of John F Kennedy. For one day, the
media spotlight will focus again on the mourners filing through Arlington
cemetery, events at the Kennedy family compound in Hyannis and the scattered
remembrance services in towns and cities around the country.
This year, following the Democrats' wresting of the presidency, Americans
are being encouraged to look back fondly at the early 1960s as some
enchanted age shattered by a volley of gunfire in Dallas.
Nowhere is that event more revered than at the Tragedy in US History Museum
in St Augustine, Florida, where today the curators are putting a final
polish to JFK's car and some assorted furniture belonging to his alleged
assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald.
They will also be cleaning the car Oswald drove on the day Kennedy was shot
and the ambulance that took Oswald to hospital after he was shot by Jack
Ruby.
In another display, the whistle, speed recorder and the dead engineer's
watch from the 'Wreck of Old '97' - one of America's great train disasters -
has pride of place. Proud of their ghoulish collection, the curators claim
it 'depicts history that the people of today understand.'
The authorities in St Augustine, however, are not so proud of the museum and
give the impression of being happy for some disaster to befall it. Yet, for
20 years, the curators have defied local opposition.
Although the tragedy museum concentrates on 20th century horror, it is also
anxious to back the campaign to establish St Augustine as America's oldest
inhabited settlement. The museum has built an old Spanish jail with real
human skeletons. The skeletons are said to date back to 1718 when St
Augustine was in Spanish hands and already celebrating its bicentennial,
more than 250 years before the rest of the country.
Not content with America's official history, the city - 50 miles north of
Daytona Beach - eschews the arrival of Christopher Columbus and rumours of
Viking visits to lay claim to the title of North America's first historic
site. It was here, according to city officials, that 'Ponce de Leon came
ashore to landmark for all time the first moment of our nation's history -
the discovery of North America.'
The claim is backed by some aggressive marketing to promote the nation's
oldest house, oldest wooden schoolhouse and oldest store museum. The Spanish
quarter has been converted into Florida's official living history museum
where 1990s residents dress and live like 1550s settlers.
Life in St Augustine is about as far from New York City as it is possible to
get in mainland US. High-rise buildings are banned, crime is paltry and
there are no yellow cabs - it is easier to get around by horse-drawn
carriage or tram.
The city's association with Spanish prospectors such as Ponce de Leon and
pirates like Sir Francis Drake has made it obsessed with the past. Almost
every street has a museum and many have several.
Such attractions are threatening to drown the old town, clustered on the
edge of Matanzas Bay, in a wave of synthetic nostalgia. But behind the
razzmatazz there is a genuine European village of narrow streets, discreet
timber board houses and high-walled gardens.
The potential for tourism was first recognised by Henry Morrison Flagler, J
D Rockefeller's business partner, who honeymooned in St Augustine and
decided to put it on the map by connecting the resort to his East Coast
Railroad in 1883.
Flagler is credited with saving the old town. His interest in the district
ensured that the oldest homes survived, and many of them have taken on a new
lease of life as up-market inns. Guests can stroll to the Castillo de San
Marcos or take a cruise into Matanzas bay.
The bay separates the old town from Anastasia Island, a flat sand outcrop of
condos and motels. The island is famous for a unique livestock collection,
the St Augustine Alligator Farm.
Although it is promoted as one of the state's finest attractions, the home
for retired alligators attracts fewer visitors than Anastasia's main asset -
the beach.
The dunes and long stretches of empty sand have been designated a state park
where the peace is disturbed only by whooping surfers.
Further information: St Augustine Chamber of Commerce, 1 Riberia Street, St
Augustine, FL32084. Tel: (904)-829-5681.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921121

