FT924-1014

FT  21 DEC 92 / End of an era as Major leaves Washington: US policy will
soon be shaped by a leader the UK premier does not know


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


   WASHINGTON


IT HAS not been Mr John Major's happiest foreign trip. His farewell to
outgoing President George Bush on a rain-swept White House lawn yesterday
marked the end of more than a decade of reassurance for Britain's
Conservative leaders.
The visiting prime minister could claim one or two modest achievements. Mr
Bush agreed that the US and Europe should set a January 15 deadline for
completion of the stalled Uruguay Round of trade talks in Geneva.
The president also softened the rhetoric of US policy on the military
enforcement of the no-fly zone over Bosnia. The US, he said, was as
concerned about possible retaliation against British ground troops as it
would be if US forces were at risk.
A new UN resolution to enforce Serbian compliance with the zone will be
passed, probably this week, but the implication is that US fighters will not
immediately be given a free hand to shoot down Serbian aircraft. The
compromise marked as much Mr Major probably could hope for.
Reports that his American trip - which included an EC-Canada summit in
Ottawa late last week - has left Mr Major exhausted and unsettled should not
be taken too seriously. The prime minister is tired after a difficult three
months, but no more than that.
But a friendly weekend in Camp David with Mr Bush could not let Mr Major
escape the reality that from now on American policy will be shaped by a
leader of whom he knows little.
Politicians and diplomats on both sides of the Atlantic insist that what
remains of the special relationship will survive under President Bill
Clinton. But for Mr Major it will not be the same.
For 12 years the occupant of 10 Downing Street could rely on a kindred
ideological spirit in the White House. Now he must deal with a president
whose election symbolised a break with the right-wing certainties of the
1980s.
The prime minister did not have a chance to meet Mr Clinton. It was not a
deliberate snub. The president-elect, still based in Little Rock, is
pre-occupied with shaping his cabinet. Instead the two men settled for a
25-minute telephone call on Friday before Mr Major left for Camp David.
Yesterday, Vice-president elect Al Gore and a number of other high-ranking
Democrats joined Mr Major for lunch at the British embassy. Downing Street
went to great pains to ensure the cameras were on hand. Mr Clinton will meet
the prime minister in early February after his inauguration next month.
Senior officials travelling with Mr Major emphasised that Mr Clinton had
been at pains to emphasise continuity in US foreign policy.
He had been sympathetic to Mr Major's grave doubts about the risks to
British forces of military enforcement of the no-fly zone. He had offered
his backing to the EC agreement with Mr Bush to give new impetus to the Gatt
trade talks in Geneva.
On the basis of his telephone conversation and of extensive briefing by
British diplomats in Washington, Mr Major was said to be 'optimistic' about
the relationship. Aides pointed out that the two men are in the same
generation of post-cold war politicians.
More discreetly they added that Mr Major's centre-left position in the
Conservative party leaves him not that far distant in the political spectrum
from the Clinton brand of Democrat.
But there are obvious uncertainties. The most senior members of the British
entourage pointed out that Mr Clinton's policy statements had so far been
deliberately circumspect. The prime minister was pleased with what Mr
Clinton had said publicly and privately but was uneasy also about what he
had not said.
Mr Major will miss the personal rapport that comes with a shared ideology.
Mr Clinton is no left-winger, but his rhetoric is not that of a natural
believer in unfettered markets. He will have to be persuaded that
maintaining a unique link with Britain should rank anywhere near the top of
a list of priorities which is already crammed with domestic issues.
It was perhaps a sign of the times that before the two leaders returned to
Washington the most important US newspapers did not carry a word yesterday
of Mr Major's Camp David sojourn with Mr Bush.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921221

