FT922-4469

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Company News: Euro Disney pushes back theme
park's second phase


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


EURO DISNEY, which seven weeks ago opened its new Euro Disneyland theme park
outside Paris as Europe's most expensive leisure complex, is postponing the
opening of the second phase of the park for a year until 1996 and is
developing plans to try to improve attendance levels.
The group is reverting to its original plan to open the park's second phase
in 1996 for 'technical reasons'. A year ago it decided to bring the opening
forward.
Euro Disney, which has been dogged by unconfirmed rumours of poor attendance
since the opening, made an operating loss of FFr80,000 (Dollars 14,732) on
sales of FFr3.07bn in the six months to March 31. It said yesterday that
'because of operational uncertainties' it could not say whether it would
become profitable in the present financial year.
Euro Disney refused to disclose specific budgets or attendance targets
before the theme park's opening on April 12.
However, the company yesterday confirmed that more than 1.5m people have
visited the park since the opening night. Euro Disney would not say whether
this level of attendance conformed with its original expectations. It said
it 'needed a full year of operation' before any reasonable assessment of its
performance could be made.
In a downbeat statement Euro Disney said that attendance at the park, and
the occupancy of its hotels, had 'fluctuated considerably'.
Euro Disney noted that attendance during the weekends and holidays had
'significantly exceeded' mid-week levels. It also claimed that prospective
French visitors had been deterred by 'misleading reports of traffic jams and
over-crowding'.
Euro Disney, which last weekend ran a lavish series of special advertising
supplements in the European press, is considering plans to increase
attendance in off-peak periods, during the week and from within France.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920605

