FT922-4428

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (15): New market beckons for banks -
Complicated merger streamlines financial services sector


   By PHILIP GAWITH


THE South African financial services sector is in healthier shape than it
was a year ago, and the man most responsible for this is Mr Piet Badenhorst,
the formidable chief executive of Amalgamated Banks of South Africa (Absa).
Driven by a healthy ego and massive determination, he is a feared and
respected figure in the banking community. Last year, he was the driving
force behind the complicated merger which brought the United Building
Society (UBS), Volkskas, Allied and part of the Sage group together to form
Absa. This year he took the process a stage further by swallowing up
Bankorp, the weakest of the big five banks in South Africa, in the process
making Absa by far the largest bank in the country in terms of assets (the
Standard Bank group remains largest by market capitalisation).
Absa have a lot of digesting to do, and not all of it will be pleasant.
'Merger business is hell on wheels', in Mr Badenhorst's own graphic phrase.
Apart from having to effect a very high number of retrenchments, Absa also
have to come to terms with the rotten apples which constitute part of
Bankorp's inheritance. As one senior banker notes: 'The last bite of the
cherry may not be so sweet as the first."
While Absa, for some time yet, will remain preoccupied with putting its own
house in order, the impacts of the shake-up in the sector promise to be
far-reaching. Mr Badenhorst believes the formation of Absa will have two
main effects: 'maverick marketing', the product of too many institutions
competing for the same business, and epitomised by 'ridiculous rates of
interest being paid and credit being offered without proper screening', will
cease with four institutions now under the same umbrella. Second, with less
competition for employees, terms of employment will become more realistic
as, in Mr Badenhorst's words, the 'artificial scarcity of skills'
disappears. 'The employment market is shifting to the employer,' he says.
The significance of the Absa merger is that the operational savings are
large enough to give the group a fundamental advantage in terms of providing
a low-cost banking service. South Africa has a very sophisticated financial
services sector, but it is very much oriented towards the needs of the
white, essentially First World, community. The challenge of the future is to
address the needs of the developing market - largely black, and Third World
in nature.
Mr Louis Shill, chairman of the Sage group and also chairman of the Life
Offices Association (LOA), believes that the challenge facing all providers
of financial services in South Africa is to 'get down our unit costs to
provide mass market products'. The challenge to be overcome is that it is
very difficult to be profitable with below-average sized products, whether
they be bank accounts or life policies.
Mr Shill believes that addressing the needs of the new market will require
new structures. 'We can't take our company that is aimed at the very upper
end of the market and adapt it to a completely different market. There's a
world of difference between Harrods and Pick 'n Pay (a South African
supermarket), though they both supply food.' New products will also be
required and intensive education of staff and clients. Mr Shill notes, for
example, that at the lower end of the market, life policies are primarily
seen as savings devices, and it is not always appreciated that the money is
not available on call.
At the moment, addressing the needs of the black market tends to take the
form of the large groups setting up satellite operations, such as Liberty's
Charter Life and Southern's African Life, in the insurance field, and First
National Bank's Future Bank initiative. Mr Badenhorst, however, argues that
the process must go one stage further. He says there is a perception and a
need in the black community that they need their own institutions. He
envisages these developing, probably with the assistance of existing banks,
initially at the lower end of the housing finance spectrum.
Although the jockeying for position in the developing market is driven by a
keen sense of where new business is going to come from, it goes further than
this. Conrad Strauss, chairman of the Standard Bank group, comments: 'The
conflict between poverty and democracy is South Africa's greatest dilemma.
If we want to survive in a democratic society we First World institutions
must get involved.' He notes that the commercial banks play more of a role
in the urban areas where their activities are centred. Addressing the
financial and developmental needs of the rural communities is a burden, he
suggests, which will have to be carried more by parastatal bodies.
Other than addressing the developing market, the main strategic challenge
facing the local banking industry is their re-integration into the world
community. On the one hand, this involves setting up offices abroad. Local
banks are anxious to 'follow the flag' and set up offices abroad so they can
provide services, primarily trade finance and foreign exchange advice.
On the other hand, banks are facing the prospect of foreign competition on
the home front. The areas where this is most likely to come is in the
'blue-chip' corporate market and project finance. Foreign banks can set up
representative offices, unrestrained by local capital requirements, and
offer off-shore credit lines at lower rates than local banks. Their
experience in project finance will probably also allow them to obtain a
share of the business if significant capital projects such as the Columbus
stainless steel venture get the go-ahead. Foreign banks will not attempt to
compete with high-street banks and local merchant banks are also considered
to have a strong hold on mergers and acquisitions business.
The main day-to-day challenge for the banks is maintaining profitability in
an inflationary environment. Although the impact of a protracted recession
is evident in the sharply higher provisions for bad debts at the large
banks, these have been more than offset by the comfortable interest margins
of about 4 per cent that are being enjoyed. Recent results from the Standard
Bank group, First National Bank and Nedcor saw earnings per share rise by 20
per cent in the case of the first two and 13 per cent in the case of Nedcor.
Although all the banks are anxious to put assets on their books, demand for
credit is low and banks themselves are lending very selectively.
South Africa's main banks are all adequately capitalised, though it is
difficult to maintain this position through retentions alone given the high
inflation rate. This explains Standard's offering of a scrip dividend option
and the recent rights offer by First National Bank, taking advantage of a
favourable market rating.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920605

