FT924-6032

FT  24 NOV 92 / World Trade News: French farm deal opposition is political
arm-waving - Paris seems to be playing for time to prepare a climbdown


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


THE FRENCH government's refusal to accept the US-EC farm trade accord might
look incomprehensible to some, but it is playing a rational, if high-risk,
game.
The signs are that Paris is playing for time so that it can find a way to
climb down and accept the deal without provoking too much domestic unrest.
The Socialist administration at the same time has to threaten to veto the
deal to guarantee its own survival. But it is unlikely to carry this
through.
To brandish the veto 'would be to recognise our weakness and admit our
isolation', Mr Jean-Pierre Soisson, the agriculture minister, told a French
newspaper yesterday.
The most forceful note came from Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the prime minister, in
a television interview a day earlier, but even that was half-hearted. France
might veto if the worst came to the worst, but the accord must first be
discussed by the European Commission and then by EC foreign and farm
ministers, he said. Mr Soisson has called for an emergency EC ministerial
meeting to debate the deal next week.
Even if the government did plan to carry out its threat of a veto, President
Francois Mitterrand has good reasons and the constitutional power to
overrule it.
For one thing, a French veto would spark a diplomatic crisis in the EC when
the Community is already at its weakest for years. Mr Mitterrand has devoted
much of his political life to building up, not demolishing Europe, even to
the extent of putting his own survival in the balance in the September
referendum on Maastricht.
For another thing, Mr Mitterrand is in no mood to do the Socialist party any
special favours, as shown by his recent lack of support for senior
Socialists in the blood transfusion scandal.
He needs the party to stay in government until the general elections next
March because an early change of government could leave him uncomfortably
exposed. But beyond that, he knows that a conservative administration is
likely to win the election and has already said he is ready to work with
such a government, as he did in 1986-88.
All this invites the question of whether the opposition will be able or
willing use this crisis to dethrone the government early and unsettle Mr
Mitterrand.
The opportunity will come tomorrow when the government will hold an
extraordinary debate on the deal in the national assembly, the first since
the Gulf war.
As it must in these circumstances, it has resorted to article 49-1 of the
constitution, under which the government puts its own survival on the line
on matters of general policy.
Now as during the Gulf war, the conservatives can hardly vote against the
government - which does after all oppose the EC-US deal - for defending a
vital national interest.
The right depends even more on the agricultural vote than does the left, has
unanimously denounced the deal and pressed hard for a veto. Mr Jacques
Chirac, leader of the RPR Gaullist party, has called it 'a Munich of
agriculture', in reference to the 1938 Munich betrayal.
Moreover, the right can only get a majority in the national assembly if the
Communists support it. The French Communist party is so anti-American that
it can hardly vote against a government that has itself taken a tough
anti-US line.
All this suggests that opposition parties, who have not yet decided how to
vote, will either reluctantly support the government's stance on the deal,
or abstain tomorrow.
The RPR will probably 'support the position of France and not that of the
government', said Mr Jacques Toubon, a Gaullist MP from Paris.
In theory, the opposition could vote against the government for not being
tough enough, but that would lack credibility given Mr Beregovoy's promise
that France will use the veto if necessary.
It might also be unwise given that the RPR and centre-right UDF leaderships
continue to be so divided on other issues that they are in poor shape to
fight an election, let alone lead France through the trade war that would
follow a veto.
The Communists, meanwhile, have an interest in keeping Mr Beregovoy in power
because they know they would lose national assembly seats in a general
election.
All this suggests that the opposition will try to use the debate tomorrow to
blame the government for having botched the negotiations and to put pressure
on it to threaten to use the veto more aggressively.
An important sub-plot to this drama is that the farm trade row has added to
the growing general unrest over France's position in the EC, shown in the
narrowness of the Maastricht referendum result.
'The enemy is not the US, it is the European Community,' said Mr Philippe
Seguin, the rebel Gaullist MP who led the campaign against the Maastricht
treaty.
'What is at issue is the. . .liberty taken by the Commission to defend
positions which threaten member states' fundamental interests.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921124

