FT924-11963

FT  23 OCT 92 / Serbian rivals face the final showdown: Milosevic is capable
of pushing the Serbs into civil war if he fails to get his way


   By LAURA SILBER


THE final showdown between the Serbian president, Mr Slobodan Milosevic, and
the Yugoslav authorities is approaching following the seizure this week by
Serb police of the federal interior ministry in Belgrade.
That action proved that Mr Milosevic, although increasingly isolated, will
stop at nothing to remain in power. It also indicated that he was ready to
use force in his power struggle against Mr Dobrica Cosic, the Yugoslav
president, and Mr Milan Panic, the federal prime minister.
The latter are attempting to strengthen the constitutional powers of the
rump Yugoslavia at the expense of eroding Serbia's powers. Mr Milosevic may
use the attempt, however, to try to destroy the federation, rather than
relinquish power
Mr Milosevic is backed by a 50,000-strong police force and thousands of
paramilitary fighters, veterans of the war in Croatia and Bosnia, while the
top echelons of the army support Mr Cosic. The loyalty of the lower and
mid-ranking officers is not known.
Mr Milosevic's main pillars of political support include the Socialist
(former communist) party, and its ultra-nationalist satellite parties;
Serbian state television; and many managers of state enterprises who are
political appointees and who see their fate depending on the survival of Mr
Milosevic.
Opposition leaders, intellectuals, and the Serbian Orthodox Church have
already called on Mr Milosevic to resign. They have thrown their support
behind Mr Cosic, a well-known writer who is seen as the spiritual father of
all Serbs. Montenegro, the other republic in the new Yugoslavia, has also
swung behind the federal government.
With these battle lines clearly drawn, and a showdown increasingly likely,
as Mr Panic warned yesterday, the Serbian leadership is increasingly
clashing with the Yugoslav government at every step. For instance, whenever
any progress is made at the peace talks in Geneva, Mr Milosevic, through his
nationalist allies, repeatedly tries to derail the process by challenging
the authority of President Cosic and Mr Panic.
Following the Geneva agreement for the Yugoslav army to withdraw from
Prevlaka, Croatia's southern Adriatic peninsula, Mr Milosevic sharply
criticised President Cosic.
Mr Milosevic has also tried to undermine Mr Panic's moves towards a
reconciliation with ethnic Albanian leaders of Kosovo, who, if provoked by
Serbia, could rebel in Serbia's southern province.
Kosovo's Serbs, who make up 8 per cent of the 2.1m population, are backed by
a powerful police apparatus, and still revere the Serbian president for
ruthlessly bringing the province under the direct control of Belgrade in
1990.
But Mr Cosic, a grandmaster of Balkan politics, understands Mr Milosevic's
Machiavellian manoeuvres, and is prepared to abandon Serbia's policy of war
in order to rejoin the international community. In an address to the federal
parliament last week, Mr Cosic warned of the dangers of civil war in Serbia,
and called for the immediate disarming of political parties and paramilitary
groups, which are armed by Mr Milosevic and his allies.
However, the key disadvantage of the federal government is that it does not
exert enough control to disband the fighters. The seizure of the interior
ministry by Serb police was Mr Milosevic's way of showing he is still boss
of Serbia.
Yet despite Serbian television's smear campaign against Mr Panic, and to a
lesser extent Mr Cosic, the two men appear to have gained popular support in
contrast to Mr Milosevic, whose popularity has slumped following a year of
war - and the imposition of United Nations sanctions which are precipitating
economic collapse.
The average annual wage has plummeted from Dollars 3,000 (Pounds 1,840) per
capita to Dollars 1,000; Belgrade economists estimate that sanctions will
reduce industrial output by a further 50 per cent over the next few months;
300,000 workers have been laid off; and hundreds of thousands of workers are
expected to be sacked by the end of the year, increasing the possibility of
social unrest.
The most obvious obstacle to stability in Serbia and the former Yugoslavia
remains Mr Milosevic. Pushed into a corner, he is at his most dangerous,
believing he has nothing to lose by dragging Serbia into a civil war.
Indeed, he is prepared to break up the reconstituted Yugoslavia, following
the same pattern used with Croatia and Bosnia. Then, Mr Milosevic showed
that if he could not dominate the federation, he was willing to destroy it.
All expectations that Mr Milosevic would resign under foreign and domestic
pressure so far have proven false. He remains the most powerful politician
in the Balkans. The chance for peace in the region hinges on the outcome of
the power struggle in Belgrade.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921023

