FT922-7362

FT  19 MAY 92 / International Capital Markets: Bank hopes to expand London's
Ecu market role


   By SIMON LONDON


THE Bank of England believes its plan to provide a new settlement system for
Ecu securities would 'bolster London's leading role' in the Ecu bond market.
In the latest Quarterly Bulletin, the Bank said the new securities
settlement system would provide institutional investors and dealers with
same-day settlement of Ecu securities.
Same-day settlement of Ecu bond trades is not currently available through
Euroclear or Cedel, the commercial clearing systems through which most Ecu
bonds are now handled.
The Bank said same-day settlement would make it easier for institutional
investors and dealers to undertake short-term borrowing and lending Ecu
securities - activity known as 'repo'.
It added that same-day settlement of Ecu securities would reduce the
'systemic' risks of trading Ecu bonds, again helping to foster the market in
London.
Repo of bonds allows investors to increase their returns from bond holdings
by lending securities. It also allows traders to cover short market
positions by borrowing bonds.
The Bank noted that repo market activity in London had expanded rapidly in
recent years. It said: 'This development has enhanced London dealers'
ability to make deep and competitive markets in a wide range of European
debt securities.'
The Bank is now talking to Ecu market participants about the need for an
improved settlement system but has not decided whether to press ahead with
the plan.
However, the report said: 'There is every sign that the cash and repo
markets are developing at a pace which would make such a system a valued
part of the Ecu market infrastructure.'
If the market is enthusiastic, Bank officials have said a same-day
settlement system could be in place by the end of next year.
The UK authorities are keen to capture an increasing share of Ecu bond
market activity in London.
The UK government's 10-year Ecu2.25bn bond issue, launched in February last
year, was widely seen as a move to attract business.
Earlier this year a programme of three-year to five-year Treasury notes was
started with the aim of improving market liquidity at the shorter
maturities.
Lending by Japanese banks fell to 28.5 per cent of total international
lending in London last year, down from 32.2 per cent in 1991, according to
the Bank of England.
However, the Bank noted the contraction was mainly due to a reduction in
lending between banks rather than to non-bank customers. In particular,
Japanese banks have reduced previous heavy reliance on certificates of
deposit.
In contrast, British banks' share of the market increased slightly to 15.6
per cent, the first increase since 1985.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920519

