FT921-12040

FT  29 JAN 92 / Foreign Affairs: Failing the bread test


   By EDWARD MORTIMER


Islamic or not, no regime can solve Algeria's problems without a measure of
popular support
For the first three weeks of this year I was an FT reader, not writer.
Naturally I watched this space with keen interest, especially last week
when, on consecutive days, it carried two trenchant pieces on
closely-related themes. Robert Mauthner took western governments to task for
condoning the coup in Algiers, and thereby failing to live up to their
democratic principles. Martin Wolf argued that democracy is only a
particular instance of a more general good - freedom of choice, and that
democracy was incompatible with the views of 'fundamentalists'  - a
reference to the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), the putative winner in
Algeria's cancelled elections.
I found this particularly interesting to read in the midst of a 'workshop'
on religious revivalism and contemporary politics. That probably sounds like
some solemn gathering sponsored by the Greater London Council in the heyday
of Mr Ken Livingstone. But it wasn't like that at all. It was a highly
enjoyable week-long seminar, organised by a remarkable body called the 21st
Century Trust, which holds such events three or four times a year, always
dealing with some Great Problem of Our Time. What makes the formula unusual
is that the 20 or so participants ('fellows'), drawn from as wide a spread
of countries as possible, are all under 40, and that they have to live
together under the same roof for eight days and nights. The Trust also
recruits two 'senior fellows' to guide them through the conceptual
minefields of their topic (that is where I came in), and invites 'visiting
speakers' to brief them on particular aspects.
One of these visitors to our workshop was Hisham El Essawi, the Harley
Street dentist who gained national fame by a valiant, if in the end
unsuccessful, attempt to reconcile Salman Rushdie with his Moslem critics.
Perhaps predictably, he anticipated Robert Mauthner's argument, suggesting
that 'while the west calls upon Moslem countries to be democratic' it also
'sees its interests threatened by democratic reform in the Moslem world as
it will undoubtedly bring about more and more Moslem rule'. Remarking on the
absence of 'voices of indignation at the cancelling of the democratic
process' in Algeria, he accused 'some writers' of latching on to 'a
statement made by a young man of no authority in the Algerian Islamic
Salvation Front, in which he said words to the effect that democracy is not
compatible with Islam', and blowing it up 'out of all proportions'.
Yet earlier in his talk he had also provided some ammunition for the other
side of the case. 'With regard to Algeria,' he said, 'one wonders how much
of a popular movement the Islamic Salvation Front is. They are no doubt well
organised and well financed by the Iranians who dearly love to export their
revolution, but with the support of only three out of 14m potential voters
one cannot be certain that it commands the support of the majority'. And he
begged us to 'give up your definition of the fanatic as the fundamentalist
or the one who takes Islam literally, for he is not. It is the moderate who
is the fundamentalist not the fanatic'. Going even further, he claimed that
'the concept of democracy is enshrined in Islamic teachings'.
Well, I suppose it is not for me, or for any of my non-Moslem colleagues, to
say whether Mr Essawi is a better 'fundamentalist' than the fanatics, or
whether Islam is more correctly interpreted as enshrining democracy than as
incompatible with it. Nor could I deny that western reluctance to condemn
the Algerian coup is in part a matter of self-interest, prompted by fear
that a FIS government would provoke a mass exodus of westernised Algerians
seeking asylum and employment in Europe.
Nor is it easy for any observer to say with confidence who has authority in
the FIS and who does not, especially since the government tends to arrest
its leaders almost as fast as they are appointed. But certainly more than
one of those leaders, and notably Ali ben Hadj, one of the original two
arrested last June, are on record as saying that an Islamic state cannot
tolerate a multi-party system. The idea that no more free elections would be
held after the one that brought the FIS to power is no mere paranoid fantasy
of western journalists or Algerian officers.
The dilemma, for sincere democrats, is not a new one. As Martin Wolf pointed
out, Hitler came to power through a democratic process. So, more or less,
did the communists in Czechoslovakia. Partly for those reasons, the
Communist party was outlawed in West Germany for the first two decades of
the Federal Republic - and is now illegal in Russia. Democracy works best
when there is a consensus on its basic principles among parties representing
between them a broad majority of the electorate. When that exists, the state
can afford to give equal treatment to anti-democratic parties.
In the absence of such a consensus, can rules restricting participation to
parties which accept the principle of democracy serve as a substitute? Or
will those rules themselves undermine the democratic process, by obliging
anti-democratic parties to dissemble their true aims, and so making it
possible for any party to question the sincerity of its opponents'
commitment to democracy? Can fundamental rights and freedoms be entrenched
by constitutional safeguards putting them beyond the reach of the elected
government? On paper they can, but what if the elected government tears up
the paper, asserting that its own popular mandate is better, or clearer, or
simply more up-to-date, than that of the body which invented the safeguards?
That last question is especially relevant to Algeria, where any rules set by
the incumbent regime were clearly tainted, in the eyes of many of the
people, by the fact that that regime itself lacked any democratic
legitimacy. It is a vicious circle. Some countries have found a way out,
after revolutions or coups d'etat, by forming a provisional all-party
government whose members agreed on a constitution, and sometimes got it
ratified by referendum, before proceeding to hold elections under it. But
would the FIS accept such a procedure? And if it did, would it be bound by
the results in practice?
What sincere democrats would hope, of course, is that over time either the
FIS itself or its supporters could be convinced of the virtues of democracy,
and the rightness of Mr Essawi's version of Islam, so that either the FIS
would accept democratic rules or its supporters would desert it. Presumably
President Chadli Bendjedid hoped to achieve this by a period of cohabitation
between himself as head of state and a FIS or FIS-led government, while the
army was not prepared to take that risk and therefore forced him to resign.
Perhaps the army was wrong, but as a non-Algerian I do not feel confident
enough to say so. What does seem clear, on the other hand, is that the
arguments which convinced Mr Chadli he could not solve the country's
problems without the help of a freely-elected government remain valid. What
led to the downfall of the former ruling party, the Front de Liberation
National, was the same combination of economic, social and moral crisis that
led to the downfall of communism in Russia and eastern Europe. In Mr
Essawi's words, it 'failed the bread test'.
By cancelling the elections the new rulers have at best bought time, and
probably not much time. Let's hope they have a clear idea of how to use it.

The Financial Times


London Page 19 Illustration (Omitted).

920129

