FT924-11394

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (17): Optimists repeatedly disappointed -
The East German Economy


   By LESLIE COLITT


EVERY quarterly period since last year brought optimistic government
forecasts that the east German economy was about to touch bottom and would
slowly begin to emerge from the trough.
But the calculated optimism did not alter the realities.
In spite of DM150bn in transfer payments from west to east Germany this
year, the east German economy continues to scrape along the bottom of the
charts. The old state monopolies are being dismantled more quickly than new
private enterprises can be erected.
Even lower unemployment figures of 1.1m last month (13.6 per cent) - 75,000
less than at the beginning of the year - were no cause for optimism. Real
unemployment is well over 30 per cent.
More than 300,000 short-time workers produce little which can be sold in
return for their German government-subsidised wage. Another 400,000 east
Germans are kept off the unemployment rolls by publicly-financed
job-creation programmes, which are to be abolished. Nearly 800,000 citizens
receive pensions five years in advance of normal retirement age. Still
another 500,000 east Germans have moved to west Germany to find work while
500,000 commute to jobs in the west.
It is the west German tax
payer, especially lower and medium-income groups, who bears the brunt of
these social welfare payments which maintain consumption in east Germany.
Small wonder that politicians speak of the urgent need to spread the growing
burden of support for east Germany to all west Germans. This, however, will
call for sacrifices which the Bonn government, faced with elections in 1994,
has been loath to demand.
The figures at the end of two years of unification are fairly grim. Gross
domestic product in east Germany of nearly DM100bn in 1990 plummeted to
DM50bn. Employment, which in the first half of 1991 still stood at 9.3m,
fell to only 6m in the second half of this year.
As a result of the sharp rise in east German wages, from DM1,407 per worker
to
DM2,725, competitiveness actually fell to 35 per cent of the west German
level.
The Bundesbank put it optimistically when it said that despite improvements
in some areas there was no evidence of a 'self-sustaining recovery.'
The German Institute for Economic Research (DIW) in Berlin observed that
even growth in construction activity in east Germany, which was expected to
be dramatic, turned out to be 'disappointing.'
In spite of a 200 per cent rise in demand for publicly-financed construction
projects since the start of the year, actual investment in construction rose
only 45 per cent. The gap was caused by the difficulties which inexperienced
east German officials had in coping with highly-complex west German building
regulations.
Private building activity has performed even worse, as a stroll through any
of east Germany's major cities confirms. Construction is still hampered by
the official ruling that the return of property to former owners takes
precedence over indemnifying them. Contested property cases clog the courts
in east Germany and are the main reason that the building boom has been
stifled.
East Germans place much of the blame for the massive deindustrialision of
their region at the doorstep of the Treuhand agency, which is responsible
for privatising former state companies.
Yet the Treuhand's achievements are impressive. Nearly 9,500 companies out
of the agency's original 12,000 were sold, albeit frequently for a nominal
price after the Treuhand assumed debts and environmental liabilities.
Privatisation led to pledges of DM151.3bn in investments and guarantees for
retaining 1.3m jobs.
Rescuing former state Kombinate (conglomerates) which were written off as
basket cases only a half a year ago is now official Treuhand policy. It has
no choice. Allowing them
to go under would eliminate more than 500 producers and 550,000 jobs,
including virtually the entire chemical and machine-building industries.
Only a few months ago, Mrs Birgit Breuel, the Treuhand's president, scoffed
at the idea that these companies might end up as wards of the state. But now
senior members of the German government openly speak of the need to protect
and support east German industries in much the same way as in the 1950s
Volkswagen and Salzgitter remained state companies in west Germany until
they were strong enough to stand on their own.
The Treuhand's debts, already expected to rise to DM250bn by the end of
1994, are almost certain to be a good deal higher, according to insiders at
the agency. The outlook for the white elephants of east German industry
appears gloomier than ever. Orders have dwindled to virtually nil at former
Kombinate such as the sprawling Sket engineering plant in Magdeburg and the
Takraf crane factory in Leipzig, which exported the bulk of
production to the former Soviet Union. Russia and the other CIS successor
republics are unable to provide the counter-guarantees which would release
DM5bn in Hermes export credit guarantees by the German government.
Invariably, where the Treuhand has succeeded in privatising huge former
state companies such as shipyards and steelmills, it has been an expensive
procedure for the German taxpayer. In this month's sale of the Warnow
shipyard, the heart of the east German shipbuilding industry, to Kvaerner of
Norway for the largely symbolic price of DM1m, the Treuhand pledged to
provide DM436m in investments to modernise the yard along with DM73m from
the state of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern. In addition, the Treuhand agreed to
compensate Kvaerner for up to DM500m in possible losses over the coming four
years. Industry sources said the Treuhand also will pay more than DM250m in
Warnow debts as well as assuming liabilities for old contracts amounting to
nearly DM600m. In return, Kvaerner agreed to invest DM96m and to retain
2,150 jobs in the shipyard. One knowledgeable German observer estimated that
saving each one of the 8,000 jobs in east German shipbuilding up to 1995
will cost the taxpayer DM820,000.
The Treuhand has agreed to pay DM300m and the state of Brandenburg DM50m in
assistance to Krupp so that it would take over and modernise the Eko
steelworks at the Polish border. But Krupp, facing mounting losses of its
own in steel production, showed signs of losing interest in the deal, which
in any event would need approval by the EC.
Agriculture in east Germany has fared no better than industry. The former
collective farms are strangled with debt and the German government shows
little willingness to relieve them of the burden.
Small-scale German farmers in the west, a potent lobby, do not want
competition from large, potentially efficient co-operative farms in the
east.

The Financial Times


London Page X

921026

