FT924-8143

FT  12 NOV 92 / The Matrix Churchill Scandal: Guidelines over sales to Iraq
founded on shifting sands - David Owen and Ralph Atkins on contrasts between
the public and private faces of policy on equipment exports to Saddam


   By DAVID OWEN, RALPH ATKINS and RICHARD DONKIN


PREVIOUSLY classified government documents released during the Matrix
Churchill trial reveal a stark contrast between the public and private
utterances of ministers and civil servants regarding the export to Iraq of
equipment with possible military applications.
In public, Mr John Major and other ministers were conveying the impression
that policy, since the formulation of the guidelines for exports to Iraq in
December 1984, had remained unchanged and that defence equipment was being
rigorously screened out.
On January 31 last year, for example, Mr Major, said at prime minister's
question time: 'There is a considerable degree of sensitivity about the
supply of arms and equipment. As the Rt Hon gentleman (Sir David Steel) will
know, for some considerable time we have not supplied arms to Iraq for
precisely that reason.'
Two weeks earlier Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, told the Commons: 'We
have not been arming Iraq. We have been applying, at some cost to our
manufacturers, an embar-go against it since the beginning of the Iran-Iraq
war.'
Behind the scenes, ministers and officials spent a great deal of time
debating how the guidelines could be manipulated and later modified.
They were certainly changed once - in December 1988. They may have been
amended again - or even done away with altogether - at a meeting chaired by
Mr Hurd on July 19 1990, two weeks before Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait.
The removal of the guidelines was being advocated by some as early as
October 1989. A 'secret' memo addressed to Mr William Waldegrave, then a
foreign office minister, urges: 'We should. . . continue to resist the
proposal to abolish the guidelines on arms sales to Iran and Iraq.'
Throughout 1989 and until last year the standard public response to
questions about defence-related exports remained more or less consistent.
But, with hindsight, the answers had the sufficient element of vagueness to
accommodate the changes that were being made in private without appearing to
mislead MPs.
Typical of the answers given in this vein was one on April 20 1989 by Mr
Alan Clark, then a trade minister, to Mr Chris Mullin, Labour MP for
Sunderland South.
Mr Clark wrote: 'There are no plans to change the current restrictions on
the export of arms to Iraq which impose an embargo on the export of lethal
equipment. A licence is required for the export to Iraq of goods which are
subject to control under the Export of Goods (Control) Order.'
He added: 'Applications for such licences are examined in particular against
the guidelines on the export of defence equipment to Iran and Iraq announced
to the House . . . on October 29 1985. The guidelines are kept under review
in the light of developments in the situation there.'
Mr Clark's wording is strikingly similar to that suggested by Mr Waldegrave
in a letter to him dated April 27 1989.
This stated that the form of words to be used if ministers were 'pressed' on
the issue in parliament was: 'The guidelines . . . are kept under constant
review, and are applied in the light of prevailing circumstances, including
the ceasefire and developments in the peace negotiations.'
On April 21 1989 Lady Thatcher, then prime minister, told Mr Harry Cohen,
Labour MP for Leyton: 'The government have not changed their policy on
defence sales to Iraq.
'Applications for export licences continue to be considered on a
case-by-case basis, according to the guidelines as announced in the House by
the Foreign and Commonwealth secretary on October 29 1985, and in the light
of developments in the peace negotiations with Iran.'
As summary records of regular inter-departmental committee (IDC) meetings
make clear, the guidelines were open to being interpreted surprisingly
laxly.
The IDC was a body comprising Department of Trade and Industry, Ministry of
Defence, and Foreign Office officials charged with scrutinising
export-licence applications to Iran and Iraq.
A summary of a meeting on September 22 1988 records that MoD representatives
maintained that supply of mortar-locating radar 'would not enhance Iraq's
military capability.
'Iraq already had large numbers of such equipment supplied from the UK.'
Less than a month later, the IDC recommended approval of an application for
spare parts for armoured recovery vehicles.
On December 1 1988 it approved 'for demonstration' the export of a Marconi
Quickfire artillery fire control system, as well as six shotguns and shotgun
cartridges. The IDC felt 'that they could be allowed to fall outside the
scope of the guidelines, particularly now that the secretary of state had
spoken of a more flexible interpretation of the guidelines'.
Its meeting on April 28 1989 - the day the Baghdad international arms fair
opened - it refused licence applications for the supply of military aircraft
spares and radar but approved one for a Racal Interferometer SSL system.
The record of the meeting noted: 'This application had originally been
refused on grounds that it was to be used to jam radio signals. In fact it
was needed by the Iraqi ministry of the interior to monitor radio
frequencies as part of an international exercise.'
As late as April 23 1990, Mr Waldegrave was continuing to insist (to Mr Bob
Cryer, Labour MP for Bradford South): 'Exports of defence-related material
to both Iran and Iraq are governed by the guidelines announced by the then
secretary of state for foreign and commonwealth affairs in the House on
October 29 1985.
'They are applied on a case-by-case basis in the light of prevailing
circumstances, including the ceasefire and developments in the peace
negotiations.'
Less than two months later, on June 14 1990, a letter from Mr Michael
Coolican, a DTI official described in the Supergun report compiled by the
Commons trade and industry select committee as the head of its export
control organisation, to his secretary of state says: 'Customs have prima
facie evidence that current machine tools exports from Matrix Churchill and
other UK companies under licence are being routed via Chile to Iraq for arms
manufacture.
'Evidence was available in 1987 to the same effect but to protect sources
ministers took a decision to let the particular exports by Matrix Churchill
go ahead.'
Within a week, Mr Nicholas Ridley, then trade and industry secretary, had
written to Mrs Thatcher arguing: 'We need to reconsider the rationale of the
Guidelines for defence sales to Iraq (and Iran) in the light of evidence of
moves on each side towards peace negotiations and in the light of impending
liberalisation of export controls agreed with Cocom partners and the trading
practices of our competitors.'
Briefing notes that appear to have been prepared for the minister of defence
procurement, dated two days before the meeting chaired by Mr Hurd on July 19
1990, recommend that the minister 'press for acceptance that machine tools
be allowed as exports to Iraq and Iran'.
The MoD's preferred option - two weeks before the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait -
would be for 'no special export controls' on either Iraq or Iran. It notes:
'HMG guidelines have lost whatever relevance they might have had now that
there has been a ceasefire for over two years. If we do not sell
defence-related equipment other countries will.'
The second MoD preferred option would be to revert to a prohibition on
export of 'lethal' equipment. The MoD was to press for weapon platforms
(including aircraft, communications equipment and spares, eg tank spares) to
be excluded from definition of lethal.
On October 29 1990 with Iraqi troops in Kuwait City, Mr Clark, then a
defence minister, wrote: 'The Defence Export Services Organisation, in all
its assistance to industry, has scrupulously followed government policy as
it has developed in relation to military sales to Iraq.'
On December 3 1990 - less than two months before Mr Major's remarks at
question time and with the allies preparing their air offensive - an MoD
document entitled 'British Assistance to the emerging Iraqi arms industry'
and appearing to date from early 1990 was reclassified as 'restricted'.
Cataloguing items supplied by British manufacturers to Iraq, the document
states that the list represented 'a very significant enhancement of the
ability of Iraq to manufacture its own arms thus to resume war with Iran'
and 'an accumulation of technical know-how and machinery which will be
harmful if passed to its close ally, the Soviet Union'.
THE British Government intervened in October 1989 when a US senator was
planning to include Matrix Churchill on a blacklist of companies which had
exported restricted items to Iraq. Richard Donkin writes.
Senator Jessie Helms was forced to back down when one of his staff received
a sharp rebuttal from Whitehall officials to suggestions that Matrix might
have been involved in breaches of the Missile Technology Control Regime.
In the document (left) the official said that 'if Matrix Churchill or any
other British company appeared on his (Helms) list he could expect a sharp
reaction from HMG.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921112

