FT924-8297

FT  12 NOV 92 / World Trade News: Washington could pay price for lifting
veil from subsidies


   By DAVID DODWELL, World Trade Editor


THE US faces the prospect of being taken to task by Gatt, after an
extraordinary formal admission of the considerable export credit insurance
subsidies it provides to exporters.
The disclosures, detailed in a 14-page study by Mr Daniel Bond, Eximbank's
chief economist, result from new US budgetary procedures aimed at greater
financial transparency in government agencies.
Unfortunately for Eximbank, export credit agencies are supposed to operate
on the basis of balancing their books. Few do this, but other agencies so
fudge the figures that they are not forced to admit they subsidise. By
formally admitting it subsidises, the US breaks the Gatt subsidies code.
It is not yet clear whether any country will make a formal complaint to
Gatt. But such countries as the UK and Sweden, both of which insist their
exporters pay higher export credit insurance rates as credit agencies try to
match premium income against country risk, may come under pressure from
local exporters, for whom the study provides clear prima facie evidence that
US exporters have an unfair competitive advantage.
The study is equally embarrassing to such countries as France, Germany and
Italy, which would be forced to admit to subsidies considerably larger than
those detailed by the US if they had to conduct a similar exercise.
Mr Bond's study, presented last week to a working party of export credit
agencies, showed:
Export credit insurance premiums to exporters cover barely a third of
expected losses on contracts in riskier countries, with the Eximbank
bridging the gap with a specifically calculated subsidy;
Eximbank premiums match the cheapest available to exporters from other
countries as part of government policy to ensure US exporters suffer no
disadvantage resulting from insurance cover costs.
Mr John Macomber, Eximbank chairman, said yesterday the US government
budgets just over Dollars 700m (about Pounds 450m) a year to subsidise
Eximbank's operations, about Dollars 50m to run the agency, up to Dollars
200m as a 'war chest' to match aid-funded export efforts by other countries,
and up to Dollars 500m to provide subsidised insurance cover for US
exporters in risky markets, mainly in the developing world.
'For this much money, we are providing for trade that otherwise wouldn't get
done,' Mr Macomber said. 'The problem is that it seems to be in violation of
the Gatt.'
He is unembarrassed by the US move: 'Export credit agencies will lose their
credibility with the public unless they become much more up-front about
their costs. We are changing the regulations to make it clearer what is
going on.'
Mr Bond notes in his study that Eximbank until recently made no attempt to
estimate explicitly the potential magnitude of losses due to non-payment.
'Rather, the fee structure was designed so that Eximbank fees would be
highly competitive with the fees charged by other export credit agencies.'
The study traces changes to be introduced in the coming financial year which
aim to measure more exactly the level of risk involved with providing credit
cover on export contracts.
'Given the visibility of Eximbank's subsidy budget and the intense
competition between government programmes for funding, Eximbank is exploring
ways to reduce the level of its estimated subsidy budget,' Mr Bond wrote.
Mr Macomber says he hopes an international trend in the direction of higher
insurance premiums would make this possible without US exporters losing
their present advantage of comparatively cheap access to insurance cover.
A fee rise is 'under consideration,' the report says. 'The bank has some
scope for raising fees without running the risk of becoming uncompetitive.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921112

