FT923-10775

FT  29 JUL 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: Board-sailing for gold Penny's way /
A looks at the prospects for British success in a new women's event despite
injury problems


   By KEITH WHEATLEY


PENNY WAY suffers from acute tennis elbow. The odd thing about it is that
Penny is one of the world's top board-sailors, not a serve, volley and
strawberries person at all.
'It's an over-use injury. As the sport becomes more intense and you spend
longer on the water training and racing, these things are going to happen to
sailors,' said Rob Andrews, national racing coach to Britain's yachtsmen and
also married to Penny Way.
Since the image of sailboards is one of sun, sand and sea, the notion of
gaining an injury on one through sheer repetitive hard work seems a bit
unlikely.
Penny Way would tell it differently. For the last three years there has
seldom been a day where she has not sailed - competing or training -
somewhere in the world.
Her consistent ranking at world No 1 led to her being pre-selected for the
British team ahead of any other athlete in any discipline. On the start
line, other women sailors were automatically working out who was going to
come second.
Way first became world champion in 1986 and four years later won the Olympic
class world championship in Argentina. That title came her way again last
year. She has won over 300 titles in virtually every country where a board
has been known to float.
It was only two years ago that the International Yacht Racing Union
announced that there would be a board-sailing class for women. Previously
there was one class for both sexes, which left women at too great a weight
disadvantage if the wind blew up at all.
Way knew instantly that her years of dedication were going to be focused on
this one event at Barcelona.
Last year went well but since the winter months, Way has begun to look a
little vulnerable.
The tennis elbow needed minor surgery to remove local scar tissue; then a
virus infection hampered her performance in the world championship in
Singapore early this year. Her world ranking has recently dropped to sixth,
with French sisters Maud and Anne Herbert looking strong ahead of Way in the
rankings.
However, sitting on the harbour wall at Barcelona's splendid Port Olimpic,
she seems calm and confident. 'For me this year the world ranking list is
not important. Only the Olympics counts.' Penny Way is 6ft tall but lightly
built, with the sailor's tan that comes from year-round travel.
Four years ago her build counted her out of the Seoul Olympics. With just
one board-sailing contest for both sexes, Penny Way beat all male rivals for
a place at the Games but was forced to withdraw when sail harnesses were
disallowed. Without that extra leverage a woman weighing, say, 18kg less
than her male opponents could not have held a board upright in the strong
winds off South Korea.
It was a disappointment that turned her resolve to steel. Yet each location
has its own special problems. Barcelona, ironically, has such light breezes
that some of the male board-sailors, such as Barrie Edgington, have been
fasting to bring their weight down to the class minimum. Keeping the board
moving is expected to be more of a problem than keeping it upright in the
likely winds of under 10 knots.
But the real demon of Port Olimpic is a course that starts and finishes
within 100 metres of the massive harbour wall. Even in average winds, this
creates a unique 1 metre-high wave, a chop in which vital starting and
finishing manoeuvres have to be made.
During acclimatisation sailing in June, the board sailors likened it to
performing a ballet on a bucking narrow beam.
The reason for the daunting lay-out is that television wants to be able to
cover the board-sailing, with the starts and finishes held closer to the
cameras than some of the track and field events. The harbour wall will also
accommodate up to 11,000 spectators, plus hundreds of athletes watching from
balconies at the adjacent Olympic village.
A total of 10 races are held for the board-sailors with one discard
permitted. There is a gruelling schedule of two contests a day for the first
four days, which will involve over 20 miles of racing. The final race is on
Sunday. The first day's racing was postponed due to lack of wind.
Way is using a special carbohydrate replacement product to help keep energy
levels up while out on the water in temperatures that have consistently been
over 30C.
Dehydration is also a real worry. Normally at international board events,
coach boats are allowed on to the course to provide water. At the Olympics
they are not.
Barcelona sounds tough, but compared with most of what Way has already
experienced on her route to the Olympics - sharks under the board in
Florida, a mugging in Brazil - she ought to be able to handle it.
'I don't want to turn round after 1992 and have any regrets,' she told me.
'Whatever the result it's essential that I know afterwards that I gave it
everything I had.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920729

