FT922-4335

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Company News: Accountant opens the books on a
secret life - Bernard Simon visits the information offices of the
beleaguered property company


   By BERNARD SIMON


A NONDESCRIPT office on the 28th floor of Toronto's Exchange Tower shows
just how much life has changed at Olympia & York in the past three months.
Furnished with a few library-type tables, a large photocopying machine and a
row of bulky filing cabinets, the room is one of three O&Y 'information
offices', where creditors of the once-secretive developer can now pore over
its most sensitive financial data.
The information offices - the other two are in New York and London - are
part of a two-pronged effort by O&Y to win the confidence of banks and other
lenders as it seeks to reschedule its CDollars 13.5bn (USDollars 11.20bn)
debt.
The other leg of O&Y's belated willingness to open its books is the
appointment of Mr Bernard Wilson, a partner at Price Waterhouse in Toronto,
as 'information officer', to liaise between the company and its creditors.
Mr Wilson's position is unique in a corporate restructuring. However, it
reflects creditors' concern in the early days of O&Y's troubles that the
developer was reluctant to change its secretive ways.
Several lenders complained after their first meeting with the company on
April 13 that information contained in their briefing books was sketchy and
out of date.
The job went to Mr Wilson, an avuncular 49-year-old accountant, partly
because of his own expertise in corporate restructurings, and partly because
Price Waterhouse has worked as O&Y's auditors for the past 11 years.
The information officer's job was created under the same May 14 court order
which gave O&Y protection from its creditors under Canada's Companies
Creditors Arrangements Act. His role has been clarified in subsequent court
rulings.
Mr Wilson thus has jurisdiction only over data pertaining to the parent
company, Olympia & York Developments, and its Canadian assets, which
together account for about two-thirds of the company's total debt.
He can demand information on O&Y's US buildings or Canary Wharf only insofar
as their affairs are relevant to creditors of the parent company. He says he
and his team have so far fielded about 50 requests for information.
Although O&Y's secrecy has been stripped away, he still has to contend with
the fact that the Reichmann family firm has never had an internal reporting
system geared to inquisitive outsiders. Unlike public companies, for
instance, O&Y's financial managers have not been accustomed to compiling
monthly reports for directors' meetings.
Price Waterhouse is only now completing its audit of O&Y's books for the
year to January 31 1992. The figures should be available by the last week of
June.
Mr Wilson hopes to be able to answer many of the enquiries by referring
questioners to the information rooms. Documents now available there include
O&Y's debt agreements, its land and tenant leases, and appraisals of its
properties. However, visitors require either Mr Wilson's or the company's
permission, and are required to sign confidentiality agreements.
Mr Wilson's job will also be made easier with the setting-up of about half a
dozen creditor committees, representing O&Y's 91 bank lenders as well as
dozens of holders of publicly-traded securities.
Reports to these committees will probably be synchronised with the monthly
reports which Mr Wilson will draw up on O&Y's receipts and disbursements.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920605

