FT921-3791

FT  12 MAR 92 / Two cheers for proposals on life assurance sales: The new
disclosure regime


   By NORMA COHEN


FINDING a way of putting price-tags on life assurance policies has not been
easy for regulators. The Securities and Investments Board's new regime for
disclosure of policy charges treads a fine line between the demands of
consumer groups and those of the industry, giving both some of what they had
demanded but falling short of what each had long sought.
'I'd give it two cheers,' said Ms Jean Eaglesham, head of the Consumers'
Association's money group. 'It will force the industry to come clean on
up-front costs.'
The new regime was prompted by pressure from the Office of Fair Trading
(OFT), which in 1989 ruled that life companies inhibit competition by
telling prospective buyers too little to make informed choices.
It also said that, because agents failed to disclose how much commission
they were paid, consumers were paying for life companies' efforts to win
market share.
Yesterday Sir David Walker, SIB chairman, stressed the extent to which the
new disclosure regime was likely to meet those objections.
'What we are proposing will have a significant effect on competition,' he
said.
He also acknowledged the greatest fear of the life industry - that the new
rules may prompt consumers to choose other savings products, such as those
offered by building societies, which did not penalise investors for early
withdrawal. He joined the life industry in calling for those savings
products to come under a disclosure regime.
Any protests are likely to be in vain. There will be a two-month
consultation period, but Sir David said the proposals were not likely to be
revised significantly unless the Department of Trade and Industry or the OFT
objected to them.
Consumer representatives say the new regime falls short in two important
ways. It will not force sales agents to disclose the amount of commission
they earn, and it allows companies to use in advertisements industry-wide
averages of expenses rather than figures specific to the company. Thus,
consumers do not see the exact cost of a product.
The Association of British Insurers, the industry's trade association, said
it shared the regulators' objectives. But it was unhappy about having to
tell prospective customers the amount by which charges are likely to reduce
investment returns by the time the policy matures.
'Policyholders may look at the information and be confused,' the association
said.
Mr Brian Sharp, manager of life assurance at the association, said it would
try to persuade SIB to change its mind, and if not successful, would take
its case to the DTI.
It is precisely the pounds-and-pence expression of cost that consumer groups
have been seeking. Sir David said SIB's own research showed that charges
varied vastly among insurance companies, reducing each pound of return by
anything from 6p to 40p. Average costs are between 11p and 19p per pound of
final maturity value.
The association is also unhappy about disclosing the cross-over point - at
which a policyholder's payback is equivalent to the total of all premiums
paid. According to Lautro, the self-regulatory body for life assurance and
unit trust sales agents, this can take seven to 10 years on a 20-year
policy. The association says this can change during the life of a policy, as
investment returns vary.
Consumer groups - and indeed the government - have sought this type of
information for years.
Until now, insurance companies have not had to disclose more than the
percentage by which the final investment return might be reduced on maturity
to cover the costs of the policy. This is known as reduction in yield.
Under the the new regime, prospective buyers must be told:
The amount of their premiums which will be retained by the company to cover
expenses if they surrender the policy in each of the first five years.
Companies will also have to show the cross-over point.
The amount of pence per pound by which expenses will reduce investment
returns over the life of the policy.
Who the sales agent is working for and the relationship to the company whose
products are being sold.
A written statement of why a particular product has been recommended.
After the contract is signed, a customer must be given cost information
specific to his or her own case, and must be told the surrender values of
policies in years beyond the cross-over point.
SIB satisfied a number of industry critics by abandoning plans to allow unit
trusts to be 'depolarised' - sold through outlets tied to another producer.
It also abandoned plans for 'multi-tying', which would have allowed sales
agents to sell the products of another company if their own did not offer a
competing product.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920312

