FT924-12107

FT  22 OCT 92 / Trafalgar accepts HK Land director


   By ROLAND RUDD


TRAFALGAR House, the property construction and engineering group, yesterday
turned down a request to accept two directors of Hongkong Land on its board.
It accepted one, Mr Rodney Leach. Hongkong Land controls 14.9 per cent and
had wanted Mr Leach and Sir Charles Powell to join the Trafalgar board.
Mr Leach said: 'Trafalgar have taken the initial steps needed to go forward
and have promised more to come. We must continue to look at ways in which we
can strengthen its board.'
Hongkong Land is expected to continue to press Trafalgar to make Sir Charles
a non-executive director.
Mr Allan Gormly, Trafalgar's new chief executive, said: 'It did not seem
appropriate to appoint two directors from Hongkong Land to our board. The
request was made when Hongkong Land thought their shareholding would be
greater.'
Hongkong Land recently failed to increase its stake by tender offer.
However, Mr Leach said: 'We have the right to go up to 29.9 per cent.' He
added: 'We tend to have bigger stakes than 14.9 per cent.'
Trafalgar's boardroom changes included the appointment of Sir Archibald
Forster, chairman and chief executive of Esso UK, as another non-executive
director unconnected with Hongkong Land.
The appointment of Mr Alan Clements as non-executive chairman of Trafalgar
is an interim measure.
'In due course Mr Clements will be looking for a successor' said Mr Gormly.
Mr Clements, 64, who has a string of non-executive directorships, is
resigning from the boards of Brent Walker and Guinness Mahon Holdings.
Trafalgar has still to settle details of the compensation due to Sir Eric
Parker, the former chief executive, and Sir Nigel Broackes, former chairman,
for loss of office.
Sir Nigel was appointed life president, an honorary position without a seat
on the board. Sir Eric remains on the board until his 60th birthday in June.
Following criticism of its accounting policy from the Financial Reporting
Review Panel, Mr Gormly said the group would be 'as clear and upfront as we
can' when announcing its year-end results in December.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921022

