FT922-613

FT  26 JUN 92 / German MPs pass liberal abortion law


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THE GERMAN Bundestag voted early today for liberalisation of the country's
strict abortion law, in spite of a strong campaign against the move by the
Roman Catholic church.
After 14 hours of debate, and almost two hours of voting on a series of
resolutions from various political parties, the only resolution to gain a
majority was a joint proposal from the opposition Social Democrats and the
Free Democrats, a minority party in the ruling coalition.
Of 657 members of the Bundestag, 357 voted in favour of liberalisation.
This means that abortion will be available to women in Germany who have
obtained formal advice from a doctor on the consequences.
An alternative proposal by Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic
Union (CDU), which would have given responsibility for a final decision to
the doctor concerned, was rejected.
Mrs Rita Sussmuth, Bundestag president, led a revolt of liberal Christian
Democrats against her party. Brushing aside a demand for her resignation
from Mr Theo Waigel, leader of the conservative Christian Social Union
(CSU), the CDU's associate in the governing coalition, Mrs Sussmuth made a
passionate plea for the right of German women to decide for themselves.
The vote was the culmination of two years of agonising over the abortion
issue. The political wrangling came about because East and West Germany were
unable to reconcile their very different abortion laws on unification in
1990. West Germany had restrictive laws; East Germany had virtual abortion
on demand.
Backed by Germany's Roman Catholic bishops, a majority of the CDU and CSU
argued for the 'protection of the unborn child' - leaving abortion as a
crime unless approved by a doctor. Their proposal would have required
precise justification of any abortion on physiological or psychological
grounds.
The alternative simply requires doctors to give formal advice on the
consequences of abortion to any prospective mother seeking to terminate her
pregnancy.
'Nobody can save the life of a child against the mother's will,' Mrs
Sussmuth declared, to a storm of applause from the opposition benches. 'We
must think of both the protection of the unborn life, and of the mother. . .
We must stop saying that women are incapable of taking their own decisions.
No-one can take away from the woman herself the final decision.'
Although a free vote was declared by the main political parties, the split
among the Christian Democrats is another embarrassment for Chancellor Kohl
while the popularity of his coalition government is shaky.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920626

