FT924-6104

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (1): A cultural melting pot - The
three eastern regions of Champagne-Ardenne, Lorraine and Alsace illustrate
in vivid microcosm the challenges and opportunities facing modern France


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


GROUPING together 5.2m inhabitants, more than the entire population of
Denmark, the three eastern regions of France are getting to grips in their
different ways with the competitive challenges thrown up by the country's
central role in Europe. The big issues facing eastern France today are as
diverse as its geography, which stretches from the fertile hills of
Champagne, through the remote forests of Les Vosges mountains to the
industrialised Rhine valley.
They include the problems faced by the huge cereals farms of the Marne as
the reforms of the European common agricultural policy begin to bite; the
impact of recession on the champagne industry; Lorraine's attempts to
modernise its industrial base after heavy job losses in its steel, coal and
textiles industries and Alsace's bid to forge closer links with its German
regional neighbours on the east bank of the Rhine, as this pivotal region
exerts increasing autonomy from Paris.
These challenges do, however, have one thing in common. They are all linked
in one way or another with the obligations and opportunities thrown up by
European Community membership, an issue which runs especially deep in a part
of France that provides the physical and cultural link with northern and
central Europe.
'We are at a crossroads, not just of motorways but of cultures . . . we are
no longer at a frontier. We are in front of a new region that links France
and Germany. Paris is no longer at the heart of Europe,' says Mrs Catherine
Trautmann, mayor of Strasbourg.
The sentiment is echoed by Mr Bernard Guerrier de Dumast, deputy mayor of
Nancy: 'We are a melting pot, a synthesis of German and Latin culture. We
have always lived, for good or ill, with the idea of Europe.'
It is no surprise that, like the rest of the country, the three regions were
passionately divided on European monetary and political union in France's
September referendum.
Alsace, where the regional capital Strasbourg is home to the plenary
sessions of the European Parliament, produced the biggest pro-Maastricht
majority of any region in France - 66.2 per cent. Lorraine also said yes,
despite a pocket of resistance in its southern department of Les Vosges,
fiefdom of Mr Philippe Seguin, mayor of Epinal, the rebel RPR Gaullist
politician who led the anti-treaty campaign. Meanwhile, neighbouring
Champagne-Ardenne produced a 'no' vote, reflecting the strength of the
agricultural lobby there.
Traditionally, eastern France has always been a centre of political,
industrial and financial influence, albeit a fragmented one. For the three
regions appear to co-operate less with each other and have less in common
than they do with their foreign neighbours in Germany, Belgium and
Switzerland.
Apart from Mr Seguin, tipped as a possible future leader of the Gaullist
RPR, and the forceful young Socialist Mrs Trautmann, the east is the local
political base for Mr Gerard Longuet, president of the conservative Parti
Republicain, who unseated Mr Jean-Marie Rausch, a centrist former Socialist
government minister, as president of the Lorraine regional council after the
regional elections last March.
Other local heavyweights include Christian Poncelet, a senior RPR senator
and former government minister, who now heads Les Vosges departmental
council and Mr Antoine Waechter, leader of the Greens party, who is a vice
president of the Alsace regional council.
The east is also the traditional cradle of some of the biggest names in
French industry, reflected in the continued existence of a large industrial
workforce and a small service sector.
Alsace, for example, is home to De Dietrich, the engineering and kitchen
equipment group which is France's oldest family controlled company, as well
as to carmaker Peugeot's showpiece plant at Mulhouse, assembly centre for
its newest model, the 109.
In neighbouring Lorraine there is Pont a Mousson, the pipes division of
Saint Gobain, three plants belonging to Usinor Sacilor, the state-owned
steelmaker, plus three-quarters of French coal output. Financially, the east
boasts France's second largest banking centre, based in Strasbourg, where
Credit Mutuel, Cial and Sogenal have made a specialty in lending to export
oriented local industry.
Like other French regions, they are all striving to use the decentralisation
of power initiated 10 years ago to seize more of the initiative in their own
economic development - but with mixed success.
'This is a decentralised country, where all the key decisions are still
taken in Paris,' mourns Mr Guerrier de Dumast. 'Too many big investment
projects go to the Paris region, which still exerts a power of attraction
that the provinces cannot resist. Without a will to reverse this in Paris,
it will never turn back.'
The east has, however, managed to attract a wave of foreign investment,
partly thanks to its central geographical position in the EC. This has also
been helped by generous aids available in Lorraine, keen to diversify away
from its traditional industries, plus a network of internationally active
economic development agencies.
It has also benefited in a small way from the Paris government's attempts to
spread more of the central bureaucracy out to the provinces, with the recent
move of the prestigious Ecole Nationale d'Administration to Strasbourg, and
the move of the CNRS national science research centre library to Nancy.
But the east has not yet won the battle in what has become a test case of
the power struggle between Paris and the regions, the continuing wrangle
over the financing of a new Trains a Grande Vitesse high speed rail link
from Paris through Strasbourg and on to Germany's Inter-City Express
network.
The line, due to open early in the next decade, is desperately wanted across
eastern France. Businessmen in Les Vosges complain that road and rail links
to neighbouring regions are poor, while Alsace sees the line as an important
step in the economic development of the upper Rhine valley and a catalyst to
trade between France and eastern Europe.
'We see the TGV as a symbol of desencalvement, breaking out from our
regional isolation,' adds Mr Gerard Cherpion, president of the Saint-Die
chamber of commerce, near Les Vosges' border with Alsace.
However, the SNCF French rail board's traffic forecasts on the French
section of the TGV-East are so poor that it wants the three regions to
contribute a combined FFr6bn to the FFr26bn cost of the project and to
charge 30 per cent above normal TGV rates for the tickets.
They have responded with an initiative launched by Strasbourg's Mrs
Trautmann, to create an association of French and German regions to lobby
both Bonn and Paris for a Franco-German TGV link. The lobby has been
effective, in that it produced in July an agreement in principle from
President Francois Mitterrand and Chancellor Helmut Kohl that there should
be such a link.
Yet, the crucial question of who pays remains to be settled. Mrs Trautmann
accepts that the regions should make some kind of contribution, but argues
that the profit forecasts become much better if calculated on through
traffic on both the French and German sections, rather than the French part
of the line alone.
Others are less moderate - 'why should we have to pay, when Rhone-Alpes and
Brittany got their TGV for free?' asks a Les Vosges local government
official.
Many others in eastern France agree.

The Financial Times


London Page I

921123

