FT924-7985

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement - Details: Concern in gilts market on
PSBR


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE GILTS market took the Autumn Statement in its stride yesterday, but the
market's current bullish tone may prove difficult to sustain, as the
longer-term implications for supply sink in.
The surge in the public sector borrowing requirement, now estimated at
Pounds 37bn for this financial year and Pounds 44bn for next year, means
that supply in the gilts market could reach Pounds 50bn next year, taking
into account the need to refinance maturing government debt. This translates
into about Pounds 1bn of gilt issues every week.
The immediate impact on the gilts market has been cushioned because, with
less than Pounds 4bn still to borrow, the government has already completed
most of its funding for this financial year.
'I don't think the real problem is for this year and it might not even be
for next year, but it is the prospect of several years of PSBR between
Pounds 40bn and Pounds 50bn that causes concern,' said Mr Simon Briscoe, UK
economist at Greenwell Montagu.
The government has some additional flexibility, because the inclusion in the
funding arithmetic of the Pounds 15bn raised through purchases of sterling
during foreign exchange intervention in September could be delayed, allowing
some pre-funding in the gilts market before the start of the next financial
year.
There are some fears that even the latest PSBR estimates may be
conservative. 'The key is going to be whether (Mr Lamont) will succeed in
keeping to his public sector pay policy,' said Mr John Kendal, an economist
at Baring Brothers.
If the 1 1/2 per cent limit on public sector pay rises was exceeded, the
government's funding needs could rise further, he warned.
But the background of low inflation and low growth, and the prospect of
further cuts in interest rates, will continue to provide support for the
gilts market.
Concern about inflation, even in the medium-term, appears to have faded.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921113

