FT922-4246

FT  06 JUN 92 / Kohl and Major call for rapid enlargement of EC


   By QUENTIN PEEL and ALISON SMITH


   BONN, LONDON


CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl of Germany and Mr John Major, the British prime
minister, called yesterday for a speedier widening of European Community
membership, in spite of Denmark's vote to reject the Maastricht treaty on
European union.
The joint call, issued after informal talks in Bonn, gives German backing to
Mr Major's push for a rapid enlargement of the Community. In particular, the
two leaders called for negotiations with prospective member states from the
seven-nation European Free Trade Area (Efta) to begin at the start of 1993.
It is seen in Bonn as a deliberate effort to play down the significance of
Denmark's referendum result, which threatens to sabotage the Maastricht
agreement on European economic, monetary and political union.
Describing their talks as 'very friendly', Mr Major and Mr Kohl merely
welcomed the outcome of the meeting on Thursday of EC foreign ministers. The
ministers had insisted that the other 11 member states press ahead with
ratification of an unchanged Maastricht treaty by the end of the year, but
leave the door open for Denmark to reconsider its position.
While emphasising the commitment to press ahead with ratification, the two
leaders believe that more work needs to be done on how the Community can
move forward before this can sensibly be discussed by heads of government,
who will meet at the Lisbon summit in three weeks' time.
The UK legislation to ratify the treaty is almost certain not to come back
to the House of Commons before July. This leaves the Westminster parliament
little prospect of completing its consideration in the timescale agreed by
EC foreign ministers. Downing Street yesterday played down the importance of
that timescale, emphasising that it was not a deadline.
Mr Major and Mr Kohl then called for 'speedy initiation and conduct of
negotiations on accession with those Efta states which so desire', urging
the European Commission to produce a negotiating mandate by the time of the
EC summit in Edinburgh in December. In the German text, they called for
'acceleration' of the process.
The move is regarded with suspicion by some member states, including France,
which believe that the 'deepening' of the community via the Maastricht
treaty is an essential precondition. They fear that new members will merely
dilute and delay the integration process. So far, Austria, Finland, Sweden
and Switzerland have applied to join. The other Efta countries are Norway,
Iceland and Liechtenstein.
The UK government's political balancing act over the current uncertainty in
the EC was underlined yesterday. Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, launched
a blistering attack on the European Commission for the 'seemingly endless
and un-questioning pressure from Brussels always to extend the competence of
the Community'.
He emphasised also that the Danish referendum result provided a timely
reminder 'that there is nothing inevitable or predetermined about the future
development of the European Community', and that the UK was not alone in
wanting to protect its national identity.
Mr Lamont's implicit criticism of Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission
president, will strike a chord with many Tory MPs - not just those who have
been consistently Euro-sceptic. He warned that small countries should not be
'bullied or pressurised' and that he could think of nothing more likely to
stir up nationalism and resentment towards the EC than talk of forcing
Denmark out of it.
The rebel Euro-sceptic Tory MPs may take some comfort from Mr Lamont's
words. But they were in no doubt that government whips would over the
weekend reinforce the pressure on MPs to withdraw their names from a
parliamentary motion calling for a 'fresh start' in shaping the EC on
non-federalist lines. Two new MPs have already done so.
At the Anglo-German talks yesterday, Mr Major apparently failed to persuade
Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, to modify his objections to the
European Fighter Aircraft project. Mr Ruhe did agree to further talks with
Mr Malcolm Rifkind, his British counterpart, before reaching a final
decision. The parties in Germany's ruling coalition are due to decide the
fate of the aircraft on June 23.
The importance attached by Mr Major to keeping the project alive was
underlined by the suggestion that he might try to raise the issue again with
Chancellor Kohl in the margins of meetings at the earth summit in Rio de
Janeiro.
British and German officials are also to have further discussions, which
will include ways in which industry might be persuaded to reduce its costs.
Re-allocating the costs of the programme between the participating countries
does not seem to have been raised as an option.
Danish Maastricht vote 'will jolt Irish', Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920606

