FT921-15258

FT  11 JAN 92 / International Company News: Olympia & York defers Moscow
hotel plan


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


OLYMPIA & York, the real estate developer owned by Toronto's Reichmann
family, has shelved plans to build a 60-storey office and hotel complex in
central Moscow.
The decision is in keeping with a more cautious approach by O&Y in the past
year or two. The Reichmanns made their name in the 1970s and early 1980s by
buying when many others were selling, but they now have their hands full
with a heavy commitment to Canary Wharf in London and the severe downturn in
the North American real estate market.
O&Y said the Moscow development was being deferred 'until the political and
economic environment is more predictable.' The company said it remained
confident that a strong market still existed for North American-style office
and residential development.
The building, with a projected cost of CDollars 250m (USDollars 219.2m),
would have been the tallest in Moscow.
O&Y said, however, that it was pressing ahead with a 450,000 sq ft head
office building for the Hungarian Credit Bank (HCB) in Budapest. It has
called for tenders for the CDollars 100m project, which will include an
underground parking garage, a rarity in eastern Europe. The building will
also serve as O&Y's eastern Europe headquarters.
HCB will have a 50 per cent stake in the 12-storey complex, which will be
located on a central square opposite the National Bank of Hungary. The rest
of the equity will be shared between O&Y and First Hungary Fund, a North
American venture-capital partnership.
With the exception of three small projects in Canada, O&Y has not built in
North America since 1985. It has put off redeveloping a building on Park
Avenue in New York until it finds a substantial tenant and is expected to
wait several years before exercising a right to build the first of three
office buildings for the Yerba Buena project in San Francisco.
The Reichmanns are also actively looking for equity partners in their
projects. According to Mr John Zuccotti, president of Olympia & York USA,
'We're talking to people who are not heavily into real estate and are keen
on getting in.'
Mr Li Kashing, the Hong Kong magnate, agreed last autumn to help refinance
an O&Y building in New York's financial district in exchange for a 49 per
cent equity stake in the project.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920111

