FT921-554

FT  28 MAR 92 / World Stock Markets: Reflective phase follows resilience to
rate rise - Talk of the beginning of a bull market in Germany is tempered by
gloomy caveats


   By DAVID WALLER


For the last quarter of 1991 investors lived in fear of an aggressive
interest rate move from the Bundesbank. When the move did come it was more
aggressive than expected - a half-point rise in both Lombard and discount
rates - and yet the German stock and bond markets responded positively.
As in the German Bund market, investors, predominantly overseas
institutions, took the central bank's move as evidence of its determination
to beat down inflation. They calculated this was as far as interest rates
would have to go, and bought shares and government securities in
anticipation of rate cuts in the spring or early summer.
Further positive impetus for German equities came from the rise of Wall
Street share prices in the first two months of the year. The DAX index
climbed to a peak of 1,772 in early March, outperforming other European
share markets in the process. It has slipped back to around 1,710 since then
 -still an increase of just under 9 per cent since the beginning of the
year.
In the past few weeks, the high volumes which induced the rally have fallen
back and the market has entered one of its periodic reflective phases.
Investors are once again scrutinising the contradictory indicators, and
asking themselves whether they are in for a prolonged bout of stagnation or
if they stand at the very beginning of a glorious bull market.
'We are sure we are in a bull market,' said Mr Gunter Kirchhain of Deutsche
Bank's Dusseldorf-based institutional equities team, at an investment
symposium in Berlin on Thursday. In its latest report on Germany, Goldman
Sachs is also optimistic, saying that the DAX index ought to rise to 2,000
over the next 12 months. But both Goldman and Deutsche Bank temper their
enthusiasm by saying that the surge in share prices will not happen
overnight.
Indeed, as Mr Kirchhain outlined to his audience of international investors,
there is much to be glum about. The negative factors include:
The west German economy is slowing down. Deutsche Bank is predicting growth
of just over 1 per cent this year. Without unequivocal - and sustainable -
recovery in the US, there is no chance the German economy will be bailed out
by a demand for exports.
Domestically, the impetus to west German growth caused by reunification is
running out of steam.
Economic difficulties are reflected in poor company profits. Hardly a day
goes by without some large German company issuing dreadful figures for last
year and bemoaning the outlook for the current year.
Veba, the energy group which announced a dividend rise on Wednesday is a
rarity in the industrial sector. Collectively, German companies' earnings
are likely to rise between 0 and 3 per cent this year.
The banking sector is enjoying a boom, but Deutsche Bank alone among the
bigger banks has had the courage to put up its dividend.
The outlook for interest rates is not as encouraging as it may have seemed
shortly before Christmas. Money supply growth is higher than the Bundesbank
would like, and the 6.35 per cent pay settlement for steel workers is not an
encouraging signal for the rest of the wage round.
Inflation is likely to reach a peak of 4.7 per cent for March and April,
before dropping back 'decisively' to below 4 per cent in the second half of
the year, according to Mr Norbert Walter, chief economist at Deutsche Bank.
He said the Bundesbank would not move to cut money market rates until June
at the earliest. Thereafter the need for finance to rebuild the eastern
Lander would keep pressure on interest rates over the longer term.
The market's rise this year is explained by the fact that investors are
already looking beyond these short-term problems and anticipating 'another
decade of double-digit earnings growth', as Mr Kirchhain put it this week.
They are expecting interest rates to come down later this year; they are
anticipating a US-led world economic recovery; they are expecting German
companies to come out of this year's recession leaner and fitter; they
believe that over the next decade German industry will be the beneficiary of
demand for capital goods, not just in the five new Lander, but in the whole
of eastern Europe; and they are anticipating the benefits of the EC's single
market programme.
Thus Deutsche Bank is forecasting economic growth of a full 3 per cent in
the western part of Germany next year, and earnings growth of 12 to 15 per
cent. With the DAX at the 1,710 level, this puts shares on a prospective
multiple for 1993 of somewhere in the low teens - arguably reasonable when
compared to 18 or 19 for the current year.
Both Deutsche Bank and Goldman Sachs think that the market may have got
ahead of itself in anticipating recovery - Mr Kirchhain even went so far as
to say that equity valuations look dangerously high in relation to long Bund
yields. But both institutions believe that now is not a bad time to buy
German equities, even if there is a risk that the market will stagnate for
some months.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920328

