FT922-13426

FT  11 APR 92 / Travel: Travelling modestly in troubled times - You don't
have to spend a fortune on travel


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


DETERMINED to celebrate the UK election result? Or worried by recession?
More cheerful this morning - or less?
Paradoxically, the well-heeled traveller has never had so many luxury
hotels, gold-card safaris or state-of-the-art cruise ships from which to
choose - recession or no, writes Michael Thompson-Noel.
But perhaps you have vowed to economise on holiday costs this year. If you
have, there is plenty on offer that is reasonably priced without sounding
tacky.
Never one to leave its rooms empty if it can help it, Hilton International
has been wracking its corporate brain for intriguingly cheap offers.
Birdwatching weekends? But of course. Hilton UK has launched a choice of
weekend breaks for bird-spotters based at seven UK hotels and one in
Holland, hosted by experts.
For example, there is a three-night May bank holiday break at the Hilton
National, Swansea, May 22-25, incorporating visits to Skomer Island and the
Gower coast, at Pounds 175 per person. And there is a four-day package at
the Amsterdam Schipol airport Hilton, starting August 28, which costs Pounds
275 each, including the ferry.
Hilton also recently launched its Weekend Hilton Style short-breaks brochure
with prices starting at Pounds 42 per person per night. With an eye to the
times, Hilton has introduced a special-offer hotline to give details of late
availability.
Perhaps you live in London. In which case, a really cheap holiday could be
spent in London's Docklands. This may come as a surprise, but in the view of
the London Docklands Development Corporation: 'Docklands is already
established as an important tourist destination, attracting an estimated
3/4 m people each year.'
Scandic Crown Hotels opened a 390-room hotel at Nelson Dock in Rotherhithe
last year, and Britannia Hotels opens a four-star hotel on the Isle of Dogs
next month. There are new restaurants and pubs, and the RiverBus is
introducing a weekend service from today, two new piers (St Katherine's Dock
from Monday and Canary Wharf from early May), plus three new catamarans
between now and June.
David Powell, LDDC's tourism manager, says: 'A new market is being opened up
on both sides of the Thames east of Tower Bridge as visitors come from all
over to see what is considered to be the largest and most successful inner
city regeneration programme in the world.'
If you seriously want to travel cheaply, your best bet is probably The Good
Bed and Breakfast Guide, newly-published by the Consumers' Association and
Hodder & Stoughton.
Since the last edition, say the editors, a significant number of b&b's have
moved up-market. There have been substantial price rises, but also increased
comfort.
Generally, though, b&b's are still good value, and some have kept their
price rises below inflation. Most cost less than Pounds 30 a night. The
guide lists prices and number and types of room for about 1,000 b&b's, many
of them, it says, in particularly attractive settings.
If you want to venture further afield, scan the classifieds or Oracle, or
visit a good travel agent, for there are plenty of deals and discounts
available.
To quote one at random, Sally Holidays' motoring short-break-of-the-month
for April is a one-night jaunt to the Chateau de Montvillargenne in
Chantilly which costs Pounds 144 for two people, including dinner (with
wine), breakfast and return ferry crossing. The Pounds 144 relates to
self-drive trips between Sunday and Thursday nights. Extra nights' b&b cost
Pounds 46 for two.
In addition, Sally Holidays has just produced a new brochure of European
short breaks, with prices starting at Pounds 55 per person for a one-night
hotel break and two-night breaks starting at Pounds 67. The idea is to
explore less well-known towns and country areas. The brochure has a wide
choice of accommodation in hotels, inns and auberges in France, Belgium and
Holland.
Because the travel trade is still under great pressure, there are plenty of
special offers going, many based on late availability. Among travel
companies, Hayes and Jarvis's prices are as competitive as anyone's.
Current H&J examples: Egypt: seven nights b&b in the Luxor Novotel for
Pounds 299, second week free, or a seven-night Nile cruise for Pounds 379,
second week in the Luxor Hilton free (departures every Thursday, May and
June, Gatwick or Manchester).
Kenya: seven nights half-board at the Shelly Beach Hotel, Mombasa, for
Pounds 299, 14 nights h/b Pounds 399 (depart Sundays, April and May, Gatwick
or Manchester). Malaysia: seven nights room-only at Ferringhi Beach, Penang,
for Pounds 499, second week free, or seven nights r/o in the classier
Casuarina Beach Hotel, Penang, for Pounds 599, second week free (depart
Wednesdays and Sundays, April and May, Heathrow).
All these prices are per person in a twin room and are subject to
availability. Hayes and Jarvis's special offers also cover Gambia, Thailand,
Sri Lanka, Antigua, Jamaica, Barbados, Grenada, Tobago and Brazil.
Hilton UK, reservations, tel: 0923-238877. London Docklands Development
Corporation, fax: 071-512-0777. The Good Bed and Breakfast Guide is
available from bookshops or the subscription department, Consumer's
Association, PO Box 44, Hertford X, SG14 1SH, Pounds 12.95, incl p&p. Sally
Holidays, tel: 071-355-2266. Hayes and Jarvis, tel: 081-748-5050.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920411

