FT922-4347

FT  05 JUN 92 / Arts: Dire Straits - Pop


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Dire Straits are deeply unfashionable. You can't make so much money over so
many years appealing to the Woking classes without getting it in the ribs
from urbane critics. The fact that the band dresses like a bunch of window
cleaners gives the criticism some weight.
For Earl's Court, on yet another leg of a global sweep (with sponsors
Philips adding more weight to their wallets), they made no attempt to
convert the unconvinced. This was a performance relaxed to the point of
inertia.
Even the jokes were laid back: near the end, after the first jangling bars
of 'Money for Nothing', leading Strait Mark Knopfler shook his head, folded
his arms, and pretended to go on strike. The rest of the group was
spotlighted, swinging their legs, drinking ale, equally reluctant to perform
the most celebrated anthem to pop excess. What a tease] Within a minute they
were back to work, churning out one of those infectious melodic lines which
make Dire Straits accessible but chunky.
Knopfler can afford the
best backing musicians and Chris White on saxophone and Paul Franklin on
steel guitar fleshed out the sound, occasionally to the point
of excitement. The problem is that Knopfler's output as a composer is
variable. A decade or so ago every song was a coconut; now there are some
dodgy walnuts among them. It's always roughly the same sound but the version
from the days of 'Sultans of Swing' and 'Romeo and Juliet' is so much more
enjoyable than the later work in which Knopfler shows off his newly acquired
social conscience.
But for all the blandness Dire Straits are polished and professional. It is
a criticism that you find yourself watching Knopfler on the screen, where
close-ups catch his fingers magically milking the frets, rather than the
long distance static view of the man live. His guitar virtuosity seems as
God-given as Clapton's: and, within limits, Dire Straits are prepared to
have fun. 'Sultans' was given a performance that was almost minimalist, with
Knopfler biting off the lyrics, and
the band embroidered some of the melodies with improvised snatches of
everyone from Diana Ross to Wayne Shorter.
Dire Straits have always delivered to the format, and there was little
tedium in a set that generously extended two hours. There was little
mind-blowing passion either, but that's not the band's bag. This was pop
music's answer to a double bill of Beethoven and Tchaikovsky, excellent for
corporate entertainment and for sending the audience out whistling the
tunes. Ideal in fact for the start of the London Season.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920605

