FT923-10987

FT  28 JUL 92 / World Trade News: McDonnell Douglas boosts Israeli ties


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


McDONNELL Douglas, the US aerospace group, is strengthening its ties with
the Israeli aerospace industry by contracting two Israeli companies for
additional work worth about Dollars 522m (Pounds 273m).
The biggest contract, worth around Dollars 500m, involves the state-owned
Israeli Aircraft Industries (IAI) and includes work on overhauling DC-9
twin-engine commercial airliners and extending IAI's activities on wing
components for the US group's MD11 three-engine airliners.
The second contract worth Dollars 20m over five years involves the
Haifa-based Elbit company, which will produce cockpit displays for the T-45
trainer aircraft system for the US Navy.
The centre piece of this system is the T-45 Goshawk aircraft, the US version
of the British Aerospace Hawk trainer in which McDonnell Douglas is prime
contractor to the US Navy, and BAe main subcontractor for the airframe.
The US group said it had decided to strengthen its ties with Israeli
industry 'because of its competitiveness and commitment to high quality'.
Under its agreement with McDonnell Douglas, IAI will carry out maintenance
overhauls on the first six of a fleet of 26 DC9s formerly owned by Delta Air
Lines. IAI would help lease or sell the DC9s.
It was the first time the US group had taken back an entire fleet of
aircraft from an operator and begun an extensive maintenance programme, it
said. After being refurbished, the jets are expected to be leased back to
Delta.
IAI will continue to build all production requirements for MD11 three engine
jetliners' fixed leading edge and slat assemblies under an expanded
agreement with McDonnell Douglas.
The US company indicated it was continuing to work with airlines in an
effort to launch a new four-engine jumbo, the MD12. The company, which
originally wanted to launch the MD12 programme this year, is now hoping to
launch the new jumbo project next year. But the future of the MD12 programme
will critically depend on the US company securing an alliance with
international partners.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920728

