FT922-721

FT  26 JUN 92 / Management: Why spreading the load is all in a year's work -
A look at moves towards annualised working hours systems which cut overtime


   By DAVID GOODHART


Companies which employ the 2m people who currently work more than 48 hours a
week in Britain have just been saved the heavy cost of reorganising their
businesses. At British insistence, employment ministers of the European
Community have reached a deal on the controversial working time directive
which means in practice that nothing need change in Britain for at least 10
years.
Even though British employers are off the hook for now, the directive may,
nevertheless, concentrate their minds on the issue of working time, and
pressure is bound to increase to cut excessive hours.
British workers work longer and less productive hours than many of their
competitors, with overtime running at more than 10 per cent of hours worked,
compared with 3 per cent in Germany and virtually none in Japan.
The vested interests defending high overtime working are strong and the
Brussels directive may provide the jolt needed to push Britain towards a
better organisation of working time.
That argument is strongly pressed by Philip Lynch Associates, a consultant
that is helping a growing number of companies introduce annualised hours
systems.
This entails calculating working time on an annual rather than a weekly or
monthly basis with employees contracted to work, for example, 1,764 hours
per year rather than 38 per week. The system gives employers flexibility in
the scheduling of work, allowing for longer standard hours at some periods
and shorter hours at others.
That avoids a pattern of underwork followed by massive amounts of overtime.
Overtime is not usually ruled out in annualised hours systems but it becomes
rare and without institutionalised overtime, workers have nothing to gain
from spinning out work in normal time.
'If the working time directive forces a re-think on deeply entrenched
practices, it can only do good. Annualised hours is one of the spring-boards
to bring us up to international best practice,' says Peter Curran, a senior
partner at Philip Lynch.
Annualised hours can allow for large variations in the working week but
still remain within the 48 hour weekly limit desired by most EC countries
and the trade unions.
The system has become increasingly popular in British industry and according
to a recent Department of Employment survey now covers about 6 per cent of
UK employees. Initially most interest was expressed by continuous process
manufacturers in paper and board, glass, cement and chemicals.
The paper and board industry already has a national framework agreement for
annualised hours, while Pilkington and Blue Circle are among manufacturers
to have introduced it. Industries with highly seasonal work flows, like food
and drink or leisure, have also taken a strong interest, as has the
distribution sector.
Drawbacks with annualised hours include the loss of overtime for lower paid
workers who may have been dependent on it and the difficulty of responding
to unexpected fluctuations in demand. The latter can be dealt with through
good contingency planning and some flexibility in the rostering of hours.
Philip Lynch says that thanks to the productivity benefits of annualised
hours, most people work substantially fewer hours for similar pay. It claims
that introducing annualised hours can leads to a general shake-up of working
practices.
At Express Foods, one of the UK's largest cheese producers, the company
pulled down weekly hours from a peak of more than 70 to an average of 39.
According to Curran, volumes rose and labour hours per tonne fell by 36 per
cent, while employee's earnings rose 9 per cent and holidays were
lengthened.
Express Foods say that annualised hours added Pounds 500,000 to its profits
in the first year. 'If I were to stop it now I would have a riot on my
hands,' says Geoff Hulland, general manager.
The biggest hurdle with annualised hours, according to Philip Lynch, is
management's apprehension at such change. 'Ironically', says Curran, 'the
issues which most daunt, like the prospect of no-overtime, rarely emerge
after the switch'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920626

