FT923-15746

FT  01 JUL 92 / Seoul moves to curb debt of 'chaebol'


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


THE South Korean government, in its latest action to curb the power of the
country's industrial conglomerates, yesterday imposed a freeze on
cross-payment loan guarantees among the 30 biggest business groups.
Subsidiaries of the family-owned conglomerates, or chaebol, frequently
guarantee loans given to other units of the same industrial group. The
government wants to tighten credit to the chaebol in an attempt to reduce
their dominance of the Korean economy.
Officials claim that the loan guarantees have encouraged excessive lending
to the chaebol, while depriving loans to small and medium businesses. 'The
chaebol have built up such huge debts as a result of the cross-payment
guarantee system that they have made hostages of the commercial banks,' said
Mr Suh Sang-mok, a government MP and a leading critic of the chaebol.
'The banks fear that the collapse of one chaebol subsidiary would lead to
the downfall of the entire business as a result of the guarantees. So they
keep lending,' he explained. The government said that the total amount of
the cross-payment guarantees among the 30 chaebol amount to Won113,400bn
(Pounds 77.2bn), while their total equity capital is only Won31,400bn.
Hyundai, the chaebol that has been the subject of recent politically
motivated attacks by the government, would suffer the most under the reform.
It accounts for almost a quarter of the loan guarantees. Yesterday's action
is only considered a preliminary step. The government is expected to soon
set a ceiling on the total amount of loan guarantees, with the ceiling
gradually lowered over the next few years.
There are doubts, however, whether the government will fully implement the
reform of the guarantee system. The government has mainly relied on credit
restrictions to control the chaebol during the last few years, but to little
avail. There are indications that the government may be consequently
changing its reform strategy. Officials have recently discussed offering
incentives to the conglomerates to encourage them to specialise in a few
core businesses and dispose of unproductive assets. Attention has also
focused on measures to widen ownership and dilute the control of the family
owners. Officials believe that this would lead to more professional
management.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

