FT922-3935

FT  09 JUN 92 / Technology: A matter of life or death - How biotech
companies can minimise risk in an industry full of pitfalls


   By VICTORIA GRIFFITH


When the US Food and Drug Administration announced in April that it was
denying approval for a septic shock drug from Centocor, a US biotechnology
company, the entire industry sat up and took notice.
'It was a wake-up call for the sector,' said Kenneth Bate, chief financial
officer for Biogen, another US group. The incident was the second alarm to
be sounded that month, coming soon after the news that Centocor's competitor
Xoma had also been sent back to the drawing board by the FDA.
Analysts say biotech drug groups have become increasingly likely to play for
high stakes in recent years. After offsetting risks in the late 1980s
through joint ventures, mergers and licensing agreements, many biotech
companies are now reasserting their independence.
Much of the shift in strategy has to do with the phenomenal success of
Amgen, a California-based group which by pursuing a go-it-alone strategy in
the 1980s built itself into a Dollars 5bn operation. The company's
achievement inspired many start-ups to take a big gamble, and these days
biotechnology groups are more likely than ever to try to bring products to
market on their own.
'The trend in the industry has been to assume more risk,' said Mark
Goldberg, head of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Research Institute.
'Companies are increasingly likely to try to do everything themselves.'
But the more independent track is full of pitfalls, and Wall Street seems to
be waking up to the risks. The approval of Chiron's IL2 cancer drug in May
has done little to allay investors' fears of over-exposure. Indeed, the
incident seemed to confirm the belief that the go-it-alone strategy is not
always best.
The FDA had rejected the drug in 1990, signing a death sentence for the
product's original owner Cetus, which was purchased by Chiron last year.
Chiron, a more cautious participant, succeeded two years after Cetus had
failed.
To the industry, the message from the FDA seemed clear: patience and
thoroughness would be rewarded. The trouble is, these are expensive
commodities. 'If they succeed, the rewards are enough to make your mouth
water,' says one executive.
But winning is not easy. 'FDA approval isn't the only obstacle,' Goldberg
pointed out. 'Even if a company doesn't trip up in the initial research or
development phase, they may fail when the get to marketing or sales.'
The problems are compounded by an escalating cost structure. 'Costs go up by
multiples as you move from research to development to sales,' said Bate. 'A
Dollars 100,000 project can turn into a Dollars 10m project.'
The industry is now littered with the casualties of go-it-alone strategies.
Genetics Institute, also considered a high-risk taker, sold 60 per cent of
its shares to American Home Products in 1991. 'I wouldn't be surprised to
see Centocor up for sale soon,' said Henri Termeer, head of Genzyme
Corporation. Other observers worry that start-up companies in the sector
have an increasingly flimsy basis from which to build a success.
'Many new companies concentrate more on technology than on specific
products,' noted Lowell Sears, chief financial officer for Amgen. 'For
instance, they try to get patents on things like carbohydrate chemistry,
with the idea that the technology is bound to turn out some valuable
products. They are a few steps further from the market than we were when we
started, because we had a specific product in mind. They'll have to raise
significant amounts of money, and I just don't think they will make it.'
Amgen is the object of much admiration in the biotechnology business, an
example of a company which took a big gamble and won. Like Centocor, the
group bet heavily on its initial products, building up a sales and marketing
force even prior to FDA approval.
According to Sears, though, Amgen was never as risk-oriented as the market
believed. 'The difference between us and Centocor,' said Sears, 'is that we
were sure of our product from the beginning. We also worked very closely
with the FDA; we involved them and listened to them, and did not adopt an
adversarial approach.'
Although many biotechnology groups are risk-takers, there are several models
for controlling it. 'We don't try for large markets,' explained Larry Kurtz,
vice-president in charge of communications at Chiron. 'We try for small
successes. We've also done a pretty good job of bringing in other firms to
help develop products.'
One of the most conservative companies in the industry is Biogen. In the
beginning, Biogen's strategy was to license out its products to other
groups. The arrangement was simple. In exchange for up-front money to
finance research and development, Biogen sold the rights for many of its
drugs.
Now the group receives regular royalties from the products, and avoids
marketing and sales overhead. 'The advantage of that strategy is that we
have a steady revenue stream,' said Bate. The problem with the approach is
that it severely limits profit potential. For initial products like the
hepatitus B vaccines, Biogen received just Dollars 80m in royalties on some
Dollars 700m in sales.
'There is the danger in following an ultra-conservative strategy that a
company will become little more than a coupon clipper,' said Goldberg. In
the wake of the Centocor incident, Biogen feels its stance is vindicated.
'We're a little less sexy than other biotech firms, but it's the time to
be,' said Bate.
One money-making gem, Genzyme, has its own recommendation for risk control:
old-fashioned conservative fiscal management. 'We never finance research for
a product we can't afford, said Termeer. 'We use our own money to finance
development, and if it's too expensive, we just drop the idea.'
Genzyme's chairman has little respect for the methods of heavy risk-oriented
companies. 'Some groups in the sector start spending and hope for FDA
approval before the money runs out,' he said. 'As the time for approval
draws near, they're making tremendous losses.'
Ultimately, it may not be the biotechnology groups themselves which decide
how much risk they will take on. The sector's future depends on investors'
willingness to put up venture capital, and some experts believe Wall
Street's love affair with high-risk biotechnology groups may be over.
According to Gabriel Schmergel, chief executive officer of Genetics
Institute. 'If you win, you'll win big, and if you lose you'll lose big. The
problem is, nine times out of ten, you lose.'

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920609

