FT921-11980

FT  29 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC ministers lack conviction on
CAP reform


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


EUROPEAN COMMUNITY agriculture ministers yesterday agreed to continue with
their year-old negotiations to reform the Common Agricultural Policy, but
without any conviction that firm decisions could be reached before the
dispute over farm subsidies within the Uruguay Round world trade talks is
settled.
The current Portuguese presidency of the EC presented a compromise 'working
paper' which was vague enough not to give great offence to any of the 12,
but concrete enough for most member states to feel they had 'something to
nibble at', as a senior European Commission official put it.
Thus, the Brussels blueprint for overhauling the CAP has been kept in play,
and Mr Arlindo Cunha, the Portuguese farm minister, has undertaken to
produce a more detailed synthesis of amendments each of the 12 are seeking
next month.
'There is forward movement,' the Brussels official said, 'but it is very
difficult to ask them to commit themselves before they can see what is
happening in Gatt,' the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade conducting
the Uruguay Round.
Mr Arthur Dunkel, the director general of the Gatt who drafted the
agriculture chapter of the Round's conclusions which the EC is trying to
renegotiate, is in Brussels here today to hear the community's point of
view. But all the indications from yesterday's farm council were that it has
yet to settle on a unified position.
There is a fragile majority of 8:4 in favour of pressing on with plans to
cut CAP price support and replace it with direct compensation to farmers,
decoupled as far as possible from the surpluses they produce, which pile up
in expensive stockpiles and get dumped on world markets. The Danes, British,
Dutch and Irish take the view that a Gatt deal must come first.
But there is a more even split among member states over what needs to be
changed in Mr Dunkel's 'final act' paper, aimed at concluding the Uruguay
Round by Easter.
Five countries - the UK, France, Denmark, the Netherlands and Belgium - want
priority to be given to renegotiating the Gatt prescription that the volume
of subsidised exports must be reduced by 24 per cent over the next six
years. This is in addition to a 36 per cent cut in export subsidies over the
same period, and is regarded as an unacceptable attempt to restrain trade.
The other seven adhere to the position defended by Mr Ray MacSharry, EC farm
commissioner, that the priority is to get the direct compensation to farmers
categorised as a subsidy which does not distort trade. Mr MacSharry believes
that only if the compensation is accepted as permanent - like the price
support mechanism now - will it be politically saleable to all member states
and the EC's 9m farmers.
Neither camp looks as though it can secure a Gatt breakthrough, much less
when the EC is not presenting a united front. Mr Dunkel, the US, and the
Cairns Group of 14 agri-exporters led by Australia appear equally firm on
both points - but if anything marginally more so on the need to cut the
volume of EC subsidised exports.
There are four meetings of EC agriculture ministers scheduled between now
and the Gatt deadline, and little prospect that this division of opinion
will change without intervention at a higher political level.

The Financial Times


London Page 28 Photograph Arthur Dunkel, Due in Brussels today to hear the
EC's point of view (Omitted).

920129

