FT923-6563

FT  24 AUG 92 / The London Conference: Macedonia hovers in wings during
Balkan drama - There are fears that international opposition to the
republic's independence could lead to unrest


   By LAURA SILBER


MACEDONIA will not be centre-stage at this week's London talks on the former
Yugoslavia, but if it is ignored it could quickly become the main act in the
Balkan drama.
Though the republic has played by EC rules, complying with EC conditions on
human and minority rights to win international recognition, it has stayed
the victim of Greek insistence that the name Macedonia is Hellenic property.
In an attempt to placate Greece, the EC has said it will not recognise
Macedonia until the southern Yugoslav republic changes its name.
This approach has held sway in the wider international context. The US has
postponed Macedonian recognition until after the November presidential
elections, to avoid conflict with the large Greek community, diplomats say.
Politicians in Skopje, Macedonia's capital, fear history is repeating
itself. Over the past century, whenever Macedonia has tried to assert itself
as an independent state, jealous neighbours have provoked a war. President
Kiro Gligorov hopes the republic's status will be resolved when the
three-day London Conference on Yugoslavia, jointly chaired by the United
Nations and the EC, convenes on Wednesday. 'There is a real danger of war
spreading through the Balkans if Macedonia is not recognised,' he says.
Diplomats say the republic's population may run out of patience with western
intransigence. 'Macedonians are united in refusal to change the name. A
serious risk exists that the radical threat the Greeks say they fear could
become a self-fulfilling prophecy if Macedonia is sentenced indefinitely to
purgatory,' says one diplomat. While politicians in the republic do not
expect a spontaneous uprising, several factors could destabilise the
republic.
Because of its sensitive geographical position, they fear unrest would
trigger intervention by some or all of its neighbours: Serbia, Greece,
Albania and Bulgaria. Mr Ljubomir Frckovski, interior minister, believes the
danger is conflict in Kosovo, a Serbian province.
Leaders of Macedonia's ethnic Albanians, about 35 per cent of the 2m
population, warn they would fight to defend kinsmen in Kosovo in the event
of Serbian aggression there. Serbia might then intervene in Macedonia.
Turkey, among the first countries to recognise Macedonia, appears interested
in gaining influence in the Balkans and might intervene on behalf of
Moslems.
President Gligorov admits violence in Kosovo could destroy the fragile
co-existence between Albanians and Macedonians. Although in a minority,
Albanians are better integrated into Macedonia than the majority Albanian
population in Kosovo. 'Albanians are part of the parliament and the
government. They share responsibility for the destiny of Macedonia,' he
says.
There is also the problem of ultranationalist Macedonians. Many fear
deepening economic deprivation, due to the war in the former Yugoslavia and
international sanctions against Serbia, will strengthen the hand of the far
right. The Internal Macedonia Revolution Organisation (VMRO) is the most
extreme party on the Macedonian political scene. A faction calls for the
integration of Macedonia into Bulgaria.
Many Macedonians fear that, in the event of a war, Bulgaria, whose people
consider Macedonians to be Bulgarians, would intervene on the pretext of
aiding their kinsmen.
Mr Vladimir Milcin, a Macedonian human rights activist, says the EC's
failure to recognise Macedonia will radicalise the population. He fears that
after the wars in Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia, Macedonians will believe the
only way to win independence is through conflict.
'Recognition would show there does not have to be bloodshed to gain
independence,' he adds.
Leading politicians believe short-term violence can be avoided through
bolstering economic ties with countries which have recognised Macedonia. Mr
Milcin warns: 'Without economic aid, the third Balkan war will begin on the
territory of Macedonia.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920824

