FT924-6438

FT  21 NOV 92 / Trade war averted as EC and US reach deal


   By DAVID GARDNER, NANCY DUNNE and DAVID BUCHAN


   BRUSSELS, WASHINGTON, PARIS


THE European Community and the US last night settled their long-running
disputes over subsidised food exports, averting a threatened trade war and
opening the way to a worldwide free trade agreement.
The agreement on agriculture is more favourable to the EC than expected,
raising hopes that it could be sold to the French, who have strongly opposed
a deal - and last night refused to accept it immediately.
US president George Bush, announcing the deal, called on the 108 nations
participating in the Uruguay Round of talks on the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) to return to the negotiating table in Geneva and
'show the flexibility' that will bring the talks to a conclusion. He said
this would spur economic growth and create jobs around the world.
Mrs Carla Hills, US special trade representative, announced the withdrawal
of threatened punitive tariffs against the EC because of its oilseeds
regime, while Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture commissioner who negotiated
the agreement, said 'the real victory tonight is for international trade'.
Mr Frans Andriessen, EC external affairs commissioner, said the deal meant
'that trade war has been avoided'.
He added: 'It is not the end of the road, but we are convinced that it will
unblock the stalemate in the Uruguay Round in Geneva.'
In London, Mr John Major, the prime minister, greeted the accord as 'the
best possible news' for the world economy and a triumph for the British
presidency of the EC.
The agreement is expected to be endorsed by EC trade officials, foreign
ministers and heads of government at the Community's Edinburgh summit on
December 11 and 12 - before farm ministers get any chance to pick it apart
on December 14 to 16.
The accord settles a five-year-old bilateral row with the US over EC
oilseeds production, and agrees terms on the farm chapter of the Gatt
Uruguay Round. Progress on the Gatt round has been delayed for two years by
the farm trade dispute, which also opened serious rifts in the EC.
Mr MacSharry said that 'the US and EC go united now to Geneva' to seek a
conclusion to the Uruguay Round by the end of the year, a sentiment that was
echoed later by Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany.
A global accord, which some estimates believe could add Dollars 200bn
(Pounds 132bn) to world trade within 10 years, needs the approval of all 108
Gatt signatories not only on agriculture, but on 14 other sectors ranging
from services to intellectual property.
Yesterday's deal between the US and EC involves an enforcement mechanism,
which includes binding arbitration, to ensure the limit on EC oilseeds
production. The EC also agreed that any new entrants to the Community would
have to limit their oilseeds production.
Under the accord, EC oilseeds production will be restricted to the 5.128m
hectares sown area contained in the EC's reform of the Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP), instead of being subject to a formal tonnage limit as had been
previously discussed. This suggests an output limit of 9.7m tonnes on this
year's crop yields, or 11m tonnes on the basis of last year's yields.
The CAP implies taking 15 per cent of land out of production, but the
agreement reached yesterday obliges the EC to 'set aside' only 10 per cent
of oilseeds land.
The overall volume of EC subsidised farm exports will be cut by 21 per cent,
rather than the 24 per cent prescribed in the Uruguay Round draft 'final
act'. Mr MacSharry said this was 'well within, with a good margin to spare',
the projections on output and exports of the CAP.
Direct payments to EC farmers in compensation for CAP price and production
cuts will be exempt from Gatt cuts. The US will also undertake to monitor
exports to the EC of its cheap cereals substitutes such as corn gluten in
exchange for EC export restraint. This is the so-called 'rebalancing'
demand, which had been made by both France and Germany.
In a cautious response from Paris last night, Mr Jean-Pierre Soisson,
agriculture minister, acknowledged that in certain respects - notably on
oilseeds - the Washington deal was better for Europe than what had been on
offer by the US two weeks ago in Chicago. But he still said that 'at first
sight, I cannot accept it'.
France was insisting on proof that the 'draft agreement' was in line with
recent reform of the EC's Common Agricultural Policy, the minister said. He
doubted whether the French parliament would accept the Gatt deal.
This left open the possibility that France could be outvoted by a majority
in the EC council of ministers. But if President Francois Mitterrand invoked
a veto the deal could collapse.
Such a move is thought unlikely without German support. Last night,
Chancellor Kohl's government endorsed the deal and said it formed a good
basis for an early conclusion of the Uruguay Round talks. However, German
farmers, siding with their French counterparts, denounced the deal.
US puts Gatt before soyabeans; French face farmers' fury; Major relishes
credit, Page 2
KEY POINTS OF THE AGREEMENT
EC oilseeds output to be based on 11m acres against 13.5m acres
Oilseeds for industrial use limited to 1m tonnes
10 per cent of EC oilseeds land to be set aside permanently
The US agrees a 'peace clause' on outstanding disputes
Subsidised EC farm exports to be cut by 21 per cent in volume over six
years. Value will be cut by 36 per cent, with internal supports trimmed by
20 per cent
An 'Andriessen compromise' not to export subsidised beef from the EC to Asia

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921121

