FT924-6182

FT  23 NOV 92 / Arts: Hawks and Doves - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Without having had a premiere in the West End, or at the National or RSC,
Louise Page has become one of our best known younger playwrights. She is
author of Salonika, Golden Girls, Real Estate and more; last year, her Adam
Was a Gardener premiered at Chichester. Her work has been performed in 21
countries and it is usually intelligent, sensitive, touching, adult and
absorbing.
Last year's Adam Was a Gardener was subtitled 'an evocative love affair
between the past and present'; Hawks and Doves, her new play now at
Southampton's Nuffield Theatre, is subtitled 'a love story for the '90s.' In
both plays, love commences between a man and woman from different
backgrounds, a love based on shared values, not least on affection for the
English countryside. But here the love is between an upper-class Southerner
and a lower-class Northerner; and it goes wrong.
So, unfortunately, does the play. It begins promisingly, like some law court
near-plotless modern version of the attraction between Jane Eyre and
Rochester. But it becomes increasingly like a North/South adaptation of
Howard's End - a too-simple-by-half depiction of heartless toffs (ie. hawks)
exploiting honest working or unemployed folk (ie. doves) and a
skeleton-in-the-cupboard melodrama to boot. The toffs breed peregrine
falcons, one of the working-class Northerners fancies pigeons.
Both classes admire open countryside, wild birds and Mozart. These shared
sympathies are enough to get Otto out of his upper-class marriage to Julia
and into a new one with working-class Marie - but that isn't far enough.
When it comes to croquet, Julia and Otto insist 'You can only learn the
rules as you go along,' as they win. Marie, refusing to play any more,
replies 'Some people are born knowing them.'
Well, croquet is enough to wreck any marriage, but worse is the fact that
Otto is hiding from Marie his complicity in - well, in the plot;
professional discretion forbids me to say more. Suffice it to say that Marie
finds out, and the play ends - fatuously - on her reaction (vengeful) and
his (terrified).
Gillian Bevan, playing Marie, has a charming housewife-Cinderella manner,
but also has an unbecoming hairdo and too many dropped syllables. Michael
Simkins carries off Otto's mixture of wimpish sensitivity and lordly
authority well, but he can't stop the final moment of terror from seeming
risible. But everybody is wrestling with a poorly-paced script and weak
direction.
Remarkably, only young Alex Scott, as Marie's son Paul, creates a fully
three-dimensional character. He is as first-rate as he was last year in Adam
Was a Gardener: spontaneous and vivid.
Nuffield Theatre, Southampton

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921123

