FT921-15507

FT  09 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Farmers told to group together
to market produce


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


   OXFORD


THE UK supermarkets, often castigated in the farming press, should be seen
'not as an impediment, but as a neighbour', the Oxford Farming Conference
was told yesterday.
Sir Alistair Grant, chairman of Argyll, owners of Safeway, told the 400
delegates that the size of the supermarkets led to pressure to find and
develop new products. Whereas 30 years ago the average supermarket stocked
800 or so items, a typical store now stocked 15,000 items.
But farmers would have to become effective trading partners, Sir Alistair
said. 'As a Pounds 5bn multiple retailer we cannot realistically deal
directly with a vast number of raw material producers.'
If the producers organised themselves into larger groups, increased size
would give them more competence and clout in their trading relationships
with both customers and their own suppliers.
'As a retailer, the last thing I want is a weak supplier,' he said.
While well conceived, good value, quality products would always sell given
an assured supply, UK producers all too often missed market opportunities.
'The enormous food and drink trade gap is the clearest evidence of this,' he
said, echoing remarks made by the prime minister at the conference dinner
earlier this week.
Since the Second World War two factors had held back the UK farming
industry's marketing. First, agricultural policies had helped farmers
prosper by concentrating on a narrow range of commodities. Second, the large
size of a typical UK farm compared with those in Europe had enabled it to
produce just enough cash flow to finance new equipment without having to
co-operate with other producers.
The challenge now was to find new ways of both reducing input costs and
adding value. 'To do this, farmers need to achieve critical mass both as
buyers and sellers, and this will mean that new forms of organisation will
be needed for all but the very largest farming enterprises,' Sir Alistair
said.
Mr Andrew Logan, a farmer and a founder of a food production group in Fife,
Scotland, said the supermarkets were both bullies and ruthless. But he
asked: 'What other industry would criticise its customers? We must love our
customers'.
The supermarkets had taught the grower his job in marketing, 'forcing him to
produce a quality article packed and presented in such a way as meets the
demands of the most discerning customer'.
It was imperative, however, that producers grouped together to achieve
sufficient size to deploy the marketing skills and finance the resources
required to be the supermarkets' supplier.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920109

