FT921-15473

FT  10 JAN 92 / Wilder quits Democrat contest


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


GOVERNOR Douglas Wilder of Virginia has bowed out of the race for the
Democratic Party's presidential nomination.
Mr Wilder said he was withdrawing from the race this year for the same
reason that Governor Mario Cuomo of New York has decided not to run: in
order to concentrate on the budget problems that face his state.
It was plain, however, that the Wilder campaign had not caught fire. He was
expected to fare poorly in New Hampshire, which is to hold the first primary
on February 18, and his fund-raising had lagged behind that of other main
Democratic contenders.
By the end of 1991, his papers at the Federal Election Commission showed he
had raised less than a quarter of the total money raised by the Democratic
front-runner, Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
Mr Wilder, the first elected black governor in the US, has not based his
political success on an appeal to a monolithic black vote. However, such an
appeal had come to seem the only course for a man who remains largely
unknown outside his own state.
A feud with Mr Jesse Jackson, the black activist leader who won seven states
in the 1988 Democratic primaries, hampered Mr Wilder's efforts to gain
support from some black organisations - nor had the other Democratic
candidates conceded black votes to Mr Wilder.
The governor's withdrawal means that, for the first time since 1980, the
Democratic candidates can compete for black voters without facing a major
black opponent. So, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa could gain votes,
particularly among urban blacks in the north and mid-west. Senator Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska is also expected to step up his efforts in these
constituencies.
The principal beneficiary, however, is likely to be Mr Clinton, who has won
many black votes in his five campaigns for the governorship of rural,
southern Arkansas. He was always expected to be the front-runner in the
southern states which will dominate the Super Tuesday primaries on March 10
 -now Mr Wilder's withdrawal should make it easier for him to achieve a big
victory.
Mr Clinton has begun to gain momentum in New Hampshire, too, and is
consecrated as the man to beat.
Pundits generally place Mr Kerrey in second place, just ahead of Mr Harkin,
who started well but has slowed in recent weeks.
Mr Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts, a former senator, is expected to do well
in next-door New Hampshire, but would need a win or a strong second place to
develop enough momentum to carry his campaign into other states, where he
remains little-known.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Photograph Governor Wilder, Too many troubles at home
(Omitted).

920110

