FT921-694

FT  27 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Centre party seeks gains at the periphery


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


THE political map of Great Britain presents a paradox as it stretches
through England's west country.
This is a bastion of Liberal Democrat strength, part of Britain's rural
Celtic periphery, where associations with Liberalism are rooted in long
traditions of independence and religious nonconformism.
Yet throughout the south-west, from Bristol to Land's End, the
constituencies are a sea of Conservative blue.
Of the 41 seats in south-west England, just two are held by Liberal
Democrats. Yeovil in Somerset is held by Mr Paddy Ashdown, the party leader,
and Truro in Cornwall is held by Mr Matthew Taylor.
Only two other constituencies stand out from the Tory blue. Plymouth
Devonport is the seat of former SDP leader Dr David Owen, who is standing
down; and Ms Dawn Primarolo holds Labour's solitary south-western seat in
Bristol South.
It is the paradox between Liberal Democrat support and Conservative
representation that makes the south-west a crucial battleground for the
Liberal Democrats. Here, more than anywhere, they are seeking to assert
themselves at the Tories' expense.
One obstacle is that their underlying strength is greatest in rural areas -
in the towns and cities, the vote tends to polarise between Conservative and
Labour; so in Bristol, where three of the Conservatives' four seats are
vulnerable, Labour stands to gain.
Similarly, Plymouth is more likely to bring a loss to the centre ground than
any gains. Devonport will almost certainly revert to Labour after Dr Owen's
decision to stand down, and the centre vote in the other two Plymouth seats
 -Drake and Sutton, both Tory-held  - will probably fall without the Owen
factor.
In rural areas, however, the Liberal Democrats are the Conservatives' main
rivals. Insofar as Labour has a presence, it has in many areas been squeezed
to near-insignificance by tactical voting: so it is the Liberal Democrats
who stand to cash in on the anti-Tory vote.
Even so, the gap between the Tories and the Liberal Democrats is sometimes
so vast that there is little hope of bridging it in a single election.
Victory in Devizes, for example, would require a swing of more than 13 per
cent from Conservatives to Liberal Democrats; in Honiton, more than 14 per
cent.
It is in Devon and Cornwall, counties associated with Liberal figures of the
past such as Mr Jeremy Thorpe and the late Mr David Penhaligon, that
traditions of independence are strongest.
Cornwall North and Devon North were both Liberal until 1979 - the former
held by John Pardoe, the latter by Jeremy Thorpe - and in both, the Liberal
Democrats have gradually rebuilt their strength. They now need a 4.1 per
cent swing in Devon North, and 4.9 per cent in Cornwall North.
A third possible victory is the Cornish seat of Falmouth and Camborne, where
recession has hit the industrial areas of Redruth and Camborne. The popular
Conservative incumbent, Mr David Mudd, is stepping down, to be replaced as
Tory candidate by Olympic gold medallist Mr Sebastian Coe - an 'outsider'
whose selection has cut little ice with the locals. The Liberal Democrats
would capture the seat with a swing of just 4.7 per cent - but this is one
seat where Labour might split the vote.
Exeter in Devon is a Tory marginal, but here, too, Labour might divide the
opposition vote. St Ives, Cornwall South-east and Torbay are on the Liberal
Democrat hit list, but they are long shots; in Bath, they will struggle to
oust Conservative party chairman Mr Chris Patten.
A gain of three or four south-western seats would be no small victory for
the Liberal Democrats - not least since that is probably as many seats as
they can hope to gain from the whole of the rest of the country.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920327

