FT923-15740

FT  01 JUL 92 / Malaysia confronts dilemma of foreign workforce:
Registration drive highlights problem of 'illegals' in a fast-growing
economy


   By KIERAN COOKE


OVER THE past few days Kuala Lumpur's immigration offices have had a frantic
air about them. Crowds have been milling at every counter, trying to harness
the attention of harassed officials. Tempers have frayed, arguments have
broken out. Many have waited in vain all day.
Midnight last night was the deadline for registration of all those working
illegally in Malaysia. Those who have not registered, says the government,
will be put into camps and deported.
In each of the past four years Malaysia's growth has been more than 8 per
cent, creating a serious labour shortage. Foreign workers, many of them
illegal, have become a key element in the economy.
Indonesian 'illegals' make up a large percentage of those employed on the
rubber and palm oil plantations of peninsular Malaysia. In East Malaysia,
particularly in the resource rich state of Sabah, Indonesian and Philippine
workers outnumber locals on the big plantations and in the timber industry.
Malaysia has a population of 18.5m. Foreign workers, while the figures vary
widely, are estimated to number more than 500,000 in peninsular Malaysia and
possibly more than 1m in the east of the country.
Gross National Product per capita in Indonesia is Dollars 600, in Malaysia
Dollars 2,500. An Indonesian working on a building site in Kuala Lumpur can
earn up to 10 times the wage back home. Malaysian officials say that last
year worker remittances from Malaysia to Indonesia were about MDollars 2bn
(USDollars 800m)
'The problem of illegal immigrants is a big one and has to be resolved
before it gets out of hand,' says Mr Ghafar Baba, Malaysia's deputy prime
minister. Mr Ghafar has warned of tough action against those who have not
registered, with the imminent launch of a nationwide police operation.
The government says Malaysians themselves are suffering because of the
foreign influx. Markets have been taken over by illegal Indonesian traders
who undercut the locals and that unscrupulous employers take on 'illegals'
rather than Malaysians because they can pay the foreigners lower wages.
But the Malaysian authorities realise they have to tread carefully. Any
wholesale exodus of 'illegals' and the economy could suffer. As the economy
industrialises, more Malaysians are moving to the urban areas - to work in
factories or service industries.
The Agricultural Producers Association says output in the plantations sector
could drop by as much as 30 per cent if all 'illegals' were deported.
Traders in palm oil - Malaysia is the world's biggest producer - say a
recent sharp reduction in stocks is partly due to workers rushing to Kuala
Lumpur and other centres to register.
Most of the unskilled labour in the booming construction industry is
Indonesian. Employers complain that work on several projects has slowed
because of workers' absence for long - and what they consider excessively
bureaucratic - immigration procedures.
There are other difficulties for the Malaysian government. For the past week
a group of Indonesians from the strongly Moslem state of Acheh in the north
of the island of Sumatra has been camped in UN offices in Kuala Lumpur. They
say they will be mistreated by the Indonesian authorities if sent home and
are demanding political asylum. Amnesty International has appealed to the
Malaysian authorities on behalf of the Achenese.
Government opponents say the authorities are acting too late and that the
increased immigration - mainly from Moslem areas of Indonesia and the
Philippines - threatens Malaysia's delicate racial balance of more than 50
per cent ethnic Moslem Malays or Bumiputras ('sons of the soil') and the
rest mainly Chinese or Indians.
Opposition claims that the governing United Malays National Organisation
(Umno) - has in fact encouraged such immigration in some areas, particularly
in Sabah, are denied by the government.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

