FT923-6643

FT  22 AUG 92 / Markets: When a bit of financial advice can be a royal pain
 -London Markets


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


BELIEVE ME, being a financial adviser isn't all it's cracked up to be -
mine's a whisky, thanks. I mean, do you ever stop to think what I have to go
through? Take that last trip of mine. OK, you know about fighting off
photographers, goes with the Fimbra membership, right? But can you imagine
having to take a copy of the Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin with you?
There I am, trying to keep everyone cheerful, dripping sun-tan oil over a
chapter called 'Negative equity in the housing market'. No joking, if
Stephen King ever falls on hard times, he can take a job in the economics
department of the Bank.
Of course, he's what they call a master of suspense, and Mervyn King - who I
gather is the horror-meister in Threadneedle Street these days - is a bit
lacking in that department. Still, the boy's got the right surname, and he's
learning.
He starts slow, all right ('This situation has left many households with a
home worth less than the value of their mortgage, a phenomenon that has been
termed 'negative equity''), but after a bit you're biting your fingernails
and jumping if a car backfires.
Take this little gem: 'Such estimates suggest that by the second quarter of
this year around 876,000 households faced a situation in which the value of
their home had fallen below the value of their mortgage. For three of the
most severely affected regions - the south east, Greater London and East
Anglia - around two-thirds of all first-time buyers who have entered the
market since 1988 are now likely to have some negative equity.'
OK, it takes a while to get into the swing of the prose style but, believe
me, when I read it out there wasn't a dry eye or pink knuckle around the
pool. Remember, the client is a recently separated upper-middle-class spouse
with a couple of kids and a house in the home counties; and there are a pair
of minders along for the ride, with houses in Essex and mortgages up the
gazoo. I mean, this is strictly bad news time.
Mind you, some people take a while to get the message. 'But I haven't got a
mortgage,' says the client. Read on, sweetheart, say I. 'Since the beginning
of 1988, over 180,000 properties have been taken into possession by lenders
. . .' Just think what that'll do to property values in the Thames Valley.
And if you're contemplating going back to work, now you're on your own, I
point out, think of the damage to the economy: '305,000 borrowers were more
than six months in arrears at the end of June, with 115,000 more than 12
months behind.'
As Mervyn or his blurb-writer says: 'Spending on major purchases has been
particularly weak; consumer confidence has fallen back and households are
repaying consumer borrowing.' I couldn't have put it better myself.
Still, there was some good news round the sun-beds. I mean, the stock market
closed the week up a bit, after rising for four days out of the last six.
The FT-SE index closed at 2,365.7, up 8.9 points on the week. That's a
pretty strong performance, really, considering what the rest of the news
crackling over the World Service was like. The pound was plastered against
the bottom of the ERM, and my dollar travellers' cheques didn't go very far
in the local bar. The Bundesbank made some heavy duty noises about inflation
and the need to keep interest rates up. The second-quarter gdp figures
showed a minuscule increase for the first time in two years, but retail
sales in June turned down. Some guy at the Central Statistical Office
offered a seasonally adjusted joke: 'A recession is when you lose your job;
a depression is when I lose mine.' (Thanks a bunch; that probably sounds
funnier if you work in the civil service.)
And there was another big-company dividend cut - from Sedgwick, the
insurance broker. Just when you think company chairmen have decided they're
too scared of Paddy Lineker at M&G to cut the dividends, another brave soul
plunges in. Corroon and Black, another big broker which seemed to be
suffering just as much from the insurance industry's woes managed to keep
its dividend intact.
But Sedgwick's chairman David Rowland made a few gnomic comments ('Dividend
cuts come about for other reasons than 'disasters in business''), dropped
the interim dividend from 4p to 3p, and went off to run Lloyd's. I guess
he'll feel right at home, since they've taken his approach even further by
introducing negative dividends.
Don't company chairmen realise what all this dividend cutting does when
you're trying to put together a portfolio of income shares for someone who
is about to come into a lump sum? It's not as if the capital-gains side of
things is easy, either. Look at this chart I scratched out on the back of a
corn-flakes packet. It shows the sectors that did worst in the slide from
the end of the post-election blip in May and the ones have done best since
things started looking up a week ago.
There's a strong interest-rate theme in both periods, I'd say, which means
that the motor behind the recent recovery is probably a feeling that the
moment when German rates start to ease isn't too far away. That makes the
equity pickup very vulnerable to more bad interest-rate news from Germany -
or any sign that Norman Lamont will have to push up UK rates to stop the
pound falling out of the bottom of the ERM.
Well, that's what I told the client, anyway. She didn't seem to be paying
attention - said there was some sort of curious reflection over in the
bougainvillea bushes. Ignore it, I said. Who'll care about a few summer
snaps, anyway?

The Financial Times


London Page II

920822

