FT922-614

FT  26 JUN 92 / Serbs agree to halt shelling of Sarajevo civilians


   By LAURA SILBER, JUDY DEMPSEY and REUTER


   BELGRADE, ATHENS


SERB FORCES besieging Sarajevo yesterday announced they would halt the
bombardment of civilian targets in the Bosnian capital as they launched an
offensive in other parts of the republic.
The news came as the European Community failed to revive peace negotiations
yesterday in Strasbourg after what EC mediator Lord Carrington called
disheartening talks with leaders of the warring republics.
In Sarajevo, General Lewis MacKenzie, the commander of United Nations
forces, said Mr Radovan Karadzic, a Serb leader from Bosnia, had agreed to
relocate heavy artillery guns to allow UN forces to resume work on opening
the airport for relief flights.
As Radio Sarajevo reported continuing attacks on parts of the city,
diplomats based in Belgrade were sceptical that the agreement would hold.
However, one diplomat said it might 'indicate that the Serbs have decided to
put the train on a different track, to lock in territorial gains by
exchanging land for peace'. But Gen MacKenzie, reached by telephone in
Sarajevo, warned: 'If the initiative failed because of Serb actions it would
have a serious impact on their credibility.'
He declined to comment on how far the artillery, which has destroyed much of
Sarajevo, would be moved from the beleaguered capital. Serb leaders
yesterday did not elaborate on what constituted a civilian target. Gen
Mackenzie said the agreement could pave the way for reopening the airport
for emergency aid to relieve some 300,000 people trapped in Sarajevo with
little food and chronic shortages of water and electricity.
Lord Carrington said he got nowhere in a day of separate talks with the
presidents of Serbia and Croatia and the foreign minister of
Bosnia-Herzegovina.
'I think today was disheartening but we're going to go on trying. There has
got to be a solution in the end,' the former Nato secretary-general told a
news conference. It was the first round of talks since the UN Security
Council imposed sanctions on Serbia and came amid talk of a possible Western
military intervention in the Yugoslav war.
Bosnia's foreign minister, Mr Haris Silajdzic, shared Lord Carrington's
gloom, saying he was even less optimistic about bringing peace to his
republic, where more than 7,000 people have been killed.
Both men criticised Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic's refusal to
recognise Bosnia-Herzegovina as a sovereign state. But Lord Carrington said
he also expressed concern at reports of violations of a UN ceasefire in
Croatia by Zagreb's armed forces and was disappointed that Croatian
President Franjo Tudjman had said he would not withdraw the forces.
Judy Dempsey adds from Belgrade: The Serbian authorities have asked the UN
to unfreeze some of its the republic's assets held abroad in order to meet
debt repayments which fall due this year, according to bank officials in
Belgrade. These reserves, which total Dollars 2bn, include the federal
reserves, which amount to Dollars 1.5bn, and commercial bank reserves, which
total Dollars 500m. A small, undisclosed sum is held in Belgrade.
Serbia has proposed to Greece that the two Balkan countries form a
confederation, including a joint military command. President Milosevic said
in a television interview broadcast yesterday. Reuter reports from Athens.
'I believe a Greek-Yugoslav confederation would not only be a factor of
stability in the area but would also serve the interests of both the Greek
and Serbian people,' he said in the interview with Athens' private Antenna
television channel.
Mr Milosevic said he had proposed the idea of a confederation to Greek Prime
Minister Constantine Mitsotakis, who has close relations with the Serbian
leader.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920626

