FT924-926

FT  21 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Maverick Minebea bears down on profits
recovery - Policy changes at a group that was one of Japan's post-war
industrial success stories


   By ROBERT THOMSON


Minebea, the world's leading maker of miniature bearings and one of Japan's
post-war industrial success stories, appeared to be an endearing maverick
for which nothing could go wrong, not its sud den move into selling
cosmetics door-to-door nor even an excursion into Canadian pig farming.
However, 'Minebea calling' never quite became a household phrase and the
Canadian pig farmers found themselves knee-deep in losses, which contributed
to the company's consolidated loss of Y13.6bn (Dollars 109.3m) in the year
ended September, the first since its founding in 1951.
Minebea accepts these ventures may not have provided much synergy with
bearings, but the company does take exception to suggestions that another
cause of its troubles was an over-reliance on zaiteku, the financial
engineering particularly popular during the late 1980s.
The company provided against securities appraisal losses of Y2.9bn in the
first half, but Mr Ryusuke Mizukami, general manager of corporate planning,
said conclusions drawn in the Japanese press about Minebea's fondness for
financial engineering were unfair.
'They put us in the same category as companies which were very heavily
involved in zaiteku. We do have a big stock appraisal loss, but we had made
a decision not to buy shares for the purposes of making money during the
bubble period. We bought Tokyo Power shares, but at that time, the price was
much higher than the present price,' Mr Mizukami said.
Falling Tokyo stock prices certainly dented the parent company's current
stock assets, which have a book value of Y43.8bn, and a market value at the
end of September of only Y27.4bn. Meanwhile, Japanese banks, now painfully
aware of lending risk, are wary of zaiteku companies and of those struggling
to stay out of the red.
'We certainly didn't want to report a shameful big loss, and our president
has been touring the country explaining the situation,' Mr Mizukami said.
'Our banks will be more cautious if we report more losses, so we are
concentrating on profit recovery.'
Sales of core industrial products have risen in the first few weeks of the
present year, Mr Mizukami says, and the loss-making hog farm and cosmetics
business have been closed. But Minebea insists it is not restructuring or
going back to basics, and will maintain its diverse interests in kimonos and
consumer credit.
In sifting through the diversifications, Minebea is undergoing a painful
re-evaluation of investment decisions made by its late head, Mr Takami
Takahashi, who fostered the remarkable growth of the bearing business, but
also indulged himself in a boyhood ambition to raise pigs.
When establishing a bearings mother factory outside Tokyo, the company
bought an adjoining tract of land with the intention of creating a pig farm,
a plan shelved after opposition from the local council.
After more frustration in Thailand, Mr Takahashi's ambition was ultimately
fulfilled in 1989, the year of his death, when Northern Manitoba Breeders
was founded in Canada.
Minebea owes much to Mr Takahashi for taking the bearing production to
Thailand in 1982, before it became fashionable to establish offshore bases.
Of a monthly output of just over 80m bearings, 60m are produced in Thailand
and 20m in Singapore, plus smaller quantities in Japan and the UK, where it
bought Rose Bearings in 1988.
The acquisition and diversification drive by Mr Takahashi, who bought 22
companies in 15 years, was done in the belief that size itself is an
important asset in Japan.
He explained that 'big industries generally enjoy advantages or profits from
their superior positions', though he, perhaps, did not fully recognise the
danger of low-yielding assets weighing heavily on the balance sheet.
'Bearings are still our key product. Electronics-related products are very
important,' Mr Mizukami said. Last year, sales of bearings, electronic
devices, and machinery components accounted for 80 per cent of the total,
while those of others fell by 72 per cent.
Total sales were down by 2.4 per cent to Y278.7bn, far below the company's
long-cherished target of Y1,000bn.
Much of Minebea's future profitability will depend on the fate of NMB
Semiconductor, an increasing burden on the group since its founding in 1984.
NMB was focused on the memory chip market, weak for much of the past two
years, but stronger recently, thanks to a recovery in US personal computer
demand and a US dumping action against South Korean producers.
The Japanese electronics industry, generally, has suffered because of
over-capacity and over-ambitiousness in semiconductor production, leading to
unexpectedly weak prices for the present generation of 4Mbit memory chips.
'Semiconductors were a very bad area for us last year. No company did well
out of semiconductors,' Mr Mizukami said. 'We are able to make 16Mbit chips,
but we are not going to compete with people like Fujitsu, NEC and Toshiba to
make a 256Mbit chip.'
Mr Goro Ogino, Minebea's president, has taken personal responsibility for
turning NMB around, but the company is still a regular source of M&A rumours
in Japan, with persistent suggestions that Intel of the US, its partner in a
project to make flash memory chips, may be a buyer.
The rumours are denied by Minebea, which is hopeful the growing variety of
NMB products will ensure its profitability, as will an eventual recovery in
the international economy.
Similar hopes are held for Minebea Credit, a financial subsidiary bruised by
the collapse of property prices and an increase in personal bankruptcies.
'We see no fundamental problems at Minebea Credit. Consumer credit is about
two thirds of the business, and this doesn't involve such big amounts.
'We are not like the non-banks who lent for speculative activity. About a
third was real estate-related, and while there are some small problems,
there are no serious problems,' Mr Mizukami explained.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921221

