FT922-13503

FT  11 APR 92 / Banks and big stores get wild about cards: Electronic
transactions have aroused anger about their cost


   By DAVID BARCHARD


SQUABBLES between banks and the large retail chains about the pricing of
transactions made with credit and debit cards have become almost a way of
life in the past few years.
Each side sees itself as the underdog in the dispute. The retailers say they
are being forced to pay excessive charges while struggling to get out of the
recession. The banks see themselves as the victims of a media witch-hunt
which ignores the fact that they set up the payment systems used by the
retailers and that they still pay for most fraud losses on card payments.
So Mr David Malpas, managing director of Tesco, provoked cries of anger and
pain from the banks when he pointed out this week that his company is being
asked to pay substantially more when a customer pays by debit card than for
a cheque payment.
Mr Malpas's threat that the retailers might press for a further Monopolies
and Mergers Commission inquiry into plastic card payments has cut no ice
with the banks.
Mr David Mills, direct banking director at Midland Bank, said yesterday:
'There have been two MMC investigations into credit cards in little more
than a decade and the banks emerged completely clean from them.'
Midland, Tesco's banker, refused to be drawn further on Mr Malpas's remarks
about pricing. Nevertheless, it is Midland's pricing policy for Switch, the
electronic debit card launched in 1988 by National Westminster, Midland and
Royal Bank of Scotland, that is at the heart of the row with the retailers.
Last year there were 169m Switch transactions in the UK and the scheme now
has 20 member banks and building societies in place of the original three.
Other payments through the rival Visa Delta scheme brought the UK total for
debit cards to 390m.
That is still a small number compared with the 2.7bn payments consumers made
by cheque last year, but it is rising rapidly. By 1995 there are expected to
be about 750m Switch payments a year, bringing the goal of substituting
electronic payments for cheques very much closer.
By the year 2000, when Switch is expected to be processing 1.5bn
transactions a year, that goal may have been reached. The trouble is that
although Switch is growing fast, it has also until very recently been losing
money for the banks that set it up.
Mr David Jessop, Midland Bank money transmission director, says: 'Switch was
a completely new mechanism, and we sustained losses on it for three years
even though it has been held at constant prices.'
Midland's partners among the other Switch banks privately accuse it of
offering Switch at unrealistically low prices when the scheme was launched
in its attempts to grab market share. The price each retailer pays for
cheque or debit card processing is negotiated separately. Small businesses
pay most, while the very large retail chains can drive bargains in which
prices are pared to the minimum.
Midland charged its largest customers such as Tesco a flat rate of between
4p and 5p a transaction. By contrast, Lloyds, which never pursued card
services for the larger retailers but went mainly after middle-sized
companies, is believed to charge a flat rate of between 20p and 30p.
That perhaps helps to explain why this week Lloyds stood aside from the
latest row with the retailers, contenting itself with a statement that since
its pricing had never been unrealistic, it had not been forced to raise its
card charges to retailers.
Visa debit card issuers charge higher debit card fees than the Switch
consortium banks, mainly because - although Visa debit cards are also
intended to be mainly used in electronic terminals - they can be also used
with the original generation of hand-operated credit card vouchers. That
gives the Visa debit card issuers a significant competitive advantage over
Switch with smaller retailers.
Even so, Barclays, the largest credit and debit card issuer, has also put up
its Connect Visa debit card from an average of 10.5p to 12p. The latest
price is still substantially below the 17.5p that Barclays charged when
Connect was launched in 1987.
By comparison, the largest retailers are paying only 4p on their cheques.
Even allowing that the very smallest retailers pay far more than that - as
much as 63p a cheque, according to Barclays - something seems to be wrong.
The introduction of electronic technology was supposed to drive costs down
by eliminating paper and the people needed to process it. Why have the banks
ended up by charging retailers substantially more for electronic payments?
The question is not one that all banks are willing to discuss. Some fear
that if details of their policies entered the public domain, they might face
a revolt from smaller retailers that would dwarf the troubles they already
have with the large supermarkets.
'For the vast majority of retailers, Switch is cheaper than cheques,' says
Royal Bank of Scotland, one of the founder members of Switch. 'The big
retailers who have negotiated extremely low charges per cheque are the
exception.'
All the banks argue that debit cards and electronic payments are far
superior to cheques, but their advantages push up their costs.
One is that retailers get immediate payment while the cardholder's account
is not debited for two or three days. The bank then has to pay for making
the money available during that period.
Another is that the debit cards are more secure than cheques and can be used
to purchase unlimited amounts. Most cheque guarantee cards are still limited
to Pounds 50. A further debit card advantage is that they substantially
reduce the time and cost of office work for retailers.
On past form however, nothing except low bank charges is likely to appease
the retailers.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920411

