FT921-11824

FT  30 JAN 92 / Novel German plan to finance roads


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BONN


THE German government is to try hire purchase as a way of paying the
estimated DM100bn (Pounds 34.8bn) bill for transport links in former East
Germany.
In a renewed discussion on the private financing of public works, the
cabinet yesterday rejected toll-roads as 'counter-productive', and decided
that leasing of railways and roads from private consortiums was
'unsuitable'.
It chose instead to test what it called a 'concessionary' model, in which
private groups will finance and build projects on the government's behalf.
Bonn will then buy them back, paying in instalments.
The idea, which will spread the costs over an as-yet-unspecified period, is
to be tested on two projects in the west of the country - a DM3bn stretch of
railway between Munich and Nuremberg, and a road tunnel on the A81 autobahn
near Stuttgart.
Mr Gunther Krause, transport minister, was yesterday commissioned to draw up
draft contracts in preparation for a call for tenders.
The timing of these is uncertain. A government spokesman said only that the
cabinet would return to the subject this summer. However, the need is
urgent. The lack of western-standard communications is seen as one of the
main obstacles to economic recovery in former East Germany.
Government resources, meanwhile, are stretched to the limit by other
unification costs. Bonn is also committed to containing public borrowing,
which is currently growing faster than gross national product.
Official estimates say that DM100bn will be needed between 1995 and 2000 for
urgent transport infrastructure. Unofficial figures suggest the cost of
bringing transport systems up to western standards could be DM200bn.
Mr Krause, who had been eager to try gathering revenue at toll booths was
told they would be counter-productive. Construction would be too costly and
would interfere with traffic flow, and the tolls would also be unpopular
with the public which believes it is already being asked to pay too much to
support development in the east.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920130

