FT922-7294

FT  19 MAY 92 / Parliament and Politics: Patten firm on selective schools


   By ANDREW ADONIS


MR JOHN PATTEN, the education secretary, signalled his determination
yesterday not to give in to Tory calls for the widespread return of pupil
selection by secondary schools.
His forthcoming education white paper will instead emphasise parental choice
and leave parents and school governors as prime movers in changing the
character of schools.
Mr Patten emphasised that the white paper would be a 'radical document',
outlining the shape of the education service for the next 25 years on the
assumption that most schools will in due course opt out of local-authority
control. Opting-out and selection, he said, would be 'parent-driven, not
Whitehall-driven'.
Mr Patten, who was briefing correspondents for the first time since taking
office last month, noted that although 86 per cent of secondary schools in
England were non-selective comprehensives, 24 of its 109 local education
authorities had at least one selective school.
Mr Patten said that rather than formal selection, specialisation by schools,
on the model of the government's 15 city technology colleges, was his
preferred way forward.
He added: 'The national curriculum is the best way of delivering equality of
opportunity to our children.' He refused to be drawn on the fate of children
unable to secure places in such specialised schools.
The government is determined that its white paper should give added momentum
to its campaign for schools to opt out. Mr Patten welcomed reports that
Labour was preparing to shift its ground on grant-maintained schools and
expressed 'surprise' that few schools had applied to leave Labour-controlled
authorities in London.
The white paper, likely to be published before parliament goes into recess
in July, will determine the future shape of local education authorities.
The university sector should not seek to increase student numbers at the
cost of downgrading research, Mr Patten warned in the same briefing. He said
that while it was natural that some institutions would wish to concentrate
on teaching extra students, he hoped that, across the sector, there would
not be 'academic drift' away from research.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920519

