FT922-7242

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (4): Merger wave continues amid
hopes for interstate reform - America's banking system is bloated with
excess capacity, and the need to streamline has become urgent


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


IT HAS been a time of reckoning for America's commercial banks, a time of
facing the realities of lean economic times, the mistakes of the past and
the need to restructure.
The past 18 months have seen huge loan losses at some of the largest US
banks, many of them caused by the crisis in the commercial real estate
market and the lemming-like plunge into such lending by many banks in the
latter part of the 1980s.
Yet bankers rarely seem to learn from their mistakes. Late in recognising
their problems, as they were in the sovereign debt crisis of the early 1980s
and in the leveraged buy-out lending a few years on, many American bankers
were last year forced not only to make record-level bad debt provisions, but
to confront a more fundamental and more structural problem: America's
banking system is bloated with excess capacity, and the need to streamline
has become urgent.
Until last December, there were many who thought that legislative reform
would provide some degree of speedy relief. They were wrong. The US congress
abdicated most of its responsibilities and approved a weak, compromise bill
that skirted the most urgent priorities, such as giving banks the right to
expand into equity, underwriting, insurance and other financial services
areas.
The biggest issue that US bank reform legislation ignored was the rather
reasonable and economically useful proposal to allow banks the right to open
branches across state boundaries.
Some big banks, most notably institutions such as Bank of America and Banc
One, are already expanding interstate. They are able to take advantage of
the varying state laws around the country. But the system is not uniform.
The US, with all its potential economies of scale, is thus one of the few
western countries that does not allow its high street banks the right to
operate nationally. This, in turn, can create enormous and excessive
administrative costs. For example, a bank must have separate boards and
administrative operations just to have branches on both sides of the Hudson
River in New York and New Jersey.
The interstate branching debate flared again recently, when authorities in
Washington gave savings banks the right to go national. Both complaints and
then lawsuits began flying at the savings bank regulators from smaller,
independent banks, while the big commercial banks simply became furious.
Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, has expressed his
support for interstate branching on several occasions, most recently in a
speech in Chicago this month. The Fed chairman said there would be
'significant cost savings' in the mega-mergers that could follow the passage
of such legislation.
'Market forces will ultimately prevail,' Mr Greenspan argued, but he added
that he didn't think such banking legislation would occur in 1992. Rather,
he predicted that a helpful political climate would favour the legislation
in 1993.
Mr Greenspan's political instincts were, as always, fine-tuned. Few
Washington insiders expect interstate branching to be approved during a
presidential election year, when the White House is doing its best to
alienate as few special interests as possible.
Yet the wave of mergers that would undoubtedly expand with such legislation
is already under way. Last year saw three giant mergers, beginning with the
joining of Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
The Chemical merger not only created the third biggest US bank, with Dollars
136bn of assets, it also will result in more than Dollars 750m of annual
cost savings over the next three years. Already this year, Chemical is ahead
of its target, proving that one can slash back-office costs by a substantial
amount - and especially when the banks being merged are in the same market.
The marriage of Bank of America and Security Pacific in California - really
more of a rescue of the troubled SecPac - is another example of how costs
can be cut in a transaction in the same geographic market. The projections
from California call for Dollars 1.2bn of annual savings by 1995, with up to
12,000 of the combined bank's 91,000-strong workforce being made redundant.
The third big merger, between NCNB of North Carolina and C&S/Sovran of
Georgia, was across state boundaries, but it would undoubtedly benefit even
more if full interstate branching laws were on the federal books.
Mergers are, of course, not the only solution to America's banking woes. The
strengthening of capital ratios is another priority for many regulators, and
banks have gone some distance to bolstering their bases by selling off less
strategic assets. The toughest challenge is faced by Citicorp, the biggest
US bank and ironically the weakest of the top 10 in terms of capital ratios.
Citicorp's problems, including its heavy real estate exposure, have been the
constant subject of speculation in the banking community. Mr John Reed, the
chairman of Citicorp, has been sharply criticised for sloppy management of
the bank by many of his peers.
Mr Reed, however, is determined to strengthen the bank's capital and clean
up the mess as soon as possible. And there have been signs he is making
progress.
Looking ahead, it seems fair to say that some of the worst of the problems
facing the US commercial banking sector are over. The skies, as Mr George
Salem, of Prudential Securities, put it recently, appear to be clearing.
A recent analysis of prospects for US banking, by Salomon Brothers,
suggested that perceptions of the real estate crisis have now shifted from
being 'life threatening' to being more in the 'nuisance' category. That may
be a trifle facile, because it is hard to generalise. Bad debt provisions
will still be very high this year at a number of US banks. But at least one
can begin to see recovery down the road.

The Financial Times


London Page III

920520

