FT921-15455

FT  10 JAN 92 / Book Review: Fair trade or foul


   By MARTIN WOLF


AGGRESSIVE UNILATERALISM: America's 301 Trade Policy and the World Trading
System
Edited by Jagdish Bhagwati and Hugh T. Patrick
Harvester Wheatsheaf, hardback Pounds 35 (Dollars 66.95); paperback Pounds
10.95 (Dollars 17.95)
THE FAIR TRADE FRAUD: How Congress Pillages the Consumer and Decimates
American Competitiveness
James Bovard St Martin's Press, hardback Pounds 17.60 (Dollars 24.95)
Mirror, mirror, on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?' Any
right-thinking American congressman would have no difficulty in finding the
politically correct reply: US trade policy is perfectly fair. Unfairness
elsewhere explains the overall US trade deficit, bilateral trade deficits
with Japan, the recession and almost any other ill to which the American
economy is deemed subject.
Uruguay Round outcome or none, American aggressive unilateralism is here to
stay. One need only look at how Mr Bush has turned his visit to America's
most important trade partner, Japan, into a sales promotion trip. A
blatantly discriminatory agreement on the sale of American auto-parts is the
most obvious result.
Mr Bush probably knows better. But he has to respond to the pressure back
home, where Congressman Gephardt has introduced a bill attempting to turn
Japan into a planned economy. Not that he would put it that way. But how
else is Japan to comply with demands that it reduce its trade surplus with
the US by 20 per cent in each of the next five years?
What is wrong with this orgy of American self-righteousness? These books
address different aspects of the question, the first in a scholarly, the
second in a blisteringly journalistic manner. The two accounts, both
excellent in different ways, are complementary and their conclusion clear:
neither in its assumptions about US rectitude, nor in its likely
consequences can unilateral US pursuit of the holy grail of 'fairness' be
justified.
The notion of 'fair trade' is pervasive in modern trade policy, but it is
Section 301 of successive US trade acts which gives the idea its aggressive
force. The post-1988 Section 301 does two things: first, what is usually
called 'regular 301', which gives the US administration the power to
retaliate in support of US rights claimed under the GATT; second, 'super'
and 'special 301', which enjoin retaliation in support of complaints that
involve foreign behaviour deemed 'unreasonable'.
The book edited by Jagdish Bhagwati and Hugh Patrick is concerned entirely
with this piece of legislation. In what must be the classic article on its
legal implications, Professor Robert E. Hudec takes as his provocative title
'Thinking about the New Section 301: Beyond Good and Evil'.
Professor Hudec concludes that under both aspects of Section 301,
GATT-illegal action is possible. But he argues that disobedience of the GATT
could sometimes be justified as a way of strengthening what is, for all its
successes, a defective legal process.
Professor Hudec's defence of the new Section 301 only makes his ultimate
conclusion the more damning. 'The heart of the problem is that the law is
based on an outrageous premise - namely, that the commands of Section 301 do
not apply to the US.' The US is to be judge and jury of a law it does not
apply to itself.
Such a stance must reduce international trade law to the law of the bully.
But Professor Bhagwati demonstrates that aggressive unilateralism also makes
little economic sense. 'Just as the belief that import restrictions will
cure the trade deficit refuses to die, . . . so does its flip side: that
lowering foreign trade barriers will cure the trade deficit.'
Some powerful countries must take the US on. Equally important, however, is
to assail the fevered rhetoric of 'fair trade'. Professor Bhagwati points
out, for example, that 'if everything becomes a question of fair trade, the
only outcome will be to remove the possibility of ever agreeing to a
rule-oriented trading system'. He is right. What must also be stressed,
however, is that under the hypocrisy and the whingeing, one finds, in James
Bovard's words, that 'the most common foreign 'unfair trade practice' is
producing a better product at a lower price'.
'When politicians speak of unfair trade, they do not mean that buyers and
sellers did not voluntarily agree,' says Mr Bovard, 'but that US government
officials disapprove of the bargains American citizens choose to make.' And
why do they disapprove, asks Mr Bovard? For a simple reason: their
paymasters say they should.
Neither the bleats about 'fair trade' nor aggressive unilateralism can be
justified. What explains both is a mixture of confusion, greed, the search
for scapegoats, and good old-fashioned hypocrisy. The results are damaging
to trade, the trading system and, not least, the American economy. So the
next American congressman who looks at the mirror should remember what
happened to Snow White's wicked stepmother.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920110

