FT924-11966

FT  23 OCT 92 / UN resumes the Sarajevo airlift despite fighting


   By JUDY DEMPSEY and LAURA SILBER


   LONDON, BELGRADE


UNITED Nations relief flights to the besieged Bosnian capital of Sarajevo
started again yesterday in a desperate effort to build up stockpiles before
the winter sets in.
'We have no choice but to resume the flights. We are trying to minimise the
risks to the pilots. The land routes from Split across Bosnia have been
closed,' said Mr Ron Redmond, a spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for
Refugees in Geneva.
All flights were suspended on Wednesday after fighting escalated throughout
Bosnia. The suspension fuelled fears that the city's 390,000 inhabitants
risked death, not only from constant bombardment from the surrounding hills
which are held by Serb forces, but from the bitter cold and starvation. Mr
Redmond said temperatures were likely to slip several degrees below zero by
this weekend.
Fighting in western Bosnia between Croat and Moslem forces disrupted all
overland aid convoys earlier this week. Instead, the UNHCR will try to enter
Bosnia from Belgrade, the Serbian capital, at the weekend. The UNHCR plans
to fly in 18 flights a day to Sarajevo, but the onset of winter, coupled
with heavy fog, which settles on the city for several days at a time, could
slow the operation.
'The people need not only food and medicine but covering for their windows,'
said Mr Redmond. He added that 150,000 apartments needed plastic sheeting.
In neighbouring Croatia, European Community monitors yesterday confirmed
that Croatian army units had launched an offensive around the Prevlaka
peninsula on the Adriatic.
The clashes followed the withdrawal of Yugoslav federal troops from the
peninsula under an agreement signed in Geneva by the presidents of Croatia
and the rump Yugoslavia.
The EC monitors, who were confined to their hotel by Croat forces during the
offensive, said Croatian artillery units fired on Bosnian Serb positions
holding Croatian territory.
The EC team lodged a strong protest with the Croatian government because
Croat special army units were using white vehicles similar to those used by
the EC, thus endangering the lives of the monitors.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921023

