FT924-8281

FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (8): No bridging the gulf - Aqaba port
needs UN sanctions against Iraq to end


   By HUGH CARNEGY


AT AQABA on the Red Sea, Jordan's only sea port, the gates to the oil
terminal are kept chained shut.
The jetty is deserted most of the time. Inside the administration building,
a few officials while away the time drinking sweet tea and pondering one
question above all others: when will UN sanctions against Iraq be lifted?
Two years since the onset of the Gulf crisis, Aqaba Port is still suffering
gravely from the lack of transit trade from Iraq it thrived upon in the
1980s.
This year, total cargo handled at Aqaba will be about 14m tonnes. In 1988,
it was more than 20m; the missing 6m tonnes accounted for almost entirely by
the loss of Iraqi business.
Last year, transit container volume collapsed to less than 10,000 tonnes
from almost 240,000 a year before Iraq invaded Kuwait.
Quite apart from the wider impact on the Jordanian economy of the loss of
this trade, Aqaba itself is struggling to make ends meet until the unknown
day when sanctions will end.
The authorities invested heavily in the port in the 1980s to handle
ballooning demand from Iraq when Baghdad's Gulf outlets were blocked by war
with Iran.
The 300,000 tonne per month oil jetty, now idle, was built; so was a new
industrial port and a Dollars 3m communications centre. Two heavy-duty 3,200
horsepower tugboats were bought. A slipway was constructed to bring some
cargoes ashore by barge.
Now the port is operating at only 60 per cent of capacity. Annual revenues
are down to less than 30m Jordanian dinars from JD40m. Though there are
still 2,500 port employees, hundreds of workers previously employed on a
daily-hire basis are no longer needed.
There are other costs as well. Ships coming into Aqaba with cargoes for
Jordan and other transit destinations, such as Syria, are subject to
inspection by naval ships in the Red Sea, policing the sanctions.
Operators have upped charges by Dollars 1,000 per 40 ft container, to take
account of the interference which causes delays and means lighter loads to
allow easy inspection.
Port officials are confident they will win back the Iraqi trade immediately
sanctions are lifted. 'The sanctions will not be for ever,' says Mr Ibrahim
Tayyan, chief of the port's development programme. 'So we are planning
always to expand.' For now, however, the reality in Aqaba is expensive
contraction.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

921112

