FT922-13363

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Allies welcome a clear victory for continuity


   By DAVID BUCHAN, GEORGE GRAHAM and JIMMY BURNS


   BRUSSELS, WASHINGTON, LONDON


SIR LEON Brittan, the Tory politician and the UK's senior EC commissioner,
yesterday welcomed his party's election victory as providing useful
stability and continuity in preparing Britain to take over the presidency of
the EC Council of Ministers on July 1.
The election result boosts Sir Leon's chances of staying on in the
Commission for the next two years and perhaps switching from competition to
EC external affairs - a portfolio he is known to covet.
As long as the UK, as a larger EC member, fields two commissioners, the
convention is that the junior one is nominated by the government from the
main opposition party.
Mr Bruce Millan, a former Labour secretary of state for Scotland who is the
EC regional commissioner, still has a good chance of being renominated,
unless Labour wants someone else.
Mr John Major's government would probably accept another Labour nominee,
unless it was highly controversial, like a choice to put Mr Neil Kinnock,
the Labour leader, out to pasture in Brussels.
In the name of the Commission, Mr Jacques Delors, its president, sent Mr
Major a message congratulating him and looking forward 'to continuing our
fruitful and close co-operation'. If, as is highly probable, he continues to
head the Commission in 1993-94, Mr Delors faces operating separate
constitutional arrangements on social policy negotiated for Britain and its
11 partners at Maastricht.
But Mr Major's victory is valued in Brussels for providing in one corner of
the EC a stability that recent German, French and Italian elections have
shown to be a rare commodity. This was pointed up yesterday, when the
Commission spokesman was asked if the EC executive had sent congratulations
after last week's Italian election. 'Yes, we will send a message to the
Italian government,' he said, 'when there is one.'
PRESIDENT George Bush has enthusiastically applauded the Conservative
party's victory in the UK general election.
'It was substantial, it was wonderful,' he said yesterday morning, promising
to discuss the result more fully at a news conference later in the day.
Mr Bush, who has elevated male bonding to the status of a foreign policy
tool, tried to avoid taking sides during the British election campaign, but
still made it clear he would rather carry on working with Mr Major than have
to develop a new relationship with Mr Kinnock.
'I expect the worst thing an American president could do would be to try to
intervene in an election in another country. I think it would be
inappropriate if I got into picking winners and losers in a British election
or French election or German election,' Mr Bush said last month.
'Having said all that, the respect I have for the prime minister knows no
bounds. John Major is a superb leader, and I work very, very closely with
him.'
Mr Major's battle to win re-election has been viewed in the US as something
of a preview to Mr Bush's own re-election campaign this autumn.
'Like George Bush, he is a 'kinder, gentler' sequel to a highly ideological
predecessor,' commented Mr Joe White, of the Brookings Institution
think-tank, in the Washington Post.
'Each inherited a debt-burdened economy that was about to collapse, angering
the electorate.
'Each is heir to a movement that has remade industrial nations' economic
policies in the 1980s.'
However, Mr Bush has the advantage that by November when the US election
will take place, his domestic economy is expected to be in much stronger
shape. Mr Major cemented his relationship with Mr Bush with an exchange of
gifts.
BRITAIN'S election result was described as good news for Conservatives
everywhere in a personal message to Mr Major from Mr Helmut Kohl, the German
Chancellor.
Mr Kohl said: 'The British people have entrusted you with leadership for
five more years at a time of many international uncertainties and in the
face of world economic challenges.'
According to Mr Carl Bildt, the Swedish prime minister, Labour's defeat
confirmed the picture of a 'deepening crisis for the social democrats and
socialists in western Europe'.
The theme was echoed in France where the socialists have suffered electoral
reverses in recent weeks.
There was no immediate comment from the government, but Le Monde, the
respected daily newspaper, said in its editorial that Mr Major's victory
'sounded the death knell of hopes for all those, not only on the Left, who
believed that Britain was ready for a change'. The Spanish newspapers were
so convinced of a Labour victory that many of them claimed Mr Kinnock had
won in their first edition stories. But Mr Felipe Gonzalez, Spain's
socialist prime minister, chose temporarily to suspend his ideological
affinities with the British Labour party for the sake of improved bilateral
relations between his country and the UK on issues such as the future of
Europe.
In Japan, which has experienced the kind of unchanging party power structure
which is now taking hold in the UK, there was no official reaction to the UK
election result.
In Hong Kong, by contrast, Mr Major's victory refuelled pressure for
political change, with politicians calling on the UK to announce without
delay the next governor for the crucial run-up to the 1997 hand-over to
China.
Reporting by David Buchan in Brussels, George Graham in Washington and Jimmy
Burns in London

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920411

