FT924-889

FT  22 DEC 92 / Life house hit by record Lautro fine


   By JOHN AUTHERS


LAUTRO, the life assurance regulator, yesterday imposed its highest-ever
fine - Pounds 120,000 plus costs - on Scottish Widows, the life company.
The fine concerns Scottish Widows' failure to monitor the advice given by
its appointed representatives to about 20,000 policyholders since February
1989. Lautro found that proper 'factfinds' detailing clients' needs had not
been kept, making it impossible to tell whether the products sold had been
appropriate.
The company has been ordered to contact all the clients affected and to pay
full compensation if inappropriate advice is disclosed. No cases of wrong
advice have yet been discovered and no compensation has been paid.
Lautro's previous highest fine, Pounds 100,000, was levied last month on
Guardian Royal Exchange, the composite insurer, after two of its tied
agencies went out of business. Fines of Pounds 50,000 or more have also been
levied this year on Commercial Union, General Accident, Norwich Union and
London & Manchester Assurance.
Lautro denied that the fine suggested any 'toughening' of its stance, but
reflected the severity of Scottish Widows' offence and the number of
policyholders affected.
Mr Newton Scott, general manager of marketing and sales for Scottish Widows,
said: 'The effective management of appointed representatives is an
industry-wide issue and we believe that our policyholders and our business
will benefit from the comprehensive review of procedures we have
undertaken.'
The company had already cut its tied agents from 180 to about 100 as a
commercial decision before the Lautro move, but remains committed to
distribution through that channel, which accounts for about 6 per cent of
its business.
Mr Scott added that Scottish Widows remained the UK's fifth-largest life
assurance company, with a weekly net income of about Pounds 25m. Its size
and strength would maintain its position with independent advisers, which
provide most of its business.
Ms Jean Eaglesham, head of the Consumers' Association's money group, said:
'It's welcome that Lautro is imposing fines of this magnitude, because it
should encourage providers to take compliance much more seriously.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921222

