FT922-4225

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: Playing it safe in retirement -
Weekend FT reader Antony Michell explains his strategy for setting - and
achieving - realistic targets


   By ANTONY MICHELL


   MANY people regard investing as a hit or miss fun occupation


some you win, others you lose. But for us pensioners, safety is all
important. Unlike younger people, we cannot replenish our funds when we make
mistakes.
While most investors select shares which they hope will outperform the
market, I suggest pensioners should decide what rate of return is reasonably
possible and then select their portfolio to obtain such a return. To achieve
this, consider the following factors. Remember that investing is not a game
for us but a serious job. If you do not have enough income, then be even
more careful. Do not try to compensate by buying shares which may make your
fortune.
Force yourself to examine your portfolio objectively at least twice a year
and make decisions based on the outlook for the share, not necessarily on
its past performance. Too many of us become attached sentimentally to an old
faithful which performed brilliantly for us 10 years ago. The outlook might
now be indifferent.
Decide what return on your investment you can reasonably expect. I try to
make a 4.5 per cent real rate per annum. Aiming for much more is taking too
high a risk, while aiming lower means that you are not even trying to
perform as well as some gross building society funds.
Do not touch shares unless you have more than Pounds 70,000. Stay with
building societies and National Savings.
Select several types of investment such as Tessas (tax-exempt special
savings accounts), two-year and one-year term shares with building
societies, and postal accounts for immediate needs. Then, put a substantial
amount in investment trusts to provide equity investment and add gilts plus
index-linked and other forms of National Savings.
Like me, you might also have some endowment policies yet to mature (many of
which have excellent records, due partly to the now-defunct life assurance
premium relief), and perhaps some investment bonds. Index-tracking stocks
and zero coupon preference shares are also an essential portfolio component
for me.
Selecting a balanced portfolio is crucial. It should minimise risks from
inflation, geographical location, industry, economies and political
uncertainties. In this context, the proportion invested in each of these
sectors needs careful thought.
Try to be honest with yourself and to realise that you are not usually
smarter than the market. It is sobering to sit down and calculate your
average return over the past five years, and assess whether your performance
has kept up with what the building society offers.
Remember that the glamour years of the 1980s are over and much slower
economic growth can be expected. Therefore, real returns of 5-6 per cent may
be the norm in the 1990s.
Spread risk, but do not pay high fees to do so. For this, investment trusts
are ideal, but stick to the International and UK General trusts, of which
more than 25 have excellent long-term records.
Many investment trusts in a personal equity plan (Pep) have low charges and
are most interesting (but only if you have more than about Pounds 100,000 of
investments in order to benefit from capital gains tax).
Cash on deposit within a Pep is another useful benefit. I do not invest in
many unit trusts and managed Peps because these, together with insurance
bonds, are a more costly form of investment, although apparently changing
now.
Investment in a few equity shares is too much of a risk. An investment in
Polly Peck would have affected a personal portfolio badly, but collective
trusts covering 100 or more companies can afford a few duds. Above all, do
not be tempted to buy after reading or hearing favourable comment about a
single company.
Bearing all of this in mind, you can now convert everything into REAL money
(after deducting inflation) and make a table such as the one above, with
yields after tax.
It illustrates a spread of investments of Pounds 200,000 (for a couple where
the wife obtains some gross interest).
The capital gain requirement column is the percentage that the investment
must rise each year so that, when added to its real yield, it provides the
key 4.5 per cent which we expect our investments to achieve. This assumes
that the market ascribes approximately correct yields to shares.
The next column is my own estimate of the probability of this investment
achieving that target.
The last column is my estimate of the same probability over the next five
years. Clearly, the risk rises with time, except for index-linked stocks.
Inflation plays a key role in fixed-interest real rates, and I assume an
increase in RPI of 6 per cent when making the estimates. This is not a
forecast but perhaps a reminder of what could happen again.
So, over the next 12 months I hope the Tessas and index-linked National
Savings are 95 per cent and 100 per cent certain to achieve the target 4.5
per cent. However, I rate the Xyz share, which is in Europe, as having only
a 40 per cent chance of success (although 55 per cent over the five-year
term). Perhaps this should be sold.
Pep investment trusts are rated at 85 per cent because of their long-term
performance and excellent spreads. Endowments are also expected to achieve
8.6 per cent growth with 90 per cent probability in the short term because
they, too, have excellent records.
For too long, investors have differentiated capital gain from yield. For us
pensioners, a gain is a gain whether it is made up of 5 per cent yield plus
10 per cent capital increase, or 10 yield plus 5 per cent capital gain.
Combining these in the table and using real, after-tax values should help to
clear one's thoughts.
All this might appear extremely cautious, but my experience has been that I
rarely outperform the FT Index over the whole of my investments. However,
with assiduous attention, this 4.5 per cent target might well be surpassed.
One final thing, which is more important than anything else - keep yourself
fit to enjoy the spoils.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920606

