FT922-4368

FT  05 JUN 92 / Receivers take control of AWD: Only 22 Bedford trucks made
in first quarter


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


AWD, the commercial vehicle company created by Yorkshire entrepreneur Mr
David JB Brown from General Motors' loss-making Bedford trucks business six
years ago, went into administrative receivership last night.
The company, based at Dunstable, Bedfordshire, has suffered both from the
collapse of the UK truck market and the lack of large foreign orders.
Nevertheless Mr Tony Thompson, a joint administrative receiver from
accountants KPMG Peat Marwick, said it was intended to sell the company as a
going concern for a sum involving 'tens of millions'.
Many of the company's 650 employees have been laid off for some months. The
company produced only 22 trucks in the first quarter of this year, compared
with 546 in the same period last year and annual production peaks of 6,000
units before the UK truck market started collapsing in 1989.
At its peak, AWD was employing more than 1,300 and Mr Brown boasted of
creating a company employing more than 2,000 people and building 10,000
trucks annually.
Mr Brown bought the business from GM near the end of 1987 for just more than
Pounds 20m. Under GM's ownership, Bedford had been losing Pounds 1/2 m a
week in a plant that had the capacity to produce 60,000 trucks a year and
which, up to the start of the 1980s, had employed 6,000 people.
The AWD receivership does not affect other companies controlled by the Brown
family. They include Artix, the world's largest maker of heavy-duty,
off-road dump trucks at Peterlee, County Durham, which are sold under the
Caterpillar badge.
Mr Thompson said that discussions had already been going on with 'a number'
of potential buyers for the AWD business. In spite of the severely depressed
state of the European truck industry, the receivers are hopeful that AWD's
acknowledged high level of engineering expertise may prove attractive for a
number of potential buyers.
Mr Thompson refused to outline the size of AWD's indebtedness. Its principal
creditors are its bank and a number of as yet unnamed suppliers. The site of
nearly 100 acres is seen as a significant asset - a small portion was sold
recently to J. Sainsbury for Pounds 5m and there remains a lot of land
surplus to the needs of truck-making.
Three months ago, the workforce accepted a 25 per cent pay cut and 10 days'
leave without pay. The biggest recent blow was lack of progress on an
agreement to supply up to 2,000 trucks a year to Iran, claimed by the
company to be worth more than Pounds 70m.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920605

