FT922-4152

FT  06 JUN 92 / Moscow hunts missing billions


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


US investigator Mr Jules Kroll has appealed for international help in
tracking down vast sums of hard currency stashed abroad by Moscow's former
communist regime.
Mr Kroll yesterday appealed to central banks, governments and businessmen to
help find the money, which he said could be worth more than the western aid
pledged to the former Soviet republics.
At a time when the west was considering giving Russia and the other former
Soviet republics Dollars 24bn (Pounds 13bn) in aid, uncovering the funds
would be 'one of the cheapest forms of aid' it could offer, he said.
Mr Kroll helped trace the missing Marcos millions and was also involved in
tracking down the assets of Haiti dictator 'Baby Doc' Duvalier.
His consultancy, Kroll Associates, is hunting for three types of funds:
profits sent abroad illegally by state-owned enterprises; bribes paid by
foreign companies to Russian officials for concluding deals on terms
unfavourable to the state; and public funds transferred abroad by the
now-banned Communist party.
'This is going to require some government-to-government negotiations,' Mr
Kroll said. 'If you leave it to a bank that has possession (of illicit
funds), you're going to have a long wait.'
The money is believed to be in bank accounts in Cyprus, Greece, Switzerland,
Austria, Germany, the UK, Jersey, the US, and any other countries where
beneficiaries either had 'trusted friends' or 'consultancies'.
'There's no doubt we are talking about billions,' Mr Kroll said, adding that
it was impossible to be precise.
In the four months since his consultancy was hired by Mr Yegor Gaidar, the
Russian first deputy prime minister, it has found 22 bank accounts of a
suspect nature, all set up since 1985, although none of the money has been
retrieved.
Mr Kroll and his team are paying special attention to commodity trading  -
particularly that involving imports of agro-industrial products, where
foreign sellers have an unusually high profit margin.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

