FT924-8118

FT  12 NOV 92 / Honecker's 'Nuremberg trial': The key question will be who
gave the orders


   By LESLIE COLITT


THE trial of Mr Erich Honecker, the former East German hardline leader,
begins today in Berlin. He and his close aides are charged with the border
killings of citizens who attempted to flee the German Democratic Republic.
It will mark the first, and probably last, prosecution of an important
deposed Warsaw Pact leader.
Germany has not witnessed a similar trial of political leaders since the
Nuremberg War Crimes Tribunal of the Nazi leadership in 1946.
Just as at Nuremberg, the question of who gave the orders to kill will play
a key role in the proceedings.
Sharing the courtroom with Mr Honecker and his fellow defendants will be the
relatives of 13 men killed by bullets, land mines or automatic firing
devices at the Berlin Wall and the inner-German border.
The mother of one of those killed, 20-year-old Mr Chris Guffroy, is among
the co-plaintiffs.
Her son was riddled with bullets at the Berlin Wall in October, 1989, only
eight months before Mr Honecker was deposed and nine months before the Wall
was breached.
The 80-year-old Mr Honecker is terminally-ill with advanced cancer of the
liver and may not survive the trial.
However, defence applications to have the trial cancelled because of his
illness were rejected by the justice authorities.
Also on trial are five senior officials: Mr Willy Stoph, 78, the former
prime minister; Mr Erich Mielke, 84, head of the state security police
(Stasi); Mr Heinz Kessler, 72, former defence minister; Mr Fritz Streletz,
66, former deputy defence minister and Mr Hans Albrecht, 72, Communist party
chief of Suhl district.
The prosecution charges that Mr Honecker, as chairman of the National
Defence Council, and the others as members were responsible for the border
killings.
The council is said to have issued orders to the border troops stipulating
that citizens fleeing to the West were to be stopped using 'all means' at
their disposal.
Mr Honecker and his lawyers have indicated they will argue that it was the
Soviet-led Warsaw Pact which approved the building of the Wall in 1961 and
that every Soviet leader since then bore responsibility for the
consequences.
Mr Klaus Feske, head of a solidarity committee for Mr Honecker, said after
visiting the ex-leader in Moabit prison hospital yesterday that he was in a
fighting spirit and would defend his 'socialist ideals' at the trial.
Pressure to hold the trial mounted when several former border guards put on
trial and found guilty last January of fatally wounding would-be escapees.
'The small fish are caught but the big ones get away' was a complaint
commonly heard among ordinary east Germans.
The fact that the court will seek to convict Mr Honecker and his
co-defendants on charges of violating the constitution and laws of the
former German Democratic Republic has no precedent in legal history.
But embarrassing questions are being posed.
Why, it is asked, if Mr Honecker is being tried as a common criminal today,
was he welcomed in 1987 with full honours on his state visit to Bonn?
Many east Germans would have preferred to see Mr Honecker brought to justice
by an east German tribunal instead of what is, for all practical purposes, a
west German one.
Others remark bitterly that west Germans, who failed to bring to justice
Nazi officials and judges after the Second World War, were scarcely
qualified to tell east Germans to come to terms with their own recent
history.
A small but vocal minority, consisting largely of Mr Honecker's hardline
supporters, dismiss the trial as a political sham designed to wipe out the
last vestiges of socialism in Germany.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921112

