FT921-14108

FT  17 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Four sites short-listed Pounds
25m abattoir


   By ANTHONY MORETON, Welsh Correspondent


FORTEX, THE rapidly-growing New Zealand meat-processing company, is to set
up a Pounds 25m abattoir and meat plant in Europe.
It has identified four sites and will make a decision in May. The front
runners are thought to be Welshpool in Wales and Lockerbie in Scotland.
Fortex is also looking at a site in the West Midlands and a fourth thought
to be on the continent. The plant would employ 750 full- and part-time
workers and Mr Glyn Davies, chairman of the Development Board for Rural
Wales, said in Newtown yesterday that 'the scale of this proposal is so
enormous, and the impact on the UK lamb market could be so dramatic, that it
needs to be very carefully considered.'
The plant would essentially handle lamb and other sheep products.
Under European Commission regulations that come into operation in January
1993 a big shake-up will take place in the meat-processing industry. Many
small abattoirs, unable to meet more stringent health regulations, will
close, putting at risk the ability of producers to sell their stock to the
supermarkets under their own labels. There are 60 abattoirs in Wales but it
is thought that next year as few as four will meet the health regulations.
Some 2m lambs from Welsh farms are already slaughtered outside Wales and
many of the 2m slaughtered within the country would, without the Fortex
investment, then have to be sent, live, to other abattoirs around Britain.
Under present rules these could no longer be sold as Welsh lamb. Lamb can
only be sold under a generic label - Welsh lamb, Devon lamb - if it is
slaughtered in the area.
Forex has grown rapidly since it was set up 5 years ago and now has a
turnover of Pounds 100m. It has about a fifth of the New Zealand market and
would probably want to use a British food-processing plant for some exports
to the EC. A new plant would allow New Zealand not just an entry into Europe
but also a foothold in an expanding sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920117

