FT923-10656

FT  29 JUL 92 / White paper stresses choice in schools: Tough new powers of
intervention - Role of local authorities to diminish


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


EDUCATION in England and Wales in the next century will be characterised
'not by uniformity but by choice', with a variety of schools playing to
their strengths and enjoying parity of esteem, according to the vision set
out by the government yesterday in its white paper on education.
Self-management of schools, a declining role for local education authorities
and tough powers of intervention in schools where standards are at risk are
the cornerstones of the proposals.
'We intend to create a stable system of education that sets international
levels of excellence,' the government says in the white paper. 'Other
leading nations have high standards and a high degree of specialisation. We
can match and outstrip them.'
The essential conditions for achieving excellence and fulfilling talent, the
white paper says, are diversity and choice. The education system of the
future will be one that offers opportunities to all children, not one in
which children are 'forced to conform to the needs of some theoretically
based, undifferentiated and under-performing system'.
The main proposals of the white paper include:
Failing schools: The school inspection arrangements will be used to identify
schools that are failing to give pupils an acceptable standard of education,
or are at risk of doing so. Governing bodies will be expected to take urgent
remedial action, and powers of local authorities to force them to do so will
be strengthened.
Where the government believes a local authority and governors have failed to
improve standards in a school that is 'at risk', it will be able to send in
an Education Association - a group of six specialists who will have the
powers to put the school under new management until its performance reaches
a satisfactory standard. The association will be responsible for providing
the 'essential leadership and management that has previously been lacking at
the school'. That might involve staff changes at the senior management level
and within the teaching force.
Opting out: The government hopes all schools will eventually become
grant-maintained - self-governing establishments with control of their
entire budget - and the white paper sets out a range of proposals to
encourage and hasten that development. Expenditure on publicity by local
authorities hostile to schools in their area becoming grant-maintained will
be limited, and the government will be able to provide prospective
grant-maintained schools with equivalent funds to produce their own leaflet
for parents.
The Education Assets Board - the government-appointed body that handles the
financial aspects of transferring schools out of local-authority control -
will be given greater powers to resolve disputes over assets when a school
becomes grant-maintained. The white paper says that the education secretary
will not hesitate to use his powers to ensure that 'unpopular or less
effective schools' which remain in the local-authority-maintained sector are
closed to ensure better use of resources.
Funding Agency: A statutory Funding Agency will take over from the
government the allocation of funds to grant-maintained schools, with the
gradual introduction of a new financing formula from 1994-95.
The Funding Agency will share with local authorities responsibility for
ensuring that there are adequate school places in a particular area, and
take over those powers in districts where more than 75 per cent of pupils
are in grant-maintained schools. The government will have powers to direct
the Funding Agency and local authorities to produce plans to reduce surplus
school places. It says money should be spent on children rather than
maintaining empty buildings.
Clusters: Small primary schools, which might be daunted by becoming
grant-maintained alone, will be able to apply for self-governing status as
part of a cluster. That would enable groups of smaller grant-maintained
schools to operate with a single governing body and budget.
Specialisation: Although all schools will have to teach the full range of
National Curriculum subjects, the government wants many to develop expertise
in particular areas. Specialisation may take place in a range of subjects -
such as languages and music - but many of the schools will specialise in
technology, with a drive to encourage business and industry to sponsor their
activities.
A new School Curriculum and Assessment Authority will replace the two
existing bodies responsible for examinations, assessment and the operation
of the national curriculum.
Choice and Diversity - a new framework for schools. HMSO. Pounds 8.60

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920729

