FT924-6275

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (5): Cost-conscious gems - Vivienne
Becker considers baubles that won't break the bank


   By VIVIENNE BECKER


APART FROM the spectacular arrival of Christian Lacroix, the great fashion
phenomenon of the 1980s was surely the rise in status of costume jewellery.
Reflecting the glamour and power of the post-feminist years, it entirely
changed the way women presented themselves and broke through enormous social
and fashion barriers.
From a lowly position as declasse poor relation to diamonds and pearls,
costume jewellery suddenly became the single most important fashion
accessory of the decade, worn in the highest echelons of society, at all
times of day, from the boardroom to the ballroom.
The 1960s paved the way with its beads and baubles and plastic
anti-jewellery. The lead came both from street fashion, from pop-star rebels
wearing antique 'junk' jewellery and from the great couture houses,
encouraged by the growth of the designer-accessories market. Dallas and
Dynasty power dressing and the Princess of Wales spurred things on and,
since the mid-1980s, the costume jewellery industry has been booming
worldwide. Today the market is saturated with costume jewels from costly
couture to cheaper-than-cheap copies of copies.
The success of the 1980s has been toned down by recession. But, it appears
that the costume jewellery market has been less badly affected than the
fashion trade. People prefer to spend money on lasting accessories rather
than on seasonal new clothes.
Jewellery is now an important money-spinning and marketing aspect of
couture. A piece of designer jewellery, a pair of Chanel earrings, for
example, has been the ideal and affordable way for women to wallow in the
designer identity parade. Just how much of the original designer's genius
they actually end up with is debatable and varies from house to house.
Costume jewellery is the jewellery women buy for themselves. But, as with
fine jewellery, there are signs that women no longer wish to be dictated to
by names and are slowly beginning to look further afield at the huge feast
of faux treasures on offer. There are also signs that the barriers between
real and costume jewellery are breaking down as more and more silver, gold
plated and semi-precious jewellery creeps onto the counters.
In 1989 Swarovski, the world's leading producer of cut crystal stones (all
those gems in costume jewels all over the world) launched its Daniel
Swarovski range of exclusive, couture accessories aimed at the very top of
the market and selling at the sort of prices that some real jewellery used
to command - anything from Dollars 700 (Pounds 463.50) to Dollars 5,000.
Masterminded in Paris by Rosemarie Le Callais, the accessories, including a
high profile range of costume jewellery, are designed by Herve Leger.
They quickly gathered high-profile fans. Ivana Trump and Catherine Deneuve
are devoted customers.
Christian Lacroix produces genuinely exciting and original couture
jewellery. It is a true reflection of his spirit and style and seems to have
more integrity than some because Lacroix himself is passionate about jewels
and has done a great deal to bring fashion and ornament closer together,
creating bejewelled and embroidered dresses and couture jewels that look
like fabrics.
Haute Couture jewels are normally ordered by couture customers as part of
the total look, and are rarely sold separately. His distinctive ready to
wear range, priced from about Pounds 30 to Pounds 600 also bears the Lacroix
stamp: lots of rich gilt metal, ritualistic emblems like crosses, crescents
and pyramids, huge ethnic chokers and of course vibrant colours in the form
of glass beads. At the London boutique opened some three months ago, the
jewellery has a steady following among Lacroix fans, particularly from
fashion students hankering after a little piece of his wild magic.
Karl Lagerfeld, the King of Whimsy, was largely responsible for introducing
wit and fantasy into couture jewellery in the l980s, first at Chloe then at
Chanel, where courageous jewellery, totally in the spirit of Coco Chanel,
plays a vital part. His haute couture jewels are inspired.
The Yves Saint Laurent couture range is under the direction of Loulou de la
Falaise, whose jewels fill a boutique on the rue Saint Honore in Paris. The
diffusion range, part of the YSL collection, including pens, lighters,
leather goods, is designed and distributed by Cartier as licensee, although
everything is approved by Saint Laurent himself and Pierre Berge. Designs
play up Saint Laurent's signature motifs like the heart and strong colours
like his vibrant deep blue. Since Cartier took over eight years ago, more
than 1m pieces have been sold worldwide. The Dior collection, made under
licence in Germany, is a mass-market product today. Fior, the London
retailer of fine quality 'real look jewellery' stopped stocking Dior
jewellery a few years ago because it was too widely available.
Several of today's shining stars of costume jewellery began anonymously
making couture jewellery for big names. Some of the most successful are
Herve van der Straeten, whose work is sold at Liberty and who made for
Mugler and Lacroix, Dinny Hall who produced ranges for Rifat Ozbek, and
Migeon et Migeon resin specialists who also made ornaments for Lacroix and
YSL.
Cobra and Bellamy, with a successful shop in Liberty and another in Sloane
Street, do a roaring trade in Chanel lookalike pearls. Cobra and Bellamy's
big rows of baroque pearls sell for around Pounds 100 to Pounds 200 and a
ravishing three-row collar for about Pounds 250.
Butler and Wilson, Britain's best, and world leaders in up-market costume
jewellery, have always offered a couture look at reasonable prices, but they
sell to jewellery addicts rather than to fashion followers.
Although business is undoubtedly tougher, Butler and Wilson is selling
classics and outrageous designs. and Simon Wilson says he is always amazed
at how well the 'mad' and expensive pieces sell - usually the designs he
creates as a strong image for the shops. Huge chokers at around Pounds 200,
although hardly a recessionary look, are just walking out.
Perhaps it is the escapism, the freedom and fantasy of costume jewellery
that we need to pierce the gloom and lift our spirits and confidence this
Christmas.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921121

