FT923-15699

FT  01 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Scandal touches emerging markets


STOCK markets in the developing countries have been exerting an increasingly
powerful attraction on investors in the developed world. The trend towards
liberalisation across the globe; the ready supply of equity stemming from
privatisation in countries as diverse as Mexico and Malaysia; the potential
for above-average investment returns in the developing world - all these
things have combined to promote capital transfers on a growing scale. Yet
the unfolding scandal on the Bombay Stock Exchange, one of Asia's more
febrile markets, raises an awkward question about future access to the
developed world's savings. Will malpractice kill off the potential inflow of
capital?
On the face of it, the Indian market, from which foreigners were excluded
until last month's Dollars 150m international equity offer by the Reliance
petrochemical group, has been shown to be a treacherous repository for risk
capital since prices started to slide at the end of April. The biggest of
India's exchanges, Bombay, which trades in nearly 700 companies, suffers
from an undercapitalised jobbing system. Liquidity is poor, insider trading
is rife and settlement is grossly inefficient.
That sounds like the very definition of a market worth avoiding. Yet it is
not so different from the British and American capital markets in the 19th
century. And the starting point for the recent surge in the Indian stock
market, which took the average earnings multiple to a Japanese-style 57 at
the peak, was not unreasonable. Investors were anticipating the increased
returns from a policy shift towards export-led growth and the opening up of
the economy to foreign direct investment.
Powerful incentive
The heady rise prompted by the prospect of liberalisation in the real
economy collided with a combination of over-regulation and under-supervision
in the financial sector. Because of tough regulations that required state
banks to put a high proportion of deposits into government paper at the
Reserve Bank of India, the banks had a powerful incentive to divert funds
into an inter-bank promissory note market.
This market in IOUs overheated as banks issued paper out of all proportion
to their capital. Money raised in the inter-bank market was then used for
speculation in the stock market. Since the central bank lacked the resources
and computer capacity to register securities transfers quickly or to monitor
events more generally, the outcome was disaster.
It is too early to be certain about the impact on foreign investors'
confidence. While the Reliance issue went ahead, Grasim, a large cement and
textiles concern, has been forced to delay a similar Dollars 90m issue
because of the halt in trading on the Bombay exchange. But outside investors
are not the chief victims of the scandals; and the extent of the damage may
ultimately depend on the Indian government's regulatory response.
Better regulation
At a time when foreign exchange is scarce in India the case for better stock
market regulation is not hard to make. For developing countries generally
that case may be reinforced by the fact that savings ratios in the developed
world have been in long-term decline and international bank lending has
temporarily been contracting. Competition for savings is set to intensify as
formerly state-controlled countries in Latin America and the former Soviet
bloc move progressively towards more open markets.
The importance of external capital can nonetheless be exaggerated. With a
savings ratio of 21 per cent, India would scarcely expect external portfolio
capital to make a dramatic impact. It is also noteworthy that of the four
spectacularly successful Asian dragons - Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea
and Taiwan - only South Korea relied heavily on foreign private capital to
finance its rapid economic growth. But elsewhere in the third world,
domestic savings ratios do not always have the support of Confucian, or
plain Asian, habits of thrift. More open capital markets can compensate for
that lack, especially when first-world investors feel short of third-world
assets. As long as the wider policy framework remains broadly liberal, greed
will outweigh fear. Foreign investors will probably take the odd stock
market scandal in their stride.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920701

