FT924-12002

FT  22 OCT 92 / Isosceles fails to sell Herman's


   By MAGGIE URRY


ISOSCELES, the heavily indebted buy-out vehicle for the Gateway food retail
chain, has lost a chance to sell Herman's Sporting Goods, its US subsidiary.
A buyer for the chain had been at an advanced stage of negotiations but
pulled out late last week.
This will be further bad news for Isosceles' shareholders and the banks
which are owed more than Pounds 1.2bn.
Rumours about the group's poor trading and unrest among its lenders have
been circulating in the City of London.
The company is said to be in discussions with its bankers over another
adjustment to its financial structure only two weeks after a refinancing -
its second since the Pounds 2.1bn takeover in 1989 - was approved by
shareholders.
Insiders say, however, that Isosceles' more pressing problem is its trading
performance, which is not meeting budgets and appears to be worsening.
The Herman's buyer which dropped out is believed to have been Odyssey, a New
York-based buy-out capital group.
Isosceles is thought to have other possible buyers for Herman's, although at
a lower price. It will have to start again with the usual lengthy
negotiating process with another purchaser.
Even the Odyssey bid is thought to have been at a price below the level to
which Isosceles had written down its investment in Herman's in its latest
accounts for the financial year to April 25 this year.
Isosceles, which has been trying to sell Herman's ever since its bid for
Gateway succeeded, cut Pounds 144.8m from the value of Herman's during the
year.
Herman's forms the bulk of Isosceles' 'investments held for disposal' which
were put at Pounds 57.7m in the balance sheet.
Herman's made a Dollars 1m (Pounds 600,000) operating profit in the 1991-92
financial year, its first operating profit since Isosceles took over
Gateway.
Herman's has suffered in the dismal US retailing market, although Isosceles
claims to have addressed many of the weaknesses in the business.
Last week Isosceles sold Wellworth, its northern Irish supermarket for
Pounds 128m, including repayment of debt. This was also at a price below
earlier hopes.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921022

