FT923-10938

FT  28 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Fyffes pays Pounds 48m for half share in
Swedish distributor


   By TIM COONE and HILARY BARNES


FYFFES, the Dublin-based fruit and vegetable distributor, has finally
secured a foothold in continental Europe by acquiring 50 per cent of Saba
Trading, a Swedish wholesale distributor with links into the Dutch, German
and Spanish markets, for SKr500m (Pounds 47.5m).
Ever since Fyffes' IPounds 60m (Pounds 56m) rights issue in June 1991, there
have been expectations of a strategic European acquisition which would give
it the strength to begin competing seriously with the other leading banana
and fruit distributors such as Chiquita and Dole.
Saba is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Axel Johnson, the Swedish trading
group, and the sale price marks a sharp reduction on the SKr4.1bn which Axel
Johnson paid to acquire the business from Carnegie in 1988. Saba currently
has turnover of Pounds 240m and reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 12.4m in
the year to end-August.
As part of the deal, Fyffes has options to acquire, or may be obliged to
acquire, the remaining half share over a number of years.
In 1990, Axel Johnson entered into a co-operation agreement with Spar Handel
of Hamburg, the fifth biggest consumer goods conglomerate in Germany, under
which Saba took on responsibility for Spar's overseas import activities and
the purchase of tropical and exotic fruits through FTK, a Dutch subsidiary
of Spar in which Saba took a 50 per cent stake. Saba also has a 47.5 per
cent interest in Compania Fresa, a Spanish fruit and vegetable distributor.
These links raise the question of whether Fyffes will continue with its
interest in acquiring PPI Del Monte.
Mr Carl McCann, Fyffes finance director, said: 'If it's available and at the
right price then we are interested.'
However, for Fyffes to take control of PPI Del Monte it would probably
either require a partner, or a new rights issue, as the Saba deal will have
reduced its cash reserves to some Pounds 47m. PPI Del Monte is expected to
be valued in the Dollars 500m to Dollars 800m (Pounds 260m to Pounds 420m)
range.
Mr McCann played down the possibility of either option saying: 'Saba has
cash in it and we remain in a strong financial position even after the
acquisition'.
One market analyst in Dublin described the deal as 'a good strategic step
for Fyffes, even if the price being paid at 13 times historic earnings is a
bit high'.
He said that annual banana consumption in Sweden had doubled from 9kg to
18kg per head over the past ten years, making it one of the strongest
markets worldwide.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920728

