FT923-9704

FT  04 AUG 92 / People: Civil servant flies into Smiths


There is a degree of symmetry, if not poetic justice, in the fact that Nigel
Hughes, formerly chief executive of the Defence Research Agency before he
was replaced by John Chis-holm who was lured from the private sector, should
himself have now touched down at a big public company.
Hughes, a scientist and engineer with a long career at the Ministry of
Defence, is the new director of technology at Smiths Industries' aerospace
and defence group, succeeding John Hollington, who is retiring after 36
years at Smiths.
'Any civil servant always has a question mark at the back of his mind as to
whether he can survive in the private sector,' says Hughes, who is 54. 'I am
delighted to have the opportunity to give it a whirl.'
He explains that since his early days working on aircraft blind landing
systems, he had worked alongside Smiths. 'I understand their product range
and technologies.'
Moving on from the Royal Aircraft Establishment to the Ministry of Defence
central staff in 1980, he became deputy chief scientific adviser in 1984.
Two years later he was promoted to become director of the Royal Signals and
Radar Establishment, whence he masterminded the launch of the Defence
Research Agency in April 1991.
But after two years as chief executive designate and chief executive of the
DRA, he is philosophical about the MoD's choice of Chisholm to continue the
job from last September. 'All is fair in love and war,' he says now.
From his new base in Cheltenham, Hughes will be in charge of the research
and development function relating to civil and defence avionics at Smiths -
which is understood to involve an annual research and development spend of
around Pounds 100m.
*****
David Skinner, the chief executive of the Co-operative Wholesale Society who
succeeded Sir Dennis Landau in the top job in June, is beginning to build a
senior team around him to press ahead with the movement's increasingly
commercial approach. John Owen (above left), 49, a lifelong Co-op man, is to
take on the position of controller of CWS Retail with responsibility for the
society's shops as well as its travel, opticians and funeral services
businesses. He will be complemented by Campbell Weir (above right), 57, most
recently general manager, food marketing, who will become controller of CWS
Production, which includes its farming, food manufacturing, milk delivery,
engineering, consumer care and branded products businesses.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920804

