FT921-549

FT  28 MAR 92 / The Long View: Canary that could not fly


   By BARRY RILEY


THE TIME-HONOURED justification for investing in land is that 'they ain't
making it any more.' But when it comes to developed property the supply is
not always so restricted. Right now 'they' have made far too much of it.
This week the world's biggest speculative real estate developer, Olympia &
York, has been forced to begin restructuring its debt of some Dollars 20bn,
which is nearly Dollars 1,000 for every citizen of Canada, the company's
base. As the saying goes, if you cannot repay Dollars 1,000 it is your
problem, but if you cannot repay Dollars 20bn then it is the bankers'
problem. The next step is that it becomes the politicians' problem.
In Britain, especially, there has been a colossal mistake over property.
London is, of course, the site of Olympia & York's most spectacular white
elephant at Canary Wharf, the flashing tower of which is tantalisingly
visible from the City, but frustratingly hard to reach. Quite apart from
that East End folly the City has an office vacancy rate of some 20 per cent.
Empty blocks loom everywhere, including one near the Financial Times. There
is said to be 30m square feet of vacant office space in central London.
Never mind, you might say, even if money is lost on such ventures, at least
the over-investment in commercial property could be put to good use. With
vast quantities of cheap, high quality space available the City ought to be
able to prosper mightily, given that in the past its high accommodation
costs have proved a serious competitive handicap.
But having made one appalling mistake the property industry is intent on
making another. Most City businesses are locked into long leases of up to 25
years on which rents can never go down. True, new tenants can shop around
for bargains but, even so, many developers are unwilling to drop their
asking rents to the market clearing level. The rent, multiplied according to
a formula, sets the value of the building. In many cases to accept the going
rate would be to admit bankruptcy, so it can seem better to both the
developer and his bankers to leave the property empty and pretend that a
market recovery is just around the corner. The way things are going, a vast
amount of space could remain empty for years.
Property crashes are nothing new, and there was an example almost as bad in
London in the mid-1970s. But that took place in an inflationary environment.
Interest rates peaked at about 15 per cent but inflation at one stage
reached 27 per cent. Those property companies that survived the immediate
crisis found that interest rates had fallen into single figures and they
could wait for rents and values to recover.
Today's situation is quite different. Interest rates are in double figures
even though inflation is only 4 per cent; in fact, rental inflation is
strongly negative, at about minus 10 per cent over the past year for office
space, nationally, and perhaps minus 25 per cent in the City of London.
Capital values have fallen even faster. If your liabilities are rolling up
at 10 to 15 per cent a year and your assets are declining at similar (or
worse) rates you cannot stay solvent very long, at any rate if you are as
dependent on bank finance as the typical property developer is.
Banks in Britain have a relatively small liability to Olympia & York, but
total UK banking lending to the property sector has reached Pounds 40bn,
having quadrupled inside 5 years. The total appears to have stabilised, but
the quality of this lending must be deteriorating all the time. How can the
banks ever get their money back? Property is highly illiquid, as millions of
home owners know to their cost; forced sales could send values crashing
further.
The property disaster happened because banks financed a large number of
different projects without having proper regard for the overcapacity that
was being generated; the banks also failed to understand the risks they were
taking in financing aggressive entrepreneurs.
Furthermore the banks were too complacent about the eventual demand for
completed and let property from long-term investors. Pension funds, for
instance, used to be big investors in real estate: in 1979 the average fund
had 22 per cent of its assets in UK property. But only a few of the biggest
pension funds now own a lot of property. The typical fund has just 3 or 4
per cent of its portfolio in commercial real estate. Nor is this likely to
change, unless property values reach giveaway levels.
According to a survey by Godwins, the pension consultants, 89 per cent of
investment managers see growth in share prices over the next year, and 82
per cent expect gilts to go up, but only 35 per cent feel the same way about
property.
Still, there was a certain amount of bargain hunting last year by UK
institutions, which invested probably about Pounds 2.5bn - a modest sum
indeed by the standards of the overhang of bank finance.
With the market opened up, property has become much riskier. As far as the
investment institutions are concerned commercial property has become vastly
downgraded as an investment over the past 25 years or so.
Once, a prime quality office block was regarded as an inflation-proof asset
in a market where an artificial scarcity was maintained by planners: rental
yields of 4 or 5 per cent were accepted.
It is different now, with sterling in a low-inflation currency bloc, and the
market glutted. There is nervous talk of 'crossover' with gilt-edged yields
on the grounds that for the foreseeable future a property investment will
carry a fixed income, and some risk on top. An average yield of just over 9
per cent has not quite reached gilt levels, however.
The property collapse is a postscript to Thatcherism: private sector
entrepreneurs celebrated new freedoms without realising that higher risks
required more prudent financing arrangements. A post-Thatcherite government
may have to pick up the pieces, if only as cheap office space for civil
servants.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920328

