FT921-1211

FT  25 MAR 92 / Labour shifts debate to health


   By IVO DAWNAY and RALPH ATKINS


MR NEIL KINNOCK last night moved the Labour party's election campaign on to
its strongest territory - the National Health Service - as three opinion
polls gave his party a lead over the Conservatives.
Amid Tory claims that Labour was in disarray over its economic policy, Mr
Kinnock challenged Mr John Major to a televised debate on the Conservatives'
plans for the health service.
Mr Major used an interview on BBC's Newsnight programme to brush aside the
challenge, and urged Mr Kinnock to respond to questions on Labour policy put
to him by the Conservative party.
The latest opinion polls upset Mr Major's hopes that a five-point
Conservative lead in a Harris poll yesterday marked a turning point.
Labour's lead ranges from one point in an ICM poll for today's Guardian to
four points in a Harris poll for ITN.
This highlights the apparent failure of the Conservatives' aggressive
taxation campaign to swing voters. The latest Financial Times 'poll of
polls' puts Labour two points ahead.
Senior ministers said last night the Conservatives would 'keep their nerve'
and continue to focus on the impact of Labour's tax and spending policies on
those on average, below-average, and middle incomes.
But there was an acknowledgement that the party must begin to turn the
campaign around by the weekend if Mr Major is to have a real chance of
returning to office with an overall majority.
In his first major speech of the campaign, Mr Norman Tebbit, the former
party chairman, signalled the beginning of an intense effort to win back
Conservative 'waverers' from the Liberal Democrats. The senior ministers
said the aim was to send a clear message to disgruntled supporters that a
vote for Mr Paddy Ashdown would let Mr Kinnock into Downing Street.
As Labour strategists seek to fix attention in the next few days on the NHS,
a politically provocative Labour election television broadcast last night
portrayed a tiered NHS in which the mother of one girl was able to pay for
private treatment while another girl suffered long NHS waiting lists. Labour
party officials said the film was based on a real case.
Mr Kinnock claimed the government had created a 'two-tier' system as part of
a scheme to break up and privatise health care. He pledged that he would
'get into every nook and cranny of the Tory plan so that they can't fool the
people this time'.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's health spokesman, promised a Labour government would
seek, within three years, to increase the proportion of patients who are
treated within three months of going on waiting lists.
Mr Kinnock's challenge, billed by party strategists as 'a critical juncture'
in Labour's campaign, foreshadowed the launch of the party's health
'manifesto' in London today.
But Mr Chris Patten, Conservative party chairman, challenged Mr Cook on how
he would pay for Labour's plans to make up alleged underfunding in the NHS.
Claiming Mr Cook had made a gaffe on a BBC phone-in programme by pledging to
resolve NHS underfunding within a single parliament, Mr Patten said the
issue of spending commitments went to the heart of the debate over Labour's
tax plans.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, the health minister, said spending on NHS patient
care had increased by 5.6 per cent this year and that Labour's commitments
were 'uncosted and undeliverable'.
The Conservatives continued broader attacks on Labour's proposals for credit
controls in the event of a consumer boom, focusing on reported comments by
Mr Kinnock that it would mean 'that we never again move into an era of 10,
11, 12, 15 and 17 per cent interest rates'.
The start of the NHS debate will trigger concerted efforts to prove that
Labour will not have the financial resources to meet its manifesto pledges.
Senior ministers are expected to argue that the impact of Labour's national
minimum wage will absorb up to half the Pounds 1bn in additional health
funding promised under Labour's 'shadow Budget' last week.
Labour officials dismiss this charge, saying the entire Pounds 1bn would go
directly to patient care. Increased wage costs of about Pounds 500m would be
met by the rise in Exchequer tax and National Insurance revenues arising
from the minimum wage proposal. The Liberal Democrats will be encouraged by
today's opinion polls as they suggest a small rise in their support.
The Mori poll for The Times puts Labour on 41 per cent, the Tories on 38 per
cent and the Liberal Democrats on 17 per cent. The ICM/Guardian poll has
Labour 40 per cent, Tories 39 per cent and Liberal Democrats 17 per cent.
The Harris poll for ITN has figures of 42 per cent, 38 per cent and 16 per
cent.
ELECTION 1992
Pages 10 and 11
Major keeps up attack with European accent
Total of overseas voters falls 10%
Formal pacts are scorned by Unionists
Labour will delay minimum wage proposals, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920325

