FT922-429

FT  27 JUN 92 / As they say in Europe: The Maastricht debate takes a
frivolous turn


   By JAMES MORGAN


FRIVOLITY, for the first time in months, if not years, peeps shyly from the
sombre pages of leading European papers. The lightheartedness may have been
partly inspired by the Irish referendum which I knew was going to be awful
because of the succession of ghastly German puns it would inspire. The
trouble is that the German for the Irish is Iren while 'to be mistaken' is
irren. You can imagine the rest, for each German word can have many others
built upon it.
The next referendum is in France where the domestic debate is flagging in
spite of the Versailles Congress which approved the changes needed to
implement the Maastricht Treaty. Liberation performed a sterling service -
several hundred words on how to pronounce the name of the 'little Batavian
city.' (This is a curious French habit, nothing is ever called by what it
is, thus France is always 'the Hexagon.') Nicole Gauthier opened with the
words, 'Tell me how you pronounce 'Maastricht' and I'll tell you who you
are.' It emerges that the Communist leader, Georges Marchais, pronounces it
'Maastriche' which nicely mixes the hated treaty with the verb 'to cheat' -
hence Maastricheries. One trouble is that the most famous of Dumas'
musketeer, d'Artagnan, died at Maastricht, which gives the city a place in
French mythology that it lacks elsewhere. As a result there was a row in the
National Assembly. A UDF deputy from what was once a royalist stronghold,
the Vendee used one pronunciation, a socialist cried, 'Say Maastricht]"
'Je prononce comme il faut]'
'No, in dying on the ramparts of Maastricht, d'Artagnan certainly said
'Maastrisht.' Let us remain French]' said the socialist.
Now in France there is always great searching for the journalistic device
that might be called the Contrived Coincidence, or Puerile Paradox. In
Britain this is seen in sentences such as, 'Although Professor Smith is the
leading authority in Oxford on medieval music, he is also a keen follower of
West Ham United.' In France the coincidence of the Versailles parliamentary
congress and the attempts by farmers to blockade the routes to Paris
provided fertile ground for the provincial press to draw gaudy parallels.
Thus La Republique des Pyrenees contrasted the two phenomena and continued,
'On one side the Jacquerie of peasants revolting against the reform of the
Common Agricultural Policy, on the other, under the gold of the Princes'
Wing, costumed deputies approving the Europe of Maastricht.' Rather lamely,
it had to conclude that this was not a repetition of ancient French revolts.
The peasant problem in France always surprises her neighbours. The image
conjured up in England by the words 'French peasants' is probably of a
cross-eyed crone throttling some poor stuffed goose outside a bucolic hovel
from which her bottled-scarred husband stares malignly through a broken
window pane. In France, however, the vision is Arcadian. I have been
treasuring for some weeks a huge article by Alain Peyrefitte in Le Figaro
entitled, 'Do we want the death of the French peasant?' It was the familiar
'true France' stuff, accusing the government of bowing to Washington in
accepting reform of the CAP. What Peyrefitte called the 'French exception'
was characterised as, 'A harmony, painfully acquired over time, between town
and country, between hi-tech industry and the permanent elements of labour
and pasture, between innovation and respect for tradition.'
It could have been taken from a speech by Marshall Petain, circa 1943, on
the Vichy government's theme of 'Patrie, Famille Travail.' Each nation has
its curious vision of rural life. In Germany it is all mixed up with organic
food and organic societies, building blocks of the nation and the need to
keep in touch with basic values. The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung reports
that 70 per cent of the German people go for walks in the 'mythic' German
forest quite regularly in search of 'cleansing of the soul.' In Britain an
upper middle class, mummified chintz-and-thatch fantasy peers out from the
carefully crafted pictures in glossy magazines. But at least in Britain few
believe that enormous subsidies are essential for the maintenance of the
rural idyll.
The Italians probably have the right attitude towards the countryside. Rural
life is coming into fashion in Italy because it now seems marginally less
intolerable than life in the cities. And for one nation at least, the
countryside is a gold mine - Ireland gets six times as much from the CAP as
it pays out. Children always vote for Christmas, as an Irish colleague put
it.
James Morgan is economic correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920627

