FT922-4264

FT  06 JUN 92 / International Company News: Pirelli backed on Continental
voting


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


GERMANY'S leading small shareholder association yesterday backed Pirelli,
the Italian tyre company, in its forthcoming attempt to overcome shareholder
voting restrictions at Continental, the German tyre group.
The Deutsche Schutzvereinigung fur Wertpapierbesitz (DSW) - a
Dusseldorf-based organisation which represents the interests of small
shareholders and has about 10,000 members - said that the preservation of
voting right restrictions is not in the interest of the mass of shareholders
in Continental.
This declaration, made in an open letter to the management board of
Continental, is a propaganda blow for Continental and Morgan Grenfell, its
merchant bank, ahead of a shareholders' meeting on July 3. Pirelli will for
the second year running challenge a rule which limits voting rights in
Continental to a maximum of 5 per cent per individual shareholder, no matter
how big that shareholder's holding.
The challenge represents a new phase of hostilities between the two groups,
which were in merger talks for almost 18 months before negotiations broke
down last December. Analysts suggest that Pirelli wants to get rid of the
rule so that it can sell its shares in the German company at as high a price
as possible.
Continental and Morgan Grenfell argue that the main reason for keeping the
voting restriction in place is that it serves to protect small shareholders.
The letter from the DSW says that shareholders' best interests are served if
they are allowed to have voting rights commensurate with the level of their
economic interest in a company, and that it will be encouraging its members
to vote with Pirelli.
Pirelli - which owns 5 per cent of Continental directly and has options over
another 34 per cent - is pressing ahead with a second attempt to overturn
the restriction despite a court ruling in Hanover last week which annulled
the outcome of shareholders' vote on the issue last March.
Last March, 65.97 per cent of shareholders voted in favour of the removal of
the restriction. A simple majority of over 50 per cent was required to get
the motion approved, but the restriction remained while the vote was
challenged in court.
Morgan Grenfell said yesterday that it was confident that a majority of
independent shareholders - those not associated with Pirelli - would vote
against Pirelli's motion on July 3. It argues that in a country without
rigorous takeover rules, the voting restriction provides a mechanism for
stopping predators taking control of a company without having to make a full
offer to all shareholders. It is not a mechanism for protecting incumbent
management from being dislodged by shareholders, the bank argues.
It is not known how many shares DSW or its members own in Continental. The
DSW declaration may encourage small shareholders actively to vote in favour
of the Pirelli motion, rather than leaving the decision to the big German
financial institutions which have custody over private individuals' shares.
Continental and Morgan Grenfell have been visiting these institutions in
recent weeks in order to influence the decision they take on behalf of their
clients.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920606

