FT924-11563

FT  24 OCT 92 / Finance and the Family: Diana's happy ending - Not all
offshore trust stories are sad


   By PAUL HAM


OFFSHORE trusts have lost some of their allure since the 1991 Finance Bill
imposed taxes on capital profits made from offshore trusts set up after
April 5 1991.
But they still have many uses for non-UK domiciled foreigners resident in
the UK. Trusts set up by non-UK domiciled individuals are still fully exempt
from UK taxes (although the law on domicile is likely to change next
spring.)
Consider the case of David and Diana Trottwell. David Trottwell, a South
African businessman, married Diana in the early 1970s and the couple settled
in Britain, but David retained some business interests in South Africa.
The Trottwells did well in the UK during the 1980s, and their assets grew on
the back of rising share prices and a booming property market. They had two
children - Charles and Lucy - a dog called Shepherd, and a house in Henley,
Oxfordshire.
By the late 1980s the wind of fortune began to change for the Trottwells in
the UK. David Trottwell lost most of the money he had made during the 1980s
on bad investments. He tried to forget his troubles in various indulgences -
younger women, a sports car and certain optional extras. But his hobbies
took their toll on Diana and their marriage started to turn sour.
Their son, meanwhile, dropped out of university to join a religious cult,
which placed special emphasis on private donations from wealthy, disaffected
youths. The daughter still had another three years of expensive boarding
school to complete.
About this time, David Trottwell was offered a good price for his South
African business interests which he sold for a substantial gain. He did not
take UK tax advice but went to Bermuda and settled the funds in a trust
which he used from time to time to maintain his lifestyle and Lucy's
education.
In 1990 David Trottwell died suddenly from a heart attack. Diana was left
with little means of visible support and substantial debts.
She was advised to sell the Henley pile and move back to Brighton, the city
of her upbringing, where she found herself operating a bed and breakfast to
make ends meet. She often considered tracking down her husband's offshore
assets, but was dissuaded by fear of a huge tax bill, a tax penalty, or
worse.
Her son's religious cult had long ceased pestering the Trottwells household
for donations but her daughter's school fees were cutting a swathe through
her meagre income.
If the measure of desperation is relative to our expectations, Diana
Trottwell had now grown desperate. She resolved to unearth her late
husband's offshore pot of gold . . . whatever the tax risk]
Diana expected, or hoped, that she was eligible for some form of income,
although memories of her husband's girlfriends lent little sustenance to
this fantasy.
She made a few inquiries of her late husband's wealthy business colleagues
who put her in touch with a solicitor who was a specialist in offshore trust
matters. She felt more confident going to a solicitor than an accountant
because she felt she would get more sympathy.
Much to her amazement she was told that apart from what her husband had
brought into the country, 'there was absolutely no tax payable.' Her husband
had died non-UK domiciled.
Flushed with hope she contacted her late husband's trustees through her
solicitor. There was a bit of a problem proving to them that she was who she
said she was, but thereafter she found them most co-operative and helpful.
She discovered that her husband's trust, which was a discretionary trust for
herself and her family, held Pounds 10m. In her lawyer's own words 'It is
quite remarkable to see the sense of relief on the faces of those who,
having lived for years in penury, discover their family assets.'
But it was not all milk and honey. Diana was told that in addition to the
trust deed, her late husband had also left a detailed letter of wishes. This
specifically instructed the trustees to provide for her out of income,
provided that the Trottwells had not divorced and she had not remarried, but
specifically excluded her from any capital distribution.
Diana however wanted to move back to her friends in Henley, and into a house
of her own.
After some persuasion and a legal opinion from her solicitor, the trustees
agreed to provide Diana with a regular income (on which she would pay tax)
and invest in a house for her in Henley, Oxfordshire, in which she could
live but not own.
Her solicitor advised how best to structure the purchase to avoid various
tax traps and pitfalls. Diana happily trotted off to Henley to find a house
for the trustees to buy.
The trustees were also persuaded to set aside a fund for Lucy to provide for
her education and future requirements.
But when it came to Charles, they were quite adamant. It had been her late
husband's wish that while he remained a member of this odd religious cult he
was not to receive a penny, neither income, benefits or capital.
Diana was deeply disappointed because she saw this as a final wedge which
would drive her son away, but the trustees could not be persuaded otherwise.
Her solicitor said it was a waste of time even to try.
Diana lives happily enough in Henley in a house owned by the trust, with a
regular income. In a funny way, she says she missed the bed and breakfast in
Brighton. But with Pounds 10m in a Swiss bank she says, on second thoughts,
that she could never dream of having paying guests in her house again.
Paul Ham is consulting editor to Offshore Financial Review, the Financial
Times publication for the offshore financial services sector. The background
for this case was provided by Caroline Garnham and David Way, trust and tax
solicitors at City firm of solicitors, Simmons & Simmons. Clients' names
have been changed.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921024

