FT923-15445

FT  02 JUL 92 / UK Company News: A question of maintaining levels - The
water industry's efforts to satisfy the regulator


   By ANGUS FOSTER


ONE PHRASE has tripped, somewhat glibly, from the tongues of the privatised
water industry's chairmen as they rolled out their results over the past
month.
'The need to balance shareholders' with customers' interests' has become
their mantra, and has prefaced every sound-bite.
But with companies announcing average dividend increases of 10 per cent, and
profit increases ranging from 2 to 30 per cent thanks to price increases,
shareholders have more to celebrate than customers.
Dividend growth compares to about 3 per cent for the market, and confirmed
the attraction of water companies as high yielding, but low risk,
investments. These defensive qualities came to the fore last week, as water
shares rallied while the market feared dividend cuts at BP and elsewhere.
Dividend cover has also remained conservative, in spite of rising interest
costs, as companies' huge capital investment programmes mount up. Yorkshire
Water, for example, raised its dividend 10.2 per cent, but dividend cover
was unchanged at 2.9 times.
The reporting season was largely free of the acrimony of 12 months ago.
Profits and salaries have risen less dramatically.
The relationship with Ofwat has improved and water companies say both sides
now understand each other better. Mr Ian Byatt, Ofwat's director general,
has appeared less confrontational of late, although his full views will only
become clear next month when he will officially comment on the results.
'I think the regulator has been through a learning curve as well and is now
doing a good job,' said Mr Nick Hood, chairman of Wessex Water.
Growth in companies' 'core', or regulated, water and sewerage business has
been predictable, rising in line with prices. Recession affected companies
in the south because of falling industrial consumption and empty houses.
Thames Water estimated that recession reduced revenues by Pounds 16m while
companies like Northumbrian, where recession has been less severe, reported
little impact.
But outside the core, in the 'enterprise' businesses which companies set up
to generate unregulated earnings, results have been poor.
Welsh Water said Hamdden, its hotel arm, had a 'disappointing' year while a
loss-making environmental services associate was sold at a loss to SAUR.
Southern Water also sold a similar associate, again to SAUR, which required
provisions of 'several hundred' thousand pounds, the company said.
Biffa, Severn Trent's waste management arm which was acquired last year,
made annualised operating profits of Pounds 12.5m, well short of the amount
needed to cover Pounds 25m in interest charges on the purchase price.
Original hopes for Biffa to meet its interest costs this year are 'unlikely'
to be realised, Severn Trent said.
Other non-core results were mixed. Northumbrian said its enterprise division
increased sales threefold, but operating results were 'insignificant'. North
West and Thames announced small profits from non-core businesses, but
pre-tax margins were below 3 per cent in both cases.
Companies claim it is too early to judge the success, or otherwise, of
diversification. 'This has to be seen as a long term investment,' Mr John
Bellak, chairman of Severn Trent, said of Biffa.
Part of the problem may be structural. Mr Robert Miller-Bakewell, analyst at
County NatWest, talks of the 'Hanson syndrome'.
'The bigger water companies have such a large critical mass that developing
a non-core is tricky,' he said.
Non-core businesses are partly designed as a hedge against tightening
regulation of core water and sewerage services. Ofwat will conduct a
periodic review in 1994 of companies' K numbers, the amount by which average
prices can be raised above the rate of inflation.
But the problem for the companies, and for investors, is that the
regulators' views on non-core earnings, and how he intends to 'ring fence'
them from regulated profits, are still under discussion and will remain hazy
until after the periodic review.
'The question is whether it has been right to try and expand earnings
rapidly outside the core or concentrate on the core, as Anglian has done,'
said Mr Bill Dale, analyst at SG Warburg. 'We may not know the answer for
two or three years,' he added.
Despite occasional hiccups in the non-core, the three best regarded water
companies - Wessex, Northumbrian and Yorkshire - reported results as
expected and emerged with their reputations intact.
Wessex and Northumbrian are seen as small enough to generate meaningful
non-core businesses. Wessex's joint venture with Waste Management
International of the US made a first contribution of Pounds 900,000,
slightly ahead of expectations. Yorkshire more than made up for higher than
expected provisions through improved efficiencies. It has now accelerated
its investment programme.
Elsewhere, only Welsh came out badly. Apparent back-tracking on its
diversification plans, and a promise to extend price abatements until 1995
unnerved investors who must now asses how vulnerable the company's perceived
high K number is to regulatory action.
This year, profits growth for the industry is set to slow, although average
dividend increases of 10 per cent are expected to continue.
Average water charges, which rose 15.5 per cent last year, are set to
increase by only 9.7 per cent in 1992-93. This includes voluntary abatements
of price rises by all companies following pressure from Ofwat.
Decelerating profits are also a result of companies' increasing debt burden
as the industry pays for some Pounds 28bn of capital expenditure this
decade. Most companies have gone, or are about to go, from holding net cash
to net debt.
As the periodic review approaches, customers are becoming more important.
Ofwat wants companies to ask customers their views on pricing and levels of
service before submitting business plans for the second half of the decade.
Ofwat is also looking at ways to measure companies' relative efficiencies
and customer service.
'Any company which does well on customer service will be viewed kindly and
allowed a more generous K,' said Mr Dale.
If so, the chairmen's mantra of a balancing act may have to be seen to swing
back a little from shareholders towards the consumer.
 ------------------------------------------------
HOW THE WATER COMPANIES COMPARE
 ------------------------------------------------
                   % growth          % growth
                pre-tax profits   net dividend
Company         1992*     1993+   1992*  1993+
 ------------------------------------------------
Anglian         12        12      10.3    9.8
Northumbrian    30        14.6    10      9.8
North West       7         8.7     9      9.3
Severn Trent     6.4       7.5    10     10
Southern        19         4.3    10     10
South West       2         5.6     9.8    9.4
Thames          11.3       9.3     9.7    9.4
Welsh            8         4.4     9.7   10.3
Wessex          16         7.8    10.2   10.1
Yorkshire        8.6      13.8    10.2   10.3
 ------------------------------------------------
*Actual
+Consensus forecasts
 ------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920702

