FT922-4383

FT  05 JUN 92 / China threatens construction schedule for new HK airport


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


CHINA'S delay in approving financing plans for Hong Kong's new airport is
causing concern among managers of the HKDollars 120bn (Pounds 8.5bn) project
about slippage of the tight construction schedule.
Under the memorandum of understanding signed last September by Mr John
Major, the UK prime minister, and Li Peng, his Chinese counterpart, China
agreed to take only one month in consultations to approve the airport's
financing plans.
The Hong Kong government gave China detailed plans in early April, but has
so far received no final response as informal consultations continue. The
airport and its associated roads, railway and bridge are due to open before
June 1997, when sovereignty over Hong Kong reverts from London to Beijing.
If agreement is not reached, the subject could be discussed by Mr Major and
Li when they meet next week at the earth summit in Rio de Janeiro. The delay
may cast doubt on what was achieved by the memorandum of understanding,
under which China won considerable involvement in the project - as well as a
visit to Beijing by Mr Major to sign the deal - in return for agreeing to
the airport's going ahead.
Hong Kong government officials dismiss concerns about the construction
timetable, saying that no work is being held up by the delay. But Hong Kong
needs China's blessing in order to bring the financing plans before the
local legislature, which ends its session on July 16.
'If we slip beyond that date it could cause significant delays to the
project,' said one senior official. 'The Chinese understand that.'
One official said the Chinese were worried about the extent of contingent
liabilities which would be inherited by Hong Kong's post-1997 government,
particularly HKDollars 12.5bn in 'callable equity' - financing which the
government would provide, but only if necessary.
Hong Kong's negotiators have indicated their desire to settle the matter but
do not believe the Chinese have come completely clean on all their concerns.
Some believe the Chinese were upset by Mr Major's positive reception in
London of Mr Martin Lee, leader of the opposition United Democrats party in
Hong Kong.
Others, however, believe that Chinese civil servants prefer to push tough
decisions up to a higher level.
'Decisions are dangerous if you live in that system,' says one observer.
'They understand the need to resolve it but understanding and meeting it are
two different things. It is better if you can get your superior to take the
decision.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920605

