FT924-11482

FT  26 OCT 92 / Legal-aid proposals stun lawyers


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


PLANS for a radical overhaul of the legal-aid system outlined at the weekend
by Lord Mackay, the Lord Chancellor, left solicitors stunned and confused.
Although details of the plans were not spelled out, the immediate reaction
of most solicitors at the annual conference of the Law Society  - the
solicitors' governing body - was that they would result in a dramatic
reduction in the number of people eligible for financial assistance and a
severe restriction on the right of clients to choose their own lawyer.
One lawyer predicted that the Lord Chancellor's vision of the future for
publicly funded legal services, concentrating blocks of work in the hands of
larger legal-aid firms, meant 'the end of the small practitioner within five
years'.
Lord Mackay told the Birmingham conference that escalating legal aid costs
and pressure on public expenditure meant no element of the system was
sacrosanct.
Legal-aid expenditure had doubled in the last four years and was likely to
reach Pounds 2bn by the middle of the decade. 'This rate of growth cannot be
allow to continue,' he said.
Lord Mackay confirmed that he would push ahead with the introduction of
standard fees for criminal legal-aid work by the end of the year and hoped
to extend standard fees to civil work soon. He outlined proposals designed
to ensure that legally aided clients were confronted with the cost of going
to court at the beginning of a case. Clients should pay higher levels of
contributions towards the costs of their cases and means testing for legal
aid should conform more with means testing for other benefits, he said.
Solicitors, rather than the Legal Aid Board, should be made responsible for
collecting contributions and competitive tendering for blocks of legal-aid
cases should be a long-term goal.
Solicitors were particularly alarmed by the proposal that they should be
responsible for collecting contributions.
Mr John Appleby, a member of the society's governing council, said that
might discourage litigation and would place an impossible financial burden
on legal-aid lawyers.
A significant proportion of clients already backed away from litigation when
they were told they would be expected to pay a contribution and a further 33
per cent who agreed to pay contributions subsequently defaulted.
If the burden of chasing up that money was passed to solicitors it would
turn them into 'debt collectors', he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921026

