FT921-15334

FT  10 JAN 92 / Arts: PLG Young Artists - Purcell Room


   By DAVID MURRAY


For a week every January, the invaluable Park Lane Group stages pairs of
concerts nightly on the South Bank, with up-and-coming performers in
contemporary music - no longer '20th-century music', since our century is on
its last legs. This year Luciano Berio and Alexander Goehr are the 'featured
composers', along with 46 more: a generally younger bunch than in past
years, and less oriented to the old Darmstadt-Dartington axis. That may have
something to do with this year's programme-committee chairman, the pianist
Andrew Ball, a tireless exponent of new music.
Still, some of the most interesting music has come from the 60-year-old
Goehr. A piano piece he wrote for Peter Serkin in 1988 has acquired four
sibling pieces, collectively entitled  ..in real time because they are
constructed in strict temporal proportions.
Though the set is due for its full premiere at Southampton University in
May, Garth Hall was allowed to give the first piece its UK premiere on
Tuesday, and Andrew Zolinsky to introduce II, III and IV on Thursday.
My ears are not well tuned to Goehr's quasi-neo-classical experiments from
the earlier '80s; but these new studies are original, fascinating and most
un-Goehr-like in their sensuous appreciation of the sound of the instrument.
Furthermore, the lovely transparency of their sound is inseparable from
their ingenious musical means. Mostly the writing is quite spare (though not
undecorated), except in the dramatic and rhythmically elaborate no. III; the
harmony, however, has rich implications which expand the canvas of each
piece. Curiously enough, the piano-music they most often recall is late and
late-middle Skryabin, which must be an accident.
Between them, Hall and Zolinsky also delivered Berio's four studies after
the Four Elements. Hall excelled in Air (which despite its theme echoes
Debussy's 'Poissons d'or' pretty generously), Zolinsky in the spectacular
Fire (here 'Feux d'artifice' was more apropos). Hall dispatched Colin
Matthews' 5 Studies in Velocity neatly, though with a touch of rhythmic
looseness that affected his Samuel Barber sonata too; Zolinsky made
something magical of Karen Tanaka's tiny, refined 'Crystalline', and boarded
Poul Ruders' doughty, obsessive Dante-Sonata with assurance.
There isn't space to sing the praises of Tuesday's sensational
piano-accordionist James Crabb - the 'classical' repertoire for his
instrument is rapidly increasing, luckily - nor of Neyire Ashworth, a
clarinettist of terrific character and imagination. Never mind: their
careers will take care of themselves.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920110

