FT924-6334

FT  21 NOV 92 / Markets: Make bonds find the balance - Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


BOND FUNDS are the flavour of the month in the world of personal finance.
Many fund management groups will be hoping that the public gets the message.
They have been battling for years to get British savers to move their funds
from cash into equity products. Persuading investors to buy bonds, which
allow a greater degree of security and certainty of return, might be an
easier task.
British savers are not stupid. The reasons they have been so reluctant to
move into bonds are twofold. The first is inflation; the high rate
prevailing in the British economy since the 1960s has taken a big dent out
of capital invested in fixed-interest securities.
Secondly, during the late 1980s, short term interest rates have been higher
than the returns on long term bonds (an inverted yield curve in the jargon).
Thus, there was little incentive for investors to remove cash from building
societies.
The situation has changed drastically over the past year. Short-term
interest rates have fallen substantially, with the result that the yield
curve has a traditional upward-sloping shape. In other words, the yields on
long-dated gilts are above base rates.
Private investors have thus been piling into the gilts causing problems in
the market, with a back-log in settlement, because of volume of business.
In addition, there has been a steady stream of bond fund launches in the
unit trust sector. Some of these funds have grown substantially - Mercury's
Global Bond fund, launched in early 1991, has almost Pounds 200m under
management.
Suddenly everyone seems to be in favour of the fixed-interest market. Five
out of the six financial advisers polled on Page III this week picked bonds,
or bond funds, in their income-producing portfolios.
Investors will be aware of one of the golden rules of personal finance; when
everybody in the industry is plugging a particular product, that is the
worst time to buy it.
There is a possibility that the rule could apply to the enthusiasm for
bonds. In the UK, devaluation and the recent rapid reductions in base rates
could cause inflation to rise; and the government's deteriorating financial
position means that the Treasury will have a lot of gilts to sell over the
next few years. Both factors would normally be bad news for gilt prices.
On the other hand, institutional fund managers, such as pension funds and
insurance companies, have plenty of scope to buy more gilts. Only 3 per cent
of the average pension fund was invested in gilts at the end of 1991,
according to Combined Actuarial Performance Services; in 1982, that
proportion was 19 per cent. So it is possible that the extra supply of gilts
could be absorbed.
Given that so many complex factors affect the bond market, should the
private investor deal on his own behalf or opt for the management skills of
a bond fund?
Fund managers claim, unsurprisingly, that their expertise is vital.
According to Whittingdale, its short-dated gilts fund has outperformed the
FT's short dated gilt index over the past one, three and five years.
The services of a fund manager do not always come cheap. Initial charges can
be 5 per cent and annual charges 1 per cent. That takes quite a chunk out of
returns when gilt yields are only 8-9 per cent.
The good news is that competition has helped reduce these fees, with no
initial charge at all on two recent Abtrust fund launches.
A further potential problem with bond funds is that gains are subject to
capital gains tax, unlike profits on direct holdings in gilts. However,
since most investors do not use up their annual Pounds 5,800 CGT threshold,
this is only a significant factor for a few.
There is no 'right' answer to the question of bond funds versus direct
investment. If you are buying just one or two gilts, and you intend to hold
them to redemption, it is probably alright to deal on your own. But if you
intend to have a large proportion of your savings in bonds, and you are not
financially sophisticated, then it is probably worth paying for the
manager's services.
It is almost certainly best to opt for a fund if you are thinking of
investing in overseas bonds. There are sound arguments for doing so as,
again on Page III, some advisers state.
Many other countries are going through the same recessionary problems as the
UK. In Europe, particularly, the high interest rates imposed by the
Bundesbank have proved a drag on economic activity.
The hope is that interest rates will fall (and bond prices rise) across
Europe once the Germans decide to loosen the deflationary grip on their
economy. Given that the record of European countries on inflation is
generally better than that of the UK, Continental bond yields may be able to
fall further than those in the UK.
There is of course an exchange rate risk, namely that the pound will rise
against other currencies. That might seem an unlikely prospect, but some
believe sterling could rebound once European interest rates start to fall.
The answer is probably that overseas bond funds, like gilts, should form
part of, rather than all of, a portfolio.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921121

