FT924-12103

FT  22 OCT 92 / World slowdown strips gloss from ICI: The company is
struggling and poised to deliver more bad news


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


NEXT THURSDAY, Imperial Chemical Industries, Britain's biggest manufacturer,
reports its third-quarter results. They will make grim reading.
Analysts, who had underestimated the duration and severity of the world
economic slow-down, have been busy cutting their estimates for the group's
full-year pre-tax profits from Pounds 756m to as low as Pounds 600m. That
compares with peak profits of Pounds 1.53bn in 1989.
ICI is proposing to demerge itself, separating its pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals and most of its specialities operations into ICI Bioscience,
leaving industrial chemicals, paints, materials, explosives and regional
businesses in a new ICI.
Both future businesses have problems. ICI Bioscience is faced with falling
earnings from its pharmaceuticals division, while the new ICI is grappling
with considerable difficulties in its industrial chemicals operations.
Materials and specialities divisions are also suffering weak demand and
lower prices.
Most of the new ICI's operations are suffering from the world slowdown.
Trading over the past quarter for all of the large chemical groups has been
terrible. Dow, BASF and Rhone-Poulenc have all issued gloomy trading
statements. The slowing German economy has added to the sector's woes. For
ICI, July and August were weaker than normal and there was no tangible
upturn in September, according to Kleinwort Benson, the broker.
Industrial chemicals, allocated to the new ICI, was once the company's
cash-cow. In 1989, it generated operating profits of Pounds 452m on turnover
of Pounds 3.8bn. Kleinwort Benson believes the division could make a profit
this year of Pounds 45m on turnover of Pounds 3bn. The operations could well
be in losses this quarter.
The paints division, which represented about 12 per cent of the group's 1991
sales and 11 per cent of operating profits, is also suffering. ICI is the
world's largest paint producer, but poor demand in Europe and a weak dollar
have hit volumes. The dismal state of the UK's DIY market has done little
for the decorative paints business.
A recent seminar on the business suggested there could be rationalisation
among the paints division's 60 sites around the world. Mr Albert Richards at
Credit Suisse First Boston, believes possible disposals include the steel
coil, powder paints, wood coatings and a small marine business. These
represent about 10 per cent of sales. This week the division sold its
aerospace coatings business to Courtaulds, the UK materials group.
ICI's own materials division lost Pounds 20m last year on turnover of Pounds
2bn. Hoare Govett, the broker, expects the business to make operating
profits of Pounds 36m this year. The films operations are probably losing
money and overcapacity in acrylics is pulling down margins. The advanced
materials business is being downsized.
Meanwhile, ICI Bioscience's future operations also face problems. The
pharmaceuticals division, which contributed 12 per cent of turnover last
year and 52.1 per cent of profits, is beset by difficulties.
Last year the division made operating profits of Pounds 538m on turnover of
Pounds 1.59bn providing margins of 33.9 per cent - an impressive figure,
even by pharmaceuticals industry standards. Much of that profit was
generated by Tenormin, a beta-blocker used for cardiovascular treatment,
which had sales last year of more than Pounds 600m.
However, Tenormin's patents expired during September last year in the US,
which provided about 45 per cent of sales. The company had expected sales to
fall 50 per cent over two years as its position was attacked by generic
competitors. But sales have fallen further, faster than expected: July
prescriptions were down 45 per cent on the previous year.
ICI did, at least, expect to lose Tenormin revenues. This year's unexpected
blow was the withdrawal, because of side-effects, of Temafloxacin, an
antibiotic the company licensed from Abbott of the US to fill a gap in its
product line.
The division is trying to compensate with new products such as Zoladex,
Zestril and Diprivan, but their combined sales were less than Pounds 400m
last year. The division's profits and turnover are likely to be lower than
last year.
ICI Bioscience's agrochemicals and seeds businesses, the world's second
largest after those of Ciba-Geigy of Switzerland, are also suffering. The
division generated 10.3 per cent of ICI's sales and 13.9 per cent of
operating profits last year.
In the short-term, sales have been hit by poor weather. In the longer term,
volumes are likely to be hit by recent reforms of the European Community's
common agricultural policy. The division could make a loss in the second
half - always its weakest six months - of Pounds 19m.
Specialities businesses are also being affected by the recession. Last year
they generated 9.6 per cent of sales and 3.4 per cent of profits. They may
make Pounds 60m this year, according to Kleinwort Benson.
Not all the news for ICI is bad. More than 80 per cent of the group's
revenues come from outside the UK, so the devaluation of sterling will
contribute to profits. Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the broker, reckons this
could add Pounds 120m to ICI's bottom line next year.
Other good news includes the European Commission's decision to allow its
assets swap of fibres for Du Pont's acrylics businesses. This provides
Pounds 250m in cash and opens the way for other deals. BASF has said it has
considered buying ICI's polypropylene operations.
Nevertheless, the outlook for ICI remains poor. The market will be watching
ICI carefully over the next few months to see whether the group makes any
further unexpected moves.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921022

