FT924-8112

FT  12 NOV 92 / Officials suspected chemical weapons link with Matrix


   By DANIEL GREEN and ALAN FRIEDMAN


BRITISH government officials suspected in 1988 that equipment being exported
by Matrix Churchill, the company at the centre of a growing political uproar
over defence-related sales to Baghdad, was destined for chemicals weapons
factories in Iraq.
Precision machine tools went to Iraq through Industrias Cardoen of Chile,
one of Baghdad's leading arms suppliers in the run up to the invasion of
Kuwait in August 1990.
The suspicion that these were 'apparently destined to be incorporated into a
chemicals weapons factory' was voiced by officials of the Export Credits
Guarantee Department (ECGD) in confidential Whitehall documents submitted
during the unsuccessful prosecution of three former directors of Matrix
Churchill, the Midlands based machine tool company
The ECGD, which underwrites loans for export contracts, was then
government-owned. It has since been partly privatised.
The emergence of a possible contribution by Matrix Churchill to Iraq's
chemical weapons effort is particularly controversial given the uses to
which the regime of Saddam Hussein put such weapons during its campaign
against Kurdish rebels.
The disclosure of the ministers' decision came as opposition parties
unleashed fresh allegations over the government's role in the Iraqi arms
build-up and subsequent attempts at cover-ups. Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal
Democrat leader, accused Mr John Major of having 'personal and specific
knowledge' that machine tools had been exported by Matrix Churchill to Iraq
for munitions manufacture.
Labour accused the government of lying over the use of 'public interest
immunity' procedures signed by ministers to try to prevent the release of
sensitive documents which were being sought for use in the trial of the
former Matrix Churchill directors.
The fears that British machine tools were destined for Saddam's chemical
weapons programme emerge in a series of exchanges between the Cardiff
headquarters of the ECGD branch which deals with short-term loans and the
regional office in Birmingham.
According to the documents, the British company initially approached the
ECGD in August 1988 for export credits 'on this arms/chemical manufacturer'.
Export cover for about Pounds 6.5m was approved, according to one internal
ECGD note.
The note goes on to say that the ECGD later learnt that Cardoen was 'a chief
supplier to the Iraqi air force', adding: 'It seems they are involved in
chemicals weapons manufacture.'
In the same note, Mr Robert Lemin, an associate director of Sedgwicks, the
insurance broker to Matrix Churchill, also voiced concerns to the ECGD that
sales to Cardoen 'would be used to manufacture munitions'.
This view was repeated almost two years later in Cardiff in a letter from Mr
Paul St John Miller, director of the ECGD's Birmingham regional office.
He wrote: 'Goods were apparently destined for Iraq to be incorporated into a
chemicals weapons factory.'
Industrias Cardoen was one of the leading suppliers of arms to Baghdad
during the 1980s. It is estimated to have sold nearly Pounds 330m worth of
cluster bombs to Baghdad as well as plans for a turnkey bomb factory that
was built in Iraq.
There is no evidence in the documents that Department of Trade and Industry
approved the sale of this equipment knowing it would be used in Iraq's
chemical weapons programme.
Nor is there any evidence that ministers were informed of the suspicions
concerning these deals.
The documents explain that, one of the reasons that Matrix used Cardoen to
export to Iraq was that the Chilean company provided a means for the Iraqis
to pay their suppliers.
Mr Miller wrote in November 1990: 'Cardoen would be paid by the Iraqis in
local currency and then use that currency with Iraqi government authority,
to purchase crude oil from . . . Iraq. That crude oil to be on-sold
immediately.'
This allowed Iraq to avoid using hard currency while Cardoen would receive
dollars at the end of the deal.
Another document, drawn up in October 1990, describes how a Ministry of
Defence working group drew parallels between the British contribution to
Iraqi arms manufacturing capabilities and the 1989 scandal over a German
project to build a chemicals weapons plant in Libya.
The working group singled out 'our machinery manufacturers' as helping 'Iraq
towards the setting up of a major arms R&D and production industry'.
Page 10
Henderson was given immunity in US
Major challenged over personal knowledge
Matrix director may sue Customs
Struggle to spike a smoking gun, Page 20
Observer, Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921112

