FT921-3735

FT  12 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Further output cuts ruled out
by Alcoa


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


ALUMINUM COMPANY of America would make no more production cuts even though
the metal's price was near its lowest-ever level, said Mr Paul O'Neill,
chairman of the world's biggest aluminium group, yesterday.
He also echoed the industry's sense of frustration and impotence about the
flood of exports from Russia which were mainly responsible for pushing
aluminium prices down by 30 per cent last year.
Some estimated that Russian exports reached 1m tonnes in 1991, 'effectively
adding 10 per cent to the world supply out of the blue'. He suggested that
Russian smelters were 'an environmental disaster' and that if they were
forced fully to cover costs they would be out of business. Russian smelters
appeared to pay almost nothing for labour and capital, while the energy they
used 'is given away'.
But it would be difficult to square the principle of free markets and open
world trade by asking the Russians to curtail exports, said Mr O'Neill at a
briefing in London.
He predicted that Russian aluminium exports would continue high for some
time because producers there faced severely reduced demand from the defence
industry while domestic demand for consumer products would not build up
until the country had a stable currency. Until that time metal would be
exported to obtain the foreign currency to pay for essentials such as food.
The western world had no institution in place to deal with the break-up of a
country of 250m people, said Mr O'Neill.
Alcoa had set up a team to visit all the Russian aluminium production
centres, he revealed. 'We will do an intensive and careful analysis to see
if there is a place for (Alcoa) there.'
Alcoa's aluminium ingot shipments remained at 1.18m tonnes last year, two
thirds to its own fabricating plants. Its average realised price fell from
75 cents a lb to 67 cents. Its affiliate in Mexico shut its smelter and
Alcoa postponed negotiations to build a new smelter in Venezuela.
Mr O'Neill insisted that Alcoa's financial strength would carry it through
the industry's present problems. He said he was 'not pessimistic' about
1992. There were signs of renewed economic growth in the US which should
help a European recovery and 'along with that a greater potential for the
developed countries to help Russia get over these hard times'.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920312

