FT921-15312

FT  10 JAN 92 / Papers show Maxwell share support scheme


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


THE illicit operation by the late Mr Robert Maxwell to support the shares of
Maxwell Communication Corporation may have begun as early as October 1990,
documents obtained by the Financial Times reveal.
Price Waterhouse, administrator of MCC, has focused on Corry Stiftung, a
Liechtenstein foundation, and several other secretive offshore and
continental European trusts in its search for more than Pounds 500m in cash
and assets missing from the company. Copies of bank account statements of
Corry Stiftung show that on October 29, 1990, Pounds 319,476 was taken from
its current account, number 247-935-013 with the Private Trust Bank
Corporation of Vaduz, Liechtenstein, to buy shares in MCC, one of Mr
Maxwell's publicly-listed companies.
Bankers and administrators suspect that Mr Maxwell spent some Pounds 150m in
buying shares in MCC without disclosing his interest - which is illegal -
and that he used MCC's own funds to help do this.
Mr David Lee, who is heading Price Waterhouse's investigation into MCC's
missing assets, said that Corry Stiftung was 'a significant debtor' of MCC,
owing it 'considerably over Pounds 20m'.
The funds for the October 29 share purchase came from a high-interest
account in Liechtenstein, but the source of that money is still unclear.
The documents also show that on November 12, 1990, Pounds 38,570 was taken
from the Corry Stiftung current account to buy more shares in MCC. The term
'EFF-KAUF' in the bank statement stands for Effekten Kauf, or purchase of
securities.
A separate transaction on the bank statement shows how Pounds 4.5m flowed
into Liechtenstein on October 17, 1990, and Pounds 4m out the same day to
PH(US)Inc, a Delaware-incorporated private Maxwell holding company. PH
shares its address in Elmsford, New York, with several Maxwell holding
companies and part of Pergamon Press, the scientific journals publisher
which Mr Maxwell sold last year.
A senior tax executive at Elmsford declined to comment on the relationship
of PH(US)Inc to other Maxwell companies or the purpose of the October 1990
transfer.
However, Mr Lee said that Price Waterhouse was also investigating advances
of 'substantial amounts' in 1991 to PH(US)Inc from Macmillan, MCC's main
business.
Titmuss, Sainer and Webb, the London solicitors who credited Corry's account
with Pounds 4,494,675 on October 17, 1990, say that client confidentiality
prevents them disclosing the source of the money. However, they confirm that
they acted for MCC as well as for Maxwell private companies until they
resigned from MCC after Mr Maxwell's death to prevent conflicts of interest.
Speculation that Mr Maxwell met a violent end was dismissed yesterday by Dr
Iain West, a pathologist who examined the body. The French magazine Paris
Match claimed he had been beaten before death. Dr West, who carried out the
examination with Israeli doctors before burial in Jerusalem, said they found
a lot of blood but all agreed it had been caused by the Spanish autopsy.
Pension funds, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 15 Photograph (Omitted).

920110

