FT922-4255

FT  06 JUN 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar slips on payroll data


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR slipped against the D-Mark on the foreign exchanges yesterday
after the unemployment rate in the US rose to its highest level since 1984,
writes James Blitz.
Analysts said that there was renewed pressure on the Federal Reserve to ease
interest rates and boost recovery after the May non-farm payroll report
showed that unemployment surged to 7.5 per cent in May from 7.2 per cent in
April. The overall picture was brightened by an upward revision in the April
payrolls to 182,000 from 126,000. But that did not stop the market sinking
into dollar blues. The US currency ended the day in London over a pfennig
down against the D-Mark at DM1.5880, and was hovering around the same levels
in late New York trading. It also ended down against the Japanese yen at
Y126.75 from Y127.55.
Some analysts believe that the dollar has a potentially stronger downside
now. 'The tone of the data for May has been set by the non-farm payroll
figures,' said Mr Mark Austin, chief economist at HongKong and Shanghai
Banking Corp in London. 'We may get to test the low end of the dollar's
ranges seen over the last couple of months, when the dollar hovered around
DM1.5750.'
Another reason for dollar bearishness is that the D-Mark's recovery seems
firmly based. Although it slipped slightly in Thursday's trading, the German
currency has lost few of the gains it made on Wednesday in the wake of
Denmark's 'No' to European Monetary Union (Emu).
Two currencies in Europe appear to be under pressure from the D-Mark rise.
The first is sterling, which yesterday slipped badly and spent much of the
day at the bottom of the European Monetary System grid for the first time
since April. It closed a  1/4 pfennig down against the D-Mark at DM2.9150.
The pound's decline has been partly accelerated by the decision of the
Danish and Italian authorities to raise interest rates. But the puff that
sterling received since the election has died away. There is still no firm
sign of UK economic recovery; the pound's support from the prospect of
European convergence was undermined by Denmark's 'no' vote to Emu; and, as
one economist put it, the Maastricht crisis has raised a few early doubts
about whether the UK government remains the most stable and confident in
Europe.
The other uncertain currency in the EMS is the Italian lira. Yesterday, the
Bank of Italy was forced to raise interest rates for the second time in a
week, moving its emergency funds rate up by  1/2 a percentage point to 13
per cent. But the currency still closed down against the D-Mark at Lira
756.80 from Lira 756.60.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920606

