FT923-15724

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Search for consensus in
foreign policy


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   BRUSSELS


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
BRITISH diplomats may have long lost an empire to run, but every few years
they get a superpower, albeit a rather odd one, to manage for six months.
Britain has always been the great enthusiast for foreign policy
co-ordination among the Twelve. The reasons are simple. Britain, like
France, tends to see EC foreign policy as an extension of its own.
The overriding British interest has been to keep foreign policy
co-ordination an informal affair between consenting foreign ministries, as
far as possible out of the clutches of EC institutions like the Commission
and the parliament.
Feeling comfortably closeted over the past 20 years within this
inter-governmental system, known as European Political Co-operation (EPC),
Britain has pushed for maximum co-ordination. In 1980 it urged extending EPC
to security issues. In 1984 it got EPC to list the areas in which diplomats
of the Twelve and of the EC based in third countries should pool
information. In 1985 Britain championed a tightening of foreign policy
co-ordination, an initiative which snowballed into the Single European Act.
There is an irony to some of these initiatives. Britain is suspected by its
partners of refusing to put sensitive information on the Coreu telex network
which links the foreign ministries of the Twelve. It also has a reputation
for not freely pooling information with EC partners in some capitals.
But, in general, Britain is keen to stretch inter-governmental co-operation
in foreign policy to the utmost, so as to avoid demands by some of its
partners for action through Community machinery. Such demands were largely
fended off in the Maastricht treaty, with one exception. Although the
treaty's 'pillar' on a common EC foreign and security policy is firmly
inter-governmental, it provides for the (very communautaire) possibility
that implementing measures can be decided by majority verdict.
The Foreign Office - from Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, on down -
firmly believes this to be a nonsense. Thus, for example, one should expect
no real UK presidency pressure for Greece to be outvoted on the issue of
recognising Macedonia.
The Maastricht treaty has led to certain changes which may live on even if
the pact fails to be ratified. The EPC co-ordinating unit in Brussels is to
be expanded from six to 23, and merged with the Council of Ministers
secretariat.
The UK also plans that political directors of the Twelve should start from
this November holding their monthly meetings in Brussels, rather than in the
capital of the presidency country. The idea is that political directors
(senior foreign ministry officials from each member country) should have
more input into foreign ministers' meetings. Mr Hurd also intends these
meetings to be more businesslike. At present, general foreign policy issues
tend to be discussed over lunch, with no papers prepared or officials
present; confusion often results.
Of course, most of the EC's impact on the outside world is still in the
arena of the Community's trade and economic business. In so far as the
deadlock in the Gatt talks is the result of the EC's failure to translate
the price and subsidy cuts in its farm reform speedily into concessions in
Gatt, the UK presidency has almost certainly come too late. For, President
George Bush has no time for anything from now until polling day in November
but to lock electoral horns with Messrs Bill Clinton and Ross Perot. But
there will still be plenty else to test British diplomatic skills this
autumn - the negotiation of the pan-European energy charter, getting the new
Europe accords with central European states off to a good start, and, of
course, paving the way for a beginning to entry negotiations for Efta
countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920701

