FT921-11798

FT  30 JAN 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Shocking tone for
united colours - Controversial questions of taste


   By GARY MEAD and HAIG SIMONIAN


Benetton has certainly achieved one of the basic aims of advertising - to
get noticed - with its proposed ad featuring the dying moments of an Aids
sufferer. The Italian clothing manufacturer has obviously decided that shock
tactics work on the level of attention seeking; whether they work on the
more profound level - increased sales - is not so simply resolved.
Benetton's Aids ad has met widespread outrage. The Advertising Standards
Authority, the UK organisation which operates self-regulating codes of
practice for advertising, last year ordered the removal of 3,000 Benetton
posters featuring a blood-smeared new-born baby after protests from the
public. At the time, Luciano Benetton, the company's managing director,
argued the bloody baby caused little trouble in any of the 50 other
countries where it was due to run. Since then, the number of protests has
increased, even from Italy.
But what Benetton might be guilty of this time is not so much poor taste as
thoughtless marketing. After all, many charities in the UK have been trying
to shock the public for years and have yet to receive slapped wrists from
the self-regulatory ASA.
The ASA received not a single complaint concerning The Romanian Orphanage
Trust, which last year ran an ad, calculated to shock (right) in national
newspapers. In a sense, the Trust could also have been accused of
tastelessly exploiting a clever marketing gimmick to attract attention. But
it was not, because public feelings have adjusted to some levels of shock in
certain ill-defined contexts.
It now looks likely that the Benetton ad will not be welcomed by most
British magazine publishers, most of whom have taken counsel from the ASA.
The ASA - which has no power to ban an advertisement - watches two areas
under the general heading of taste; sexism and general decency.
According to Caroline Crawford of the ASA: 'The number of advertisements
which might be termed sexist are on the decline, but the number of
complaints about those advertisements is on the increase'.
The ASA has studied the issue of sexual stereotyping in commercials and
finds that it is, for the most part, a dying practice, mostly found in trade
publications which have a predominantly male readership.
When it comes to the more general issue of taste - under which complaints
against the Benetton ad would be considered - the ASA works on the basis of
precedent.
'Certainly, over the last couple of years, advertisers have shown themselves
much more prepared to use shock tactics to draw attention to their causes,
their products, than was previously the case,' says Crawford.
But the crucial difference is location - which audience the advertisement is
attempting to target.
'With charities, for example, the public has come to accept that shock
tactics are not just an acceptable but perhaps even necessary way of
advertising. But the public is not prepared to see a commercial company do
the same thing. It's also a question of corporate image, most companies
would not wish to be associated with advertising which shocks,' says
Crawford.
The ASA has in the past cautioned Amnesty International a couple of times,
and 'if we felt a charity had gone overboard we would mention it to them.
But most charities use national broadsheets to advertise in, where they can
be fairly sure that the readership is not going to be offended. Shock ads
might not be appropriate in other types of press,' says Crawford.
That would seem to suggest Benetton's big mistake. Rather than build a
carefully-planned campaign around the clever and now commonly used marketing
trick of shock-impact, it has once again exploded with an ad which seems
gratuitously and not purposefully shocking. One approach would have been to
deal with important but delicate issues in a way which portrays the company
as having a sensitive image.
Benetton itself feels differently. Oliviero Toscani, the freelance
photographer who has been its advertising 'guru' for the past nine years,
staunchly defends the company's publicity.
Using 'real-life' pictures underlines Benetton's commitment to social issues
and its distaste for run-of-the-mill corporate advertising, dismissed as
'banal'. Benetton's publicity should make consumers think; selling clothes
has nothing to do with it, Toscani claims.
So it may not be a mistake at all. While the British version of the monthly
fashion magazine Vogue is not going to run the Benetton Aids ad, its sister
publication in the US plans to do so. But only Benetton's - and US Vogue's -
future sales figures can be a reliable guide to what advertising styles are
now socially acceptable.

The Financial Times


London Page 12 Photograph A matter of taste, this advertisement was intended
to shock but it drew no complaints to the Advertising Standards Authority
(Omitted).

920130

