FT921-1212

FT  25 MAR 92 / Survey of North Wales (6): A rare survivor - All-Welsh
television station spreads its wings


   By RHYS DAVID


THE biggest independent television production facility outside London is
based not in one of Britain's main regional centres but in the small north
Wales town of Caernarfon. Its working language is not English, the lingua
franca of the media world, but Welsh.
Barcud was founded 10 years ago by a group of independent producers to
provide programmes and facilities for the Welsh Fourth Channel, S4C, and has
grown to employ 60 people, based in a modern factory unit equipped with the
latest in television editing, studio and outside broadcast technology.
Apart from producing a range of light entertainment and other programmes,
Barcud also makes its facilities available to other Welsh-based companies
serving S4C, and to television companies elsewhere in the UK and abroad. CBS
of the US, Yorkshire Television and Channel 10 Australia are numbered among
its clients.
Barcud (pronounced ba'rr kheed) is the Welsh name of the rare Red Kite found
only in mid-Wales. It is a symbol of the growing use of Welsh in business
situations. Though spoken at the last published count by around 500,000
people, Welsh has suffered from the decline in industries, such as mining
and quarrying in north and south Wales, in which it was once the language of
work.
At Barcud the policy of using Welsh across all the company's range of
activities flowed naturally from its work with Welsh-speaking clients.
'We have a belief that the language could and should be used in work
situations, otherwise it cannot be considered as fully-functioning. We have
always used it as the natural medium for communication internally, and with
our Welsh customers,' the company's chairman, Huw Jones, points out.
Welsh-speaking staff have been recruited for technical jobs within the
company and its audit is dealt with in Welsh by Welsh-speaking partners at
the Swansea offices of Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte.
The emergence of companies such as Barcud is part of a significant change in
attitudes towards the language over the past 25 years, brought about at
least in part by the campaigning of activists, and especially the Welsh
Language Society, who were reluctant to see one of Europe's oldest tongues
die out.
A policy of bilingualism in road and other signs has been adopted,
significant growth has occurred in the numbers of children being educated at
primary and secondary school level through the medium of Welsh, a separate
Welsh television channel (S4C) broadcasting about 30 hours a week of Welsh
has been established, and Welsh has been given a place alongside other core
subjects on the national curriculum in Wales.
All of this has raised the status of the language, making its speakers less
reluctant to use Welsh in situations where perhaps they would have switched
previously into English.
Yet, in spite of examples like Barcud, Welsh-speakers remain somewhat
reluctant to move into business and are failing to make the most of the
opportunities available to them. Among young Welsh speakers the broadcast
media is still very often regarded as the career pinnacle.
Menter a Busnes, based in Aberystwyth and backed by a number of public and
private sector bodies, aims to encourage Welsh-speakers to become more
involved in business by encouraging them to invest money in ventures, start
up on their own or simply enter the business world.
'We aim to get more Welsh speakers to the starting-point. Once they have
reached this, a network of development agencies exists to offer support,'
its director Hywel Evans says.
The agency's activities so far have included television advertising,
business awards, television and radio shows, business games, educational
material for schools, careers guidance aimed at broadening the range of
occupations which Welsh speakers enter, networking arrangements for
Welsh-speaking businesses, and other forms of practical advice and
assistance.
For those who take the plunge, more specific guidance and advice on how to
attract funds is provided by a range of enterprise agencies, such as Antur
Dwyryd (Venture Dwyryd) based in Penrhyndeudraeth, near Porthmadog in
Gwynedd.
Antur Dwyryd has its origins in an inquiry set up by Nicholas Edwards, the
then Welsh Secretary, to look into areas where entrepreneurial activity had
become limited. In this part of south Gwynedd a flourishing slate-mining
industry, with a range of ancillary businesses serving it, had largely
petered out, and the proportion of people working in manufacturing had
fallen to only 12 per cent, half the rate for Wales as a whole.
The agency has, according to its director, Dafydd Wyn Jones, seen a
transformation in attitudes since it began work four years ago. With a
current income of around Pounds 60,000-Pounds 70,000 a year derived from the
private sector (mainly lCl which used to employ 800 people locally making
quarry explosives) and from UK public sector and EC sources, it has embarked
on a series of initiatives aiming at building entrepreneurial awareness.
Roadshows are taken to outlying towns and villages, a news sheet detailing
local busines success stories is distributed to 10,000 households twice a
year, and a total of 850-900 serious inquiries resulting in 90 new
businesses have been dealt with. Roughly two thirds of inquiries have come
from longstanding locals, and one third from the many newcomers who have
settled in the area.
Yet, while new emphasis has been placed in recent years on stimulating
indigenous growth, very many more jobs than are likely to be provided from
this source will be needed if the employment aspirations of Welsh and
non-Welsh speakers in the area are to be satisfied. Otherwise, the young and
active members of the population will inevitably be forced to move away to
find work, resulting in a further rundown of rural communities, which will
be left to the retired.
The county remains very much in the market for inward investment, therefore,
which far from damaging the language, as some believe, is essential to its
salvation, according to Huw Thomas, Gwynedd's chief executive. 'The future
of the language is bound up with the prosperity of the region. Ours is a
policy of expansion for Gwynedd not protectionism,' he argues.
The urgency of winning new investment to supplement jobs won through
stimulating local entrepreneurial activity has been emphasised by a downturn
this year in the local economy. Gwynedd rode out the recession relatively
well until the end of last year but has since been hit by a number of plant
closures, as companies retrench nearer their markets. Unemployment has as a
result begun to rise again.
Companies which have moved to the area have in general not found it hard to
come to terms with its still predominantly Welsh nature or with the
bilingual policies of the council and other public bodies in the area, Huw
Thomas states.
Any initial apprehensions about moving into a bilingual community have
tended to be quickly dispelled by subsequent experience, and for companies
relocating from outside the UK such worries tend not to arise in the first
place, perhaps because German, Japanese or American companies are more used
to operating with the speakers of other languages.
As in relocations everywhere the most important consideration is to be
responsive to the local community, he observes.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920325

