FT923-11044

FT  27 JUL 92 / 'Someone even swore at the chairman . . .': People who work
at Lloyd's, where the extraordinary meeting demanded by Names is to be held
today


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


BARRY McDONNELL, touching seven feet tall in his black and gold top hat,
hurries from the sentry box outside Lloyd's of London to usher his
chairman's Daimler into the lunchtime traffic.
Mr McDonnell, a liveried waiter, stands sentinel in Lime Street to the
world's oldest insurance market. A man of unfashionable servility, who
pockets Pounds 6 extra for candlelit functions in the 11th floor dining
room, he fiercely defends the 300-year-old institution housed behind him in
a stainless steel and translucent glass tower and which daily sucks in
Pounds 30m of insurance premiums.
Mr McDonnell strikes a realistic note. 'Things have been very difficult,
sir,' he explains. 'There is tension in the air. Someone even swore at the
chairman on his way out after the annual meeting. I had to remind him that,
whatever has happened, we are all still gentlemen here.'
Good manners, along with the guiding principle of utmost good faith which
has endured since marine insurance began in a Tower Street coffee house, are
being tested to breaking point at Lloyd's.
The announcement of losses of Pounds 2bn during 1989 follows an
unprecedented run of natural and man-made disasters. Now the most reputable,
rock-solid society of underwriters is enduring its own brush with
catastrophe.
On the 11th floor, with its incongruous chandeliered Adam Room, members of
the governing council today face an extraordinary general meeting and votes
of no confidence. Some have received hate-mail and abusive telephone calls.
The spectacular calling to account of those who staked their all on the
promise of profit - but now live with the stomach-churning reality of
unlimited personal liability - has taken a heavy toll.
Ford Orions are said to have replaced Ferraris. Cries of 'Bankrupt]' slip as
easily off the tongue as the fresh Galway Bay oysters that used to start a
lunch at Wheeler's.
The preamble to the Insurance Act passed during the reign of Elizabeth I
laid down that after catastrophe 'there followeth not the undoing of any man
but the loss lighteth rather easily upon many than heavilie upon fewe . . .
'.
'Undoing' there has been. Accusations of incompetence and betrayal are
poised to lead into what one wounded soul has dubbed 'the slurry pit of
legislation'.
Many Names have fled the market - some to face ruin. More than 6,000 have
gone in 18 months and more will follow, leaving behind unproven allegations
that working Names with inside knowledge sacrificed outside Names to save
their own skins.
Not surprisingly, the members' agents responsible for entry into the club
say inquiries from prospective Names are down to a dribble.
'Insurance is supposed to be dead boring. But this lot are straight out of a
disaster movie', laughs Sam Niblock, a streetwise sandwich maker, waving at
the lunchtime crowd spilling on to the pavement outside the Lamb Tavern in
Leadenhall Market.
Underwriters and brokers, who live or die by each other's efforts, mingle
with aspiring assistants to sip spritzers under the Victorian street
market's ironwork canopy. They swap gossip - part of the broth of the
insurance business since the 17th century.
Mark Bowen, a bank clerk turned broker who specialises in big construction
projects, has just had a quick cappucino at the Croissant Express with a
deputy underwriter. They will meet later at Lloyd's when a stamp and
signature on Bowen's slip will seal a promise binding in honour, if not
necessarily in law.
Nathan Philips, whose plummy tones hint at youthful privilege, says his
priority is to complete professional indemnity cover for a Hong Kong
structural engineering business. Clutching his 'Sushi de luxe' lunch box, he
complains: 'It's proving tricky. You'd think the Chinese had already marched
in.'
Though they may not all approve of the comparison, those at Lloyd's have
much in common with the crew at Linwood's, the local fishmonger, or at
Booths, the florist which delivers flowers or fluffy bears carrying
messages.
In the words of David Rowland, chairman of international broker Sedgwick and
leader of the recent investigation into Lloyd's governance: 'We are all
barrow boys in pin-striped suits who like making money.'
The Lime Street insurance market does not flog flounder or freesias and its
traders wear Gieves & Hawkes suits and Gucci loafers rather than rubber
gloves or aprons. Shirt sleeves or short skirts inside the famous
underwriting room may even bring reprimands from a discreet waiter. But it
is, for all that, little more than a marble-floored bazaar in which the
highest risk is touted for the lowest fee.
If your client seeks protection from war risks, head for Stephen Merrett's
underwriting box; don't forget George Lloyd-Roberts if insuring babies
against illness; call on Danny Chappell if you want cover for a Dollars 1m
racehorse that might go berserk.
It is Lloyd's readiness to consider the unusual, encouraged by its
individualistic heritage, that adds piquancy to its public image. Beside
insurance terms of 'long tail', 'short tail' and 'excess-of-loss' stand less
traditional alternatives such as 'Samurai' cover - 'so bloody risky you
deserve to have your head cut off'.
Whether it is film stars' legs, wine tasters' palates or rock star's voices
 -Lloyd's will usually oblige. Fish can be insured against drowning and
satellites against wandering off into the wide black yonder.
But in spite of its openness for diversity, the recent contraction in the
market, aided by imploding syndicates and shot-gun mergers, means the number
of syndicates is down to 279 - nearly 100 fewer than last year. There is the
more vacant trading space than at any time since the present building opened
in 1986. Rents, which can reach Pounds 20,000 a year for a modest perch,
might fall.
Earnings have fallen for the underwriters after being stoked in the 1980s by
big commissions and syndicate fees. But many still earn well over Pounds
100,000 a year.
Most brokers remain salary slaves, but high-rollers can strike deals which
include a share of the action. A few are said to have broken the Pounds 1m
barrier.
Julian Messent, a geology graduate who decided to become a broker after a
boozy night in the Duke's Head, Putney, is looking for Dollars 400m cover on
a Chilean copper and gold mine. A Latin American property expert with
Alexander Howden, he has researched his risk well and lined up a lead
signature. He wants Jeremy Austen, underwriter at FR White, to add his
stamp.
The two regularly play squash but the negotiation is strictly business. Mr
Austen signs a line and Mr Messent makes for Mark Donald at syndicate 33, a
shaker-and-mover who has made a name as an expert in issues relating to
property, sabotage and terrorism.
Peter Tritton, a colleague of Mr Messent, sums up the bargaining process:
'It's all about peer respect, gut feelings, intuition and accurate
intelligence.
'If someone lies in here . . . news goes from one corner of the building to
the other in a flash. If you get found out, your credibility is shot.'
But Lloyd's credibility is at stake, having found itself sucked into the
maelstrom of the 'anything goes' economy of the 1980s.
Paul Barnes, a would-be painter turned non-marine underwriter, scans a
Dollars 25m claim for snow damage from the Israeli Flower Board before
reflecting on what has gone wrong at Lloyd's. He has a saying, 'volume is
vanity, profit is sanity' to sum up his view of a market that took its eye
off its prime duty to secure profitable business for its Names in favour of
winning premium income.
A senior broker at Fenchurch Group comments: 'It was the mood of the times.
Too many underwriters threw caution to the wind. They were doing things they
did not really understand.'
What they did understand, and lap up, was the wave of entertainment that
oiled the wheels of a booming business.
'It's amazing how many underwriters got a suite in one or more of the luxury
hotels they agreed to insure,' says Phil Guthrie, a non-marine broker who
admits to his own share of treats from clients.
Now, more modest hospitality prevails: 'It's back to football tickets for a
while,' Mr Guthrie grins.
Dave Burling, the casualty loss-book clerk whose quill pen commits lost
Cuban barges and Irish fish factories to the book that once recorded the
Titanic and the Torrey Canyon, has seen 'a real sifting out' among brokers
and underwriters.
Danny Chappell, an unstuffy underwriter whose mum worked for a broker, is
putting his name to a Dollars 2.5m all-risks policy on Dr Devious, this
year's Derby winner. He gives his views on some of the new breed of people
around him.
'It used to take years to work your way up through the ranks. Now, they
arrive out of the blue, set up their stall and they're away. It's not
surprising if some have come unstuck.'
'It's the survival of the fittest,' chips in his assistant, clutching lurid
pictures of American cows allegedly struck by lightning.
Those running Lloyd's say they do not doubt that it will survive.
Better self-regulation is promised although old-timers warn that it will
destroy Lloyd's individualistic heritage and raise costs.
David Coleridge, chairman of Lloyd's, traced the fault line when he told
members last month that the dash for business had sapped market disciplines
and standards.
The finger of suspicion inevitably points first at the ambitious young men
and women who did not do their homework. Many of them have already paid with
their jobs.
Some of the older hands were not impressed with the newcomers and stuck to
the practices they knew best. Others tried to keep up with the pacemakers
and became players in areas of which they had little or no experience.
Yet, to the casual observer, the depth and breadth of experience held
collectively by those who make up the Lloyd's market remains impressive when
set against the skills and competence employed in other professional
marketplaces. When a broker and underwriter discuss cover for a South
African goldmine there is still a fair chance they have both been down it.
While Lloyd's tries to regain its footing, the job of re-establishing its
reputation continues. In the claim office, housed in the old Lloyd's Room
across the street, Bob Moore and his team work on to demonstrate that,
whatever the problems, payout calls are promptly met.
But if the money is still flowing out, people such as Keith Leonard,
managing director of RW Sturge, one of the Sturge members' agencies, are
doing their damndest to keep it coming in. A cheque for Pounds 190,000 has
just arrived.
Mr Leonard, who has a six-figure sum to find, also gets daily letters of
resignation from Names. 'There's no sense to it,' he rails, 'they are
pulling out at the bottom of the worst cycle and will miss the upturn.'
Back in the Room, Paul Barnes muses on risks attached to a sewer back-up in
Saskatchewan and ponders on a critical time for a great British institution.
'We've all got one last shot to get to the promised land,'he says. 'Blow it
and God knows where we'll all end up.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920727

