FT921-14288

FT  16 JAN 92 / UK Company News: A pension scheme with no guarantees - The
gloomy prospects for MCC pensioners


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


MAXWELL Communication Corporation may not have to repair the Pounds 45m
deficit in its pension fund, which could mean that its present employees
lose all their pension benefits, according to a confidential report by Price
Waterhouse, the accountants.
In a startling assessment of MCC's debts, Price Waterhouse says that there
may be 'no liability under the pension fund's trust deed to make good a
deficit' if the scheme were wound up this year before the full provisions of
the latest pension legislation come into force.
The report shows that the late Mr Robert Maxwell siphoned off Pounds 40m
from the MCC pension fund - part of a total of up to Pounds 700m raided with
apparent ease from all his companies' pension funds to support his tottering
private business empire.
If the MCC scheme is not wound-up then MCC has a clear obligation to make up
the deficit.
A decision whether to wind up would be made partly by Law Debenture Trust
Company, independent stewards which Price Waterhouse recommended as new
trustees of the fund, replacing a company run by Mr Robert Maxwell.
However Price Waterhouse, who are administrators of MCC under UK insolvency
law and could also have a say in a wind-up decision, conceded that there was
a potential conflict between the company's pensioners and its creditors. The
fund's trustees act on behalf of present and future pensioners, but the
administrators act for MCC's creditors and want to realise the maximum value
from the company.
The MCC fund, which covers only its UK subsidiaries - Macdonald, Nimbus and
the MCC head office staff - is thought to have lost some Pounds 40m of its
Pounds 65m assets when its investments were lent without security to Mr
Robert Maxwell's private companies.
That could leave it with a Pounds 45m deficit on its potential liabilities,
estimated at Pounds 70m.
und can probably keep up payments to those now drawing a pension, according
to the presentation by Price Waterhouse to MCC's bank creditors on December
18.
But it may not be able to meet obligations to deferred pensioners - those
who have left the company but are still below retirement age - nor those to
existing employees.
That means that employees - who have been paying 5.75 per cent of their pay
into the scheme - may have lost most of their benefits.
They also risk getting nothing back if they continued to contribute - their
payments might be set against the fund's deficit and so help only existing
pensioners, according to Price Waterhouse.
Law Debenture is understood to have written to the scheme's members to say
that until this risk is clarified, it would be wrong for it to accept more
contributions.
The 1990 Social Security Act includes provisions to create a debt on the
employer when schemes are wound up, but these will not come into force until
1992 or 1993.
MCC's US pension funds for Macmillan and Official Airline Guides, the US
companies which are its main businesses, appear to have suffered no losses.
Price Waterhouse yesterday met MCC's bankers, who face huge write-offs on
their loans of Pounds 1.6bn, to agree extra funding for MCC over the next
three months.
The administrators 'hope to progress soon' on selling small MCC businesses,
which they assess could raise Pounds 105m to Pounds 159m after tax. Sales of
US offices, including the OAG and Macmillan headquarters, could raise
another Pounds 17m to Pounds 21m after tax.
However MCC's rivals have said that Panini, an Italian printer of stickers,
and Collier, the US encyclopedia business, have been up for sale for more
than 15 months, and are minor compared to MCC's main US businesses.
The report exposes how MCC's Pounds 1.1bn of shareholders' funds at March
1991 had been wiped out by Mr Maxwell's plundering in the months before his
death.
Mr Maxwell's private companies owe MCC Pounds 252m which they now cannot
pay. MCC's subsidiary Berlitz, the language instruction company, was
included in its assets at Pounds 318m but its shares have been pledged to
banks as security. US tax losses slice another Pounds 40m off the value.
Foreign exchange dealing also lost it Pounds 27m since March.
The overall result is that MCC's liabilities could exceed its assets by more
than Pounds 500m.
London & Bishopsgate Group and Robert Maxwell Group, two private Maxwell
companies, yesterday won an extension of the High Court's Mareva injunction
against assets of up to Pounds 4.35m of Mr Sheldon Aboff, a former executive
of several private Maxwell companies.
LBG and RMG allege that two transfers were made from their funds in October
1991 of Pounds 3.1m and Pounds 1.25m to Mr Aboff's account, and that this
money was used to buy MCC shares.
Mr Kevin Maxwell was in court yesterday to hear the third day of his appeal
for the right to silence in answering questions about missing pension fund
money.

The Financial Times


London Page 25 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted). Photograph MCC
assets on the block, Above, Collier's Encyclopedia (Pounds 30m-36m*), below,
Nimbus Records (Pounds 30m-40m*), right, Panini (Pounds 35m-55m*) *Price
Waterhouse estimates of selling price (Omitted).

920116

