FT921-11921

FT  29 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Half of Scots support independence,
poll shows - Break with the Union


   By:BY IVO DAWNAY


A STRONG SURGE in support for Scottish independence emerged last night in an
opinion poll showing 50 per cent of Scots now back a full break with the
Crown - the first time that half the population has indicated a readiness to
end the Union.
The new figures demonstrate a drop from 41 per cent to 27 per cent since
September last year in those favouring a limited devolution of powers from
parliament and a sharp rise from 27 per cent to 50 per cent in those backing
independence.
According to the poll for ITN and The Scotsman newspaper, compiled from a
sample of 1,026 by ICM last week, those backing the status quo remained
constant at 19 per cent. The findings were welcomed by the Scottish National
Party last night. Mr Alex Salmond, the SNP leader, said the call for
independence was becoming 'irresistible'.
He added: 'A clear majority of Scots now recognise that only independence
will guarantee a prosperous future for our nation as an equal partner in the
European Community - as shown by a straight switch from second-class
devolution to first-class independence in Europe.'
The figures also show that backing for the SNP - the only supporters of full
independence - has risen by just seven points to 26 per cent, substantially
less than the headline numbers might suggest. Backing for Labour, which
advocates devolved powers to Edinburgh, has dropped two points to 41 per
cent with the Tories showing a similar fall to 23 per cent.
The outcome, none the less, is a further blow to the Conservatives who are
now believed to be ready to reconsider their opposition to any form of
Scottish devolution once the coming general election is over.
After the Kincardine and Deeside by-election last year, the Tories have
dropped to the third largest party in Scotland with just nine seats.
An independent analyst said last night that the poll suggests only one Tory
seat - Dumfries - can now be regarded as genuinely 'safe'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920129

