FT921-3753

FT  12 MAR 92 / MPs criticise role of Bank in BCCI affair: Dissenting Labour
members of committee take tougher line


   By ROBERT PESTON and RICHARD DONKIN


THE Bank of England's role in the supervision of Bank of Credit and Commerce
International yesterday received comparatively mild criticism in a report
prepared by a cross-party House of Commons committee.
Although the report implies that the Bank should have closed BCCI long
before July 5 1991, when it was shut, it does not state this explicitly.
The committee said it was important that henceforth the 'minimum criteria
for authorisation (of a bank) should be strictly interpreted'.
One Bank official admitted: 'The report was surprisingly tame in some
respects.'
Last night, Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England,
dismissed calls from two Labour MPs, Mr Brian Sedgemore and Mr Keith Vaz,
that he should resign. He said there was 'nothing to resign about'.
The four Labour MPs on the committee, who include Mr Sedgemore, disagreed
strongly with the report's conclusions and have made much sharper criticisms
of the Bank, which are recorded in committee minutes.
The Labour group accused Mr Leigh-Pemberton of the 'grossest negligence' for
failing to close down BCCI after receiving many warning signs that it was
corrupt. They also accused Mr John Major, the prime minister, of a
'dereliction of duty' for his failure to recommend closure at the time when
he was chancellor of the exchequer.
Responding to the main report, the Bank repudiated 'the implication' that it
should have closed BCCI earlier. It received information long before July
1991, such as BCCI's links to terrorist organisations and to drug money
laundering, which put in doubt BCCI's fitness to carry on business as a
bank. But the Bank said yesterday that it believed at the time that the
interests of depositors would have been damaged by closure.
'Under banking legislation, when we contemplate what action to take against
a bank, we have to consider both the behaviour of the bank and the effect on
depositors of closure,' the Bank said.
The Bank said that it was not until July 1991 that it had incontrovertible
evidence that depositors' interests would not be served by keeping the bank
afloat.
The report said that there was a 'climate of opinion' in the Bank which
'favoured reconstruction and reform rather than restrictions and closures'.
It said: 'We . . . question why the Bank of England did not at least
restrict BCCI's ability to accept new deposits.'
The report added that the interests of potential depositors were damaged by
the failure to close BCCI earlier. 'In retrospect that is true', the Bank
said. Though it said it had no way of knowing that at the time.
Sedgemore attacks Bank over BCCI affair, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920312

