FT921-4013

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Red Book Details): ERM membership to remain
central discipline for policy


Successful economic performance requires permanently low inflation and a
healthy supply side. The defeat of inflation on a lasting basis is the
central objective of the Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS). This
macroeconomic framework is complemented by microeconomic policies designed
to improve the flexibility and efficiency of markets, with a view to
increasing the sustainable growth rate of the economy over the medium term.
The government is committed to membership of the exchange rate mechanism
(ERM) of the European Monetary System, and this provides the framework for
monetary policy. Sterling is currently operating within broad (6 per cent)
bands, but will in due course move to narrow (2 1/4 per cent) bands at the
current central parity of DM2.95.
Fiscal policy is set in a medium term framework. The government's policy is
to maintain a firm fiscal stance by balancing the budget over the medium
term. This approach ensures that fiscal policy supports monetary policy in
achieving low inflation.
The UK signed the Maastricht Treaty on European Union on February 7 1992.
That treaty, which has not yet been ratified by Parliament, sets out the
conditions for establishing economic and monetary union (EMU) in the
European Community, including the adoption of a single monetary policy and
in due course a single currency. The UK has reserved the right to choose
whether or not to participate in the final stage of EMU, and in particular
whether to move to the single monetary policy and single currency. But
whatever choice is made, the government's policies are designed to ensure
that the UK meets the convergence criteria laid down in the treaty.
ERM membership will remain the central discipline underpinning UK
macroeconomic policy in the medium term. In principle, policy requirements
are not fundamentally altered by ERM membership: they would be much the same
even if the UK had chosen to pursue the objective of defeating inflation
outside the ERM. But ERM membership now provides the medium term nominal
framework within which the UK economy must operate.
The UK is an open economy, with few constraints on international trade in
goods and services; and the completion of the single market will further
reduce the remaining tariff and non-tariff barriers between the UK and our
European Community partners. This freedom of trade, combined with the
commitment to the ERM, means that the price of traded goods and services
produced in the UK will largely be set in competitive international, and
especially European, markets. UK costs and prices will not be able to move
independently of those of our competitors for any length of time.
Maintaining sterling within its ERM bands means that over the next few years
UK inflation will move progressively into line with the best inflation
performance in other ERM countries. All countries in the European Community
are firmly committed to the objective of price stability, and the government
will set monetary and fiscal policy to achieve this outcome. The more
rapidly markets, and in particular labour costs, adjust to the new
discipline of the ERM, the sooner the UK will be able to achieve a
satisfactory growth of output and bring down unemployment.
Fiscal projections
The sections below set out the government's approach to monetary and fiscal
policy in more detail, and provide fiscal projections over the medium term
based on illustrative paths for output and inflation.
The UK has been a member of the ERM for almost a year and a half. During
that time the government has demonstrated its commitment to the ERM by
setting interest rates to maintain sterling within its ERM bands. The
authorities will continue to give overriding priority to the ERM commitment
in setting interest rates.
Sterling will move to narrow bands within the ERM in due course, maintaining
its central rate at DM2.95.
The authorities continue to assess monetary conditions on the basis of the
behaviour of the monetary aggregates and a range of other indicators. Over
the past year the position of sterling within its ERM bands has generally
allowed the authorities to reduce UK interest rates as warranted by domestic
conditions, and particularly by the fall in inflation. Since joining
the ERM in early October 1990 the differentials between UK and German
interest rates have narrowed markedly. This is a sign of enhanced confidence
in the policy for achieving low inflation and the ability of the economy to
adapt to the discipline of the ERM.
Narrow money (M0) rose fairly steadily, at an annual rate of a little over 2
per cent, through 1991, having been more or less flat during the steep fall
in output in the second half of 1990. For 1991-92 as a whole M0 is forecast
to have increased by about 2 1/4 per cent, just above the middle of the 0 to
4 per cent target range set a year ago. The government proposes to set a
target range for M0 growth for the financial year 1992-93 of 0 to 4 per
cent, unchanged from 1991-92.
The annual growth of M4 slowed down through 1991 and has flattened out at
around 6 per cent in recent months. M4 has thus probably grown only a little
faster than money GDP over the past year, following more than a decade of
steeply declining M4 velocity. It is unclear how durable this change in the
trend of M4 velocity will prove, and the future growth rate of M4 remains
very uncertain. As for the past five years, the government does not intend
to set a target for broad money, but will continue to pay careful attention
to the growth of broad money and credit.
The government continues to follow the 'full fund' policy, discussed in
detail in the 1990 MTFS. In 1991-92 the public sector borrowing requirement
(PSBR), together with maturing debt, has been funded by increased sales of
national savings and gilts. During the year long term yields have fallen
significantly as progress has been made in reducing inflation. In 1992-93
gilt sales will again be complemented by an increased contribution from
national savings to the total funding programme.
In 1991-92 the public finances moved into deficit, after being in surplus
for three years from 1987-88 and close to balance in 1990-91. The PSBR for
1991-92 is now expected to be Pounds 13 3/4 bn, equivalent to about 2 1/4
per cent of GDP.
The government's objective is to balance the budget over the medium term,
while permitting the 'automatic stabilisers' to operate. This approach means
that the PSBR varies with the cyclical position of the economy. The budget
surpluses in the late 1980s reflected the strength of domestic demand and
activity, while the swing into deficit in 1991-92 reflects the subsequent
recession.
Cyclical developments will continue to determine the evolution of the public
finances over the medium term. The budget will return towards balance as
activity recovers. But the process of adjustment will take time, and in the
short term the level of borrowing will rise because of the lagged impact of
the recession on both revenue and expenditure.
The government's policy will ensure that the UK meets the requirement set
out in the Maastricht Treaty that Member States should endeavour to avoid
'excessive budget deficits'. The decision on whether an excessive deficit
exists rests with the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers, and that
judgment must be made in the light of all the circumstances, including the
medium term economic and budgetary position.
Budget deficits
The treaty recognises that deficits can be affected by temporary and
exceptional factors: the intention is to prevent 'gross errors' of budgetary
policy, and not to constrain deficits which arise for purely cyclical
reasons.
In the economic forecast, non-North Sea GDP in financial year 1992-93 is up
1 3/4 per cent on the previous year, below the sustainable growth rate of
the economy. And the recession will still be affecting the public finances:
in particular, social security expenditure and corporation tax receipts both
lag behind the output cycle. For both these reasons the PSBR will rise in
1992-93: it has been set at Pounds 28bn, equivalent to about 4 1/2 per cent
of GDP.
Assumptions about the path of the economy are required in order to
illustrate the possible evolution of the public finances over the medium
term. The economic assumptions which form the basis for the fiscal
projections are shown in the accompanying table.
The level of real GDP is now below trend, following the contraction of
demand over the past two years. But in the medium term output is determined
primarily by supply factors, and over the next few years there should be
scope for more rapid growth accompanied by low inflation.
The projections assume that non-North Sea GDP grows by 3 1/2 per cent per
annum from 1994-95, above the likely trend rate of growth; and that
inflation comes down to 2 per cent by 1996-97, close to the best performance
in other ERM countries. The output path implies that between 1990-91 and
1996-97 non-North Sea GDP grows on average by around 2 per cent a year, well
within the potential growth rate of the economy.
These assumptions underlie the PSBR path shown in the accompanying table.
The PSBR rises further as a share of GDP in 1993-94, to 4 3/4 per cent,
because of lower privatisation proceeds and the lagged effects of below
trend growth in 1992-93. But thereafter it declines steadily towards balance
in the medium term.
The projected PSBR path implies some increase in the level of net public
sector debt over the next few years.
Public sector debt
As the PSBR declines in response to faster output growth the ratio of net
public sector debt to GDP will in due course resume a downward trend. The
ratio is projected to peak at about 35 per cent of GDP in the mid-1990s,
compared with an average of well over 45 per cent in the first half of the
1980s. Thus the prospective increase in the ratio only partially reverses
the sharp fall in the late 1980s which was associated with the cyclical
upturn and debt repayments.
Within this broad medium term fiscal framework the government's policy is to
cut taxes as and when this can be done on a sustainable basis and without
prejudice to the government's objectives on inflation. The projections
include fiscal adjustments of Pounds 1bn in 1995-96 and 1996-97. But the
precise size and timing of future tax reductions will depend on developments
in the economy.
The revenue projections in the accompanying table are based on the
conventional assumption of constant tax and national insurance rates from
1992-93, except where future changes have already been announced (for
example, on contracted out rebates for national insurance contributions).
Allowances, thresholds and specific duties are assumed to be indexed from
their proposed 1992-93 levels. All proposed Budget changes are taken into
account. The ratio of general government receipts to GDP falls further in
1992-93, largely reflecting the delayed impact on tax receipts of the fall
in output in 1991-92. But as output recovers towards trend and delays in the
payment of taxes work out, the ratio picks up over the medium term.
Projections for the tax burden and the components of general government
receipts are given in the accompanying tables.
The government's objective for public spending is that, over time, it should
take a declining share of national income, while value for money is
constantly improved. This is consistent with policy on the overall level of
taxation within the framework of maintaining a balanced budget over the
medium term. The public spending objective is expressed in terms of the
ratio of general government expenditure (GGE), excluding privatisation
proceeds, to GDP. An underlying downward trend in this ratio was established
in the early 1980s. Strong economic growth in the later 1980s led to sharp
falls in the ratio. Cyclical influences are now exerting upward pressure on
public spending, notably on social security, leading to some rise in the
ratio. It should resume its downward trend as the economy recovers. In
1991-92 the ratio is expected to be 42 per cent of GDP, 2 1/2 percentage
points above its 1988-89 level, but still 5 1/2 percentage points below the
level seen in 1982-83 following the early 1980s recession.
The projections of general government expenditure in the accompanying tables
include the cash planning totals published in the 1991 Autumn Statement for
the period to 1994-95. The projections for local authorities' self-financed
expenditure take account of latest information on local authorities'
spending in 1991-92 and budgets for 1992-93; and the projections of gross
debt interest payments and accounting adjustments are consistent with the
economic assumptions in the accompanying table.
Expenditure plans
For 1995-96 and 1996-97 it is provisionally assumed that the growth of real
GGE will slow as cyclical effects continue to unwind: expenditure plans will
be settled in future Surveys.
The MTFS reaffirms the government's commitment to bringing inflation down on
a sustainable basis within the ERM, and achieving convergence within the
European Community. The government continues to operate fiscal policy
consistently with the objective of medium term budget balance. This will
provide full support for the government's commitment to the ERM.
Financial Statement and Budget Report 1992-93, HMSO, Pounds 9.65

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920311

