FT924-6471

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment (4): Chicken-and-egg problems -
Television


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


It has been some time since the invention of colour television created a
sensation in the consumer electronics world and sent many television
enthusiasts out to buy new TV sets.
TV manufacturers are hoping that a new sensation will be created by what is
the hottest topic today in the market for television sets: wide-screen high
definition TV.
Compared with box-shaped conventional TV sets, wide-screen TVs, as the name
implies, have screens that are wider than they are high. The aspect ratio,
or the relationship between width and height is 16:9 compared with 4:3 for
conventional TVs.
The advantage of the wide-screen format, according to manufacturers, is that
it is visually more powerful and provides cinema-quality viewing.
Our field of vision, according to Philips, the Dutch consumer electronics
group which has been heavily promoting wide-screen TV, actually encompasses
more horizontal information than vertical information and therefore
wide-screen is closer to our natural view of things.
Whether or not this is true, the enthusiasm for wide-screen TV in the
industry has yet to see equivalent excitement among consumers who have been
rather muted in their response.
This is hardly surprising because as yet there are no programmes broadcast
in the UK in the 16:9 format. Consumers who buy wide-screen sets must be
content with zooming up conventional TV pictures to fill in the screen or
make do with pictures with black bands on the sides that make up the extra
width in the wide-screen format.
Broadcasters are naturally wary of introducing a new format for which the
majority of consumers do not have an appropriate receiver.
The same chicken-and-egg situation faces full High Definition TV (HDTV)
which has been hailed as the television event of the decade, if not of the
twenty-first century.
While HDTV has only been introduced in Japan where NHK, the public
broadcasting corporation, is transmitting a few hours of high definition
programming each week, the response has been just as muted as for
wide-screen TV.
The problem in the case of the Japanese HDTV project is that the cost of
HDTV sets, at several thousand dollars each, is still much higher than what
Japanese consumers are willing to bear in order to enjoy better quality
pictures.
Europe, meanwhile, faces an entirely different set of obstacles in
introducing its HDTV programme, which was somewhat belatedly launched in
response to the Japanese challenge.
The first obstacle concerns subsidies for satellite TV broadcasters who will
presumably be beaming HDTV programmes based on the European D2-MAC and
HD-MAC standard into viewers's homes. Terrestrial broadcasts will use a
modified standard called PAL-Plus.
HDTV is not being introduced in Europe until 1994 at the earliest. However,
Europe's HDTV programme has been stalled by failure among European nations
to agree to help broadcasters make the transition from conventional PAL
broadcasts to the new standard.
The European Commission, which is leading an EC-wide HDTV effort, has
recognised that the new standard is unlikely to attract consumers unless
there is sufficient programming available. It has therefore attempted to
obtain European Community agreement on an Ecu850m subsidy for satellite
broadcasters, to solve the chicken-and-egg dilemma. Once the programmes are
in place, with the help of the subsidy, it reckons demand for HDTV sets
should surge.
Not only are broadcasters divided over the merits of the subsidy, but there
is disagreement among Community members as to the necessary level of
subsidy, with the UK telling the EC Telecommunications Council this summer
that it does not see the need for a subsidy at all.
Mr Edward Leigh, Britain's technology minister, said that while the UK
supported development of HDTV, 'it totally opposed the EC's proposal' to
spend Ecu850m on it.
The second obstacle to HDTV in Europe has to do with the HDTV sets
themselves.
The unfortunate thing about Europe's HDTV programme is that in order for
HD-MAC, the standard agreed within the EC, to provide the better quality
pictures that it is supposed to, the TV set has to be fairly large.
The picture quality of a 36-inch HDTV may make it worth the cost to the
consumer of switching over to a new set but that would not be true of a
21-inch set, which is the most popular size in the UK, or even the slightly
larger TVs favoured in continental Europe.
The problem, however, is that even if the better quality of HDTV managed to
raise enthusiasm for larger-sized TVs, these would be extremely heavy, due
to the weight of the glass used on the screen. What's more, full enjoyment
of HDTV quality depends on sitting a certain distance away from the TV set,
and the larger the set the further away viewers should be seated.
While HDTV has been hailed as bringing cinema-like viewing to the living
room, it is evident that not very many living rooms could accommodate such a
massive piece of equipment as well as provide the required distance between
viewer and TV.
To add to Japan and Europe's HDTV woes, the US has opted to adopt a digital
advanced television system which would be fundamentally different from
either Japan's or Europe's analogue HDTV standards.
The US initiative affects the two other regions in that it has led to cries,
particularly in Europe, that they should abandon their somewhat outdated
HDTV standards and follow the US lead in going digital.
Digital HDTV would, in addition to providing enhanced picture quality,
enable viewers to receive many more programmes than would be available on an
analogue system. It would also allow viewers to manipulate programmes and
other information they receive via the television and could even allow
interaction between viewer and broadcaster by creating a two-way information
flow.
The US digital television initiative also provides an important opportunity
to form a worldwide television standard that has eluded consumers as a
result of reluctance on the part of one region or another to adopt a
standard that was developed elsewhere.
If Japan and Europe adopted the digital standard that the US eventually opts
for, that would at least be one way in which electronics could bring a large
number of people in the world a little closer together.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921120

