FT921-14003

FT  17 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Salomon resignations continue
as top analyst quits for First Boston


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


THE WAVE of defections from the equities department of Salomon Brothers, the
Wall Street securities house, continued yesterday when Mr Thomas Hanley, the
top-ranked bank analyst, left the firm to join First Boston. Mr Hanley's
colleague, Mr Phillip Carter, has also left Salomon for First Boston.
However, three members of the equity research team reportedly turned down an
offer from First Boston. The three staying at Salomon are Mr John Leonard -
who will head the banking research group - Ms Diane Glossman and Mr Jeffrey
Naschek.
Mr Hanley's exit takes the number of departures by senior equities staff in
the past six weeks into double figures. Among those to have left Salomon for
other firms are Mr Ralph Fletcher, head of private placements; Mr Leslie
Ravitz, a chemicals analyst; Mr Gary Gastineau, a derivatives analyst; and
several members of Salomon's London team, including Mr Chris Mitchinson,
head of equity research and strategy. Mr Peter Clarke, head of equity sales
and trading in London, also resigned yesterday.
The trickle of defections from the equities business is threatening to turn
into a flood because of changes in Salomon's compensation system, which left
stock traders and analysts with lower bonuses at the end of last year.
Staff in the equities department are also worried that reforms in the firm's
business structure could mean equities will be neglected at the expense of
the two most profitable departments, bond sales and trading. Senior
management at the firm, however, insists that it remains committed to
maintaining a presence in US and European equities.
The circumstances surrounding Mr Hanley's departure were unclear. He was
reported to have been upset because he was unable to get a meeting with Mr
Warren Buffett, the chairman of Salomon, to discuss the firm's direction. He
was said to have finally decided to resign because of a 'pay dispute'.
The loss is a blow to Salomon's equity research team. Mr Hanley was a
20-year Salomon veteran who had topped the banking section of Institutional
Investors's poll of US brokerage analysts for the past eight years.
There was some good news for Salomon yesterday. The treasurer of California
announced that the state would resume all business dealings with the firm.
California suspended certain business activities with Salomon last year in
the wake of the Treasury bond market scandal.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920117

