FT921-11783

FT  30 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Fleming Income coming to main market


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


FLEMING INCOME and Capital Investment Trust is joining the main market via
an offer for subscription which could raise up to Pounds 250m.
Like many other recent investment trust issues, the trust has a split
capital structure and is linked to a personal equity plan. Investors will be
able to place a full Pounds 6,000 of shares into a Pep in respect of each of
the 1991-92 and 1992-93 tax years. Returns from a Pep are free of both
income and capital gains tax.
The trust has two classes of share: zero dividend and ordinary income. The
former, which are being placed at 30p, will have an entitlement to be repaid
at 85.2p when the trust is wound up in 2002. This is equivalent to a gross
redemption yield of 11 per cent.
The initial net assets of the company, after expenses, are expected to cover
112 per cent of the final capital entitlement of the zero shareholders.
The ordinary income shares will be entitled to all the income of the trust
but will only be repaid after the entitlements of the zero shareholders have
been met in full.
The forecast gross dividend yield on the ordinary income shares is 9 per
cent. Dividends will be paid quarterly. The compound rate of growth of
assets needed for the ordinary income shares to be redeemed at the issue
price in 2002 is 5.2 per cent.
The trust will invest in UK shares and will aim for a yield one third higher
than that on the FT-Actuaries All-Share Index. That implies a gross dividend
yield on the portfolio of 6.6 per cent.
Private shareholders can apply for the ordinary income shares at 70p, or a
packaged unit of ordinary income and zero shares at 100p, which will yield
6.3 per cent. They will not be able to apply for the zeroes directly. These
will be placed with institutions.
Commissions of 3 per cent are being paid to independent financial advisers
who sell the trust so the expenses, like those on last year's M&G issue, are
high for an investment trust offer. If the trust raises Pounds 100m,
expenses will absorb 4.3 per cent of the proceeds.
Applications are invited by February 24 for a minimum of 1,000 units or
1,500 ordinary income shares. The offer, which is not underwritten, will not
proceed unless Pounds 30m is raised.
COMMENT
The investment trust marketing spree rumbles on, with an extra selling
device being the prospect of a Labour government. The attractions of offers
like this is that if all goes well, a private investor placing the ordinary
income shares in a Pep can earn a tax-free yield of 9 per cent; the
equivalent gross yield for a top rate taxpayer is 15 per cent. Of course,
the risk is that the ordinary income shares might not be repaid at the issue
price, especially as the managers will not be able to buy exclusively blue
chips if they are aiming for a portfolio yield of 6.6 per cent. As so often
with these trusts, the zeroes, which are well covered, look the best deal
but private investors can only buy them as part of the package. What with
this offer, and the M&G Recovery Trust being advertised on TV, we will soon
discover whether the industry has swamped investor demand.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920130

