FT921-15338

FT  10 JAN 92 / Technology: Driving away in comfort


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


Interior lighting and air conditioning, two elements of cars which usually
receive little promotional attention from manufacturers, have been the
subject of intensive development by research engineers at Nissan.
Their results provide another example of how Japanese manufacturers are
prepared to probe into unlikely nooks and crannies of product development in
search of market advantage.
The interior lighting comprises a computer-controlled system with an array
of functions which 'welcome' occupants aboard and make it easier, for
example, to find small objects which often roll under seats.
The air-conditioning system has the ability to simulate a natural breeze,
while taking account of weather conditions outside the car.
Nissan claims to have spent three years developing its interior lighting
system, which uses 21 light sources scattered around the car. It has been
designed according to two criteria: to facilitate activities such as map
reading, and to create a comfortable ambience.
Aircraft-style roof spotlights are provided for driver and front passenger.
Because such concentrated light over a small area can produce eye strain,
soft bands of 'fill-in' light can be projected on to the roof lining from
the pillar areas. The floor and under-seats are illuminated by indirect
lighting.
The air-conditioner, which is fitted in Nissan's new CIMA Type 3 luxury
saloon, blows air into the interior using a fan and four ducts. The fan is
micro-processor controlled both to vary its speed, apparently at random, and
to adjust itself in response to temperature changes and sunlight.
The four ducts are covered by motor-driven louvres. These can change the
direction of the impelled air and its 'focus' from highly concentrated
'spot' delivery - used when occupants first get into a hot car - to a more
diffused type, with the air flowing gently back and forth across the car.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920110

