FT924-937

FT  21 DEC 92 / Lucas engineers a defence against short-term views: How the
group has allowed itself to become a takeover prospect


   By ANDREW BOLGER


LUCAS, one of the UK's biggest and most technologically-successful
engineering companies, is on full bid alert.
The Midlands-based group is the City's favourite candidate for takeover, now
recession has slashed its profits and a long-planned succession of senior
management has collapsed.
Lucas shares touched a five-year low of 78p in September, valuing the group
at a mere Pounds 550m - less than half its pre-recession peak in 1989. They
have since recovered to 132p, fuelled mainly by speculation that the group
is vulnerable to predators such as BTR, the acquisitive industrial
conglomerate which last year snapped up the recession-struck Hawker
Siddeley, another famous name in British engineering.
Sir Anthony Gill, Lucas's 62-year-old chairman and chief executive, is
philosophical about the prospect of a bid, but unapologetic about the
group's record: 'People who own us have that decision to make, if it is
presented to them. I hope that they will decide to keep us independent.' To
retain that independence, Lucas, already advised by Schroders, recently
added the US investment bank Goldman Sachs to its team. The core of its
strategy will be a defence of the group's long-term record of investment,
which it says has put it in the world's top three suppliers for its chosen
sectors of automotive and aerospace components, such as braking and diesel
fuel injection systems.
Sir Anthony says: 'There isn't another company quite like us in the UK - our
competitors are in Japan and Germany. Getting the long-term things right
makes the difference between whether the company does well or not. We do
have the problem - which I'm not trying to whinge about - that we are judged
by short-term standards. One year's pre-tax profits figure - that's at the
margin of what we are doing.'
The chairman points to Lucas's consistent record of growth in profits,
earnings, and dividends until the present recession started: 'There's no
reason why we can't get back to the sort of margins we were making then.'
He adds: 'In the first and second years of the recession our sales went up,
when other people's went down, and our profits were lower than other
people's.
'The main reason was that we went on with engineering expenditure to take
market share and win new contracts, some of which we haven't got income from
yet. We could easily have battened down the hatches, not gone for new
business, sacked our engineers - we didn't do that. We don't regret not
doing that.'
Sir Anthony was determined not to repeat the mistake which Lucas made during
the last recession at the beginning of the 1980s, when it cut research and
development spending - and lost market share to Bosch in two crucial product
areas, anti-lock braking systems and petrol fuel injection systems, in which
the German group is now world leader.
He says: 'Although we are now at least the equal to Bosch in technology, we
have a smaller market share. We see the present recession within that
context: it is a challenge to continue to manage our resources of people and
cash for the future, but resist cutting back where that would mortgage our
future.'
Lucas has been reducing costs. In October the group said it had started a
three-year restructuring programme to shed 4,000 jobs, half of them in the
UK, to bring the workforce below 50,000, compared with more than 57,000 two
years ago. Although Sir Anthony says this is strategic reshaping, analysts
disagree, and accuse him of being slower to respond to the downturn than
rivals such as GKN, BBA and T&N.
In curious contrast to Sir Anthony's emphasis on the company's investment
record, Lucas also says recent high levels of R&D - about Pounds 100m
annually over the last three years - and capital spending at twice the rate
of depreciation, are both set to fall, as programmes are completed.
The group's main area of vulnerability, though, is its failure to manage the
succession to Sir Anthony. He had been due to retire this year, but has now
agreed to remain as chief executive for another year and as chairman until
1994.
In February, Mr Tony Edwards, head of the aerospace division, was made chief
executive designate. In March Mr David Hankinson, then finance director who
had been considered for the top job, left with compensation of Pounds
352,000 to give Mr Edwards a clear run in his new role. In August Mr Edwards
was told the board did not consider him to be suitable for the top post as
chairman. In October he moved to rival TI Group.
Lucas last month appointed Mr Frank Turner, from Rolls-Royce, to head its
aerospace group - but it has gone back to the drawing board in the search
for both chief executive and chairman.
Sir Anthony denies any reluctance to hand over the reins of the group he has
dominated for years. 'Just ask my wife about that,' he says grimly,
explaining that he had promised her he would retire this year.
While he remains in his job, he is haunted by the example of Hawker
Siddeley, which last autumn depressed the market with a gloomy trading
statement. The next day BTR pounced.
With that example in mind, Lucas was careful to accentuate the positive when
announcing its annual results in October. It dipped into reserves to keep a
7p total dividend, and expects to generate enough profits in the year to
July 31 to cover a maintained pay-out of Pounds 50m. Analysts are sceptical,
given that the group has said the first half is likely to be flat. However,
the group is confident that it will achieve its target of Pounds 100m from
disposals in the current year.
Sir Anthony had a personal interest in the fate of Hawker, in the shape of
Mr Alan Watkins, who joined it as chief executive from Lucas two years
before BTR's bid. He said: 'Poor Alan Watkins took a bit of the Lucas
culture with him. The market is very, very impatient and when they did not
see enough happening, they persecuted him and did not give him the benefit
of the doubt. I hope they would give us the benefit of the doubt, because
what we are doing is consistent with what we said we would do.'

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921221

