FT923-15555

FT  01 JUL 92 / 'Big Brown' delivers a challenge to rivals: United Parcel
Services' purchase of Carryfast makes it a major player in Europe. But can
it succeed where FedEx failed?


   By NIKKI TAIT


It is one o'clock in the morning in Louisville, Kentucky. Dozens of cargo
aircraft sit on the airport tarmac. In the vast hangars nearby, local
students are pulling packages off and on conveyor belts, for a princely
Dollars 8 an hour. In the course of one night, more than half a million
parcels will come and go.
The remarkable feature of this operation - a typical night for United Parcel
Services' air division - is that it did not exist 10 years ago. The
Atlanta-based company dates back to 1907, but for most of its life it has
been a cheap, reliable 'ground deliverer' of bulky parcels within the US.
Mud-coloured vans earned UPS the nickname 'Big Brown'; its image was
similarly dull.
The extent to which UPS has tried to change all that was demonstrated this
week. The Atlanta-based company announced it was buying, for an undisclosed
price, Carryfast, the UK's largest privately-owned express delivery company.
The deal adds 8m packages to UPS's annual total of 2.9bn handled.
Carryfast is the last main link in UPS's European delivery system, the 16th
purchase in a seven-year build-up which has cost more than Dollars 1bn
(Pounds 527m). A decade ago, UPS did not own an aircraft and did not move
express packages between the US and most foreign countries. Suddenly, it has
become a large player in the European market, with an owned fleet of more
than 130 jets.
All of which would be fine, except that Federal Express (FedEx), the largest
US express delivery company and a rival of UPS, has just terminated an
important European expansion strategy.
The cause was simple: losses running at more than Dollars 100m a quarter,
and mounting. Since FedEx and UPS are chasing similar customers - a
business-oriented market that wants a speedier, more convenient service than
national post offices can offer - and UPS is also making losses in Europe,
this raises a simple question: can UPS succeed where FedEx failed?
Part of the answer may lie in the company's character. UPS has been in the
delivery business since its founder, Mr James Casey, sent motorcycle
messengers around Seattle in the early 1900s. These homespun origins are
still apparent today. UPS is markedly devoid of business school whizz-kids
and its chairman, Mr Kent Nelson, began his career in an Indiana customer
service department.
At home, the company has a reputation for conservatism; it clung to listed
prices when competitors were wooing customers with discounts. But when the
company does move, it tends to do so with immense deliberation.
UPS's structure is an important factor. In spite of its size - revenues of
Dollars 15bn make it the world's largest parcel delivery business - its
equity is privately owned, mainly by employees. UPS has also made no large
acquisitions recently. The result is long-term debt of Dollars 830m at
end-1991, compared with shareholders' funds of Dollars 3.9bn. 'UPS has long
pockets,' says one analyst, 'and it is able to take the long view.'
Second, UPS cannot afford to fail. The US express delivery market is
squeezed by recession and competition. FedEx is trying to cling to its
entrenched position, while Airborne Express, a low-cost operator in the
business market, has carved out an effective, undercutting niche.
In the ground deliveries sector, there is pressure from imitators, such as
Roadway. UPS, although solidly profitable, saw its US ground volume decline
last year. 'The US ground market was maturing,' says Mr Donald Layden, UPS's
director of international operations. 'The opportunity was to move into
express deliveries and expand internationally.' He says that by the end of
the decade, around one-third of UPS's revenues will come from outside the
US.
Third, the fact that FedEx has, to some extent, retreated from the European
market may make life easier for the remaining players.
Even so, competitors are quick to point out the potential hurdles. Part of
the problem at FedEx was the difficulty in integrating national ground-based
delivery services into an international, air-oriented network.
One rival said: 'It's a different mentality. A domestic driver picks the
goods up and delivers them; with an international delivery, you need some
idea of customs regulations and all that. International express is also very
time-sensitive - Federal found that some of its drivers just saw these
packages as another delivery.'
A second problem is the market itself. One reason why the likes of FedEx and
UPS were attracted to Europe was the notion that, as the single market
dawned, trade barriers would fall, companies would become increasingly
multinational and cross-border packages would flow. In reality, there has
been an increase in delivery capacity and a smaller upturn in volume. FedEx
recently estimated the intra-European overnight market at just 100,000
packages a day, compared with 3m in the US.
Third, although FedEx has given up trying to deliver for itself in most of
Europe, some large rivals - including Brussels-based DHL, with whom UPS once
considered merging, and Australia's TNT - are less likely to abandon the
fight.
Competitors have no doubts that UPS is trying to force the issue. 'They're a
real a thorn in our side,' says one rival, 'They're very competitive and the
prices are suicidal - they must be losing hundreds of millions of dollars a
year.'
UPS's response is phlegmatic. Mr Layden clings fiercely to his stated goal
of profitability in Europe by 1994, although he admits that blending of the
numerous businesses acquired is 'a very big management task'.
With 20,000 employees in Europe, and a Dollars 1bn-plus investment at stake,
Mr Layden cannot afford to be wrong. Even so, UPS may find that travelling
is the easier part. It is usually harder to arrive.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920701

