FT922-4417

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (3): Plastics
makers' mixed feelings


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


INCREASING enthusiasm among vehicle makers for aluminium as a solution to
their weight-saving and recycling problems was much in evidence at the
Society of Automotive Engineers' annual congress in Detroit two months ago.
It is a development regarded with mixed feelings, however, by the
manufacturers and processors of plastic composites.
Should the enthusiasm extend to cladding with aluminium panels the
spaceframes which would form the primary structure of an aluminium car, Dow,
DuPont, GE and others among the big plastics producers could be
disadvantaged. It is only recently that they have begun making significant
inroads into the potentially very high volume market for vehicle body
panels.
Less than two years ago, the composites sector was given a big boost with
the launch of General Motors' Dollars 4bn Saturn project in Tennessee.
Saturn saw the adoption, for the first time ever on a 100,000-plus annual
volume car, of a body comprising a steel spaceframe hung with recyclable
thermoplastic panels. Yet Saturn is only the latest of several vehicles
making extensive use of such materials to be developed by GM.
If the Saturn plant and General Motors' leisure van facilities were working
to full capacity, the composites industry would currently be supplying the
bodies for nearly 500,000 vehicles annually to GM alone, if production of
the Corvette sports car was also included. The GM vans, sold under various
badges such as Chevrolet Lumina and Pontiac TranSport, also use plastic body
panels on a steel spaceframe, with capacity available for 200,000 units a
year.
The vans' panels, however, are of thermosets, which can only be chopped up
or burned after their useful life ends whereas thermoplastics can be melted
down and used to make something else.
Nevertheless, both types have allowed GM - and in Europe, Renault with its
plastic-bodied Espace 'people carrier' - to benefit from the lower tooling
costs involved in producing moulds rather than the dies for stamping steel:
the greater flexibility of body styling which plastics allow, and the
ability to mould in one piece a complex body part which otherwise would
require the welding together of four or five separate metal pressings.
Their achilles' heel, however, is the longer cycle time inevitably needed to
produce components and recyclability.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920605

