FT924-1074

FT  19 DEC 92 / Sport: A wind-blown heaven - Golf / American friends
introduced John Hopkins to the joys of Porthcawl's links in his native Wales


   By JOHN HOPKINS


I HAD grown up hearing stories about Royal Porthcawl, the famous golf course
in south Wales, and years later I covered amateur and professional events
that it staged. Porthcawl, then, had a place in my mind, but as I had never
played there, it had not yet won a place in my heart. The chance to try out
my middle handicap game over its 6,600 yards came unexpectedly in the form
of a letter from my friend Robert Macdonald in the US.
Macdonald and his fellow enthusiasts were making their annual pilgrimage to
play golf in Britain. Last year it was Muirfield in Scotland and
thereabouts; this year it was to be the Welsh courses. They would start at
Hoylake, move down to Aberdovey, Royal St David's and Borth and conclude
with Southerndown and Royal Porthcawl.
There was no messing around. These were the sort of men who put the word
serious into the phrase serious golfers. It was 36 a day, nothing less.
Would I join them for all or some of the trip? Could a Welshman refuse such
an invitation?
Macdonald cares deeply about golf as it is played in Britain. He has no more
interest in watching most professional tournaments than a pro would have in
joining one of his monthly Shakespeare play-readings in New York city where
he lives. He and his friends have been making these golfing trips to Britain
on and off since 1980. The organisation is meticulous.
Before Macdonald settles the itinerary, telephone calls are placed hither
and yon and letters whizz across the Atlantic. 'To travel hopefully is a
better thing than to arrive,' wrote Robert Louis Stevenson. Macdonald does
not agree. 'I am well aware that what seems like a rainbow to me may seem
like a wisp of fog to others,' Macdonald wrote to me.
Tee times are booked well in advance, hired cars organised, route maps drawn
up. I would not be surprised if the foreign secretary received a carbon copy
of the final itinerary. I have no doubt the US Ambassador to Britain is on a
red alert.
The golf is only the half of it. We are talking of men of substance, who
like to complement their efforts on the golf course each day with something
more than bread and dripping. The quality of the eating and drinking
receives as much attention as a two-foot putt to win a hole.
So one evening in September I made my way to the Egerton Grey Hotel at
Porthkerry near Porthcawl. As I walked in, I heard transatlantic voices
coming from the lounge.
In one chair was Arch, a tall man with a warm smile and clumps of hair that
sprang out seemingly uncontrollably from above his ears. He was The Keeper
of the Records and deadly serious about it, too, noting all the details in a
thick book.
At one point the discussion turned to the forthcoming US presidential
election when Arch suddenly interrupted. 'Wait, wait,' he said urgently. 'I
have got to write down our putts from this morning. How many did you have
Robbie?'
Macdonald, meanwhile, was wearing the smile of a man who is halfway to
heaven. He had played well that day and fallen in love with Porthcawl.
Sidney, the third member of the trio, had his head in the wine list
assessing the bottles as he had scrutinised every putt that day.
Up to this point, 1992 had been a good year for me in my quest to experience
good courses. In March I had played at San Lorenzo in Portugal and been
enchanted by its stirring holes by the sea in the middle of the round and
its wonderful finish.
The morning after the conclusion of the US Open, I tackled Cypress Point on
the Monterey Peninsula. Behind me was Ian Baker-Finch, the 1991 Open
champion. 'Good-day mate,' he had said. And as we walked to the 16th tee,
who should appear but Mark Calcavecchia, the 1988 Open champion.
Still, it is not for so many stars that I remember Cypress Point. It is
because I went par, par, par on the 15th, 16th and 17th holes, two par
threes and a four on three of the most photographed holes in golf.
By September, the flush of excitement at my feat had worn thin and when I
saw the sea hurling itself furiously at the shore by the side of the first
hole at Royal Porthcawl doubts assailed me.
Four hours later I was as elated as Macdonald had been the day before. I
changed out of my spikes and admired the magnificent wooden lockers, which
must be as old as the club. Silently I berated myself for ignoring the
charms of Porthcawl for so long.
It was a good enough test to stage an Open. The sea is visible from nearly
every hole and as we leaned in to the wind we could glimpse in the distance
some of John Masefield's 'dirty British coasters with salt-caked smoke
stacks' barging through the seas. 'I think I am going to have to revise my
top five British courses,' said Macdonald. 'This place is terrific.'
At the bar over ham sandwiches and beer, Arch worked out that he and SK were
level on the morning's play. Robert Macdonald calculated the state of our
match. It was to be good news: 'John has won.' I took delivery of three 50p
pieces and returned to London, victorious, windblown and deeply contented,
like an art lover who has found an unexpected Rembrandt.
As for Macdonald and company, they played another 18 - and then a further
four. If darkness had not intervened, they would still be there.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921219

