FT922-552

FT  26 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Lasmo to raise extra Dollars 200m from
disposals


   By ROLAND RUDD and NIKKI TAIT


   LONDON, NEW YORK


LASMO, the oil exploration and production group, said yesterday that
disposal of US property and production assets worth at least Dollars 200m
(Pounds 108m) would more than offset the reduction in the amount raised from
the flotation of Ultramar Corporation.
The initial public offering of shares in the North American oil refining
business, which LASMO inherited when it took over the Ultramar group last
year, finally went ahead yesterday evening in New York. The shares were
priced at Dollars 15.
This was at the lowest end of the revised pricing range suggested by Goldman
Sachs, the US investment bank handling the flotation. The original offer
documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 1, had
suggested a maximum price of Dollars 21 a share. Earlier this week, however,
Goldman reduced the expected price range for the 33m shares on offer to
between Dollars 15 and Dollars 17.
Mr Norman Davidson Kelly, Lasmo's director for corporate development, said
the shortfall in the proceeds from the offer would now be more than made up
by the planned disposals.
Ultramar's oil and gas production business is valued at more than Dollars
100m by Lasmo. A further Dollars 100m could be realised from selling
Ultramar's US property interests.
The property disposals, expected either later this year or early next year,
would be via trade sales. Ultramar has properties in California and the East
Coast.
'It may have to sell one or two things it did not intend to sell', said one
of Lasmo's advisers, 'but the main thing is that it is selling the North
American oil refining business immediately.'
Mr Davidson Kelly said: 'We are very pleased that within six months of
acquiring Ultramar we have been able to sell its refining business and
concentrate our resources on exploration and production.'
Lasmo's disposal of the North American downstream assets, earmarked since it
took over Ultramar, was expected to go to a single buyer. Lack of interest
from potential buyers forced it to seek a flotation.
In the wake of the aborted flotation of GPA Group, the aircraft lessor,
Lasmo shares fell, partly because of nervousness about the new issue market
generally. The shares yesterday firmed 2p, however, to close at 176p.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920626

