FT924-12229

FT  22 OCT 92 / Cabinet thwarts Tory revolt: Government makes extra
concessions to win vote over pit closures


   By RALPH ATKINS


THE GOVERNMENT succeeded last night in thwarting a revolt by Tory MPs over
coal pit closures after new concessions by Cabinet ministers.
The revolt, which at the start of the week looked certain to end in
humiliating defeat for the government, was curbed after Mr Michael
Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, promised a 'genuine review' of the
UK's energy strategy.
He also offered a slight hope that the 10 pits excluded from the moratorium
on pit closures announced this week could yet be reprieved.
After a stormy Commons debate, a Labour motion was defeated by 13 votes. Six
Tories voted against the government and five abstained but the government
was helped by eight Ulster Unionist MPs abstaining.
The motion called for a moratorium on all 31 affected pits until the
completion of a full analysis planned by the all-party Commons trade and
industry select committee. A government amendment endorsing the Cabinet's
policy on the pits was approved by 320 votes to 305.
Winding up the debate, Mr David Hunt, Welsh secretary, went out of his way
to give undertakings to possible opponents about the extent of the review -
including an assurance that Northern Ireland energy policy would be
included.
Mrs Elizabeth Peacock, Tory MP for Batley and Spen, was sacked as
parliamentary private secretary to a social security minister last night
after defying government whips.
The latest concessions were the culmination of three days of retreat. Mr
Heseltine had already offered, first, a delay and then extensive
consultations by his department on the closure programme. The case for
closure will now be scrutinised separately for all pits.
In spite of a bravura performance during the Labour- initiated debate, Mr
Heseltine's political reputation, and Conservative MPs' faith in the
sure-footedness of Mr John Major, have been damaged by the back-tracking
during the past week.
Mr Heseltine said the impact of legislation introduced by the government
which affected the markets for coal and electricity generation industries
would be covered by the review of UK energy policy. Subsidies for the
nuclear industry would also be included.
Mr Heseltine said the review by his department would be wide-ranging and
would consider evidence from all interested parties, including the trade
unions. Apart from evidence given in commercial confidence, as much as
possible would be made public.
The inquiry would be 'without restrictions' and have 'no pre-ordained
outcome', he said. Boyds, an international mining consultancy firm, would be
employed to give evidence on the viability of pits and the prospects for
British Coal. Mr Heseltine was pressed repeatedly by Labour MPs and rebel
Tories on the status of the 10 pits which British Coal has advised have no
prospect of being economically viable and are due to be shut down after a
statutory 90-day consultation period.
He replied that British Coal was compelled, during the consultations, not to
take any action which might prejudice the possibility of the pits continuing
in operation afterwards, 'and that means they have to indulge in the
appropriate care and maintenance in order to keep open that option'.
He sought, however, not to raise expectations too high, emphasising that
British Coal had advised him that the 10 pits were loss-making, and there
was 'no case' for waiting until the end of the general moratorium before
beginning the statutory consultation period.
Mr Robin Cook, Labour's trade and industry spokesman, said Labour objected
to the government's review because it covered only the 21 pits included in
the moratorium and would be carried out by the government itself. He said
the government had no energy strategy and that ministers had created a 'a
nation united in anger'.
Labour rounds on abstainers Page 9
Search for balance of power, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921022

