FT924-6423

FT  21 NOV 92 / Yeltsin wins over South Koreans


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin left Seoul yesterday having won the confidence of
South Koreans and dispelling much of the distrust that South Koreans have
harboured against Russia since the Korean war.
Symbolic gestures, such as Mr Yeltsin's personal delivery of the 'black box'
from the Korean airliner shot down by the Soviet Union in 1983, were meant
to convince the public of Russia's friendly intentions.
Mr Yeltsin also assured his hosts that Moscow was ending its military
support of North Korea, while supporting South Korea's demand that Pyongyang
accept spot inspections of its suspected nuclear weapons facilities.
The signing of several accords, including one establishing regular bilateral
consultations and another on military co-operation, appears to place
Moscow-Seoul relations on a firm foundation only two years after the
countries established diplomatic links.
But Mr Yeltsin may still be disappointed if he expects these measures will
result in a sharp increase of Korean investment in Russia.
One indication of the troubles involved in economic ties was the failure
yesterday to sign an agreement establishing an Korean industrial complex at
the port of Nakhodka.
Although a contract was signed on a feasibility study for the joint
development of natural gas reserves and construction of a gas pipeline to
South Korea, this massive project will take at least 20 years to complete if
undertaken.
Korean companies, meanwhile, are more attracted by the immediate gains
promised in the rapidly developing Chinese market. Korean direct investments
in China are 10 times larger than in Russia.
In the context of South Korea's Nordpolitik policy to isolate North Korea,
China is also considered to be more important than Russia because it has
greater influence in Pyongyang.
Seoul wants to use Beijing's influence to persuade North Korea to make
concessions on the nuclear issue and open up its economy to market forces.
By selecting South Korea as the first nation he visited in Asia as Russian
president, Mr Yeltsin was also perceived as delivering a diplomatic snub to
Japan over the Kurile Islands dispute.
Russian officials indicated that Moscow's closer economic ties with Korea
would force Tokyo to make a concession on the territorial issue.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921121

