FT922-4181

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: A 'Wozzeck' awaited with bated breath / Review of the
first Barenboim/Chereau collaboration at the Chatelet


   By MAX LOPPERT


THE BASTILLE'S loss is the Chatelet's gain. Three years ago, Daniel
Barenboim was forcibly removed from the administration of the new Paris
opera house, and a whole first set of opera-programming went with him - but
not all of it was entirely lost. The planned Boulez-Stein Pelleas was taken
up instead by the Welsh National Opera, and in due course brought by them to
the Chatelet, Jacques Chirac's Paris opera bastion, from where noses can be
neatly thumbed at Mitterand's Bastille down-river.
By a similar arrangement - in this case, a Chatelet co-production with the
Berlin Staatsoper and Chicago - the theatre has acquired probably the
biggest single event of the current Paris season: the Wozzeck that launches
the partnership of Barenboim (conducting his former 'home' orchestra, the
Orchestre de Paris) and the producer Patrice Chereau.
Wednesday's opening was treated to the sort of silent, bated-breath audience
attention - and then the thunderous cheers - the city can sometimes accord
its operatic happenings. On this occasion it was with good reason:
performances on this level of theatrical seriousness and skill are rare on
any opera stage.
Chereau's work in the medium has been intentionally limited to the
epoch-making Bayreuth Ring and Paris Lulu of the 1970s, and a tiny handful
of other outings since; he shows here the rigorous control of style and
texture for which all his theatrical presentations are celebrated. The
three-act opera, played (as is now the rule) without intervals, unfolds as a
severely simple, beautiful piece of continuous opera-theatre. One marvels at
the subtlety of the lighting (by Dominique Brugiere), sometimes daringly
minimal, always precisely focused to the growth of dramatic event, and at
the smooth way Richard Peduzzi's sets - small-town buildings reduced to
vestigial shapes and forms - can be slid across the stage.
Only the fall of the great black curtain marking scene-breaks provides any
starkness, any jagged edge. Nothing too local or too 'anecdotal' - still the
ultimate term of French dispraise - mars the sleek lines of the show. Though
period is touched in by Moidele Bickel's costumes, and a sense of bourgeois
oppression evoked by the enmeshment of Wozzeck and Marie in this
nightmarishly looming-and-dissolving landscape, the great strokes of drama
are boiled down to a kind of Wozzeck essence.
No shaving scene at the start, no medical examination later on: the Doctor
(with a jutting bald head out of German silent cinema) and Captain (with
darting rabbit-runs and skips) are reduced to a catalogue of physical tics.
Here, and indeed in almost all the other key Wozzeck places, something big
and heart-searing about the opera - the angry compassion of its
characterisation, the pained ferocity of its social protest - seems to me to
go missing in the process.
The production opens with the house lights up and the Captain arriving on
stage via a bridge from the auditorium, and closes with the lights up in
similar fashion. The message to the audience is, plainly, 'This is your
life'. For me, though, it remains a statement rather than an emotional
confirmation - and an indication of the extent to which the linked skills of
Chereau's immensely disciplined stagecraft have failed to draw blood, to
stir the emotions beyond distanced connoisseur appreciation.
This may be because of the distanced effect of the music-making. In any
really overwhelming performance of the opera, Berg's music takes possession
of a theatre, fills it to overflowing. Barenboim has exercised enormous care
over the musical preparation - the detailed shaping and dynamic
differentiation of string phrases afford just one among many tokens of
evidence. As before in the opera house, I find his account of the score
lacking in authority, in forwardness of momentum, in 'animal' certainty of
dramatic direction.
Whatever emotional impact the performance does possess is owed to Franz
Grundheber, a Wozzeck admired on stage and record, who concentrates all his
long experience of the opera into Chereau's production without any loss of
his own individuality. He sings the music with wonderful frankness of sound
and manner, shaping words and notes as the idiom were his natural habitat;
he comes across in full, bravely and generously.
Waltraud Meier, a magnificent theatrical animal, throws herself into Marie's
music with thrilling disregard for the safety of her high mezzo; her scenes
with the child are brilliantly staged, yet without allowing the character to
emerge in the round. Graham Clark (a virtuoso Captain), Gunter von Kannen
(Doctor), Mark Baker (Drum Major), Donald Kaasch (Andres) and Birgitta
Svenden (Margret) are all outstanding exponents of Chereau's production.
In repertory until June 15

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

920606

