FT924-6517

FT  20 NOV 92 / How the French fought to save the franc: William Dawkins and
David Buchan tell the tale of how the government's financial team managed to
thwart the markets


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS and DAVID BUCHAN


A few yards beneath the helipad on the roof of the high-tech structure that
houses the French finance ministry is the office of Mr Thierry Aulagnon,
chief adviser to the minister.
Mr Aulagnon, one of the brightest financial brains in the French
administration, is at his computer screen, gloomily watching the value of
the franc, stuck near the bottom of its permitted rate in the European
Monetary System (EMS). The screen tells him that the franc is continuing to
wilt under the heaviest speculation on record, despite the large sums being
spent on intervention by the Bank of France.
It is late afternoon on Tuesday, September 22, two days after France's
narrow vote in favour of European monetary and political union. Mr Aulagnon
is aware that failure to turn back the speculators would be a disaster for
an already weak government.
Every 15 minutes, the Bank of France telephones to tell Mr Aulagnon that it
has bought another billion francs or so of its own currency in an attempt to
thwart the speculators. As dealing rooms across the world continue to bet on
a devaluation, the screen beeps intermittently, breaking the calm of Mr
Aulagnon's carpeted office. 'It was my worst moment,' he recalls. By the end
of the seven-day crisis on September 23, the French central bank had bought
FFr160bn (Pounds 19.6bn), its biggest-ever intervention.
That Tuesday afternoon, Mr Aulagnon could not have felt more alone. His
inexperienced young boss, Mr Michel Sapin, 40, who was promoted from junior
justice minister to finance minister only last April, was closeted in a
Washington hotel room with Mr Jacques de Larosiere, governor of the Bank of
France, and their German counterparts, Mr Theo Waigel and Mr Helmut
Schlesinger. There, they negotiated the Franco-German support for the
franc/D-Mark parity that in the end foiled the markets. Until then, Mr
Sapin's best-known contribution to his country's finances had been his
collection of antique coins.
Today, the French government is confident enough to tell the tale of how the
battle for the franc was won. Mr Sapin and his team claim they never doubted
that they would pull it off. 'People told us that the market is always
right. But we saw no reason why the franc deserved to be devalued, in terms
of economic fundamentals. It was total determination, total - from the
finance minister, to the prime minister and the president,' says Mr
Aulagnon.
But at the time, the markets did not see it that way. Traders found it hard
to believe that a currency which was effectively devalued five times in the
1980s could survive unscathed the September currency crisis. So how did the
finance ministry keep its head?
Mr Aulagnon recalls that 'a shadow fell across the franc' from the moment of
the Danish vote against the Maastricht treaty in early June, followed by
President Francois Mitterrand's decision to call a referendum. Throughout
July and August, it weakened steadily against the D-Mark.
The battle began in earnest at lunchtime on Thursday, September 17, the day
after sterling and the lira were forced to leave the exchange rate mechanism
of the EMS. Officials expected the franc to be next in the firing line, if
only because nobody knew what the result of the referendum would be on the
coming Sunday.
In afternoon dealings in Paris and morning trades in New York, the franc's
previously gentle decline suddenly accelerated, until it hit FFr3.4250 to
the D-Mark, still a fraction above its permitted floor of FFr3.4305. But
that was close enough to alarm a French government committed to intervening
voluntarily before EMS rules obliged it to do so.
By Friday evening the Bank of France had bought FFr56bn of its own currency,
borrowing heavily from the Bundesbank and commercial banks, but had failed
to shift the rate significantly. It had even begun to spend its own
reserves. 'We tried not to panic, to learn a lesson from the British and
Italian experience,' said Mr Aulagnon. Even so, Mr Sapin was worried enough
to delay by a nearly a day his departure to Washington for a meeting with
the other finance ministers of the Group of Seven leading industrialised
nations.
Finally, on Friday evening, he left for the US with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet,
director of the Treasury, and Mr de Larosiere. Mr Aulagnon was left in
charge of an emergency team in Paris. Over the Atlantic, the trio prepared
plans for defending the franc in the event of a No or a narrow Yes in the
Sunday referendum. In either case, German political support would be needed.
By Sunday afternoon Washington time, Mr Aulagnon was able to relay to Mr
Sapin that the French result was a narrow Yes and that the franc was
therefore likely to come under worse attack. Mr Sapin and Mr de Larosiere
opened negotiations with their German counterparts the next day.
Back in Paris, Mr Aulagnon was surprised as the franc, contrary to
expectations, recovered against the D-Mark to FFr3.3850 in off-market
trading on Sunday night. But by Monday morning, his worse expectations
turned out to be true and the franc slammed back down to FFr3.4250.
Chaos broke out on the markets for the next two days, while the
Franco-German teams in Washington finalised - in English, their only common
language - the complex details of co-ordinated intervention by their central
banks. Meanwhile, the Bank of France continued to hold the fort.
It was not until 2am on September 23, that an exhausted Mr Sapin made it
back to the finance ministry in Paris, bearing a Franco-German statement
that the franc/ D-Mark parity would be defended, and the secret details of a
public promise by the Bank of France and the Bundesbank to intervene
'massively'. Mr Sapin went into a two-hour meeting with Mr Aulagnon's team,
at which they discussed how to present the deal.
At 8.15am a rise in French official interest rates flashed across the Reuter
screens, followed five minutes later by the joint statement. At 8.30am Mr
Sapin announced the deal. The finance ministry held its breath as the
Bundesbank began, for the first time, to intervene. It was not until the
afternoon that Paris received its reward, as the franc started to recover,
to FFr3.40 in early New York trading. The rise prompted relief in the French
finance ministry.
'Since then, things have gone on improving,' says Mr Aulagnon. At that
moment, his screen beeps from the other side of the room. Mr Aulagnon
saunters over to check, with an air of perhaps overstudied calm. 'I always
thought we would win,' he repeats. 'But even so, I wouldn't want to go
through that again.'
Mr Aulagnon may get his wish. But the continuing turbulence on the foreign
exchange markets, which yesterday saw the franc fall 0.7 centimes to
FFr3.38, suggests more battles could lie ahead.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921120

