FT924-5946

FT  24 NOV 92 / German companies in rail link


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


SIEMENS and Daimler-Benz, Germany's biggest industrial corporations, plan to
tighten their railway engineering links in a move which could lead to the
creation of a world-scale locomotive, rolling stock and track systems group.
Siemens said yesterday that it and AEG, the Daimler subsidiary, had asked
the Berlin cartel office if there would be any fundamental objections to
'co-operation'.
'We have not yet raised the question of what form the joint venture should
take - whether it should involve all or part of our operations,' Siemens
added.
A merger, which could include all Siemens' holdings in other joint ventures,
such as those with steel and engineering groups Krupp and Krauss Maffei,
would create a company with sales of almost DM4.5bn (Pounds 1.85bn).
Both businesses were profitable, but the increasing privatisation of railway
networks, and internationalisation of markets formerly dominated by public
sector utilities buying from domestic manufacturers, made increased
competitiveness desirable, Siemens said.
There was a growing market for companies which could provide complete
systems, including tracks, signalling, locomotives, power supply and
signalling.
Competitors such as ABB and GEC-Alsthom had consolidated strong positions in
their domestic markets and were increasing their international presence. The
German industry, by contrast, was still fragmented.
Apart from seeking greater critical mass in the home market, where contracts
totalling DM100bn are expected for work on upgrading and linking the former
East German rail network with that in the west, both prospective partners
want to extend their international presence.
Seeking influence in east European markets, Siemens is currently battling
with the new management of Skoda, the biggest Czech engineering group, to
take control of its rail interests. It is lead company in a consortium of
German engineers signed up to rebuild rail links between Warsaw and Berlin.
The group, which created its own rail transport technology division only
three years ago, has many co-operation deals in the rail business, including
one with Ansaldo, the state-owned Italian company.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921124

