FT924-12151

FT  22 OCT 92 / People: Sir Anthony Tennant to join Morgan Stanley as an
adviser


Sir Anthony Tennant (left), who is stepping down as chairman of Guinness at
the end of the year, is to become a senior adviser and director of Morgan
Stanley International.
Sir Anthony, who says he has worked with Bob Greenhill, president of Morgan
Stanley Group, for many years, had used Morgan Stanley's services when he
was at Grand Met, and then at Guinness where the US investment bank advised,
among other things, on the Glenmore Distilleries acquisition.
Whereas appointments of prestigious names from British business to be
advisers at City institutions do not always in practice amount to much, Sir
Anthony suggests he intends to roll up his sleeves and get closely involved
in Morgan Stanley's work. He says he plans to 'spend a lot of time - as much
as is needed' at the bank, immersing himself not just in group strategic
issues but in the policies and strategies of important clients - including
meeting those clients directly.
Last month confirmed as chairman of Christie's when Lord Carrington steps
down next May, and recently appointed to the board of Forte, Sir Anthony
suggests his time post-Guinness is now more or less spoken for. 'My main
activities will be Christie's, Morgan Stanley and Forte in that sort of
order,' he explained yesterday. 'I think that will be enough, don't you?'
*****
David Beynon, formerly a main board director at Allied Dunbar, has been
named managing director of Midland Personal Financial Services and chief
executive of Midland Life, its life assurance subsidiary. He is the third
main board member to leave Allied Dunbar since the departure of Mike Wilson
in late 1990 to join Sir Mark Weinberg in the new J Rothschild Assurance
Company.
Beynon, who started out as an Allied Dunbar salesman 17 years ago, says
there is no suggestion that the hard selling reputation garnered over the
years by Allied Dunbar will be transplanted to Midland Bank. 'They have this
horrible reputation as Allied Crowbar', Beynon says. 'In fact, they are only
aggressive on prospecting for names. Once they make a sales call, they are
very professional and don't hard sell at all. And there is no need for
prospecting at Midland.'
Banks in general, and Midland in particular, have the three necessary
ingredients to survive in the increasingly competitive retail financial
services business: a directly-employed sales force, multi-channel
distribution and 'a source of warm clients', Beynon says. Midland has plans
to increase its personal financial services sales staff to 750 by the end of
1993 from 450 now.
*****
Professor Douglas McWilliams is stepping down from his post as chief
economic adviser to the Confederation of British Industry. He has been a
ubiquitous presence on radio and television in recent months and has
consistently taken a gloomy line on the prospects for the UK economy.
'Unfortunately, I have been proved to be right,' he says.
McWilliams will still act as a consultant to the CBI but will no longer be
an official spokesman for the organisation. Meanwhile he has big plans for
his consultancy London Economics which is to be renamed the Centre for
Economics and Business Research. One service he hopes to provide is a user's
guide to the effectiveness of the many business surveys which are produced.
He also hopes to return to the cricket field where a leg injury, which he
once suspected to be gout, restricted his play this year. These days he is
built for comfort rather than speed, but his canny swing bowling has tricked
many a good batsman. Even more important for a cricketer, he knows that the
most important battle to win is the post-match discussion in the bar.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921022

