FT921-1452

FT  24 MAR 92 / Tories shift focus to rally support of skilled workers


   By PHILIP STEPHENS and IVO DAWNAY


A SHAKE-UP of Mr John Major's campaign strategy was signalled last night
after the Conservatives had been put on the defensive by the prime
minister's admission that he might be unable to reduce the tax burden in the
next parliament.
Senior ministers said the Conservative campaign had been 'recalibrated' to
focus all of its efforts on winning back the support of the skilled working
classes who delivered the party victory in 1983 and 1987.
After a bruising day, Mr Major was cheered by an opinion poll showing the
Conservatives with a five-point lead over Labour. The Harris poll for
today's Daily Express put the Tories at 43 per cent, Labour at 38 per cent
and the Liberal Democrats at 15 per cent.
The result contrasted with the average of most recent polls which have shown
a Labour lead of two points, but ministers said it offered the first sign
that their onslaught on Labour's tax plans was yielding results.
Harris has tended to give the Conservatives a higher rating than other
polling organisations, so confirmation of any trend back to the
Conservatives will hinge on three further surveys due over the next two
days. Those results are seen by strategists on all sides as potentially
crucial to the outcome of the April 9 election.
As the Conservatives conceded that scope for tax cuts was limited, Mr Neil
Kinnock launched his party's 'manufacturing manifesto' in Birmingham,
stressing a Pounds 1.1bn recovery programme as a blueprint for boosting
industry and exports.
The document's release - timed to coincide with yesterday's trade figures -
was followed with a denunciation by Mr Kinnock of news of another Pounds
750m trade gap in February as 'quite dreadful'. Labour is now expected to
shift the focus of its campaign to allegations of deteriorating public
sector services.
Mr Major's campaign aides acknowledged that the Conservatives had made two
important errors in the first week of the campaign. The view last night was
that the party had been mistaken initially in believing that the prime
minister could be kept above the fray in the assault on Labour's tax plans.
It had then directed too much attention on the impact on those higher up the
income scale.
Mr Richard Ryder, the Conservative chief whip and a confidant of the prime
minister, is said to be the moving force behind the new approach. Mr Ryder,
who has been given a wide-ranging brief to oversee the party's strategy, has
established a base at Conservative central office.
The strategy is designed to press home the charge - dismissed as absurd by
Mr Kinnock - that the opposition's spending plans would force an increase of
Pounds 1,250 a year in the bills of all taxpayers. One senior minister
described the shift - designed to win back the so-called C2 group of skilled
manual workers - as the only hope of regaining the initiative.
But, facing strong questioning about the Conservatives' tax plans, Mr Major
was forced to concede that, in spite of a pledge to reduce eventually the
basic rate of income tax to 20p in the pound, he could not guarantee a
reduction in the overall tax burden.
Amid charge and countercharge about the two parties' tax plans, Mr Kinnock
said the admission had all but confirmed Labour's longstanding charges that
the the prime minister had a secret agenda to increase value added tax.
The prime minister hotly denied suggestions that the deterioration in the
government's finances was such that it was now paying for current
expenditure from borrowing. He insisted that next year's prospective
borrowing of Pounds 28bn had to be set against public investment of Pounds
30bn.
But while Mr Major said that the tax burden had been 'broadly flat' under
successive Conservative government, official figures showed a rise from 35.5
per cent of national income in 1979 to 36.75 per cent this year.
ELECTION 1992
Pages 8-10 Arms groups 'may fare better under Labour' Page 10
Technically speaking Page 18
Editorial comment Page 20
Lex Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920324

