FT923-9699

FT  04 AUG 92 / Arts: The Death of Moses - Music


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


AN inspired piece of programme-planning the Promenade concert at London's
Royal Albert Hall on Sunday brought together a pair of works based on the
story of Moses. Biblical themes have been fruitful ground for composers,
whether to serve as picturesque narrative in the 18th-century style or to
investigate universal themes for the present day.
The new work was The Death of Moses by Alexander Goehr. Not strictly a first
performance, as the piece had already been given two days earlier in Seville
(ironically a city which expelled its Jewish population exactly 500 years
ago). But this was among the major premieres of this year's Prom season and
the high standard of the performance by the Monteverdi Choir under John
Eliot Gardiner will surely have done it justice.
Its theme is Moses's rejection of death, or by implication the refusal of
man in general to accept his fate. In both John Hollander's words and
Goehr's music, both incidentally a model of clarity of expression allowing a
firm grasp of the issues the work seeks to address, that wider
interpretation is suggested with commendable sleight of hand.
The music's style is at once ancient and modern. Inspired by the sounds of
Monteverdi's Vespers, Goehr has sought to translate some of those
instruments into modern terms: the archlute becomes an electric guitar, the
chamber organ a synthesiser, the cornetti are soprano saxophones. But the
marvel of the small orchestra that he has assembled is its pungency, which
continually brings to mind the oldest instrumental traditions.
In this way the music reaches beyond any specified period. The work is not a
standard oratorio, certainly not an opera, although Moses's cry 'I will not
die' is placed with the sure dramatic sense of a composer well versed in the
operatic medium. In its half dozen or so short sections it rather offers
individual meditations on Moses's story, each specific in its aim,
economical in gesture. Sacred though it may be, the mood remains sharply
focused throughout.
All this is very much in the right vein for Gardiner and his highly
disciplined band of singers. The New London Children's Choir joined them for
the Goehr, but otherwise the cast was the same as for the first part of
Handel's Israel in Egypt before the interval, with Michael Chance the
counter-tenor, Nigel Robson the tenor, and the English Baroque Soloists. To
both narrators of the Moses story they proved exemplary interpreters.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920804

