FT923-6619

FT  22 AUG 92 / Gardening: The grass menagerie - Exploring an unusual garden
in Essex


   By ARTHUR HELLYER


IT SEEMS unlikely that there is any small garden in Britain, other than
Thorpe Park Cottage at Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex, which grows more than 200
species and varieties of ornamental grass, sedge and rush. This is the
achievement of Trevor Scott, a New Zealander who until recently worked as a
medical researcher in a London hospital. He kept Thorpe Park Cottage as a
weekend retreat and grew grasses and reeds as a hobby.
He was made redundant in 1990 and decided to turn his hobby into a living.
He increased his already considerable collection through his many contacts,
including the Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, and began to advertise his
specialities. It is early days yet but the business seems to be working out
favourably.
I found his little garden most charming - and bewildering, because it
contains so many plants I did not know. Thorpe Park Cottage is a genuine
cottage, part of an old farm complex. The garden is planted in the true
cottage manner, almost all the open space being given over to beds filled
with a medley of herbaceous perennials, lilies, roses, a few annuals - and,
of course, grasses which, in this profusion, look their most elegant.
There was the Australian feather grass, Stipa elegantissima, delicate in
effect with narrow leaves and sprays of purplish flowers from June to
September. Scott has produced an excellent catalogue which is strong on
description and makes suggestions for associations between grasses and other
plants. As companions for the Australian feather grass, he suggests
campanulas and yellow anthemis.
I had not realised how many grasses have leaves that colour richly at some
time of the year. One such is the yellow Indian grass, which Scott considers
to be one of the most beautiful Australian species. It is quite tall and
arches gracefully; the grey-green leaves are tipped with purple; and the
drooping sprays of flowers are iridescent bronze with yellow anthers.
Both stems and leaves turn rich purple in autumn. At Thorpe Park Cottage,
this grass was growing beside a deep ruby-red chrysanthemum which was yet to
flower. Scott assured me that the grass would continue to flower until
chrysanthemum time.
Then there was Panicum virgatum Rehbraun, more than 3 ft high with
red-tipped leaves and ample sprays of flowers which start greenish-brown but
in autumn change to rich purple and yellow. Scott says it looks stunning
planted with Rose Iceberg.
Melissa altissima atropurpurea has quite short leaves but tall flowering
stems that are up to 6 ft high carrying narrow, one-sided spikes of deep
purple flowers. It looked wonderful growing through some blue annual
larkspurs.
Completely different is evergreen Ampelodesmos mauri tanicus, which makes
big, dense clumps of arching leaves which retain their lustrous green
throughout the winter. Its flowers, which come in May, are buff and nothing
special; but as an architectural foliage plant, this is unsurpassed.
Different again is the mosquito grass, Bouteloua gracilas, a very
fine-leaved grass which, in spite of its delicate appearance, is
drought-resistant. Scott recommends planting it with alpines or as a
contrast to small growing shrubs.
There were three varieties of the feather reed grass, Cala magrostis
acutiflora, which I admired greatly. The tallest, a good 6 1/2 ft tall, is
called Stricta and was standing bolt upright among some of the tallest
plants in the garden. The flowers, carried in slender spikes, start green
but turn rosy buff. Two other forms of this grass are Karl Foerster, with
brown flowers and leaves that turn yellow in autumn and retain this colour
in winter, and Overdam, which has leaves striped with green and white and
flushed with purple.
The blood grass is well named for its leaves are green at the base and rich
red at the ends, remaining so all summer. Scott says it needs
moisture-retentive soil and some sun to be at its best. He recommends
planting it in groups or as ground cover, preferably where the sun will
shine through it, for it lights up brilliantly.
The cottage is open only by appointment. Mail order catalogue available from
Thorpe Park Cottage, Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex CO16 1HN.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920822

