FT921-1149

FT  25 MAR 92 / Arts: Digging for Fire - London Theatre


   By DAVID MURRAY


Rough Magic is a youngish Irish company, attractive and evidently very
close-knit. The play they have brought from the Dublin Theatre Festival to
the Bush is by one of their artistic directors, Declan Hughes, and directed
by the other, Lynne Parker, and two of the actors here are founder-members.
It would be easy to believe that each of the other five roles was written
with its performer specifically in mind. They all play to one another with
the beady-eyed easiness of old friends, which forbids social show-offery but
does not preclude moments of asperity - just what Digging for Fire requires.
The play is two familiar plays at once: the Reunion of College Chums that
goes sour with home truths (sourer as the night wears on and they get
drunker), and the Deflating of Heroic Pretensions (an Irish favourite since
Playboy of the Western World, though there are many European versions of
it). The fluent naturalism of the writing and playing almost disguises the
schematic character-list - the host couple, doctor and teacher, whose
professional security has not extinguished old yearnings for something less
trammelled; a brittle media pair, he in advertising and she a TV presenter;
a vine-leaves-in-his-hair loose cannon, the statutory gay, and a fey but
sensible young woman (Pom Boyd, greatly appealing) whose HIV-positivity is
declared early but never explained.
We should have heard more about that, for the revelations we did get were
dull stuff - conventional adulteries, and the falsity of a claim to literary
fame. Various characters became convincingly cross, disabused or bitter as
circumstances dictated, even with some vehemence, but no real blood was
spilt; they were all too tame and nice for that. Hughes's writing for the
detached gay (Peter Hanly) and the snuffed-out Dionysus (Darragh Kelly) left
them bloodless too, visually well-cast but denied any interesting griefs to
test them.
How Arthur Riordan's advertising-chap could be (as advertised) so
successfully randy remained a mystery; but Gina Moxley captures her
telly-type with prickly assurance, and Sean Kearns makes a decent, solid
blunderer of the doctor-host. For his dispiritedly romantic wife Jane
Brennan provides continual subtleties, wry and engagingly honest: this is an
actress who could shoulder a whole TV series with aplomb.
The glum unspoken message of this Irish play seems to be that there's
nothing Irish left among the trendy middle-class in Dublin. Many a Londoner
might know every one of these people and the reunion-hosts' highly visible
books - mostly paperbacks - emphasise the cosmopolitan point: Kundera of
course, both the latest Martin Amises (a bit excessive?), the complete
Nathanael West, drugs-and-pathology studies, Christopher Hitchens - instead
of Conor Cruise O'Brien - and a token, glossily-illustrated The Irish
Village. In Dublin, the shock of painful recognition was probably sharper
than anything we can feel.
Bush Theatre Box Office: 081-743-3388

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920325

