FT923-9856

FT  03 AUG 92 / Arts: Sweet Temptations - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


There are times when it seems that the arts set out almost deliberately to
give themselves a bad name. Such a reflection occurred as Jan Fabre's Sweet
Temptations passed through London at the weekend on its way to represent
Belgium at Expo in Seville. The best thing about it is the title, which
turns out to be a deceit: there is nothing sweet about the production and
nothing tempting.
Fabre is a young (34) Belgian artist who also has a prolific list of works
for the stage behind him. His This Theatre Like It Was To Be Expected And
Forseen lasted eight hours. Sweet Temptations confines itself to 3 1/2 hours
without an interval and was performed at the Queen Elizabeth Hall on
Saturday and Sunday.
The dialogue is in a mixture of English and German - not that it greatly
matters, for there is not a lot of it. Two middle-aged men, probably twins,
sit in wheel-chairs which occasionally revolve round the stage, possibly
reflecting the movement of the planets. Much of the time they sleep. When
they are awake, they talk - very slowly - about owls, appearance and
reality. They repeat, frequently, the line 'times, they are a'changing'.
There are obviously meant to be cerebrally very intelligent: equally
obviously they are bored. Perhaps the boredom is cosmic. There is more than
a touch of Beckett in slow motion.
The point about Beckett, however, is that he knew when to stop, and he did
write plays. About three hours of Fabre's piece is taken up with
distractions. These include the odd military intervention - a symbol, no
doubt, of Europe over the ages, what is described as 'another excuse for a
party' when the piece's many extras repeatedly break into dance, and a good
deal of sex.
The publicity for Sweet Temptations quotes the Guardian as saying that
Fabre's work is 'the toast of the European avant-garde'. If it is still in,
it shows how profoundly, nostalgically reactionary the avant-garde has
become. I saw nothing experimental in Sweet Temptations and no new
frontiers,only a desire to prove that by going on and on, you are somehow
making a point. There is no theatrical virtue in repetitive slowness.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920803

