FT924-5985

FT  24 NOV 92 / Management (The Growing Business): A Spaniard in the works -
A fresh start abroad is the dream of many entrepreneurs. Lorraine Bacchus
describes the bureaucracy encountered by an expatriate horticulturist in
Andalusia


   By LORRAINE BACCHUS


Five years ago, Scotsman Callum Christie decided that southern Spain would
provide the ideal climate for a new horticulture venture. Subsequent events
have proved him right but Spanish bureaucracy has at times left him
wondering why he is putting himself through so much pain.
'It's the time wasted on endless legal formalities that is so frustrating,'
he says, 'together with the knowledge that as an outsider you're obviously
mainly dealing with people who know the ropes better than you, can get a
better deal for themselves and can be more competitive. As an outsider it
takes a long time to acquire that necessary insider network.'
Christie has two sides to his horticultural business, Mundo Verde, both in
Andalusia. The nurseries in San Martin del Tesorillo, near the Costa del
Sol, concentrate on indoor ornamental plants with the Schefflera Bola being
the principal seller he has developed.
On the plains near the Sierra Nevada, with Granada an hour away, his farm is
entirely devoted to strawberry runners, produced mostly for sale to the
growers in the Huelva region whose big export markets are Britain and
Germany.
In total he owns 12 hectares, yet has found it difficult to borrow money
against the land and its fixed assets
'I'm pretty sure I would have managed to raise money in Britain against this
security but I think the banking system here is very conservative and
expensive. The base rate is 15 per cent, with loans costing anything over 17
per cent,' says Christie.
However, his main cashflow problems are caused by the endemic use in Spain
of a kind of promissory note called a letra de cambio. They constitute an
acceptance of the goods concerned and a promise to pay.
They can be dated for any time ahead and are so widely used that in cases
where the issuer's creditworthiness is known, the bank will lend against the
security of the letra in advance of the settlement date.
However, if there are insufficient funds when the letra is finally
presented, it will be returned to the drawer with costs and his own bank
will then recoup the loan. If the issuer refuses to pay up, the only
recourse is through the courts.
'All this can take months,' says Christie, 'and is further complicated by
the fact that if the issuer of the letra lives in a different province, you
have to instruct your lawyer to appoint another lawyer based in the relevant
district to act for you. You can't pursue someone in legal terms from
outside his province.'
Both lawyers have to be paid up front and, as with all debt chasing, there
is no guarantee of success.
Thirty per cent of Christie's business involves the use of letras de cambio
and he says he has never had so may bad debts. 'Obviously we have good
customers who pay promptly but there is a substantial number who use every
dodge to avoid payment.'
Part of the job of debt collecting falls to Christie's 23-year-old son CJ
(they share the same Christian name and so initials avoid confusion) who
joined his father in Spain two years ago.
His Spanish is now so proficient that in Andalusia at least he is often
mistaken for a local. 'As my Spanish has got better, so the job has got
easier and more enjoyable because you can indulge in a bit of banter with
the customers as well as being firm when necessary. But I'm still a gringo
and so I'm sure I have to work harder to get an order and that I get messed
around a lot more than a Spaniard.'
CJ spends a lot of his working life on sales trips, driving all over Spain
and dealing with people in almost every region. This has given him a
valuable insight into the Spanish character
'I've never been in business in Britain so I can't make comparisons, but
here you can sometimes spend a hour talking about football, the sovereignty
of Gibraltar, the weather and so on before even broaching the subject of how
many plants they want. But I think that if I didn't spend the time doing
that, l would not get the orders. And anyway, it is fun.'
The horticulture business in Spain can be as precarious as anywhere. Just
last year, the Christies lost all their strawberry runner harvest because of
unseasonal rain and flooding.
Christie thinks a more secure business might be that of a notary. 'It's
incredible to think how much money they must earn just because of the amount
of red-tape in Spain.
'With company accounts, for example, you have to sign them in front of a
notary. You have to pay him for this privilege as well as perhaps waiting a
hour to see him and another hour or so driving to his office,' says
Christie.
'You also have to appear in front of a notary to obtain the title deeds for
your property and to obtain the authority to sign documents on behalf of
your own company. Each time you have to pay him just for witnessing your
signature. And all this is on top of your lawyer's fees,' he says.
The authority to sign company documents is known as a poder and in business
in Spain you need to use it a lot - even to collect a refund.
'You have to go in person to the nearest tax office - in my case a two-hour
drive away - with your poder and passport to prove that you are who you
claim to be and that you are empowered to receive money on behalf of the
company,' explains Christie.
A corredor comercial, similar to a notary, has to be used to witness
signatures when a bank loan has been negotiated. For this, the official
receives a tenth of 1 per cent of the agreed loan which can be a
considerable amount.
'I can only assume all this signature witnessing is either because there's a
lot of fraud in Spain or because, in case of problems, nobody wants to be
where the buck stops,' says Christie.
For the Christies, the main pleasure of being in business in Spain has come
from the Spanish workers they employ. They describe their small team as not
only extremely industrious but also loyal and interested in the company.
'These five years have certainly been a learning experience and at certain
levels it has been very enjoyable. I can't say though whether I would embark
on the project with the benefit of hindsight,' says Christie.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921124

