FT922-13399

FT  11 APR 92 / Arts: A twisting road west - Sergey Leiferkus


   By MAX LOPPERT


'IT HAS nothing to do with glasnost or the political changes in Russia -
nothing]'. Sergey Leiferkus underlines his point with an amiable rap on the
table, his brilliant blue eyes flashing friendly fire. We are tracing the
twists and turns of a career launched in the West in 1982 which has made him
the singer from eastern Europe most regularly seen and heard by British
audiences since the war.
It has been an extraordinary career, for which he gives thanks entirely to
fate. Not quite ten years ago Leiferkus arrived from Leningrad to take the
leading male role in Massenet's Griselidis at the Wexford Festival. Next
Tuesday he does the same in the new Royal Opera production of Prokofiev's
Fiery Angel. In between his Irish Massenet and Covent Garden Prokofiev there
have been an unprecedented number of engagements on the stages of the
British Isles.
The Coliseum performances were, of course, sung in English; his accented but
clear and highly expressive use of the language only added to the eclat of
his performances. Covent Garden saw him first during the 1987 London visit
of the Kirov; the house's own 1989 new Trovatore production followed, and
Prince Igor the following year.
Leningrad reverted to the name St Petersburg, and the Kirov that of
Maryinsky. While maintaining his close connections with both, Leiferkus
sings throughout Europe and America. He has bought himself a house near
Oxford, and delights in the 'family atmosphere' of British artistic
institutions; he tells people, with relish, that he 'lives in a village,
Iffley, on an island, Britain'.
How did it happen? It was his good fortune to acquire an English agent,
Robert Slotover, of Allied Artists, via a recommendation from the celebrated
Russian bass Yevgeny Nesterenko; luck also attracted the attention of
Wexford's artistic director, Elaine Padmore, a talent scout of renown. But
it was those qualities immediately sensed in Leiferkus's Griselidis Marquis
that must have encouraged other British houses to persevere with him.
It was true that the flow of Russian singers to British houses never
entirely ceased even during the iciest periods of Cold War hostility. But
often those singers, once arrived, looked and sounded out of place, with
vocal and physical gestures that proclaimed entirely different - and
apparently unmalleable - traditions of operatic rhetoric.
Nature and education had already prepared Leiferkus for a different sort of
encounter. Though finding himself initially ill-equipped for Western life
and Western artistic practices he was ready to embrace both. For one thing,
he had learned English at school; and from his youthful days at the Maly
Theatre (now grandiosely re-named the National Theatre of St Petersburg) he
had worked up an appetite for many varieties of operatic idioms and
stage-styles - not just the heavy naturalism practised at the Kirov and
Bolshoy.
He needed it. His first British show was the Scottish Opera Don Giovanni
production by Graham Vick that soon became notorious for, among other
things, the scene in which Giovanni, a gangster in sharp suit and fedora,
dunks Masetto's head in an onstage lavatory bowl. 'I really loved that
production. I miss it. It was so clever, so alive in its presentation of the
characters and the relationships'. He enjoyed no less the chance offered by
David Pountney's ENO Carmen, set in a car-wreckers' yard, to play Escamillo
with Elvis Presley hairdo, leather jacket and swagger; and he speaks with
the born stage-animal's close interest in detail of the unforeseen physical
demands required of his Scarpia by Opera North's Tosca, moved forward to
Puccini's own time.
In the 'school' (as he calls it) of Western production Leiferkus has
developed into one of the world's most remarkable singing-actors: a
chameleon of medium size and compact build who seems to grow in inches when
playing noble leaders such as Prince Igor or swell with just the right
degree of hauteur for Onegin; the secondary figures in his repertory tend to
develop a weight of impact unrelated to the time they spend on stage.
But in the end, the supreme distinguishing attribute of the great
singing-actor is the voice itself. Leiferkus's lean, dark-toned baritone,
mettled for the heavier assignments like Wagner's Telramund and Verdi's Iago
as well as for Mozart and Tchaikovsky, is an instrument of wide compass and
wonderful but rather undemonstrative beauty. Lacking the rich lustre of the
younger Russian Hvorostovsky and the Italianate vibrancy of Vladimir
Chernov, his Maryinsky colleague, he tends to make his points through that
specially subtle, eloquent musicianship afforded by expert vocal technique.
After a recent New York Queen of Spades concert performance Andrew Porter
was moved to remark (in the New Yorker) that in '(Leiferkus's) command of
every vocal resource . . . the great days of Imperial Russian singing seem
to return'. Yet he is oddly dismissive of his voice - 'I don't really like
it, the timbre is never quite what I expect'. While quietly confident of his
suitability to Onegin (which he has sung more than any other), he responds
to criticisms of his Italian enunciation with a modesty that is refreshing.
Like all artists of his calibre he is continually absorbed in niceties of
style, in the need to offer more than peacock vocal displays. For that
reason, too, he is anxious that the durably valuable features of Russian
opera should not be abandoned amid all the turmoil of change. Whether on the
operatic stage or the concert platform he reveals himself as belonging to
that most elevated species of international performers - the singing-actor
with a strong national identity and unbounded artistic horizons.
Fiery Angel plays at Covent Garden from April 14 to May 2).

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920411

