FT921-15389

FT  10 JAN 92 / Bush hails mission to Japan as a success: Some US
businessmen sceptical of bilateral trade agreements


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


   TOKYO


MR GEORGE BUSH yesterday announced a series of bilateral economic and trade
agreements between the world's two most powerful economies.
The US president, whose Asian tour turned into an exercise to counter his
falling popularity at home, sought to portray his trade mission to Japan as
a success. 'I think we have created jobs,' the president said, declaring
that his message had 'been received'.
Mr Bush - shrugging off his collapse at a Tokyo banquet on Wednesday night -
and Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, Japan's prime minister, also pledged co-operation in
a Tokyo Declaration, a statement intended to symbolise a strengthening of
their relationship.
In the declaration and an accompanying action plan, the leaders acknowledged
that Japan and the US, as the two largest market-oriented economies and
democracies in the world, had a special responsibility for shaping the new
post-Cold War era. They reaffirmed their bilateral security alliance and
pledged to work together on global issues, including the reconstruction of
the former Soviet Union.
They also promised to co-operate in achieving a successful conclusion to the
Uruguay Round trade talks and welcomed the recent paper by Mr Arthur Dunkel,
the director-general of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which
laid out the outlines of a possible agreement on trade liberalisation.
Mr Bush, who ends his trip today, pronounced himself well on the road to
recovery from the gastric 'flu which he blamed for his collapse. He came
close to making official his candidacy for the Republican nomination for
this year's presidential election. 'I think I'm going to win,' he said.
The friendly words between the two leaders could not disguise the fact that
the bilateral trade agreements which accompanied the declaration contained
little substance. While the president claimed success, some of the US
businessmen accompanying him were sceptical. The trade deals also drew
criticism in the US from congressional Democrats with ties to the car
industry.
The agreements were the subject of tense negotiations, completed only hours
before the declaration was published. Japan promised to improve access for
foreign companies to markets including glass, paper, legal services and
computers, as well as cars and car parts - the main sticking point.
The US secured a promise from Japanese motor groups to increase their
planned purchases of US-made components from about Dollars 7bn (Pounds
3.8bn) in the 1990 financial year to about Dollars 15bn in 1994. That
includes imports and parts supplied to Japanese factories in the US.
Japanese companies promised to import more US-made cars - although the total
will be only about 40,000-50,000 and most will be Japanese-brand vehicles
made in the US.
Mr Bush described the agreements as 'a significant but interim step' and
pledged to accomplish more.
US motor industry leaders accompanying Mr Bush re-frained from criticising
him. But Mr Harold Poling, Ford Motor chief, said the Japanese carmakers'
proposals were inadequate.
Japanese car chiefs said the published documents represented the most they
could do to help the US industry. They resent being bullied by the US and
their own government.
Mr Lee Iacocca, the Chrysler chief and an outspoken critic of the Japanese
car industry, left Tokyo without comment. He plans to make his views known
in a speech today at the Detroit Motor Show.
Mr Bush and Mr Miyazawa also confirmed their promise, made in a declaration
on Wednesday, to promote world economic growth and seek to persuade other
industrialised countries to do the same.
The leaders pledged to aid developing countries and eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union. They said they would co-operate in arms control,
environmental protection and science.
Page 4
Small gains for Bush from mishandled tour
Motor industries still on collision course
Page 12
Editorial comment
Honda's US credentials are under attack
Page 14
Lex
Bush seeks to dispel anxieties about health
Chrysler aims to be a star in Motown, Page 15

The Financial Times


London Page 1 Photograph Touching wood for luck, Mr Bush, during his meeting
with the Japanese prime minister, superstitiously indicates that he hopes
his health is improving (Omitted).

920110

