FT924-8204

FT  12 NOV 92 / The lasting legacy of the Treuhand: David Marsh and Leslie
Colitt on the industrial problems that lie behind the heavy borrowing


   By DAVID MARSH and LESLIE COLITT


If the Treuhandanstalt, the agency in charge of privatising industry in
former East Germany, ends its operations on schedule in 1994, it will live
on in two ways.
First, in the international capital markets, where the Treuhand, with a
Triple-A rating thanks to its government guarantee, is becoming a regular
borrower.
And second, through the legacy of partly reconstructed heavy industry that
is the agency's biggest problem in its attempt to revive the east German
economy.
In the German capital markets, the Treuhand looks set to become a prime
issuer of 10-year bonds. It made a successful DM10bn (Pounds 4bn) issue in
September, and is expected to make another of the same size around the end
of November.
The agency confirms that an understanding has been reached with the Bonn
finance ministry for the Treuhand to be a priority issuer of 10-year bonds.
The federal government has said it plans to avoid issuing 10-year federal
bonds in future, concentrating on other maturities.
The Treuhand needs the money. Even after privatising around 9,500 companies,
it still owns 3,800 companies in eastern Germany. Its priority is to sell
them off quickly, says Ms Birgit Breuel, the agency's chief executive. 'They
say abroad that the jewels have been sold out,' she says. 'But it isn't
true.'
Allowing for disposals and closures - 1,600 Treuhand companies have been
shut down - the agency aims to have only around 500 companies left by
end-1993.
The Treuhand's problem, however, lies in those that remain, including many
of the huge former state-owned Kombinate which depended on exports to the
former Soviet Union and eastern Europe. And for them, the outlook grows
bleaker by the month.
Some of these groups have found overseas partners. The former monopoly
tyremaker, Pneumant, has been rescued by the government of Iran. The deal
will secure 910 jobs out of the present 1,800 - but Pneumant had 6,000
employees in 1990, a figure which gives an idea of the Treuhand's problems.
Another successful sale is that of Werk fur Fernsehelektronik, which makes
television tubes under license from Toshiba of Japan, and has now been sold
to Samsung of Korea. The company lost DM120m on sales of DM140m last year,
but has recently installed a automated Japanese production line. Samsung has
promised to retain 800 out of the present 1,200 jobs - but the group used to
employ nearly 10,000 people.
Other Treuhand assets have fared worse. Large metal-working combines such as
Takraf, the Leipzig crane-builder, and SKET engineering in Magdeburg, have
failed to find western partners.
Krupp's recent decision not to take over the Eko steelworks at
Eisenhuttenstadt has been another setback. It has left the Treuhand with
little option but to pump in millions of D-Marks to modernise a plant which
few see as viable in the long run.
Most of the east German machine building industry in Saxony and Brandenburg
is in similar straits. West German engineering groups, facing a drop in
world demand, are not interested in acquiring additional capacity in the
east. The Treuhand is expected to keep at least the core of these companies
afloat - but at heavy cost.
This financing burden is one of the reasons for the projected sharp increase
in the Treuhand's debts, to at least DM250bn by the end of 1994. Other
factors are the cost of cleaning up the environment and covering debts
inherited from the communist regime.
The Treuhand aims to raise between DM100bn and DM130bn in bond issues to
around end-1994. These operations will be 'the main pipeline through which
we do our funding', according to Mr Paul Hadrys, Treuhand's chief financial
officer. But the agency will also be using other financing vehicles. It has
outstanding DM3bn of short-term loans from the domestic money markets and
the Euromarkets, DM9bn of commercial paper and DM24bn of borrowers' note
loans (Schuldscheine).
One problem for the agency is the general perception that Treuhand bonds are
less liquid than more established issues.
A specific handicap was the decision by the London International Financial
Futures and Options (Liffe) not to make the first Treuhand issue deliverable
into its Bund contract - the main reason why the Treuhand issue trades at a
slightly lower price than comparable Bund issues. Dealers say the yield
spread above Bunds has been as high as 24 basis points, although this week
it has been only about half that.
The Treuhand is hoping that the problem of Liffe deliverability will be
resolved before the launch of the next DM10bn issue. Even if that happens,
Treuhand bonds will not be deliverable until well into 1993.
'The Treuhand isn't quite regarded as the same as a Bund or a Unity (a bond
issued by the German Unity Fund),' according to one London bond dealer - but
he adds that, during the next few years, familiarity is expected to grow
rapidly.
Additional reporting by Sara Webb in London and David Waller in Frankfurt.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                        TREUHANDANSTALT
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Potential total indebtedness
                                                    DM billion
Assumption of 'old debt'                                    80
Annual deficit resulting from
THA's tasks-1990                                             4
           -1991                                            20
           -1992 to 1994, DM 30 bn each year totalling      90
Additional funding requirements                          26-56
(eg liabilities resulting form equalisation
claims, guarantees and unidentified claims)            -------
                                                 Total 220-225
                                                 (by end-1994)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921112

