FT922-486

FT  27 JUN 92 / World Stock Markets: Saying goodbye to the 1987 stock market
crash - Adrian FitzGerald suggests that fund managers should be able to peep
out from behind their parapets


   By ADRIAN FITZGERALD


There will be gleeful rubbing of hands at the end of 1992, whatever happens
over the next six months. Why? Because the effects of the 1987 stockmarket
crash will fall out of most long-term performance statistics.
Few will forget the euphoria of the pre-crash 1980s. By mid-1987, UK fund
managers could boast proudly of long-term returns from their equity
portfolios of almost 35 per cent on an annualised basis. Fund managers
heavily invested in Japan could point to a sustained performance in that
market averaging over 55 per cent a year. Anyone sitting with money in the
bank was on to a loser. Or so it seemed.
Performance statistics have looked very different over the five years since
then. Cash has been the winning UK asset over the last five years,
outperforming both gilts and equities. Sterling returns from overseas equity
markets have been almost precisely zero. And anyone looking for a dinner
party ice-breaker might like to note the interesting fact that UK bank
deposits have outperformed Japanese equities by 250 per cent since the
mid-year point five years ago]
Yes, the real grief has been experienced in Japan. That market has fallen 60
per cent from its high point in December 1989 to its recent low. Those
investors heavily exposed to Japan and who are now desperately searching for
indications of cheapness will find little consolation in the fact that the
market still yields only 1 per cent. Nor will they feel comforted by the
realisation that the market has to climb by 150 per cent simply to get back
to where it was. The mathematics of investment is always fascinating, but it
can also be very cruel.
Another mathematical consequence of the Japanese market's dramatic decline
is that its capitalisation is now less than that of the combined European
markets. Europe comprises almost 28 per cent of the FT-A World Indices
compared with a figure of just under 24 per cent for Japan. Japan has had
the larger capitalisation for the last nine years. The US market weighting
relative to that of Japan also shows a substantial increase. It is almost 17
percentage points higher after being more than 10 percentage points lower
just two and a half years ago.
Certainly, any of the funds rumoured to have moved money into Japan in the
latter part of 1991 will not have enjoyed the last six months. But the
typical UK-based pension fund has nothing like the same exposure as the FT-A
World benchmark. WM Company figures suggest that approximately 6 per cent of
total equity exposure is to Japan, with a further 7 per cent invested in the
US. Approximately 11 per cent is invested in Continental Europe.
Given this distribution, most pension fund managers should record at least
some modest progress during the first half of 1992. UK equities - by far
their biggest asset class - notched up a new peak in May and have produced
an overall return of 6 per cent. Sterling returns from Japan, the US and
Continental Europe have been minus 28 per cent, minus 2 per cent and 5 per
cent respectively.
And what a difference it would make to those five year performance figures
if equity markets were to regain some upward momentum over the next six
months. The second half of 1987 will drop out of the reckoning, to be
replaced by the second half of 1992; the long-term returns from at least
some equity markets may start to show a modicum of respectability; and fund
managers should at last be able to peep out from behind their parapets.
This is not to suggest that major mishaps can be entirely ruled out for the
rest of the year. Indeed, financial markets are going to have a lot to
contend with, particularly as the world economy is showing only a faint
inclination to stagger to its feet. Some hopeful signs are starting to
emerge in the US, but the economic news coming out of Japan is still
depressing. The same is true in the UK, where any economic growth at all
this year would come as a pleasant surprise.
The result of the recent Danish referendum has also added to uncertainty and
places a large question mark over successful, united progress in Europe. The
Irish equivalent has raised some hopes that all is not lost; however, there
can be little doubt that European markets will continue to feel the effects
of the current impasse.
But it is Wall Street which could prove to be the most vulnerable during the
second half of the year. Signs of economic recovery and a pick-up in
corporate borrowing suggest that we are close to the bottom of the interest
rate cycle. Rates are likely to start trending upwards later in the year. On
top of this are the increasing political risks, including the possibility
that a determined Ross Perot could well cause more than a few upsets come
November. The only certainty is that investors in the US market are in for a
bumpy ride in the second half.
It would be wrong nevertheless to paint too bearish a picture. One lesson
the stockmarket crash of 1987 should have taught us all is that it is
optimism and euphoria that we should really be wary of, and there is
precious little of either about at present. Indeed, the level of gloom is
such that contrarian investors can only be scenting buying opportunities.
And long-term investors know that very little has to be achieved for their
performance figures to become so much better by the year end.
Farewell, then, the stockmarket crash of 1987.
Adrian FitzGerald is Director, Equity Research, at County NatWest WoodMac.
Footnote: All 1992 stockmarket statistics have been calculated on the close
of markets at 24/6/92.
 --------------------------------------------------------------
STERLING TOTAL RETURNS (annualised %pa)
 --------------------------------------------------------------
                5 yrs to mid-1987    5 yrs to mid-1992
 --------------------------------------------------------------
UK equities                  34.9                  6.1
UK gilts                     15.6                  9.4
UK cash                      10.1                 12.5
Japanese equities            55.6                -12.5
US equities                  30.3                  5.8
 --------------------------------------------------------------
Source: County NatWest WoodMac
 --------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920627

