FT921-15390

FT  10 JAN 92 / Russia and Ukraine vieto control Black Sea fleet


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE STRUGGLE for control of the Black Sea fleet assumed the proportions of
an inter-state crisis yesterday as Russian politicians demanded that
territory be seized from Ukraine if it took over the nuclear-armed navy.
Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, told workers at an aerospace plant
in Ulyanovsk, in the Urals: 'No one, not even (Mr Leonid) Kravchuk will take
the Black Sea Fleet away from Russia . . . (it) was, is and will be
Russia's'
Mr Kravchuk, the Ukrainian president, told Ukrainian officers yesterday that
Russia was now 'testing our resilience' over the naval dispute. On
Wednesday, he declared that the fleet would be taken over by Ukraine from
July. He said that he was not in breach of accords signed in Minsk last
week: 'As an independent state Ukraine has the right to have its own armed
forces.'
Ukrainian officials have also taken over a key communications facility
linking the central military command with 300,000 Ukraine-based troops,
including those in charge of tactical nuclear weapons.
Western concern about the spread of such weapons, and the technology to make
them, was voiced again yesterday in London by Mr Dick Cheney, US defence
secretary, who warned that it might be impossible to prevent new
nuclear-armed states emerging as a result of the Soviet break-up.
Russian politicians of various hues yesterday joined an increasingly bitter
war of words against Ukraine. Mr Sergei Baburin, leader of the hardline
Russia faction in the Russian parliament, called on Mr Yeltsin to abrogate
the 1954 decision which ceded the formerly Russian region of Crimea - in
which Sevastopol, the fleet's headquarters, is located - to the Ukraine, and
to allow 'any region outside the Russian Federation to enter Russia as
independent subjects'.
The leadership of the centrist Democratic Party of Russia said in a telegram
to Black Sea Fleet personnel that the takeover of the fleet by Ukraine
'could result in tragic consequences for the people of the Commonwealth.'
Although Mr Yeltsin said that 'we cannot quarrel with Ukraine' because of
the presence of 11m ethnic Russians in that republic, he is under growing
pressure to confront Mr Kravchuk on this issue.
Naval shipyard workers in Sevastopol have asked to be taken under Russia's
protection if Ukraine continues to demand control. Naval officers in the
town demanded that the fleet remain under control of the Commonwealth of
Independent States - the grouping which succeeded the Soviet Union, and of
which Russia and Ukraine are founding members.
Mr Yeltsin has instructed Admiral Vladimir Chernavin, head of the Soviet
navy, to tell Black Sea commanders they are under the protection of Russia,
and must not take the oath of allegiance to Ukraine now being required of
them if they wish to continue to serve in the fleet.
He himself has signed a decree introducing a military oath of allegiance to
Russia, which blurs the line between a Russian and a Commonwealth army by
obliging the recruit to serve 'in any place inside or outside the Russian
federation' where he is sent.
Admiral Chernavin, in an interview yesterday in the conservative newspaper
Sovietskaya Rossiya, said Ukraine had never been a naval power, and would
only be allowed to operate a small force to protect merchant ships and deter
smuggling. He said the entire navy was a 'strategic' force, in that it
guarded strategic shipping lanes.
Page 2
Cheney fears nuclear technology will spread
Moscow stokes trade war with Ukrainians
Two players take the stage after Georgia's one-man band bows out

The Financial Times


London Page 1 Map (Omitted).

920110

