FT922-4386

FT  05 JUN 92 / Bush gets a second wind for Americas: Washington's injection
of new life into its hemisphere initiative


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


WHEN Mr Nicholas Brady, the US treasury secretary, sits down with Latin
American finance ministers in Washington later this month, one of his tasks
will be to inject new life into a US initiative which some see as flagging.
The Enterprise for the Americas Initiative (EAI) was launched nearly two
years ago by President George Bush as the first comprehensive US policy for
Latin America since President Kennedy's Alliance for Progress more than 30
years ago.
It placed economic partnership at the centre of post-Cold War relations
between the US and Latin American democracies. It stressed regional trade
liberalisation - opening up the possibility of a free trade zone from Alaska
to Antarctica - reform of investment regimes and official debt relief.
Former secretary of state Mr Henry Kissinger called it the most creative
international policy measure undertaken by the Bush administration. Mr John
Sewell, president of the Overseas Development Council, a study group based
in Washington, described the EAI as the first 'post-aid development policy'.
Carrying none of the paternalism of previous US policies towards the region,
the EAI was applauded by almost every Latin American leader. Although there
were some worries that the US was replacing an insistence on anti-communism
with an insistence on neo-liberalism as the basis of policy, it succeeded in
addressing current concerns of Latin American governments without proposing
resource transfers to the region that the US could ill afford.
The launch of the initiative came two weeks after the president's
announcement of his intention to seek a free trade agreement with Mexico and
appeared to signal a new-found US interest in the region beyond the usual
concerns about drugs and immigration.
The prospect for a partnership was reinforced by the willingness of the Bush
administration to work through the Organisation of American States, an
organisation it ignored throughout the 1980s. The culmination of this was
the June 1991 Santiago declaration which committed member governments to
help defend democracy in the region.
Since then, however, some of the good feelings have dissipated. The OAS
proved helpless to reverse a military coup in Haiti, was stunned by an
attempted coup in Venezuela and divided over how to deal with President
Alberto Fujimori's dissolution of Peru's Congress in April.
Meanwhile, the EAI also showed signs of losing momentum. According to Mr
Mark Falcoff, of the American Enterprise Institute, the new policy had
'fallen from the screen'. Mr Viron Vakey of the Carnegie Endowmentsaid he
was 'becoming more and more pessimistic about the policy'.
Each of the three parts of the initiative suffered delays:
Trade: By October 1991, the US had signed bilateral framework agreements -
the first step to a free trade accord - with all Latin American countries
except the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Surinam and Cuba. But negotiation of
free-trade agreements with other countries has had to await the completion
of talks with Mexico and Canada over the North American Free Trade
Agreement, which have been going more slowly than expected. Chile will be
next in line.
Investment: Two new programmes were set up with the aim of encouraging
reform of economic policies and investment regulation. The first was an
Inter-American Development Bank programme to support investment
liberalisation and privatisation, from which countries such as Colombia have
already benefited.
The IADB was also to administer a Dollars 1.5bn Multilateral Investment Fund
to which the US, Japan and the EC would each contribute Dollars 100m each a
year for five years. Some EC countries, including Britain, declined to
contribute, with part of the shortfall being made up by Latin governments.
However, in April, the US Congress refused to vote US funding, which meant
matching funds from Japan would be unavailable.
Foreign debt: Covering Dollars 12bn in bilateral debt owed by Latin
countries to the US, it allowed for interest payments to be paid in local
currency for an environmental fund and the cancellation of certain loans
through debt-for-equity or debt-for-nature swaps.
Although only a modest benefit overall - the savings if fully implemented
would amount to Dollars 400m a year - this was potentially important for
some countries, such as Jamaica, with heavy government-to-government debt.
Some debt has already been reduced, but the vast majority was also held up
in April by Congress.
These delays have contributed to a sense of frustration among Latin
governments and a concern that US interest in the region will prove as
transitory as it has in the past.
Mr David Mulford, US treasury under-secretary for international affairs,
disagrees with this view. Admitting congressional delays were a setback, he
said this week that the Bush administration remained strongly committed to
the initiative, and would press for passage of the relevant legislation in
the current fiscal year. Latin America, he pointed out, was the fastest
growing foreign market for the US. 'A strong Latin America is good for the
US economy,' he said.
Those invited to Washington on June 24-25 are finance ministers from a dozen
governments which have benefited either from Mr Brady's bank debt reduction
initiative or the EAI, or those expected to benefit in the near future, such
as El Salvador and Brazil. Mr Enrique Iglesias, president of the IADB, will
also attend. Mr Mulford said the meeting would provide the opportunity for
consultation before the summit of the Group of Seven in Munich early next
month.
While this should help to promote the idea of a hemisphere partnership,
finance ministers will also be interested to hear how the US proposes to
advance the Enterprise initiative. Interested and probably - given the
narrow preoccupations of Congress and Mr Bush's own concerns - sceptical.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920605

