FT924-11460

FT  26 OCT 92 / Brussels tries to plug an information gap: The European
Commission believes that misunderstanding is hindering the process of
integration


   By ANDREW HILL


The death of unpasteurised camembert has been greatly exaggerated. According
to the European Commission, there never was a threat from 'meddling Brussels
bureaucrats' to do away with cheese made from untreated milk. Thousands of
frightened French fromagiers were misguided, as was the Prince of Wales, who
made a celebrated speech defending obscure French cheeses in Paris six
months ago.
Why then was the alleged threat to French cheese still so prominent on the
menu of complaints levelled at Brussels during the Maastricht referendum
campaign in France?
Mr Jacques Delors, the European Commission president, says the prevalence of
such examples of alleged Euro-madness are symptoms of the deficit
d'information in the Community.
Although the extent of opposition to the Maastricht treaty in the French and
Danish referenda clearly worried Mr Delors and his colleagues, they were
also disturbed by the depth of misunderstanding of the EC which opponents of
the treaty were able to exploit.
In successive speeches over the past few weeks, Mr Delors has lambasted
Europe's political elite for failing to explain the EC to their fellow
citizens. He believes politicians, including the commissioners themselves,
should inform their constituencies about the community's complex
institutional framework, how it works, what its purpose is, and why its
policies - from environmental control to food hygiene - are necessary.
The problem for Mr Delors is that the Commission is only one voice among
many informing the EC citizen about the Community. And the Commission itself
speaks with several voices, a situation which reflects the current internal
confusion about Brussels' political status: should the Commission behave
like a quasi-governmental organisation, trumpeting its own message, or
merely as a tool of the member states?
Mr Delors has the personnel and financial backing to launch a more
aggressive information campaign promoting the Community. At least Ecu60m
(Pounds 48.06m) is spent on information policy by Brussels every year.
Roughly half of that is used by the information directorate, which was
responsible for Euro-displays at the opening ceremonies of the winter and
summer Olympic games as well as the EC pavilion at the Seville Expo; the
other half is spent by individual departments promoting their own policies,
such as research programmes. The Commission also has a small spokesman's
service, producing daily information and responding to the queries of
Brussels' 600-strong press corps at regular midday briefings.
But for the time being, the Commission's information policy is a sort of UN
peacekeeping force, returning fire only when fired upon.
Mr Delors himself is convinced that this hands-off policy is correct, and
that a more aggressive approach would be counter-productive. 'During the
French referendum campaign I was told that the Commission should have
informed the French people about what was going on,' he told the European
Parliament earlier this month. 'But can the Commission usurp the role of the
French authorities, can the Commission just demand airtime on radio and
television? That would have made matters worse, and might have lost the
referendum.'
Commission spokesmen and information officials are unanimous that it is the
member states which should bear the burden of closing the information gap,
explaining the European Community and the role of the Commission. Its 20
information bureaus within the EC exist to distribute information and answer
direct queries. But they can do little - so the official line goes - against
disinformation put out by national governments, industry and the press.
As Mr Bruno Dethomas, the Commission's and Mr Delors' chief spokesman, puts
it: 'Without a common political will to restore the (Commission's) image you
could pay the best PR agency in existence and employ the best spokesmen on
earth and you still wouldn't be able to change anything.'
But that common political will is a long way off. Sir Bernard Ingham,
Downing Street spokesman when Lady Thatcher was UK prime minister and now an
outspoken Euro-sceptic, believes the Commission already goes too far, and
says that, in any case, it is unrealistic to expect 12 nations suddenly to
start speaking as one. 'Individual governments exist to put over their own
point of view and they fight for their own national interests,' he points
out.
Under such circumstances, some Commission officials believe that Brussels
should be fighting back with a more aggressive information policy, which
would reflect its genuine political aspirations, rather than complaining
about disinformation by national governments. Some publicity-hungry
commissioners, like Sir Leon Brittan, are already happy to take the fight to
the member states in areas where the Commission has autonomous powers, such
as competition policy.
The Commission believes one way of setting the record straight might be to
use commissioners' political clout more constructively.
For example, at last week's emergency summit of EC leaders - which pledged
to improve openness and democracy in the Community - Mr Delors proposed
sending individual commissioners out to national parliaments to explain the
Commission's plans for the year.
At the same time the Commission president is considering the establishment
of a working group, made up of half a dozen communications professionals -
senior journalists, public relations consultants and national government
spokesmen - to examine Commission and Community information policy.
The information directorate itself, in one of its periodic and convulsive
changes of strategy, is devolving more responsibility to individual
departments - external relations, research, agriculture, and so on.
In the longer term, information officials in Brussels dream of encouraging
citizens to identify with the Community, for example through EC-funded
cultural programmes. Ms Colette Flesch, the former Luxembourg minister who
heads the information directorate, says: 'We ought to try and bring about
some emotional link with the Community and the positive things it has
brought about: peace, economic growth, social progress.'
At the moment, with the European economy struggling and the Commission under
attack for allegedly riding roughshod over national identities, such plans
are a long way from fruition, as Ms Flesch and her colleagues freely admit.
As one Commission official puts it: 'Instead of waving the blue and
gold-starred flag and singing the European anthem, we ought to be out there
explaining our policies.'

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921026

