FT922-7131

FT  20 MAY 92 / International Company News: BTR Nylex sells two US assets


   By KEVIN BROWN, EMIKO TERAZONO and DAMIAN FRASER


   SYDNEY, TOKYO


BTR Nylex, a quoted Australian subsidiary of BTR, the UK industrial
conglomerate, yesterday announced two US disposals together worth Dollars
171m.
It has sold ACI America, its US glass business for Dollars 89m and also part
of its shareholding in General Chemical Soda Ash Partners (GCSAP), a US soda
ash producer, for Dollars 82m.
Mr Alan Jackson, chairman, said that the ACI America sale - to the Vitro
Group of Mexico - was part of an overall group review of operations which
might include other disposals of non-core assets 'where prudent'.
ACI America was acquired in 1988 when BTR Nylex bought ACI International, a
diversified industrial group, for ADollars 1.7bn (USDollars 1.29bn). ACI
America is a market leader in glass distribution, with more than 120
distribution and retail sales outlets on the US west and south coasts, and
in the eastern states.
BTR Nylex said ACI America would complement the glass manufacturing
activities of Vitro Plan SA, a subsidiary of Vitro Sociedad Anomica of
Mexico.
The company manufactures and distributes flat and autoglass products. BTR
Nylex's main glass interests are in bottle manufacturing.
BTR Nylex announced plans for a restructuring before reporting a 41 per cent
slump in annual net profits to ADollars 286m six weeks ago. The group's
shares closed unchanged at ADollars 3.61 on the Australian Stock Exchange.
The shares in GCSAP are being acquired by Tosoh, the leading Japanese
integrated chemical company. The company's US arm will buy 24 per cent of
GCSAP, reducing the BTR Nylex stake from 49 per cent to 25 per cent.
GCSAP was set up by General Chemical Corporation, a US chemical company, and
BTR Nylex in 1986. The company's current soda ash production capacity is
2.2m tonnes a year.
The purchase will make Tosoh one of the world's leading soda ash producers,
and will give the company access to a ready supply of alkali in the US.
Vitro, Mexico's largest industrial conglomerate and producer of flat glass,
is listed on the the New York Stock Exchange, writes Damian Fraser.
The purchase of ACI furthers Vitro's aim of becoming an integrated North
American group ahead of a free trade pact with the US and Canada. More than
50 per cent of Vitro's sales are now outside Mexico, largely as a result of
the 40 per cent accounted for by its US arm, Anchor Glass.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920520

