FT923-15580

FT  01 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: Major scorns Kinnock jibe on
Maxwell pensions affair


   By ALISON SMITH


MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, refused to accept yesterday that the
government had ignored repeated warnings from the Investment Management
Regulatory Organisation (Imro) about the difficulties of combining trust law
with the Financial Services Act in pension fund regulation.
He reacted angrily when Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, asked him
whether any ministers would be resigning in the wake of the Maxwell affair.
In noisy scenes in the Commons, Mr Kinnock quoted the words of Mr George
Nissen, who on Monday resigned as chairman of Imro. Mr Nissen said that the
organisation had been telling the government for some years of the
difficulties of pension and trust law.
'Why did the government take no effective action in response to these
repeated warnings from the regulatory body?' Mr Kinnock asked. 'When can we
expect the government to take its share of the responsibility, and when can
we expect ministers to follow Mr Nissen's example?'
Mr Major replied by citing another part of Mr Nissen's statement, in which
he had said that Imro freely acknowledged that it was open to a share of
reproach for what had happened. The prime minister went on to accuse Mr
Kinnock of 'seeking to spread blame where it doesn't exist.'
The essence of Mr Kinnock's question reflects the case that has been put to
the parliamentary ombudsman by Mr Richard Page, the Tory co-chairman of the
all-party group of MPs campaigning on behalf of the Maxwell pensioners.
The argument is that the Department of Trade and Industry failed to act on
warnings that the regulatory regime was inadequate.
This is the second time in just over a week that Mr Kinnock has stepped up
the pressure on the government over the Maxwell affair by raising it at
question time.
Ms Marjorie Mowlam, Labour's City spokesman, said yesterday that Imro's
evidence to the social security committee recalled that the organisation had
briefed a leading expert on trust law to advise it and had sent a copy of
his report to the government.
Mr Peter Lilley, the social security secretary, confirmed yesterday that he
had laid regulations to bring into effect greater legal powers for
pensioners whose pension funds are wound up.
People, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920701

