FT924-11355

FT  27 OCT 92 / International Company News: Zuckerman to take control of NY
Daily News


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


A NEW York bankruptcy judge yesterday approved the sale of the New York
Daily News, the loss-making tabloid, to Mr Mortimer Zuckerman, the property
investor and magazine publisher.
Judge Tina Brozman said the sale was 'necessary and appropriate' shortly
after she ruled in favour of Mr Zuckerman on a trade union dispute involving
the paper's typographers.
Mr Mortimer Zuckerman, the owner of the weekly US News and World Report
magazine and The Atlantic, a monthly magazine, had warned he might walk away
from the transaction if he had to honour a 20-year-old contract that
guaranteed life-time employment for 165 typographers.
In allowing Mr Zuckerman to go ahead with the purchase, Judge Brozman
effectively forced the typographers to file an administrative claim as a
creditor and seek payments from funds that are destined for the newspaper's
general creditors' pool.
The union said it would appeal the court ruling, but Judge Brozman said she
did not think the appeal would succeed. She said that enforcing the
typographers' contracts 'would have a devastating effect on the sale and
would probably kill it.'
The fate of the Daily News, which was previously owned by the late Mr Robert
Maxwell, has been in the hands of the bankruptcy court since it filed last
year for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of US bankruptcy law.
Mr Zuckerman's chances of acquiring The Daily News have been improving ever
since the withdrawal several weeks ago of Mr Conrad Black, the Canadian who
owns The Telegraph newspaper group in London. Mr Zuckerman has also made
progress with most of the other trade unions involved.
The deal is expected to close within 30 days, during which time Mr Zuckerman
may have further talks with the Newspaper Guild, the union that represents
editorial staff at the newspaper.
The guild has been unhappy with Mr Zuckerman's demand that he have the
freedom to change editorial staff at the paper.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921027

