FT921-427

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Dollars 500m typing error that moved
the market - Wall Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


THE FIRST week of spring should be a time of rejuvenation, an opportunity to
embrace the new season with enthusiasm. Not in New York, where four inches
of snow last week persuaded almost everyone, Wall Street's investors
included, to remain in hibernation.
It says something about the dullness of the week that the main, indeed only,
excitement on the stock markets was generated by a clerical error  -
admittedly one of impressive proportions.
The blunder was committed late on Wednesday by a clerk at Salomon Brothers,
the beleaguered Wall Street securities house that must be wondering if fate
has anything else in store, so accident-prone has been the last year.
The unfortunate clerk's mistake was simple. The repercussions were anything
but. He mistook a customer's order to sell Dollars 11m of shares as an order
to sell 11m shares - a much bigger trade, and one that could move the
market. The error might have been spotted if the order had been executed the
old-fashioned way, with the broker telephoning the marketmaker on the
exchange floor. The Salomon order, however, was for a computerised program
trade. As soon as the clerk pressed the button on his terminal at 3.58pm the
block of 11m shares began to be automatically sold by the Stock Exchange's
computer.
The impact was dramatic. In the final two minutes of the day's trading, a
12-point gain on the Dow Jones industrial average was wiped out. When the
closing bell rang, the index showed a net decline of 1.57 points. The near
14-point turnaround was the second biggest move in share prices during an
unusually quiet week.
It could have been a lot worse. Salomon traders spotted the mistake while
the computers were selling millions of dollars of smaller shares. They
halted the trade before some of the biggest stocks in the order were
reached. Even though Salomon managed to salvage something from the mess -
the firm says it quickly 'neutralised' the trade by some fancy footwork in
the derivatives markets - the fuss will take longer to die down.
Opponents of computer program trading have wasted no time in using the
Salomon blunder as ammunition in their fight to persuade regulators to
impose tougher restrictions on computer trading. Program trading is already
proscribed when the market rises or falls beyond a certain limit, a rule
introduced after the October 1987 crash to prevent computer trading of large
blocks of shares from exacerbating market volatility.
Wednesday's debacle led a range of 'experts' to raise a bigger issue in the
press and on television: how Wall Street uses its latest trading technology,
the development of which some critics believe may have outstripped peoples'
ability to control it.
They are missing the point. No amount of regulation or hi-tech wizardry can
prevent a clerk from misreading 'Dollars 11m' as '11m shares' and acting
accordingly. The foul-up at Salomon was the result of human error. Yet, more
importantly, it was also because of a failure of internal control systems at
in the firm's trading department.
Salomon needed a safety system to catch big orders and ensure their
verification before execution. The most worrying aspect of the affair was
not the power of computer technology in financial markets, but the fact that
a clerk could initiate a sale of 11m shares, worth as much as Dollars 500m,
without senior colleagues knowing what he was doing.
Aside from Wednesday's trading glitch, the week was quiet. New York's
investors and traders would have better spent their time frolicking in the
spring snow on Vermont's ski slopes, so uninspiring was trading.
The little news on the economy proved mixed. On the debit side there was
another rise in weekly jobless claims, a poor set of mid-March car sales and
a small decline in February durable goods. The good news came from the
housing market. Existing home sales rose sharply last month to a three-year
high, and construction contracts, both residential and commercial, also
advanced handsomely in February. The conclusion: the recession is probably
over, but the recovery looks as if it will be both shallow and slow.
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Monday      3272.14    -4.25
Tuesday     3260.96   -11.18
Wednesday   3259.39    -1.57
Thursday    3267.67    +8.28
Friday      3231.44   -36.23
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

920328

