FT921-15418

FT  10 JAN 92 / International Company News: Italian banking finds a new
force / A look at a three-way Roman bank merger


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


ITALY'S banks have been known for strange moves over the centuries, but sex
changes have not been among them. Not, at least, until now.
That is what will happen to Banco di Roma, the big Rome-based bank until
recently controlled by the IRI state holding company. It will become part of
three-way banking merger under way with Cassa di Risparmio di Roma, the Rome
savings bank, and Banco di Santo Spirito, another sizeable Roman bank, also
formally owned by IRI.
The product, to be called Banca di Roma, will be Italy's second biggest
financial institution, with total assets over L130,000bn (Dollars 113.2bn)
and some 1,100 branches by end-1992.
Although the difference in connotations between a Banco and a Banca may be
lost on most Italians, let alone foreigners, the new name will be a small
but significant sign of changes in the country's creaking banking system.
The three banks fit well together. The Rome Cassa is concentrated in Rome
and Lazio; Banco di Santo Spirito is also strong locally, but has nationwide
branches, too. And while Banco di Roma has no particular local roots, it
offers a sizeable national and international network.
Their skills are also complementary. Banco di Roma's dependence on
relatively volatile interbank funds will be counter-balanced by the
established local deposit base of its two partners. But Banco di Roma will
also provide many of the international banking skills, particularly in
capital markers, which the other two lack.
IRI's willingness to sell stemmed partly from the fact that both Banco di
Roma and Banco di Santo Spirito have reputations which are more illustrious
than their earnings. In 1990, Banco di Santo Spirito's net profits amounted
to L92bn. Net profits at Banco di Roma were L159.2bn on total assets of
L75,052bn.
By just changing one letter, the new Banca di Roma should capitalise on the
strong national identity and international familiarity of its almost
eponymous predecessor. Yet the switch from masculine (banco) to feminine
(banca) will also provide a newer and more modern gloss, according to Mr
Cesare Geronzi, director general of the Rome Cassa.
Whatever the semantics, investors may be well-advised to remember the name.
Under the complex merger, IRI now has 35 per cent of holding company
controlling the three banks.
However, IRI's current financial problems mean it may end up with much less
before the new bank takes shape.
Mr Geronzi will not say whether or when IRI might float its shares. But many
analysts believe that private investors, rather than IRI, will eventually
form the second biggest shareholding group in the new bank after the
foundation which controls the Rome Cassa itself.
The investment could be appealing. Banco di Roma, which until last year was
the only member of the trio to be quoted, has hardly been a star; only in
1991 year did it resume dividend payments after a five-year gap.
By contrast, Mr Geronzi forecasts the new Banca di Roma will have operating
profits of L1,800bn in 1992. That will represent a full year's contribution
from the Rome Cassa and Banco di Santo Spirito, and six months' earnings
from Banco di Roma, which will be integrated by next April.
His optimism is indirectly confirmed by some bankers' astonishment that the
deal has been allowed to go through without running into anti-cartel
barriers.
Although the new bank will have a virtually uncontested position in central
Italy, Mr Geronzi denies that a monopoly will be the primary motor for its
profits. 'When we thought this up it wasn't to create the biggest bank in
Italy but to create a unit able to fight growing competition and retain its
market share, and then go on to win more,' he says.
Earnings may also be limited by Italy's powerful bank unions and strict job
protection laws, which will hamper large-scale rationalisation. Even Mr
Geronzi talks of staff transfers rather than cuts.
That may be partly explained by the fact that the new bank still has room
for organic growth. In the 20 towns where the Rome Cassa and Banco di Santo
Spirito have overlapping branches, closures have been avoided by moving one
branch to another part of town. The market could sustain both branches, and
closing one would only have opened the door to a competitor, he explains.
The Rome Cassa will also continue its strategy of taking minority stakes in
neighbouring savings banks. So far, it has struck deals with two banks, with
a third due by the year-end.
Eventually, Mr Geronzi would like to extend such deals as far north as the
rich region of Emilia Romagna. 'Obviously it's a slow process, but we have a
lot of talks with other local savings banks under way,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page 17 Photograph Geronzi, predicts L1,800bn operating profits
(Omitted).

920110

