FT921-3670

FT  13 MAR 92 / Arts: The survival of the Jews - Jackie Wullschlager reviews
'Patterns of Jewish Life' in Berlin


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


This year marks two, chillingly connected, anniversaries in Jewish history:
1492, the date of the expulsion of all Jews from Spain, and 1942, when the
Nazis fixed on 'the final solution' in a Berlin villa and Auschwitz began
operating as a murder factory which killed 6000 people a day. 'Who in the
world would go voluntarily to Berlin?' asked the novelist Joseph Roth in
1927, when there were over 150,000 Jews in the German capital. Today, there
are 5,000.
Patterns of Jewish Life, at Berlin's Martin Gropius Bau (to April 26)
commemorates not the terror but the survival, continuity and range of Jewish
experience. 'Two Jews, three opinions', goes the proverb; this exhibition is
at once a triumph of diversity, a feast of visual delights and an
enthralling history told through paintings, objects, books, archives.
Everyday life - Moroccan costumes, mementos from the Polish shtetl - rubs
along with all the richness and colour of spirituality made tangible: a
thousand-year-old Pentateuch (the five books of Moses), a model of the
Indian synagogue of Cochin's 'white Jews', a painting of the Altneushul in
Prague, the oldest synagogue still in its original form.
The elegantly-proportioned Martin Gropius Bau sets the story of 2000 years
of exile and world-wandering to fine advantage: its open courtyard is a
'holy tent' where the core of Judaism, the written word, is explored;
leading off in all directions, a circle of bright, large rooms allow the
visitor to pick up historical or thematic links at any point. There is no
dogma, but cumulatively, the chronicle of cultural exchange between Jews and
the varied regimes within which they have lived, and the restrictions and
fear which Jewish thought and aesthetic expression have provoked over the
centuries, waves like a banner trumpetting the power and importance of
artistic and cultural life in any society.
Nothing demonstrates this better than the cultural history of Berlin itself.
By the 19th century, Jews hoped to gain acceptance by converting - 'the
certificate of baptism is the entrebillet to European culture', wrote
Heinrich Heine - and, when they were granted citizenship rights in the
founding of Germany in 1871, most identified strongly with the Wilhelmine
empire and later with the Weimar republic. The parade of political notables
here ranges from Bismarck's banker, Gerson von Bliechroder, the curled
moustache and stately pose of Emile Wauter's 1888 portrait the very essence
of Prussian dignity, to Edvard Munch's picture of the cigar-puffing patron
of expressionist artists, Weimar Foreign Minister Walter Rathenau (later
murdered by the Nazis).
The run of assimilated bankers and entrepreneurs who gained public success
lulled Jews into a false sense of security. Those from the east, passing
through en route to America, often stayed; the city's high point as capital
of the European avant-garde in the first third of this century would have
been impossible without artists like Max Brod, Joseph Roth, Max Reinhardt,
who settled there until their works where burned or banned by the Nazis and
Berlin was denuded as a cultural centre.
Arthur Kaufmann's massive triptych, 'Intellectual Emigration', tells the
story: its three parts - leaving occupied Europe, the Atlantic crossing,
arrival in New York - contain life-size portraits of 38 Jewish artists, from
Kurt Weill to Klemperer, who fled. A Hanukkah menorah draped in the Stars
and Stripes, each of its eight branches a statue of liberty clasping a
birthday-cake candle, makes a companion piece of joky optimism.
In 'Ulysses', Stephen's teacher Mr Deasy proudly declares Ireland's record
as the only country which never persecuted the Jews - 'because she never let
them in'. The great contrast of this exhibition is between 19th and early
20th century American religious liberalism and European repression, and the
resulting erratic relationship between the Utopia of Jewish idealism, the
return to the promised land, and the actual Utopia of the new world.
Cultural conflict in America became that of Jew against Jew - bourgeois
Americanised German Jews versus proletarian, orthodox,
Zionistically-inclined Russian Jews: a foreshadowing of similar tensions in
Israel today.
'We German Jews are spiritual proletarians, while the Polish Jews, who live
in proletarian conditions, are aristocrats of their spirits', wrote Franz
Rosenzweig in 1918. Among the highlights at the Martin Gropius Bau is the
reconstruction of the shtetl world of east European Jewry. Famous pieces
like Chagall's appear here in the context of Jewish folk art such as
Issachar Ryback's topsy-turvy villages and frenzied violinists in the cycle
'The Little Town'.
Cultural centres which disappeared completely with Hitler - Vilna, for
example, the 'Jerusalem of Lithuania', where newspapers appeared in six
languages, exports included the international hit play The Dybbuk, and half
the population in 1939 was Jewish - are evoked through paintings,
photographs, manuscripts, with the nostalgic intensity and mystery of a
Bashevis-Singer novel.
Even in an account designed to celebrate Jewish achievement, pogroms and
forced baptisms and persecution form as inescapable part of the tale. What
is valuable in a show of this scale is the long view, which shows how minor
indignities imposed over the centuries were built upon as the foundations
for the horrors of the Third Reich. Special degrading clothing for Jews, for
instance, was ordered in 13th century Vienna; by 1551 Ferdinand I's Jews
were forced to wear a yellow ring; later, Prague Jews wore a yellow collar:
Hitler's yellow star, therefore, must have initially been seen not as
uniquely menacing but as a variation on a long-ordained 'yellow stain'.
The Dreyfus case in the 1890s, where justice was eventually done and the
Jewish officer Dreyfus rehabilitated, had by ironic contrast a vehement
impact in persuading European Jews that they were not as assimilated or safe
as they had thought: Theodor Herzl's response, the book The Jewish State,
laid the foundations of Zionism.
Without driving at specific answers, 'Patterns of Jewish Life' throws up all
the timeless questions about Jewish identity, the significance of faith -
'J'ai trop peu de religion pour en changer', was the celebrated reply of an
old French lady when asked why she did not convert - the essence of Jewish
art and thought, the differences between anti-Judaism, anti-Semitism and
anti-Zionism. The exhibition is a magnificent record of the entwined fate of
a people, a religion and a culture which no one interested in recent history
would want to miss.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920313

