FT924-12105

FT  22 OCT 92 / Facing up to the costs of a close shave: Wilkinson Sword's
new razor needs investment


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES


The name Wilkinson Sword still conjures up images of the proud British
military tradition out of which the business was born 220 years ago. But
much of the company's recent history has been less than glorious, while it
has also grown steadily more remote from its British roots.
Yesterday's announcement that Eemland, Wilkinson's Dutch-registered owner,
is putting it up for sale marks another of many changes of ownership since
1980, when it was acquired by Allegheny International, a US conglomerate.
Long respected as an innovator in the shaving market, Wilkinson repeatedly
failed to capitalise on its commercial achievements and has never fully
recovered from a loss of market share to the disposable razors introduced by
Bic of France in 1977.
The AI acquisition was supposed to put the company back on track by
providing capital for international expansion. However, those hopes never
materialised and AI plunged heavily into loss in 1986. Wilkinson was sold
that year to Swedish Match, which was itself acquired in 1988 by Stora
Kopparberg, Sweden's leading pulp and paper producer.
A year later, Stora sold Wilkinson to Eemland, a consortium of investors
including several Swedish financial institutions, JP Morgan, the New York
bank, and Gillette, the US company which dominates the world's wet shaving
market.
Since then, uncertainties over Wilkinson's ownership have persisted, as
competition authorities in several countries have challenged Gillette's
financial involvement in its smaller competitor.
Though Gillette insists that its 22 per cent interest in Eemland gives it no
influence over Wilkinson's management, the British government and the German
Cartel Office have ordered the US company to dispose of its stake.
Wilkinson today is a much smaller company than in the early 1980s, when its
operations included matches, garden tools, household products, fertilisers
and Scripto pens. These have been sold off one by one to leave a business of
which 85 per cent is wet shaving equipment and most of the rest male
toiletries.
But this business is more profitable than during much of the past decade.
Last year, Wilkinson earned operating profits of DM46.8m (Pounds 18.90m) on
sales of DM316.3m, and industry observers estimate that it could fetch a
price of as much as Dollars 300m (Pounds 184m).
Indeed, Mr Mike Dowdall, Eemland's chairman, says the recent recovery in the
company's fortunes is at the root of the decision to sell it. Since it
introduced Protector, a sophisticated system razor, in March it has been
scrambling to meet unexpectedly strong demand.
Mr Dowdall says that in Germany, Protector has seized leadership of the
systems shaving market from Gillette's rival Sensor razor, itself a big
success since it was launched in early 1990. Protector is also said to be
doing well in Britain and France, the two other countries where it is on
sale.
Wilkinson would like to launch Protector in other European markets and in
the US but it has been constrained by inadequate production capacity, which
will only be partly eased by a decision six weeks ago to expand output at
its UK plant by 50 per cent.
Mr Dowdall and his managers want to increase production still further and
step up sales and marketing efforts. However, building up sales in the razor
market does not come cheap. Gillette is estimated to have invested Dollars
200m to develop and tool up production for Sensor and earmarked a further
Dollars 100m for marketing in the first year after it went on sale.
Whatever sums Wilkinson is looking for are clearly beyond the scope of
Eemland's Swedish institutional investors. Faced with severe financial
difficulties at home, they concluded that they had no option but to sell.
Meanwhile, Gillette's conflict with competition authorities precludes any
increase in its stake. Rather, the sale of Wilkinson Sword offers the US
company a face-saving way of extricating itself from an increasingly
embarrassing regulatory quagmire.
Mr Dowdall, who is a former director of Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch consumer
products company, says he has held talks with several unnamed prospective
buyers but has been unable to agree on terms.
He believes Wilkinson's future would be best guaranteed if it were owned by
a big consumer products company with the resources, experience and
commitment needed to back the development of new products and marketing.
Among the most likely bidders are Bic, Warner Lambert of the US, maker of
Shick razors, and Colgate-Palmolive, the American toiletries and personal
care group.
However, all three companies have been mentioned as possible buyers of
Wilkinson on previous occasions. Whether any of them now judge that its
performance has improved sufficiently to justify the investment it needs may
become clearer in the coming weeks.
Sharpening the image, Page 15; Lex, Page 20
                        *      *      *
SPOTLIGHT ON THE RAZOR BUSINESS
Wilkinson Sword's ownership history
1973  Wilkinson Sword merges with British Match.
1978  Allegheny Internationl (AI) buys 40 per cent of Wilkinson Sword
1980  AI acquires rest of Wilkinson Sword
1986  AI sells Wilkinson Sword shaving products, household goods       and
garden tools business to Swedish Match for Dollars 160m.
1988  Stora Kopparberg buys Swedish Match
1989  Stora sells Wilkinson Sword's EC shaving and toiletries business
 to a consortium.  Gillette acquires 22 per cent stake and       Wilkinson's
US operations
1990  Wilkinson buys back US operations from Gillette after US Justice
 Department challenges deal.
 -----------------------------------------------------
      UK MARKET SHARE FOR RAZORS AND BLADES
 -----------------------------------------------------
                                  1990
 -----------------------------------------------------
                      '000     %     Pounds m     %
                      units            rsp
 -----------------------------------------------------
Gillette               220    45       47        64
BIC                    132    27       12        16
Wilkinson Sword         87    18       10        13
Own label               44     9        4         6
Others                   5     1        1         1
TOTAL                  488   100       74       100
 -----------------------------------------------------
Source: Gillette/Mintel
 -----------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921022

