FT921-1189

FT  25 MAR 92 / Nunn urges further cuts in US troops: Military presence
overseas should be 'more realistic'


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE Bush administration's efforts to hold off pressure for further cuts in
US troop levels received a blow yesterday when an influential senator called
for 'more realistic levels' of military presence overseas.
Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, chairman of the Senate armed services committee
and a crucial advocate of a strong defence in congressional debates, said
that he believed it was possible to cut below the 'base force' level which
the Pentagon has argued is an irreducible minimum.
He warned, however, that it would be very difficult to reduce military
spending and force structures in 1993, and that any savings would have to be
achieved in subsequent years.
The base force envisaged by the Pentagon already involves cutting US active
duty military personnel from a peak of 2.17m in 1987 to 1.6m in 1997, with a
reduction in force structure to 12 active army divisions, 12 navy carrier
battle groups, and 15 active air force fighter wings.
President George Bush in January announced plans to cut the defence budget
by a total of Dollars 50bn (Pounds 28.9bn) over the next five years from the
levels planned a year earlier, but said that he could cut no further.
'This deep and no deeper,' he said.
But Senator Nunn said the base force contained 'redundancy and duplication
among the military services in role and mission'.
The senator advocated another Dollars 30bn to Dollars 35bn of cuts over the
next five years, above those already proposed by the president.
Senator Nunn argued, in particular, that the US military presence in Europe
could be cut well below the level of 150,000 currently proposed.
US military commanders have said that they must maintain at least a full
army corps of around 70,000 in order to have a coherent force able to defend
itself.
With three fighter wings and adequate naval and logistical support, they
have claimed that a total of 150,000 is a bare minimum.
Following the recent decision by Canada to pull its troops out of Europe,
some European nations have been worried that the US might succumb to
domestic pressure to withdraw its European presence.
They have lobbied hard to try to persuade Congress to sustain the US's
commitment to Nato.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920325

