FT922-13369

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Pollsters face questions over their methods


   By DAVID OWEN and GARETH SMYTH


THE POLLSTERS woke up yesterday morning with some explaining to do.
After a campaign in which Labour had consistently led in poll averages, it
was the worst result since at least 1970 for the chroniclers of the nation's
views and intentions.
'I think it has put market research back a long way,' said Mr Julian Bond,
new-product development director at Research International, which has a
policy of not doing political polling. 'Political pollsters don't get enough
opportunities to analyse their data against actual results.'
Mr Robert Worcester of Mori said on BBC radio: 'We have to go back to the
drawing board.'
After an inquest yesterday afternoon, the readiest explanation was that the
polls provided a reasonably accurate snapshot during the campaign but a late
swing, hinted at by Wednesday's surveys and the Harris/ITN exit poll, had
carried things the Conservatives' way.
'All the signs are there was a late switch,' said Mr Brian Gosschalk of
Mori, noting that the company would get more details from a recall survey of
respondents who had been interviewed throughout the campaign.
Newspaper deadlines precluded Mori from interviewing on the evening before
polling day, as it had done in the three previous elections which it
predicted much more accurately.
Mr Nick Sparrow, managing director of ICM, speculated that the Tories owed
their victory to 'a relatively small number of people walking into polling
booths who voted Tory without a great deal of enthusiasm'.
One explanation put forward by pollsters was that people were unwilling to
say they were voting for financial motives, but would consult their wallets
rather than their consciences in the privacy of the polling booth.
From the beginning of the campaign Tory strategists set out to exploit what
psephologists call 'pocket-book voting'. They succeeded. The simplest
explanation for the result is that voters felt they would be better off
under the Conservatives.
Thursday's NOP/BBC exit poll found nearly two-thirds of voters feared that a
Labour government would increase the basic rate of income tax. The Tories
were 16 points ahead on the economy as a whole.
The Harris/ITN exit poll found that 49 per cent of voters believed they
would be worse off under Labour's 'taxation and benefit policies'. Just
under half (48 per cent) of the crucial C2s, the skilled manual workers,
believed they would be worse off.
Undermining Labour's credibility was crucial for the Conservative strategy.
Voters seemed ready for the message: Harris in a poll in January had found
46 of Liberal Democrat voters and 50 per cent of women believed Labour had
'changed just to win the election'. During the election ministers seized on
every opportunity to pounce when Labour spokesmen hinted at additional
spending commitments. It paid off in the end.
The key slogan of the campaign was simple, but telling: 'You can't trust
Labour.'
After their sub-standard performance, pollsters must be hoping there is no
knock-on effect for the commercial market-research business that is meat and
drink to most of them.
Were clients to conclude that their findings on consumer attitudes to soap
powders were no more accurate than recent poll forecasts, the consequences
might be serious indeed.
The Market Research Society said yesterday that it would hold an inquiry
into the performance of opinion polls during the election.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920411

