FT923-6598

FT  22 AUG 92 / From currencies to currents: Alison Streeter, forex dealer
and cross-channel swimmer


   By STEPHEN COURT


ALISON Streeter is something of a long-distance specialist. During the week
she trades in Far Eastern currencies in the foreign exchange dealing room at
Standard Chartered Bank in London. The rest of the time, she swims. She is a
marathon swimmer.
She has covered the equivalent of an Atlantic crossing. It is a good counter
to the pressures of work, she says. 'Either it's been really quiet and you
haven't been able to make any money, or it's been so hectic that you didn't
know where the next million was coming from. Then you can go home in the
evening and thrash it out on the swimming pool.'
Alison's relentless front crawl has powered her round the Isle of Wight,
Jersey and Manhatten Island, up and down the tidal Thames from Richmond to
Gravesend, and across the Catalina Channel in California. She has crossed
from Capri to Naples, and from Ireland to Scotland and back.
But it is to the grey waters of the English Channel that Alison returns time
and again. She is 28 next Saturday and has recorded a total of 18
cross-Channel swims since her first in 1982.
Alison is the first woman to have swum a three-way Channel crossing. That
was two years ago. It took 34 hours and 40 minutes, with 10-minute breaks
allowed at either end. The swim was almost her last.
'I nearly died of asphyxiation. My throat had swollen up so much with 34
hours of salt water non-stop that I could hardly breathe. We just about
finished in time.'
A successful Channel crossing during the week of neap tides that started
yesterday would equal the women's record of 19 crossings held by Canada's
Cynthia Nicholas. A further push, planned for next month, would make Alison
Queen of the Channel.
What is the attraction? 'When I'm in the middle of the Channel, I think:
'What am I doing here? I can't believe I'm doing this again.' It's yourself
against the elements. It's not racing against other people, but it's how you
compete against the tide and the wind. Although I've done 18 crossings now,
every swim has been different. That's what I like about it.'
Alison has a ready smile, a weather-beaten face and the build you would
expect of the carbohydrate-loading pasta binges which are part of the
long-distance swimmer's training. She is stocky, with broad shoulders and
powerful arms. Her brown hair is cut in tight curls to fit under her bathing
cap.
Closer inspection reveals her latest battle scars. There are abrasions on
her neck, caused by the rubbing of her bathing cap on skin not covered with
enough of the grease that marathon swimmers use. On her upper arm is a red
patch where the skin has been rubbed raw by swimming. Below is another
graze: the remains of a jellyfish sting.
Her voice is slightly wheezy. She started swimming in childhood to combat
bad asthma and discovered she had a long-distance swimmer's endurance and
lung capacity. After thousands of miles and hours in the water, what keeps
her going?
'All my swims have been sponsored for charity. I keep thinking that there's
a lot of other people who are less fortunate.'
Alison has raised Pounds 65,000 for charities, particularly for leukaemia
research and Across, which provides holidays for sick and handicapped
people.
Alison's father contracted leukaemia, which has since been cured, and that
fuelled her desire to help fight the disease. Her mother is also her
trainer; it is her parents, she says, who have helped her most.
Before starting a swim she psyches herself for the marathon ahead. Once in
the water, however, things are different.
'The biggest problem is boredom. In the first hour, you're already bored and
cold and tired, with another 10 hours ahead. Once you're over half-way you
try and gear your mind to blanking everything out. That seems to make the
time go a lot quicker.'
Brief hourly rests help break the monotony. 'But you have to make sure you
don't stop concentrating. I've often found myself under the hull of the
boat, very close to knocking myself out.'
On her latest swim, a two-way crossing on August 6, a cross-Channel ferry
passed within 50 metres at full speed, leaving Alison to struggle through
its wash. Other hazards have included jellyfish, which attacked her during a
crossing from Ireland to Scotland.
'I was stung non-stop for four hours. Eventually I was pulled out of the
water, unconscious from the poison. They only managed to grab me out of the
water by my finger-tips as I was going down.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920822

