FT922-4103

FT  08 JUN 92 / Milosevic fails to convince he is powerless: Observers
believe the Serbian leader does have authority over forces in Bosnia


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


MR Cedric Thornberry, the United Nations mediator in the besieged Bosnian
capital of Sarajevo, is pinning all his hopes on the coming days.
Following lengthy negotiations between the Bosnian presidency and Serb
militia groups at the weekend, an agreement was reached to reopen Sarajevo
airport.
As long as the airport remains blocked by the Serb forces, the more likely
the people of Sarajevo will die of starvation. Its remaining 300,000
inhabitants have been without food, water, electricity and medicine, after
Serb forces started bombarding and besieging the city nine weeks ago.
Mr Thornberry wants UN troops to take control of the airport, as well as the
surrounding areas. But any successful implementation of this plan depends on
Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic.
In an attempt to distance himself from the fighting in Bosnia-Hercegovina so
as to end the UN sanctions imposed on Serbia a week ago, Mr Milosevic claims
he no longer controls the forces in Bosnia. Few experienced UN or western
diplomats in Belgrade believe him. They say the fighting in Bosnia could be
reduced if the Serbian president chose to call in the Serbian commanders who
control large sections of that war-torn republic.
These commanders are located in four key centres: Sarajevo; Pale, which is
close to the capital; Banja Luka in the north-east; and Tuzla, in the east
of Bosnia.
In Sarajevo, Mr Milosevic's hand-picked man is General Ratko Mladic.
Formerly Yugoslav army commander in the self-proclaimed Serbian republic of
Krajina, south-western Croatia, he was appointed head of the Yugoslav army
in Sarajevo by Mr Milosevic in early May. A few days later, he was made
chief of Serbia's proxy Bosnian army.
Since then, along with Mr Radovan Karadzic, leader of Bosnia's Serb
Democratic party (the sister party of Mr Milosevic's ruling Serbian
Socialist party), General Mladic has ruthlessly tried to starve Sarajevo
into submission.
Through siege and bombardment, he and Mr Karadzic, whose headquarters is now
in Pale, want to divide the city's ethnically-mixed, but close-knit,
community into separate Croat, Moslem and Serb districts.
To the north-west, in the 195,000-strong city of Banja Luka, a Serbian
stronghold, a more insidious campaign to create ethnically-pure Serb regions
is under way. A special 'Centre for Migration', organised by Mr Brdjanin
Kuprasanin and Mr Radislav Vukic, has been set up to administer the transfer
of populations.
For example, Mr Kuprasanin recently demanded that the mayor of Zenica, a
city in central Bosnia, swap 30,000 Moslems and Croats from Banja Luka for
Serbs from Zenice. Before the fighting, Banja Luka was 55 per cent Serb, 15
per cent Croat, and 15 per cent Moslem. Zenica was 55 per cent Moslem, 15
per cent Serb and 15 per cent Croat.
Moslems refusing to move out of their homes are forced to, or are killed.
When they try to flee, the men are often picked out of the convoys and shot.
A bus driver, involved in bringing some of the 200 refugees from the eastern
Bosnian town of Visegrad, recounted last week how Serb militia forces on the
Serbian border turned back the convoy into Bosnia. The Serbs then stopped
the bus, picked out 17 Moslems and shot them dead.
In Tuzla, Serb forces led by Mr Mile Dubajic began bombarding the
131,000-strong city two weeks ago with the aim of driving out all non-Serbs,
and consolidating that swathe of territory between Serbia proper and Tuzla.
Over 47 per cent of the city is Moslem.
Like other Serb commanders, Mr Dubajic has no respect for UN or other relief
agencies. He told a senior international aid agency official that if he
returned to the city, he would be shot personally by Mr Dubajic. 'They don't
want us around because they don't want us to see the atrocities,' said a UN
official.
Away from the main centres of fighting, UN and diplomatic military personnel
returning from other regions in Bosnia explained how Serb and Croatian
forces were driving out innocent civilians from villages through a policy of
pillage, burning, and killing.
'In remote areas, Croats and Serbs are doing their own forms of ethnic
cleansing in such a way that refugees who want to come home will have
nothing to come home to,' a senior UN official explained.
In regions around the south-western city of Mostar in Hercegovina, Croat
forces under the command of Mr Slobodan Praljak, Croatia's assistant defence
minister, have forced thousands of Serb villagers to flee into neighbouring
Montenegro. UN officials say Croatian President Franjo Tudjman is using the
international spotlight on Serbia to advance Croatia's own aims by trying to
annex Hercegovina to Croatia.
But they still insist that Mr Milosevic has the authority to order the siege
of Sarajevo and its airport to be lifted, and the power to rein in General
Mladic, Mr Karadzic and Serb militia groups.
A senior western diplomat said: 'If Milosevic says he has nothing more to do
with Bosnia, why doesn't he prove it by halting all oil and money sent from
Serbia to the army in Bosnia, and removing General Mladic?' He added:
'Maybe, in his cynical and cowardly way, Milosevic will do it when Sarajevo
has been completely destroyed.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920608

