FT922-13337

FT  11 APR 92 / Major makes a monkey of us all: The Conservatives' success -
and the prospect of 18 years of one-party rule


   By JOE ROGALY


Welcome to Japan - or is it Italy? Whichever analogy you choose, Britain
feels very like a one-party state this morning. Its people have the right to
change the government, but it is beginning to look as if 57 per cent of them
always remain hopelessly divided, while the other 43 per cent invariably put
the same lot in. By the time of the next election, the Conservatives will
have been in power for 17 or 18 years. Why should they lose then? On
Thursday, they emerged triumphant in the middle of a debilitating recession.
They will surely try to time it better on the next occasion.
They should also be technically well placed to win in 1996 or 1997. Changes
in constituency boundaries are expected to favour the government to the
extent of 10 or more seats. If Scotland is given self-rule - a very big 'if'
in view of Thursday's results  - the price will almost certainly be a
reduction in Scottish, and therefore Labour, representation at Westminster.
More to the point, Mr John Major, the unseasoned prime minister who
surprised everyone except himself by winning, will by then be a mature
leader. He will be able to draw upon five or six years of experience, not to
mention memories of this year's painful campaign. Painful? He has been
almost universally derided over the past three weeks. Clearly this lack of
confidence was misplaced. Under his leadership, soapbox and all, the Tories
attracted more than 14m votes, a record in British polling history. He won
against tougher opposition than any Mrs Margaret Thatcher faced. If he could
pull that off now, in spite of what seemed to many observers to be a
sequence of tactical errors, think how well he should do when his
apprenticeship is long behind him.
To talk in this way is not to qualify my acknowledgement of Mr Major's
achievement. It deserves to be recognised for what it is. He held his nerve
against a barrage of criticism and adverse opinion poll results. His
unassuming personality won through. His sense of the popular mood was
superior to that of all the polls and all the pundits. During the past 21
days, I have written more than once about the possibility of a hung
parliament with the Conservatives the largest party. I said that if they won
more than 315 seats, Mr Major would stay as prime minister. So did others.
Yet during the campaign there were very few who admitted publicly to a
belief that the prime minister would win a secure overall majority. He has
made monkeys of us all. If this gives him quiet satisfaction, he has earned
it.
A reign lasting to 2000 and beyond is another matter. Nobody deserves that.
Continuous power can be bad for the character of anyone, including the
political parties that hold it. In Japan and Italy it has led to large-scale
financial and political corruption. British corruption, actual or potential,
is of a different sort. It is not a case of politicians lining their
pockets, selling favours, or peddling preferment, although none of these is
unheard of in our recent history. It is more a sense of creeping
omnipotence, first noticed under Mrs Thatcher after her third victory in a
row in 1987.
This has already led to the gradual politicisation of the civil service and
the dominance of government supporters in every public body over which the
prime minister or one of his cabinet colleagues can exercise the power of
patronage. We must hope that Mr Major reverts to the earlier custom of
drawing on a wide spectrum of interests and political allegiance when
looking to fill the boards of the Tories' many quangos.
During the past year, I have discussed the possibility of a fourth
Conservative victory with various ministers and expressed such concerns to
them. The reply is threefold. First, we are British. We have a tradition of
relative probity in government. To take one small example - look at how
ministers are denied the use of official cars while on campaign. Second, Mr
Major is not like Mrs Thatcher. He has tried to run a more collegiate
cabinet than she did. He is committed to more open government. He has a
strict sense of the traditional proprieties, as illustrated by his all-party
approach to the conduct of affairs during the Gulf war.
Third, democracy prevails even if the Conservatives come back every time.
The natural party of government is obliged to take into account the
possibility of being turfed out. It can win many elections in a row, but it
will be kept honest and sane by the knowledge that every election is a risk.
It also has to be said that the Japanese economy has done very well under
the continuous rule of a single party. It may be sliding into recession now,
but it has become the most dynamic growth machine in the contemporary world.
Yet it would be rash to assert that the cause of Japan's success is the
apparently permanent rule of its Liberal Democratic party. As to Italy, it
is true that its northern half has prospered. under the Christian Democrats,
who nearly always provide the prime minister in their coalitions. Yet its
governance is not often praised, and rarely as an example for Britain to
follow.
The reason is plain. Coalitions are anathema to the English. The idea of
alternating bouts of power by opposing parties is ingrained in the national
character. It seems like a necessary ingredient of our democracy. It will be
absent unless the non-Conservative opposition finds a way of winning
elections. You can see part of what has to happen by considering the last
three contests. In 1983, Labour's worst post-war year, Mr Michael Foot led
the people's party downhill to a mere 27.6 per cent of the total vote. The
Liberals and Social Democrats did almost as well, with 25.4 per cent. In
1987, Mr Neil Kinnock's first election, Labour pulled ahead, to 30.8 per
cent against the Alliance's 22.6 per cent. This represented a 3 per cent
swing back to Labour from the Liberals and the schismatics of the SDP.
There was a further swing to Labour of roughly 4.4 per cent on Thursday. Mr
Kinnock's party ended up at 35 per cent to the Liberal Democrats' 18 per
cent. For most of the campaign, the polls suggested that both Mr Kinnock and
Mr Paddy Ashdown would do better than that, but on the day more closet
Tories fled home from the Liberal Democrats than even the most optimistic
Conservatives could have hoped for.
Some people in the Labour party will now be tempted to argue that one more
heave is required. Then the Lib Dems will be back to the single-figure
percentages that prevailed when Labour won so well in 1945 and 1966. This is
worthy of debate. All that Labour requires in order to achieve such a
consummation is new policies, a new leader, a new party constitution and a
new name. For it does not seem possible for it to get elected while it
advocates redistribution of the incomes of high earners to the public sector
and low-income groups, nor - in spite of his untiring efforts - under Mr
Kinnock, nor while allied to the trade unions that founded it, nor while the
name 'Labour' reminds a vital extra margin of voters of the disasters of the
1970s.
Back to the drawing-board. A second line of argument, propounded in this
space immediately after the 1987 election, is that Labour should make its
peace with the Lib-Dems. That would require new policies, a divorce from the
unions and possibly a new leader. It is not certain that it would work. It
appears that on its own, Labour cannot be elected in sufficient southern
constituencies to win nationally. If it were part of a pre-electoral pact,
the thought of helping it to victory by voting Liberal Democrat might
continue to frighten some voters into the Tories' arms.
If the parties of what is still for convenience called the 'left' were led
by selfless men or women of far-sighted vision there might be hope that
something practical could be constructed. As it is, Labour seems likely to
revert to a period of internal bickering and bids for the leadership, while
the Liberal Democrats must await either the break up of Labour, or a
proposal of alliance, or virtual extinction by a renewed Labour party. Mr
Ashdown does have his eye on a realignment of the opposition parties, or the
resurgence of his own, but he does not have any obvious means of making his
dream come true. If the floundering of competing opposition parties is what
we are in for, Mr Major can safely set his eyes on the millennium.
Konichi-wa. Benvenuti.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920411

