FT921-3858

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Company News: Loral goes on the attack in
defence - The US defence electronics group's expansion plans


   By PAUL BETTS


Loral, the US defence electronics company whose crafty acquisition strategy
has turned it into one of the darlings of Wall Street, is on the prowl again
for more bargain deals.
'We still have an appetite for growth both by internal investment and
development and by acquisition,' said Mr Bernard Schwartz, the company's
chairman and architect of Loral's transformation from a struggling company
with Dollars 30m annual sales in the early 1970s into one of the leading US
defence electronics contractors with a turnover of about Dollars 3.3bn in
its current financial year ending this month.
The uncertainties facing the defence industry have depressed the value of
many companies in this sector. But while most defence companies are seeking
to rationalise their military business, Mr Schwartz sees this as offering
Loral a chance to pick up further opportunities to expand its core defence
electronics businesses.
Mr Schwartz's last big acquisition was the Dollars 750m takeover of Ford
Aerospace 18 months ago. But he has systematically acquired some of the
defence activities of leading US 'blue chip' companies which decided to
diversify into the military sector and are now refocusing their activities
on their core operations.
Over the past seven years, Loral bought the military computer operations of
IBM; the military operations of Honey-well Optics; the defence business of
Goodyear, Xerox and Fairchild/Schlumberger before buying the defence and
aerospace activities of the Ford car group.
'There are still some big companies out there which have military
operations,' he said. 'These companies sought to diversify into the military
business when diversification was the buzz-word. My focus has been the
opposite. We always concentrated on our core defence business,' he
explained.
The strategy has paid handsome dividends. Although Loral has never been a
household name, it has now become a leader in several defence electronic
sectors including aircraft protection systems, training and simulation,
command and control, weapon delivery and battle management systems.
The company has also had an uninterrupted run of earnings increases. 'We
have continued to improve our profits every year,' Mr Schwartz said. 'This
year will be the best we ever had,' he added.
For the first nine months of its current financial year, Loral reported net
income of Dollars 81.4m compared with Dollars 59.7m for the same period the
year before. Mr Schwartz expects profits for the current financial year to
be around 13-15 per cent higher than last year. 'Next year will probably be
not so much but I'm still hoping for a double-digit increase,' he said.
Although the defence industry has come under pressure because of government
cuts, Loral remains confident about its future prospects because of its
strategy of concentrating on tactical weapons rather than on the strategic
nuclear weapons of the Cold War era. 'We've always been in the retrofit
business,' explained Mr Schwartz. 'We design and manufacture improvements on
present weapon systems,' he said. In the post Cold War defence market,
emphasis on retrofitting and enhancing existing weapons systems is expected
to grow.
The company, which saw about two thirds of its product line used in the
Desert Storm operation in the Gulf conflict last year, is also looking at
future market opportunities in the Middle East.
But Loral has traditionally concentrated its defence activities on the US.
In spite of budget cuts, Mr Schwartz said the US defence market will
continue to be huge. 'It still remains a very large market despite the
precipitous decreases in defence spending: we are talking of Dollars 289bn
last year and Dollars 270bn this year. The defence budget is still larger
than the US housing market and is about the same size as the US automobile
industry,' he said.
Loral has not been spared by the cutbacks in defence. Mr Schwartz
acknowledged Loral, which today employs about 25,000 people, has also had to
adjust to the new defence environment. But the company started rationalising
several years ago. 'Our labour population has decreased by about 10 per cent
over the last few years. But we never faced a cataclysmic cutback of
resources,' he explained.
Mr Schwartz believed the defence market would eventually stabilise. 'We can
still show earnings growth in this difficult period. But there will be fewer
industrial competitors in what is still a very large business and our market
share will increase. At least, that's the target,' he said.
Although Loral's emphasis remains the defence business, Mr Schwartz has also
moved the company into the commercial satellite business following the Ford
Aerospace acquisition. 'But moving into the commercial sector is not a
primary thrust of our strategy and it's not our objective to balance our
military business with commercial activities,' he added.
The commercial space business was an opportunity which emerged from the Ford
Aerospace acquisition. 'My concept was there was an opportunity to become a
global participant in the satellite business but we needed to branch out and
forge a partnership with other international groups,' he said.
This led to the satellite partnership with a group of European companies
including Aerospatiale and Alcatel of France and Alenia of Italy. The three
European companies last year acquired for Dollars 182m a 49 per cent stake
in the US company's new commercial satellite business called Space
Systems/Loral.
The venture has got off to a good start by winning a Dollars 500m contract
for a Japanese satellite programme.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920312

