FT924-11474

FT  26 OCT 92 / People: Fashionable banking


There cannot be many bankers who have experienced as many changes in banking
fashions as Sir John Hall, the new chairman of The Nikko Bank (UK), the
London commercial bank owned by one of Japan's biggest securities companies.
Sir John, an old Etonian, spent the first half of his career climbing the
boardroom ladder at J Henry Schroder Wagg, one of the London acceptance
houses.
However, in 1973 he joined Bank of America International. It was the period
when the leading US banks were keen to get involved in medium-term
Euromarket lending and it was thought a new institution which combined
merchant banking skills - Kleinwort Benson and Paribas were shareholders -
with the balance sheet strength of a big US commercial bank, would be a
powerful force.
In the event, US banks quickly learnt how to make medium-term loans and the
merchant bank eventually became a wholly-owned subsidiary of Bank of
America.
After a short stint with the US parent, Sir John was seconded to run the
European Brazilian Bank, one of a group of consortium banks which
specialised in lending money to one region, and in which Bank of America had
almost a one-third stake.
Once again the original rationale did not survive the onset of the debt
crisis in the developing world in the early 1980s and in October 1988 the
bank gave up its banking status because it could not afford to make
sufficient provisions against doubtful loans.
A year later Sir John was made a managing director of the newly-established
Nikko Bank (UK). It employs 120 staff, has a balance sheet of Pounds 2.7bn
and in the year to March made after-tax profits of Pounds 5.6m.
Sir John, 61, who takes over as a non-executive chairman from John
Cunningham, an ex-Coutts man, is confident that the life expectancy of his
new vehicle is considerably longer than some of his earlier charges.
If he has learnt any lessons from his earlier career moves, it is not to
have 'all your eggs in one basket' and have plenty of liquidity in the
balance sheet. Less than six months after he joined Eurobraz, two thirds of
the bank's liquidity disappeared because of the debt crisis, and the
problems this caused have left a lasting impression on Sir John.
*****
Russell Middleton, an India specialist who was managing director of ANZ
McCaughan Capel Cure between 1989-1990, has been made head of the new Indian
department at James Capel.
Middleton, 45, first got interested in the sub-continent when he went there
eight years ago to attend the wedding of a friend from his London tennis
club. One of his first tasks now is to give institutional clients at his new
company 'the feel, small and taste of India'.
James Capel is this month opening a representative office in Bombay, in the
offices of its parent HongKong Bank - staffed by two analysts, both Indians
 -but Middleton will continue to be based in London 'because that is where
most of the major international institutional investors are still based'.
Notwithstanding India's manifest problems, and the recent stock market
scandal which has badly shaken confidence, Middleton believes the country is
'opening up very quickly'. Nor is he unaware of the hazards, having been in
Australia trying to interest investors in a closed-end fund which he was
working on with his previous employer, boutique merchant bank Chescor, when
Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated and the country thrown into chaos yet again.
He moved to Capel to allow himself scope to branch out from fund management
and become involved in other areas - interesting foreigners in global
depositary receipts and in newly available direct investment opportunities.
Middleton, who comes originally from Melbourne, began working with
Australian stockbrokers Bain in London in 1977, then joined McCaughan Dyson,
taking charge of the Melbourne broker's London office in 1984.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921026

