FT924-1070

FT  19 DEC 92 / Food & Drink: Bargain bottles in serious quantity - Jancis
Robinson completes her round-up of the best buys from the off-licence chains
and the big supermarkets


   By JANCIS ROBINSON


THIS WEEK, we enter the competitive, knife-sharpened world of the major
supermarkets, together with the two biggest off-licence chains, both
brewery-owned. There is an unfortunate gulf between the wines that sell in
quantity (well below Pounds 4 a bottle) and the window-dressing wines the
supermarkets tend to show off to us wine writers, typically the second wine
of a smart Bordeaux chateau available in just two branches at a price
remarkably similar to that offered by the independents. (Supermarkets' best
bargains are lines that can be bought in serious quantity). Here is my pick
of what they all offer, but some of the more expensive bottles are only at
bigger stores. The stars denote my own rating.
Safeway***
Safeway does try terribly hard, embracing all manner of worthy if awkward
causes such as organic wines and English wines (good examples available in
their regions of origin). What I like is the stamp of individuality that is
apparent throughout the range. I included three of the wines below before
learning their prices had been slashed for Christmas.
Hungarian Country White 1991, Pounds 1.99. Wonderfully Hungarian with real
fire. Poor man's Gewurztraminer.
I Frari Bianco di Custoza 1991, Pounds 3.75. Comes in one of those
super-smart Italian bottles that look as though it alone is worth a fiver.
Nice, powerful, versatile dry white.
Australian Chardonnay 1992, Pounds 3.49. Everyone's got 'em. This one (from
Griffith, the marijuana capital of NSW) has better acid than many.
Domaine de Rivoyre Chardonnay 1991, H Ryman, Pounds 4.99. Languedoc fruit
internationalised beguilingly by Australian-trained winemaker. Elegant.
Yarden Chardonnay 1991, Pounds 7.29. Very sophisticated wine -
barrel-fermentation, malolactic fermentation, all the tricks - from the
Golan Heights. Much the best-value wine made in Israel and, quite
incidentally, kosher.
Safeway Australian Red, Pounds 2.65 a 75cl cardboard brick. Relatively fresh
and exciting - and in a light, non-smashable pack.
Villany Kekoporto 1991, Pounds 2.79. Excitingly lively, characterful
Hungarian red from the same winemaker as Reserve Cask F12.
Romanian Cabernet Sauvignon 1985, Pounds 2.69. Absurd price for a
seven-year-old, oak-aged classic, exclusive to Safeway.
Domaine de Soulie 1991, St Chinian, Pounds 3.95. Vigorous, chewy, organic
Midi red.
Reserve Cask F12, Villany Cabernet Sauvignon 1991, Pounds 3.99.
Exceptionally fruity, exuberant Hungarian red that will improve.
Don Maximiano Cabernet Sauvignon 1988, Pounds 6.39. Full-blooded Chilean
red.
Lustau Old Dry Oloroso, Pounds 3.29 a half. Lovely light, greenish tawny,
it's so old. Silly price. Sad.
Sainsbury *
I have tried particularly hard to pick out the stars from a somewhat
lacklustre wine collection because Sainsbury trolleys are still Britain's
favourite. The new South African wine range is labelled prettily.
Hungarian Pinot Blanc, Pounds 2.59. Good price for soft, off dry, curranty
fruit.
Chardonnay Vin de Pays d'Oc 1991, Pounds 4.99. A Hugh Ryman Aussified wine,
remarkably similar to Safeway's Rivoyre.
Beaujolais-Villages 1991 Les Roches Grillees, Pounds 3.79. Correct,
appetising and discounted specially for Christmas. Best served slightly
cool, with cold turkey.
Ch Tourteau-Chollet 1988, Pounds 4.99. Good, gutsy red Graves. Ready to
drink claret.
Moscatel de Valencia, Pounds 2.99. Probably the best buy of all - a tooth
rotter but a well-balanced, silver-medal-winning sweet white with a useful
stopper cork. Serve icy at the end of Christmas dinner and shake your
spinning head at how cheap it is.
Clos St Georges 1990 Graves Superieures, Pounds 6.96. Almost a Barsac, a
particularly good vintage of an old favourite.
Clos l'Abeilley 1990 Sauternes, Pounds 7.95 a half. Worth it. Fine, classy,
as great sweet wine ought to be. Second wine of classed growth Ch
Rayne-Vigneau.
Sherries, especially the 35-year-old Aged Amontillado at Pounds 3.49 a half
(ridiculous price); the slightly richer Palo Cortado; and, in bigger
branches, the stunningly pale and lovely Lustau Almacenista Oloroso at
Pounds 6.79 a half, putting all the rest, bargains as they are, in the
shade.
Tesco**
Putting significant pressure on Sainsbury's, and several steps ahead of the
crowd in South Africa. Its interesting International Winemaker range, the
product of one man and his air miles, shows too little distinction between
the continents so far but should be worth watching.
Mendoza Blanc 1992, Pounds 2.99. Probably best value of the International
Winemaker range, although Blanc seems an odd word for a clean, aromatic
white made in Argentina.
Tesco Australian White, Pounds 2.99 Amazing value. Poor old Riesling
disguised in a white burgundy bottle and, admittedly, taking on a few Oz
Semillon characteristics. Dry, definitely Australian, white.
Robertson Chardonnay 1992, Pounds 3.99. Good value, well balanced from Danie
de Wet, the Cape's Chardonnay king.
Santa Rita Casablanca Chardonnay 1991, Pounds 6.99 (top 18 stores only). The
most subtle, burgundian Chilean Chardonnay I have tasted, from the new,
cool, coastal region that is the Carneros of Chile.
Jackson Estate Sauvignon Blanc 1992, Pounds 6.99 (top 49 stores).
Grapefruit, gooseberry flavours. See Thresher, too.
Chalk Hill Chardonnay 1990, Pounds 9.99. This quite happily withstood
comparison with a premier cru Chassagne-Montrachet from a reliable source.
Top stores only.
International Winemaker Malbec, Pounds 2.99. Deep purple pastiche of young
claret, from Argentina.
Australian Sparkling, Pounds 4.49. Quite light and frothy but very easy and
good value, from Seppelt.
Tesco Finest Amontillado, Pounds 4.89. You will want to decant this, partly
to distance the wine from its down-market packaging, partly to exhibit its
beautifully subtle, pale tawny colour, the green tints betraying its age.
Light, off-dry and, thanks to its acidity, very refreshing.
Thresher Wine Shop/Wine Rack/Bottoms Up***
Am I the only pedant annoyed by their television advertisement confusion of
palate with palette? Probably. No matter, as Britain's biggest (and, thanks
to chancellor Norman Lamont, most famous) agglomeration of off-licences
cares genuinely about the wine itself (and still cannot quite believe how
much bigger than old rival Oddbins it is).
Prices are edging up, presumably much to the relief of smaller operators.
The moody new Bottoms Up list is a triumph. The best Thresher branches are
emblazoned Wine Shop, but Wine Rack and Bottoms Up (WR/BU) carry the widest
range.
Eden Ridge Dry White 1992, Pounds 3.99 (WR/BU). Adam Wynn's cheap, organic,
lively off-dry crackling bargain made mainly from a shockingly unfashionable
grape variety (Riesling).
Jackson Estate Sauvignon Blanc 1991, Pounds 6.95. Thoroughly serious
Marlborough (NZ) Sauvignon; fine alternative to Cloudy Bay.
Slovakian Pinot Noir 1990, Pounds 3.29. Good colour, leafy aroma. No problem
distinguishing this from a Corton but jolly good value.
Penfolds Bin 2 1991, Pounds 3.99. See Waitrose.
Ch Clement Termes 1990 Gaillac, Pounds 4.59 Smooth, suave, juicy fruit and
not a jot of tannin. Drink now.
Ch Guibon 1990 Bordeaux, Pounds 4.39. A good, leafy claret from Andre
Lurton.
Bourgogne 1990 Domaine de l'Arlot, Pounds 7.99 (WR/BU). Just the sort of
wine we all want: proper domaine-bottled red burgundy from a great vintage
and vines too young to qualify for their normal appellation,
Nuits-St-Georges. Fresh fruit and no doubt about the oak.
Mountadam Pinot Noir 1990, Pounds 5.99 a half (WR/BU). Flattering sweet
mouthful of Australian fruit to be drunk soon.
Saintsbury Pinot Noir 1990, Pounds 11.49. Fine, juicy stuff from one of
California's best Pinot producers.
Ch Les Hebras Monbazillac 1990, Pounds 5.49 a half. Still looking gorgeous,
although demanding cellar space for a few years more vociferously than it
was last Christmas. I am going back for another two cases.
Dow's 10-year-old Tawny, Pounds 6.99 a half. Textbook stuff to be drunk with
cheese or even Christmas pudding.
Victoria Wine*
Some very good prices at the bottom end, but only until January 4 - and only
the top Wine Shops will have all of those listed below. A comparison of VW's
list with those of Whitbread's Thresher group (above) is instructive. Won't
Allied-Lyons throw a bit more money Victoria's way?
Willow Court 1991, Pounds 2.99. Lively, clean white from Gloucestershire.
Good aperitif or with smoked salmon.
Randall Bridge Dry White Pounds 2.99. It was probably much easier to find a
good wine at this price from Australia than from England. Another clever
attempt to make Riesling taste like Semillon (see Tesco). A bargain.
Leziria, Pounds 1.99. Juicy Portuguese answer to Beaujolais that would make
a great house red.
Vin de Pays de l'Uzege, Pounds 2.99 a litre. A soft house red for
francophiles. To be drunk sooner rather than later, this VW exclusiveness
sports a much-improved label.
Cismeira 1990 Douro, Pounds 2.99. Quite different from the other Portuguese
red above. Savoury, solid, yet lively red from port country.
Yalumba Show Reserve Liqueur Muscat, Pounds 6.89 half. A great Australian
speciality, rich and raisiny.
Taylors' First Estate, Pounds 8.99 a litre. Special offer in Wine Shops on
Taylors' delightfully unapologetic concentrated young ruby port. Lovely
stuff.
Waitrose ***
Some interesting new lines here, such as a Vin de Pays d'Oc matured on its
lees to taste like Muscadet; an unusual Vin de Pays from the Cote d'Or, made
from the white Auxerrois grape, at Pounds 4.45; and a low alcohol sparkling
wine from Alsace, called Paul Trudel Alsace, at Pounds 1.99.
Robertson Sauvignon Blanc 1992, Pounds 2.99. Thoroughly commercial (ie, by
no means bone dry) but perceptibly Sauvignon.
Domaine de Lalande Merlot Rose 1991, Pounds 2.99. This versatile dry pink
from Cabardes is sufficiently refreshing and versatile to become anyone's
house wine over Christmas.
Currawong Creek Chardonnay 1991, Pounds 3.99. Exclusive and rather smart
bottling from Rothbury, a blend of New South Wales' unashamedly distinctive
fruit.
Cabernet 1990 Haut Poitou, Pounds 3.99. A real stride forward for the Haut
Poitou co-op. Ambitiously oaked and much cheaper than many of the Loire reds
it matches.
Penfolds Bin 2 1991, Pounds 3.99. Why, oh why, they do not bill this as
trendy Syrah/Mourvedre, rather than Shiraz/Mataro, I do not know, but it
offers an absurd amount of savoury interest for the money. Not too heavy.
Waitrose Special Reserve Claret 1989, Pounds 4.65. Much the best of
Waitrose's clarets in this price range and cleverly chosen from Fronsac,
wines from which are getting plumper and juicier with every vintage. Drink
or keep a year.
Waitrose Solera Jerezana Rich Cream, Pounds 4.99. The awful truth is that
this would probably sell much better in a snazzy package that distanced it
from the appellation sherry. Quite extraordinary maturity and subtlety, with
a neat dry finish after a sumptuously rich palate.
This is the perfect end to Christmas dinner. Another absurdly under-priced
sherry.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

921219

