FT921-12096

FT  29 JAN 92 / French choose liberte over fraternite


   By IAN DAVIDSON


   PARIS


France's Communist-led CGT trade union federation held a splendid party on
Monday night for its departing first secretary, Mr Henri Krasucki, who is
retiring at the age of 67. It was a distinctive send-off, in the form of a
Mozart concert at the Opera Comique in Paris, with extracts from The
Marriage of Figaro and The Magic Flute. It should have given Mr Krasucki
particular pleasure, since he is renowned in trade union circles for his
passion for Mozart.
In the cold light of day, however, Mr Krasucki may not be all that sorry to
be going. After all, his departure effectively completes a generational
changing of the guard of the leadership of the three main French trades
unions federations. In 1988 Mr Edmond Maire retired after 17 years as leader
of the CFDT, and in 1989 Mr Andre Bergeron retired after 26 years as leader
of Force Ouvriere.
Mr Krasucki, by contrast, has only been 10 years in the job; but it may be
enough. For the plain fact is that Mr Krasucki leaves his union in a steep
and apparently unstoppable crisis of falling membership.
In 1947 it claimed 4m members, before the schism with a socialist minority
which broke away to form Force Ouvriere. In 1977 the CGT was still claiming
2.3m members, but by 1981 the total had shrunk to 1.9m members. In the past
decade this decline has gathered speed, and even the claimed total
membership is now no more than 855,000, and 200,000 of them are pensioners.
The two other main federations have also declined in recent years, though
much less steeply than the CGT; but they are also both significantly
smaller. In elections to works councils, according to official figures from
the Labour Ministry, the latest score by the CGT was just under 25 per cent
(compared with over 36 per cent in 1980); whereas the CFDT scored under 20
per cent, and Force Ouvriere got under 13 per cent. In fact, the biggest
single group of those elected to works' councils, is now the category of
non-union candidates.
In other words, the CGT phenomenon of falling membership is part of a larger
phenomenon which is affecting the general union scene in France; indeed, one
might even say that the country is entering a crisis of residual trade
unionism. According to the latest comparative study by the OECD, France now
has the lowest union penetration of any member country - only 12 per cent.
And that membership is disproportionately represented in the public sector,
where it reaches 26 per cent, while dropping to a mere 8 per cent in the
market sector.
In Scandinavian countries, union membership remains at near saturation
levels. But many other industrialised countries experienced significant
falls in union membership in the 1980s: this was true of Spain where it
dropped by over 31 per cent, Britain (21 per cent) and Italy (18.6 per
cent). But the drop was much the steepest in France: down 41.6 per cent,
from 3.37m to 1.97m.
One general factor in declining union membership could be the relative
decline of traditional smokestack manufacturing. But in France the acute
problems of the CGT seem likely to be directly related to its connection
with the Stalinist French Communist party, which is itself in free fall.
The paradox is that Mr Krasucki, who has presided over the steepest
collapse, is normally held to be something of a reformist Communist; whereas
his successor, the 58-year-old Mr Louis Viannet, has the reputation of an
unreconstructed party hard-liner.
In his opening speech to the CGT Congress on Sunday, the be-spectacled Mr
Viannet proclaimed the imperious necessity of 'changing what does not work'.
But the changes will need to be spectacular if he is to bring the union out
of its nose-dive.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

920129

