FT922-521

FT  27 JUN 92 / Man In The News: The third phase of Mr Europe - Jacques
Delors


   By DAVID BUCHAN and IAN DAVIDSON


EC leaders have chosen a new man to lead a new European Community for the
next two crucial years. His name is still Mr Jacques Delors. But this
66-year-old chameleon has now changed his image from Jacques the Power
Grabber into Jacques the Conciliatory Statesman.
This change of mind, if not of heart, made it all the easier for all 12 EC
leaders at their dinner last night in the Queluz Palace to give the
Commission president an unprecedented fifth two-year term at the head of the
EC executive. Even Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, seems confident
that Mr Delors is shedding the image that has made him a hate figure for
some Conservative back-benchers. Not that Mr Delors is backing away from the
high goals of the Maastricht Treaty on political and monetary union. Far
from it. But he now realises that the national debates on the treaty have
opened up an apparent gap between what the 12 governments were able to
negotiate in Maastricht and what European public opinion is able to accept.
Narrowing that gap will be the great challenge of Mr Delors' extra two years
as Commission president. Riding on his success is ratification of
Maastricht, the possibility of the Community being ready for another
integrationist lurch forward at its next planned constitutional revision in
1996, and even Mr Delors' own long-shot chances of a crack at the French
presidency.
The Lisbon summit, and the run-up to it, saw Mr Delors apologising for his
threat that Denmark's rejection of Maastricht might cost it EC farm
subsidies. He conceded he had pitched EC spending plans too high. He has
dropped ideas of early institutional change to accompany the admission of
new countries into the Community. Above all, he has declared his readiness
to return to individual governments some of the powers that have flowed to
Brussels over the past 35 years.
Is this just show? Undoubtedly, Mr Delors will feel and behave in a less
contrite manner, once the shockwaves of Denmark's Maastricht rejection cease
reverberating around the Community. But there are grounds for supposing that
Mr Delors has a longer-lasting interest in 'subsidiarity'. Indeed, it would
be in tune with the way that Mr Delors has realised his vaulting ambition
for the EC, if, having got a hand on some of the levers of political and
monetary power, he were to devolve the less enticing duties of implementing
and supervising EC law to others outside Brussels.
In fact, this is not the first strategic shift in Mr Delors' Brussels
career. It is now possible to see three phases to this:
Mr Delors arrived in Brussels with ideas about a single currency and common
defence, but had to confine himself largely in 1985-88 to the internal
market programme. The latter hardly thrilled him. In his oft-repeated
statement that 'one can hardly fall in love with the single market', Mr
Delors speaks for himself. But he realised it was an essential building
block;
In 1989-91 his ambitions took off, getting aerodynamic shape in the form of
the Maastricht Treaty last December. But, like Icarus, Mr Delors made the
mistake of flying too high. The Commission president saw the inevitability
of an enlarged Community as an opportunity to float further ideas. One was
of a more 'political' EC executive which would not exactly replace the EC's
rotating presidency, but which would come to eclipse it as the sun does the
moon. But Danish voters nearly shot the treaty, and Mr Delors with it, to
the ground;
In his third phase, 1992-94, now opening, Mr Delors' immediate aim is to
keep Maastricht flying. To do this, with a degree of subsidiarity that makes
all member states including Denmark feel comfortable, he has hinted he is
ready to jettison the purist prospect, held out in Phases One and Two, of a
single market.
It is true that, with 90 per cent of the 300 internal market measures
already on the EC statute book, the Commission will now be slapping fewer
legislative proposals down on the Council of Ministers' table. But there
still remains a potential conflict between the single market and
subsidiarity. Because member states do not always trust each other to
implement faithfully EC laws they have nodded through in Brussels, they
often thrust a monitoring role on an unwilling Commission. The danger,
therefore, in handing more responsibilities to governments is that the EC
market will become less single. As Mr Delors said this week: 'The best (the
single market) can be the enemy of the good (subsidiarity).'
Unevenness in the single market, with all this implies in giving some
governments and companies an unfair advantage over others, is clearly a risk
Mr Delors is now ready to take. Are others, especially Mr Major? But even if
Mr Delors now adopts a lower profile, he will still remain Mr Europe, for
better or for worse. Some governments would like to cut the Commission down
to size. But the history of the Community shows that the Commission has
always played an essential role in making the system work.
Will it be up to the sophisticated challenge of now making a more
de-centralised system run more effectively than in the past? Some of the
burden should fall on the other 16 commissioners. However, there are several
pairs of weak shoulders there at the moment. Many may well be kept on by
their governments after January 1 1993. In the current climate, Mr Delors is
even less well-placed than before to demand a say in any new appointments
governments care to make.
So, even though Mr Delors promises to run the Community on a looser rein, he
is liable to continue the same autocratic style of management inside the EC
executive. This may be a handicap in the 'new-look' Community, but it could
also be entirely consistent with Mr Delors' future personal ambitions. At
present, he is one of the most popular figures on the French political
scene. If he makes a success of the next two years in Brussels, he could be
nicely poised for the next French presidential election, scheduled in 1995.
And the one thing that can be safely said of the Fifth Republic is that no
president has ever bothered his head about notions of subsidiarity.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920627

