FT924-1008

FT  21 DEC 92 / Steve Ross of Time Warner: Obituary


MR Steve Ross, who died yesterday at 65 after a a long battle with prostate
cancer, built his father-in-law's funeral home business into the Dollars
12bn (Pounds 7.8bn) US media and entertainment conglomerate Time Warner.
On the way he displayed equal charm and ruthlessness. As recently as
February, already ill, he ensured the replacement of his nominated successor
at Time Warner, Mr Nick Nicholas, by an executive more to his taste.
'Steve', said one rival, 'has this uncanny quality of making you feel sorry
for him even when you think he's screwing you.' He was born as Steven
Rechnitz in 1927, the son of a Brooklyn plumber. Mr Ross spent only two
years at a junior college and began his career selling women's bathing
suits. He then went to work for the funeral business, expanding it in the
1950s into limousine and car rentals, carparks and office cleaning.
In 1969 he bought Warner Brothers-Seven Arts, a loss-making film and record
company, and his first cable television business, an entry into a rapidly
growing industry.
After surviving the rise and fall of the Atari video-game subsidiary in the
1980s, his strategic planning culminated in the merger with Time.
The group was as big as he planned; its success proved harder to ensure. To
head off another bid, Time had to make a Dollars 14bn bid for Warner
Communications, leaving the merged entity encumbered by debt. Mr Ross became
its chairman and co-chief executive, but the synergy he had promised to
generate from its range of media assets - television, film, books, magazines
 -was hard to see in the results.
A perennial subject of criticism was the scale on which Mr Ross and his
close colleagues were rewarded by the company. Forbes magazine calculated
that between 1986 and 1990 Mr Ross alone received Dollars 137m out of
Dollars 923m in salary, bonus and stock gains received by all the top
officers of all big US companies. Still, in the 16 years to 1989 he managed
a 24 per cent compounded annual total return for shareholders, better than
three-quarters of all big US companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921221

