FT921-3745

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Company News: O&Y acts to allay concern on
financial state


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


OLYMPIA & York, the Canadian property group and developer of London's Canary
Wharf, has been taking steps to allay concerns about its financial
condition.
A quiet word from senior O&Y officials is understood to have contributed to
a decision by Dominion Bond Rating Service, Canada's largest credit-rating
agency, to reaffirm ratings late last week on publicly-traded O&Y
securities. The ratings, which classified the securities as investment
grade, had been issued only a few weeks before. The decision to reaffirm
them was 'unusual, but the circumstances were unusual,' said a DBRS
official.
Shortly after the DBRS announcement, Mr Oskar Lustig, O&Y's comptroller, set
up a conference call to the seven Canadian securities dealers who make a
market in the company's commercial paper.
According to other participants in the call, Mr Lustig stressed the
reaffirmed ratings, and outlined O&Y's plans for an orderly retirement of
the commercial paper programme.
An O&Y spokesman said yesterday the redemption of the commercial paper was
'being done in a very orderly way'. About CDollars 270m of CDollars 500m in
one of two series of paper has already been redeemed. The intention is to
retire all CDollars 800m outstanding as it matures.
As part of its efforts to raise cash, O&Y is also understood to be on the
point of selling its controlling interest in Home Oil, a Calgary-based oil
and gas producer. It is also seeking buyers for its stakes in Abitibi-Price,
the large newsprint producer, and Gulf Canada Resources, another energy
group.
These moves appear to have had only limited success, however, in restoring
outsiders' confidence in O&Y. For instance, trading has dried up in bonds
secured by First Canadian Place, O&Y's 72-storey Toronto flagship building.
One tranche of the bonds, maturing next year, currently yields 3.2
percentage points more than equivalent Canadian government paper. By
contrast, the spread on 10-year bonds issued by Hammerson Canada, another
property developer, is only 1.9 percentage points.
The Reichmann family, which owns O&Y, has consistently refused to disclose
details of the parent company's financial condition, even to backers of
their projects.
One senior Toronto real estate expert said yesterday that 'they're paying
the price for all their secrecy'. He said outsiders were unable to assess
the full extent of the Reichmann family's debts.
On at least two occasions in the past fortnight O&Y has made an unusually
late redemption of maturing commercial paper. A trader at one securities
firm said that Royal Bank of Canada, which acts as O&Y's issuing and paying
agent, waited until after 6pm last Monday to redeem paper maturing that day.
It is usual for redemptions to take place earlier, during the main part of
the working day. A Royal Bank official said yesterday that the time of
payment generally reflects when the paper is covered by the issuing company.
O&Y is also understood to have turned down a proposal last week by
securities dealers that it become more active in creating a secondary market
to support its commercial paper.
On March 5, O&Y sold its controlling shareholding in Interprovincial Pipe
Line (IPL), which operates the world's longest oil pipeline network.
GW Utilities, which is 89 per cent owned by O&Y, sold its 63.5 per cent
stake in IPL for CDollars 26 a share, which was below the prevailing market
price. The shares, trading at CDollars 27 3/4 before the deal, are being
sold on an instalment basis, with full payment due only in March 1993. But
GW Utilities said it plans to pay a special dividend of CDollars 4.50 a
share 'at the earliest possible date'.
The IPL sale, which will bring O&Y CDollars 160m in dividends, marks the
fourth time since January 1991 that GWU has paid a special dividend to O&Y
as a result of asset sales.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920312

