FT923-15767

FT  01 JUL 92 / European Finance and Investment, Germany (5): Envy mixed
with deep suspicion - For years, the Bundesbank has been at or near the
centre of world monetary affairs


   By ANDREW FISHER


GERMANY'S central bank, the Bundesbank, is regarded with envy, respect, and
sometimes awe by its admirers and with scepticism or deep suspicion by its
critics and detractors.
For years, the Bundesbank has been at or near the centre of world monetary
affairs, its importance increased by western Germany's steady post-war rise
to economic prominence and bolstered by its legally guaranteed independence.
Today, the D-Mark is by far the most important currency in western Europe
and a vital element in the move towards economic and financial cohesion in
the EC.
But it is these very attributes which lead to concern among those who
dislike the Bundesbank's dominance of EC monetary affairs and the European
Monetary System (EMS). On the one hand, the link with the D-Mark has enabled
countries such as France to pursue stability-oriented policies which have
brought inflation down to a level lower than that in west Germany, currently
bearing the burden of trying to integrate its new eastern states.
But this French success has not been without economic cost, especially in
terms of employment. The UK, which belatedly joined the EMS - though with a
wider margin of currency fluctuation than the core members - is also
bringing down inflation successfully, but is finding that the cure for past
monetary laxity is painful. It is hardly surprising that those opposed to
the Bundesbank's dominant role in EC financial affairs find it easy to point
the finger of criticism at the Frankfurt central bankers.
The truth is, though, that the Bundesbank did not seek out this role. It is
a natural consequence of the so-called anchor position of the German
currency within the EMS and its part in helping to promote economic
convergence in the European Community. This reflects both the efforts of the
Bundesbank to help promote growth in Germany at the lowest inflation rate
possible - it would like to see the latter back to 2 per cent from the
present 4 per cent plus level - and the strength of the country's economy.
However, an assessment of the Bundesbank now has to take two outstanding new
factors into account, neither of which featured in the four decades after
the Second World War. The first is German unification, which has put massive
pressure on public finances and left the Bundesbank struggling to contain
the impact. The second is the drive towards European monetary union (Emu)
and economic union, with political union also on the agenda.
The rejoining of west and east Germany was a momentous event, but it has
left the united country with a big financial headache. After first promising
voters that no tax increases would be necessary to pay for the consequences
of unification, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's centre-right coalition government
found it quickly had to backtrack. It has also had to borrow heavily to help
meet the spending commitments in east Germany, which turned out to be in a
much worse economic and environmental state than most experts had realised.
This year, everything seemed to come to a head. Inflation advanced to a peak
in March of 4.8 per cent, well above what the Bundesbank and most German
citizens regard as acceptable in a country which suffered grievously from
the horrors of runaway prices earlier this century. Wage negotiators slapped
in demands of around 10 per cent and the country was threatened with a wave
of damaging strikes at a time when economic growth was less than robust. And
public confidence in the Bonn government's ability to keep control over its
finances sunk to a new low.
In the midst of all this, the Bundesbank has been trying to steer a tight
monetary course. Last December, it lifted official interest rates further to
try and ward off inflation and make clear to employers, employees, unions,
and the government that it was not prepared to accommodate unreasonable pay,
price, and spending rises. This left the discount rate at 8 per cent and the
more important Lombard rate at 9.75 per cent, levels which are uncomfortably
high for the rest of Europe.
Coming just as the Maastricht treaty on EC monetary and economic union had
been signed, the German rate increases led to accusations that the
Bundesbank was operating selfishly and without enough regard for the needs
of other countries. Those charges have faded as it has become clear that the
central bank is faced with a serious problem of inflation and that it has
proved hard to convince the west German public of the need to tighten its
collective belt to meet the financial challenge of unification.
But German interest rates do not look like coming down for some time yet,
maybe not even this year. The Bundesbank regards the 1992 wage deals as
still too high, even though they were below 6 per cent compared with the 7
per cent of last year. Unit labour costs will rise by some 4 per cent this
year, a figure that the bank said recently was 'not reconcilable with the
aim of price stability'.
Even so, it is hopeful that next year's pay deals will be more moderate, now
that a damaging strike has been avoided in the car and engineering industry
with an agreement for a 5.8 per cent rise this year and one of 3.4 per cent
for 1993. It is still worried, though, by the price rises of 6 per cent or
so in the building and service sectors, stating that 'considerable
inflationary tensions still exist'.
In outlining its determination to tackle these, the Bundesbank also brings
its wider European responsibilities into the argument, thus countering those
who allege it has acted against the spirit of Maastricht. Because other
countries like France, the Benelux countries, Italy, the UK and Spain have
tied their currencies to the D-Mark through their membership of the EMS, the
performance of the German currency is vital to the process of economic
convergence which precedes Emu, if it ever comes about.
Thus the Bundesbank sees it as its domestic and European duty to bring down
Germany's inflation rate and preserve the monetary stability upon which the
EMS is based and on which Emu will depend. It is also concerned about the
fact that German money supply has been growing far more rapidly than the
target figure, partly because of bank lending to finance east German
corporate investments but also because of the attractiveness of high
short-term interest rates.
With Mr Helmut Schlesinger's presidency of the Bundesbank due to run for
just over another year, the institution's stern anti-inflationary efforts
are set to continue in force. But it is not just Mr Schlesinger's legacy
that is at stake. His successor, Mr Hans Tietmeyer, the present deputy
president, will be in charge over the crucial period preceding the attempt
to introduce Emu. He believes that countries wishing to participate will
have to make strenuous efforts to meet the Maastricht criteria - and that
goes for Germany, too.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

920701

