FT921-3695

FT  13 MAR 92 / Deng scores economic reform coup: China's top leader has
stolen a march on party hardliners


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


ANY Chinese looking at it would know, without even reading the text, that
something significant had happened,' said a western diplomat in Beijing
yesterday.
The 'it' he was referring to was the front page of yesterday's People's
Daily (Renmin Ribao), the newspaper of the Chinese Communist party.
Occupying the top half of the page was a report - with eight decks of
headline - of a full Politburo meeting that took place on Sunday and Monday
of this week. 'The party's basic line should be adhered to for 100 years,'
said the main headline. 'Grasp the chance to speed up reforms and opening up
(to the west) so as to improve the economy.'
This story was carried by every party newspaper in China yesterday, giving
it a theoretical readership of more than 1bn people. Diplomats can not
remember an occasion since the Tiananmen massacre of June 1989 when the
People's Daily gave such prominence to a meeting of the Politburo.
The article is the outward expression of a struggle that has been taking
place for at least two months at the highest level of the party.
The debate is about the pace of economic (not, of course, political) reform
and the degree of foreign participation China should allow. Equally, it is
about who will lead China into the 21st century.
At an economic level, the debate seems to have been resolved in favour of
the line advocated by Deng Xiaoping, China's 87-year-old paramount leader.
As the paper said yesterday: 'Borrow and absorb from other countries,
including western developed countries, their advanced methods of running
business and management skills.'
China's managers will have to grab that opportunity with both hands. Since
1988 China's state companies have amassed losses of Yuan31bn (Pounds 3.3bn)
and debts to each other far in excess of that. Along with price reform,
there is the pressing problem of China's bloated and inefficient state
industry.
What is still unclear, however, is what the economic reform means for the
political future of China's party hardliners. These men and women have
opposed quickening the pace of economic reform. Others fear that 'opening
up' to the west risks the importation of western ideas as well as western
technology and capital.
The People's Daily said: 'Be wary of the right, but mainly be guarded
against the left' - the first high profile reference to the left (hardline
faction) for years. It may mean a 'soft' purge of anti-reformist elements in
the leadership is in the offing.
This, if it happens, will be played out in the coming months as the 14th
party congress nears. The congress, due this autumn, will decide the
composition of the new central committee and the politburo - in short, who
will run China for the next five years or more.
Party committees in the provinces are in the process of choosing delegates,
so Deng's intervention is seen as an attempt to influence the choices.
The struggle first came to light at the beginning of this year when Deng
went to southern China and praised the economic development in the region.
This trip culminated in a letter he wrote to the Politburo and circulated
among top officials.
Much of this document has leaked out in the Hong Kong Chinese-language press
over the past two weeks and it is remarkable how close yesterday's story in
the People's Daily follows what the colony's press has reported of Deng's
letter.
If these reports are correct, China's bureaucrats will soon be reading
reassuring noises from Deng about the merits of foreign investment.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920313

