FT922-4429

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (12): Hopes for a quick future -
Corporate South Africa is holding up well


   By PHILIP GAWITH


MOST South African businessmen believe business will flourish in the new
South Africa because the operating environment cannot possibly be worse than
that of the 80s. But, as Mr Meyer Kahn, chairman of South African Breweries,
has commented, the quicker the future comes, the better.
He has good reason for saying so. South Africa's corporate sector is under
considerable pressure from the effects of a three-year recession.
Calculations from the Reserve Bank's quarterly bulletin reveal that
operating profits of the corporate sector, as a percentage of the fixed
capital stock of private businesses, declined from 12.5 per cent in 1985 to
9.4 per cent in 1989 and 8.9 per cent in 1991.
According to the Reserve Bank, manufacturing output, which started to
decline in 1990, decreased at an annualised rate of 4 per cent in the fourth
quarter of 1991. Real value added by the manufacturing sector dropped by 2.5
per cent in 1991. Percentage utilisation of manufacturing capacity reached a
new low of 80.4 per cent in the third quarter of 1991.
An indication of hardship on the ground is the 41 per cent increase in
company and close corporation liquidations for the first quarter. Cumulative
motor vehicle sales, a useful indicator of economic activity, were 11.4 per
cent down for the first four months of 1992 compared to 1991.
Although conditions are difficult, corporate South Africa seems to be
holding up reasonably well. A survey by the Financial Mail of 160 leading
industrial and commercial companies which reported in the second half of
1991, showed overall growth in earnings per share of 7.3 per cent, compared
to negative 0.4 per cent growth for the same period in 1990. This was
achieved in spite of lower turnover growth - at 13.7 per cent, below
inflation - and shrinking margins. Interest cover was an average 5.1 times,
suggesting balance sheets remained in fair shape.
Mr Charles Booth, research director at stockbrokers J D Anderson, says
balance sheets are in better shape than at the bottom of the previous cycle
when interest rates were higher and many companies suffered large foreign
exchange losses. Companies learned their lesson then and this time kept
their gearing down.
A number of blue-chip companies, both fixed-investment and
consumer-oriented, reported a decline in earnings during the first quarter.
Mr Booth believes, however, that recent results, notably respective
increases in earnings of 10 and 15 per cent from South African Breweries and
Barlow Rand, the country's two industrial heavyweights, suggest that an
upturn has begun. The fact that the performances of these companies was not
worse, in spite of the extremely difficult trading conditions, is also a
measure of the market domination that some of the large companies are able
to exert within a small market.
If the upturn has begun, the question is whether it will replicate past
upturns in which earnings growth of 20-30 per cent in the first year was
normal. Mr Booth argues that the present upturn is likely to be more subdued
on the grounds that there seems little prospect of a rise in commodity
prices, particularly gold, which have in the past helped fuel economic
growth in South Africa.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920605

