FT921-11793

FT  30 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Deterrence in Europe


ON THE face of it, the disarmament measures announced by President George
Bush on Tuesday night, and by President Boris Yeltsin yesterday do not
directly affect western Europe. Both British and French officials were quick
to point out that, even after these measures are implemented, Russia and the
US will still have nuclear arsenals far larger than either Britain or
France.
But officials in both London and Paris are well aware that the reverse arms
race, if it continues at its present rate, will before long reach a point
where the size of the British and French arsenals becomes a consideration
affecting US and Russian decisions.
And without waiting for that point to be reached, it is already abundantly
clear that the old rationale for the deployment of nuclear weapons in
western Europe no longer applies. Mr Tom King, Britain's defence secretary,
effectively admitted as much yesterday when he invited journalists to draw
their own conclusions about the targeting of Britain's submarine-based
missiles from Nato's declaration that it no longer viewed the former Soviet
Union as an adversary. It no longer makes sense for British or French
strategic weapons to be targeted on Russian cities.
The threat to western Europe from Soviet conventional power has now been
removed. There is therefore no longer a justification for any Nato country
to retain an option of being the first to use nuclear weapons. The remaining
function of nuclear weapons is, so to speak, to deter each other. Given that
there are a great many of them around, particularly at present in the former
Soviet Union but potentially also in the Middle East and the Third World, no
country wants to be exposed to the threat of their being used against it.
Three choices
Three ways to avoid that risk suggest themselves. One is to be armed with
nuclear weapons of your own as a deterrent. But that solution, if
generalised, leads to a world with dozens of nuclear powers. Few theorists,
and no political leaders, are prepared to say that such a world would be a
safe one. Consequently there is more or less of a consensus on the
preferability of a second and contrary option, which is to limit the spread
of nuclear weapons as strictly as possible. That is the object of the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), of which Britain was a co-sponsor
with the US and the Soviet Union, and to which France too is now a party.
The awkward long-term question for Britain and France is whether, by
insisting on the necessity of maintaining their own independent national
deterrents, they do not risk undermining the NPT and making it more
difficult to persuade states such as Kazakhstan and Ukraine to adhere to it.
The awkward short-term question, for Britain in particular, is whether a
decision to commission a fourth Trident submarine, which is due to be taken
within the next weeks or months, might not in present circumstances be seen
as a step in the wrong direction, sending a wrong signal to states now
considering their nuclear options.
Uniform security
It was perhaps with such thoughts in mind that President Francois Mitterrand
recently suggested the necessity of working out a 'European nuclear
doctrine'. Certainly Britain and France would be well advised, if they wish
to retain their nuclear forces, to relate them as clearly as possible to the
security of Europe as a whole. If they decide that a tactical air-to-surface
missile is necessary as a deterrent against new nuclear powers, they would
surely be well advised to pool their resources in developing it.
The third solution, compatible with both of the others, is the one suggested
by Mr Yeltsin yesterday: a co-operative effort to build anti-missile
defences. Implausible when President Ronald Reagan suggested it as a way of
making nuclear weapons 'impotent and obsolete', it becomes less so as an
insurance against a single strike from a novice nuclear power. It is
certainly worth examining, and if it goes ahead Europe should make sure of
being included in it.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920130

