FT921-15521

FT  09 JAN 92 / Variations seen in the cost of crime


   By ANDREW JACK


CRIME DOESN'T pay, but it costs a lot less in Newport, on the Isle of Wight.
Getting caught red-handed committing a crime in the town, close to Parkhurst
Prison, is much less likely to lead to a spell inside than in most other
places in England and Wales.
Research published yesterday reveals that courts in certain towns
consistently find defendants guilty, while others, such as Newport, York,
Taunton, Exeter and Southampton, are much 'softer' and acquit a higher
proportion of defendants.
The town to avoid is Mold, north Wales, followed by Caernarvon and Chester,
where defendants are more likely to end up detained at Her Majesty's
pleasure after appearing in a crown court.
The findings came in a detailed analysis of decisions against bailed and
remanded defendants at 64 crown courts excluding London and the south-east
during 1987-90, presented at the Institute of British Geographers'
Conference in Swansea yesterday.
Mr Paul Robertshaw, a lecturer at Cardiff Law School, was unable to explain
the variations, but said judges in 'softer' areas tended to dismiss many
cases before they came before juries, while those in more authoritarian
areas pushed most cases to trials.
He suggested that Newport's low conviction rate might partly reflect a large
number of fairly trivial offences such as holiday skirmishes at the seaside.
Research he is conducting on a smaller sample of courts appeared to show a
tendency for areas with strong Labour majorities to be lenient, while those
under Conservative control were generally tougher.
Mr Robertshaw admitted that publishing the information might encourage
criminals to travel to 'softer' areas.
'But there is a lot to be said in the public interest about researching
these variations.'
The proportion of bailed defendants acquitted by juries ranged between 16
per cent and 50 per cent.
The figures for judges issuing discharges before trials commenced or
acquittals during trials ranged from less then 5 per cent to more than 50
per cent.
Conference Reports, page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920109

