FT924-6360

FT  21 NOV 92 / International Company News: Restructuring raises Ricoh
margin


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


A RADICAL restructuring programme at Ricoh, the office equipment maker, was
the main factor behind a threefold increase in its operating profits despite
the slowdown in the Japanese economy.
The sharp improvement in Ricoh's financial performance in the midst of the
downturn is testimony to the effort it has devoted to cutting costs.
Most Japanese manufacturers - burdened by high fixed costs of heavy
investment in the late 1980s and unwilling to cut swiftly into employment
costs - have seen their profits fall sharply as revenues have declined.
But Ricoh's restructuring, one of the most radical yet attempted by a
Japanese company since the economy began to slow, has reduced the ratio of
manufacturing costs to sales by 1.8 per cent. The ratio of selling and
general expenses to sales fell from 25 per cent in the first half of 1991 to
22.7 per cent in the six months to the end of this September.
Most Japanese manufacturers which have announced their interim results
recently have complained they were unable to restrain cost increases.
However, several other manufacturers - such as Fujitsu, Honda and Sony  -
have also announced restructuring plans designed to cut costs and improve
profitability.
Ricoh's operating profits rose to Y3.85bn (Dollars 31.3m) in the six months
to the end of September from Y1.18bn in the first half of last year
But pre-tax profits fell by 37 per cent to Y4.4bn from Y7bn last year,
largely because successive interest rate cuts reduced its interest income by
43 per cent to Y6.5bn.
The company said the yen's appreciation against the dollar had also affected
its profit margins, reducing its pre-tax profits by a further Y1.3bn.
After-tax profits were 56.5 per cent down at Y2.04bn. Turnover was 0.7 per
cent up at Y336bn. A 3.6 per cent increase in sales of copiers was partly
offset by a fall in sales of information and optical equipment, especially
in export markets.
A reorganisation of the overseas sales network helped to expand export sales
of facsimile machines by more than 10 per cent.
Ricoh said it hoped to increase its share of the Japanese copier market
through a new range of digital copiers.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921121

