FT921-15227

FT  11 JAN 92 / Finance & The Family: Revenue changes will hit leave pay -
Expatriates


   By DONALD ELKIN


THE LAST quarter of 1991 was not, from a tax point of view, a good time for
those expatriates planning to return to the UK.
First, the rules regarding the UK tax treatment of various kinds of lump sum
termination payment were tightened.
Then, in December, the Revenue announced impending changes to the tax
treatment of those expatriates who continue to receive leave pay after
completing their active employment and returning to the UK.
The December changes relate to a relief introduced in 1974 as part of
measures concerning the taxation of overseas earnings. This ensured tax
exemption on remuneration earned in the course of a 'qualifying period'
lasting for 365 days or more, regardless of whether or not a full tax year
was involved.
'Qualifying period' encompasses not only days spent overseas but also
intervening days spent in the UK, provided they do not exceed 62 consecutive
days, or one sixth of the days in the period. The exemption also extends to
any terminal leave immediately following the qualifying period.
The benefit of this legislation has been accorded to UK residents and
non-residents alike, and has ensured exemption from tax of terminal leave
pay. Unfortunately, the December announcement makes clear that for all who
become resident in the UK from and after April 6 1992, days of non-residence
will no longer count towards a qualifying period.
This change will have unfair results. Someone who has worked overseas for,
say, 20 months without becoming non-resident will be exempt from tax on
leave pay, whereas a non-resident of 20 years standing will not.
This could have serious consequences for those with long periods of paid
leave, such as pensionable officers in Hong Kong, for whom leave pay
extending to a year or more is not uncommon.
For years before the proposed changes, leave pay either attracted no
liability or could easily be avoided. Now, avoiding liability will very much
depend on an individual's circumstances.
So, what can you do?
If, following your return to the UK, you have no choice but to draw your
leave pay month by month, you will at first sight be caught by the new
regulations.
But if you are a public sector employee, and you worked in a country with a
full Double Taxation Agreement with the UK, your leave pay may be exempted.
However, if you are a private sector employee, you will have no entitlement
to UK exemption, although you may be able to obtain this from the country in
which you worked. In either case, caution is necessary - not all Agreements
incorporate the necessary provisions.
If you can re-negotiate your contract so that you are paid for leave
entitlement during your active service, the problem will disappear.
Unfortunately, the simple expedient of obtaining payment in advance from
your overseas employer before you return to the UK might not solve the
problem. As a result of the 'receipts basis' of Schedule E, introduced in
1989/90, the payment will be taxable in the year of receipt, even if you
were then still abroad and non-resident. But even in this case liability
might be excluded by a Double Taxation Agreement.
Another option is to ensure that you remain UK non-resident throughout your
leave. This might be less difficult than it would appear since your full
time overseas employment will, technically, be continuing during the period
of your leave.
This means that in deciding your resident status, the Revenue should leave
out of account any available accommodation which you may have in the UK. So
you need only ensure that your UK visits exceed neither 182 days in any tax
year, nor 90 days per annum over any period of four consecutive years.
However, this assumes that you do not decide to remain permanently in the UK
until your final return.
Another approach could be to accept UK residence as soon as possible. For
example, if you arrive in the UK in March 1993, you would normally be
regarded as resident from that point as a result of a concession. If you
decline the concession, you will be treated as resident from the preceding
April 6, thus starting off a qualifying period.
By a regime of judicious absences, (during which you do not have to be
working) you might be able to build up a period of 365 days or more. If you
do so, the leave pay relative to the period will be exempt, as will that
which immediately follows it, even though you are then back in the UK.
Remember that if you become resident in the UK sooner than necessary, there
could be undesirable results on the tax treatment of any non-salary income
and capital gains. Consequently, there is no easy answer: expert advice is
needed.
Donald Elkin is a Director of Wilfred T Fry Limited of Worthing, West
Sussex.

The Financial Times


London Page IV Illustration (Omitted).

920111

