FT921-14046

FT  17 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Electricity companies attacked over
pricing - Utilities


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


PRIVATISED electricity companies were accused in the Commons last night of
overcharging their customers by 'a staggering' Pounds 93.5m.
Mr Nigel Griffiths, Labour spokesman on consumer affairs identified Norweb,
which covers the north-west, as the worst offender when leading Labour's
unsuccessful attempts to insert provisions in the Competition and Service
(Utilities) Bill for improved consumer safeguards.
He said the consumer bodies for the water and telecommunications industries
were ineffective and urged the government to make the consumer protection
arrangements in the gas industry the model for all the privatised utilities.
He said the consumer bodies in the electricity sector were too closely
associated with the Office of Electricity Regulation and often resembled
'toothless watchdogs' unable to command action.
Mr John Redwood, corporate affairs minister, rejected Labour's view that
there should be a clear distinction between consumer bodies and the
regulator for the utility concerned. He said: 'In order to have effective
regulation you have to have one person or one body which can make a
decision.'
Commenting on the performance of the privatised electricity companies, Mr
Redwood acknowledged that they had done well 'against the background of firm
price regulation and control'. He expressed full confidence in the ability
of all the regulators to settle complaints on the basis of fair judgment.
The Bill was given an unopposed third reading and now goes to the House of
Lords.
The separation of the British Gas pipe network from its sales and marketing
operations and creation of regional gas companies by the end of the decade,
were proposed yesterday by the Liberal Democrats.
Legislation forcing British Gas to lose 60 per cent of its industrial market
share by 1997 was also suggested by Mr Simon Hughes, the party's environment
spokesman. The pipe network would form a new privately owned company.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920117

