FT924-6421

FT  21 NOV 92 / Japan's leaders to testify on scandal: Ruling party backs
down after opposition blocks economic package in parliament


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S parliament yesterday cleared the way for debate on the long delayed
Y2,990bn (Pounds 16bn) supplementary budget to boost the economy after the
ruling Liberal Democratic Party agreed to produce three key figures at the
heart of the Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin scandal for questioning.
The budget, which is central to the implementation of the Y10,700bn
emergency public spending package announced in August, has been held up for
more than two weeks by the dispute over testimony about the scandal.
The LDP, under heavy economic and political pressure, agreed to opposition
demands that Mr Hiroyasu Watanabe, the former president of Tokyo Sagawa
Kyubin should give evidence under oath.
Mr Watanabe's testimony could provide the long running scandal with a new
lease of life by linking up to 12 LDP leaders to his former company, which
made illegal donations to politicians.
In court this month Mr Watanabe alleged that he gave money to several LDP
leaders. It is also alleged that Mr Watanabe acted as an intermediary
between LDP politicians, right wing nationalists and organised crime
syndicates.
Mr Watanabe is in prison during his trial on breach of trust charges brought
by his former employer, a leading trucking and courier company. It is not
clear when or where he will be questioned.
The LDP also agreed that Mr Noboru Takeshita, the powerful former prime
minister and Mr Shin Kanemaru, the former leader of the LDP's largest
faction should give sworn testimony.
Mr Takeshita is likely to testify next Thursday, while Mr Kanemaru is likely
to be questioned at his hospital bedside after undergoing eye surgery next
week.
Mr Kanemaru recently resigned from parliament after admitting that he had
received an illegal political donation of Y500m from Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin in
1990. Mr Takeshita faces allegations that he enlisted the company's help to
ask organised crime syndicates to quell a right wing smear campaign against
him when he was seeking to become prime minister in the late 1980s.
The parliament's budget committee began work on the supplementary budget
immediately by questioning Mr Tsutomu Hata, the finance minister. The
committee will question the cabinet on the budget next week.
Although the agreement is a reflection of the public pressure on the LDP
over the affair, it also marks an important step in its attempt to regain
the political initiative after more than two weeks of drift and stalemate.
In the past few days the party has come under increasing pressure from
business leaders to break the parliamentary impasse which has held up the
budget.
Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister has attempted to respond to business
criticism and assert his authority over the fractious squabbling at the top
of the party by calling on the finance ministry to draw up plans for an
expansionary budget for 1993.
The LDP also signalled yesterday that it may be prepared to amend its
limited proposals for political reform by taking on board some of the
opposition's demands.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921121

