FT923-10989

FT  28 JUL 92 / Turkey softens hardline stance over pipeline for Iraqi oil


   By JOHN MURRAY BROWN


   ANKARA


TURKEY'S state pipeline company has sent a delegation to Baghdad for the
first time since the Gulf crisis started almost two years ago, in a further
indication that Ankara is seeking to improve relations with Iraq.
Officials confirmed that Botas, the pipeline company, sent representatives
to the Iraqi capital earlier this month to consider the technical problems
involved in re-opening the 1,000km twin pipeline, which was built to take
Iraqi crude to the Mediterranean.
Officials say Turkey has dropped its demands for financial compensation from
Baghdad for the loss of revenue which resulted from the imposition of United
Nations trade sanctions against Iraq in August 1990. Turkey is instead
considering claiming from the Geneva-based UN War Reparation Fund.
With Ankara soon to re-open its embassy in Baghdad and Prime Minister
Suleyman Demirel urging reconciliation during last week's showdown over
Iraqi compliance with Gulf war ceasefire resolutions, Turkey is making a
renewed effort to improve relations.
Turkey's decision to send Botas to Baghdad follows reports that Iraq is
considering building an alternative pipeline through Jordan. The move is a
measure of Turkey's concern that the Gulf crisis should not prejudice its
long-term commercial ties with Iraq, before the war its second largest
trading partner.
Since Iraq invaded Kuwait, Turkey has lost almost Dollars 600m (Pounds 314m)
in tolls foregone on the twin pipeline from Mosul in north Iraq to
Iskenderum on the Mediterranean. Turkey claimed a contractual right to
compensation, under the original agreement.
Its hardline position was in part responsible for Iraq refusing to adopt the
terms of UN resolution 706, under which Iraq would ship Dollars 1.6bn worth
of oil exports to finance medical and food imports under UN supervision. The
former Motherland party government demanded Dollars 264m for use of the
pipeline for this six-month operation.
However, Mr Demirel's government is taking a softer approach.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920728

