FT922-426

FT  27 JUN 92 / The easy way to guarantee a friendly press: How the rich and
powerful can corrupt their critics


   By DOMINIC LAWSON


SIR John Junor once said of journalists: 'It is not power which corrupts; it
is not money which corrupts; it is friendship which corrupts.' The former
editor of the Sunday Express was absolutely right.
Any business tycoon who wants to buy the good opinions of a financial
journalist, or any member of parliament who wishes to ensure favourable
mentions from a political correspondent, need only offer the press man
friendship, or at least the illusion of it.
At the very least, they will be guaranteed an absence of spiteful copy from
the pundit in question. This is not a rule which works invariably, but it is
infinitely more effective than employing public relations advisers to pump
out press releases which nobody reads, still less believes. Journalists are
star-struck and like the idea of their social circle overlapping with that
of the rich and famous. Second, they like to think that, by maintaining a
close 'friendship' with these stars, one day they might be given a scoop.
They will, of course, but it will be a scoop which suits the political or
financial aspirations of the famous 'friend.'
The other week, this form of journalism came in for some criticism. The
editor of the Mail on Sunday - or whoever writes that paper's leading
articles - took it upon himself to lecture Charles Moore, deputy editor of
the Daily Telegraph. Moore had written an article in The Spectator critical
of the conduct of yet another editor who published details about the private
life of the Prince and Princess of Wales.
'What Mr Moore's readers couldn't guess,' said the editor of the Mail on
Sunday, 'was that he had an interest to declare. He is one of those
journalists who is reasonably close to the Prince of Wales, a position he
visibly relishes. There is nothing wrong with that, but journalists ought to
let their readers know when they are singing for their supper.'
On a matter of fact, this happens to be wrong. Having checked, I discover
that the deputy editor of the Daily Telegraph - a friend of mine, I admit -
has neither seen nor spoken to the Prince of Wales since October, 1990. But
this is not the point, which is that the editor of the Mail on Sunday is
reasonably close to the prime minister, a position he relishes. As a result,
he writes things such as that John Major 'has so much adrenalin that, if
only it could be marketed and sold for export, it would solve the balance of
payments problem for ever.'
Is he singing for his supper, when he publishes such stuff? Should his
readers be told? I do not know. But it is far more significant in the
parliamentary age for an editor to be in the pocket of a prime minister than
to be in the pocket of a Prince of Wales.
Perhaps the Prince of Wales should take a leaf out of John Major's book and
seduce with friendship those who are now so critical of him and his family.
His great-great-grandfather would certainly have advised him thus.
I have been reading Sir Sidney Lee's great biography of Edward VII,
completed a few years after the the monarch's death. When there was a great
surge of republican feeling in England in the 1870s (far more significant
than that engineered by parts of the press in recent weeks) Edward, then
Prince of Wales, simply neutralised the critics.
I quote from Sir Sidney: 'The Prince's readiness to meet socially critics of
monarchy was not at first blush encouraged, but the Prince's tact and grace
usually won the day. His first invitation to the Radical stalwart, Mr
Fawcett, to a garden party, was refused; but Mr Fawcett subsequently
accepted the Prince's hospitalities, and Mr (Joseph) Chamberlain, silencing
any earlier scruples, became the Prince's frequent guest. Of greater
significance, Sir Charles Dilke, the Radical champion of the
anti-monarchical movement, soon joined the Prince's intimate social circle .
. . The Republican wave had spent itself, and there was to be no more strife
between the Prince and the forces of Radicalism.'
Dominic Lawson is editor of The Spectator.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920627

