FT924-6448

FT  21 NOV 92 / Project to put jobless into work: US 'workfare' offers
example


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


A SCHEME based on US workfare programmes, in which unemployed people will be
paid a wage above the level of benefit to do work for the community, is to
be tried by the government.
Mr Patrick McLoughlin, junior employment minister, told the Commons
yesterday a pilot scheme would be conducted in the North Norfolk
constituency of Mr Ralph Howell, the Conservative MP who has campaigned for
the adoption of workfare in Britain for more than 20 years.
The minister emphasised that the government did not believe that the
unemployed should have to work in return for their social security benefit,
and that it had no plans to introduce a compulsory workfare scheme.
He suggested that the pilot scheme would help to establish whether greater
flexibility could be introduced into localised facilities for the
unemployed.
Mr Howell said of some form of workfare would enable unemployment benefit to
be ended by providing everybody with an opportunity to earn a decent wage.
He said unemployed groups from all over the country shared his view that
they would escape boredom and be better off by undertaking 'caring work',
tree planting or other jobs that improved the environment or infrastructure
 -for a wage of Pounds 100 for a 40-hour week.
Mr Howell said youth training schemes should continue, but when they did not
result in employment, no more young people should move into 'the
something-for-nothing society which has destroyed our whole social system'.
He emphasised that his proposals would not affect disablement and other
benefits. Arrangements would be needed to ensure that individuals entitled
to social security payments in excess of Pounds 100 a week were not
disadvantaged by whatever form of scheme was introduced.
Mr Howell urged the government to make some form of workfare scheme the
'cornerstone of plans to revive the economy'.
Mr Tony Lloyd, a Labour frontbench spokesman, rejected as 'socially
unacceptable' the creation of a society with some doing real jobs and the
remainder allocated second-tier, devalued jobs. He urged full employment.
He said the government had failed to honour the guarantee that all school
leavers would either be offered a job or a training place.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921121

