FT921-11697

FT  30 JAN 92 / Israel to sell chemicals company stake


   By HUGH CARNEGY


   JERUSALEM


ISRAEL'S slow-motion privatisation programme is poised to take an important
step forward, following unanimous approval by the Knesset finance committee
yesterday for the public flotation of a 25 per cent share in Israel
Chemicals Limited.
The committee has an effective veto over the sale of state companies.
An attempt in 1989 to sell to foreign investors a 50 per cent stake in
Israel Chemicals, always regarded as the premier privatisation prospect
among the state's 150 companies, was blocked by the finance committee,
throwing the privatisation plans into disarray.
The delay has taken on added significance recently, becoming a principal
element in US criticism of the state-heavy economy as Washington assesses
Israel's request for Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5.57bn) in loan guarantees to aid
Jewish immigration from the former Soviet Union.
The 1989 Knesset committee decision forced the government to adopt a less
ambitious programme, based initially on share issues on the Tel Aviv Stock
Exchange.
Minority stakes in companies such as telecoms monopoly Bezeq have been sold
this way. But the failure fully to divest control of any significant company
has led to criticism that genuine privatisation has been thwarted.
After the initial sale approved yesterday, the government intends to go on
to sell a total of 72 per cent of the company, said to be worth up to
Dollars 1.4bn, by the end of this year, including private placement of a 15
per cent block.
Mr Avraham Shochat, a prominent member of the finance committee, said
yesterday that events had proved its 1989 decision correct because, at the
time, the company had been undervalued by the government - and because among
the leading bidders at the time was the late British publisher, Robert
Maxwell.
'We can only imagine what would have happened if (the) shares had gone the
way of the rest of Maxwell's assets,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920130

