FT923-11019

FT  27 JUL 92 / Rowland set to head Lloyd's: Sedgwick chief's appointment
will boost confidence in troubled market


   By RICHARD LAPPER


MR DAVID ROWLAND, the chairman of Sedgwick, the UK's second biggest
insurance broker, is expected to become chairman of Lloyd's of London. His
appointment would probably boost confidence and spur reform at the troubled
insurance market.
The outgoing chairman, Mr David Coleridge, will today endorse Mr Rowland as
his successor to the top job at Lloyd's at an extraordinary general meeting
called by dissatisfied Names. It is the first Lloyd's EGM in a decade.
Mr Rowland will have to be first elected to the 28-man council, the Lloyd's
governing body, which will select the new chairman from among its own number
in December. But the council is already understood to have signalled its
full support for Mr Rowland. He is understood to have accepted the job in
principle, a full-time paid post lasting for three years and beginning on
January 1 1993.
Mr Coleridge will leave as planned in December after two years in the job.
The changeover will be welcomed by many at Lloyd's. Leading agencies and
brokers as well as the Association of Lloyd's Members, a moderate group
which represents over a third of the market's 22,300 Names, the individuals
whose assets support the insurance market's capital, are all likely backers.
At today's EGM, Mr Neil Shaw, newly elected ALM chairman, will speak in
favour of a motion, backed by the ALM, which urges the council to press
ahead with implementing reforms recommended in January by a market task
force led by Mr Rowland.
The task force advocated the modification of the principle of unlimited
liability - by which Names are liable for all insurance losses - and the
introduction of corporate capital to Lloyd's.
Task force recommendations that the regulation of Lloyd's be separated from
day-to-day governance were echoed in the conclusions of a second committee,
headed by Sir Jeremy Morse, Lloyds bank chairman, earlier this month.
Mr Shaw said yesterday that it was 'fundamental' to have a new leadership
team in place 'as quickly as possible'. He warned that Lloyd's dissidents
would send the wrong signals to Lloyd's bankers and policyholders if they
win motions which the dissidents have tabled at the EGM. Names would trigger
a 'meltdown' if they voted to overturn a levy needed to boost the market's
central fund, he added.
The fund, recently increased from Pounds 500m to Pounds 1bn, pays claims
when Names are unable to meet their obligations.
The proposal is one of four submitted by the dissidents who called for the
EGM last month. But voting will be by postal ballot, with the result not
known until the end of next month.
Mr Claude Gurney, a Name who heads the dissident group, described Mr Shaw's
allegation as 'baloney'.
He said that, even if names were to vote in favour of his resolution, the
Lloyd's council or governing body would not be legally obliged to implement
the decision. Lloyd's should consider other ways in which the levy could be
more fairly distributed.
Extraordinary meeting, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920727

