FT922-4418

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (5): Expanding
into new areas - Computer-aided design


   By ANDREW BAXTER LOOKS AT


THE automotive industry was one of the pioneer customers for computer-aided
design and manufacturing equipment, and remains an important testbed for new
products and applications.
Vehicle producers recognised the benefits to be gained from designing on
screen, long before phrases such as 'simultaneous' or 'concurrent
engineering' loomed over Detroit's horizon. Large companies are into their
fourth or fifth generation of equipment.
The same holds true for their suppliers, particularly in the automotive
design sector. Abbey Panels, the Coventry-based producer of full-size
vehicle body models and prototypes, realised in 1978 that it needed the best
Cadcam available to survive as a leader in vehicle modelling.
Companies such as Abbey, which uses the Euclid-IS 3D solid modelling system
produced by Matra Datavision, have taken advantage of the growing
sophistication of Cadcam software. Solid and surface modelling has become a
vital element in the success of simultaneous engineering, although by no
means a guarantee of the idea's main aims - reduced product development
times and improved quality.
For the big vehicle manufacturers, Cadcam installations are in almost
constant flux. Rover Group, for example, is spending Pounds 17m over three
years on upgrading its Computervision Cadcam facility to support its
concurrent engineering strategies while enhancing product quality. The UK
motor group has been using Computervision equipment since 1983.
Cadcam with solid modelling is expanding into areas of hitherto unparalleled
design complexity.
Lucas Commercial Diesel Systems is using a Computervision CADDS 4X system to
model complex castings for products such as its EPIC electronic fuel
injection system for high-speed diesels.
Solid modelling enables Lucas quickly to develop the correct
numerically-controlled (NC) toolpath for manufacturing the product, reducing
time-to-market and increasing quality levels.
The motor industry's voracious appetite for products and software to keep
the design process competitive is providing business for many of the smaller
players in the computer systems business.
Wisdom Systems, based in the US, has a technology called knowledge-based
engineering (KBE). It automates the simultaneous engineering strategy, and
builds a knowledge-based model incorporating not only the geometric
variations of the product but also all relevant manufacturing, costing,
production planning and marketing constraints.
The system has been tried at PSA, the holding company of Citroen and
Peugeot. It has produced an optimised design for a mechanical assembly at
increased speeds.
Another knowledge-based system used in the motor industry is Solstar,
developed by Foseco (FS) of the UK to predict the shrinkage that occurs when
metals and alloys solidify during casting. The system can deal with complex
shapes such as manifolds and cylinder blocks.
Specialist design simulation companies such as Analogy are benefiting from
the motor industry's need to check how mechanical and electronic system
designs work at an early stage in the development process.
Analogy's Saber Automotive Simulation Package, recently improved, can reduce
lead-times by analysing the operation of designs before prototyping, thus
reducing the number of design cycles needed.
Another important trend is for motor manufacturers to use 3D solid modelling
for designing tools as well as vehicles Volkswagen was one of the earliest
to recognise the potential of Cadcam in this area, having begun seven years
ago to develop AWK, a 3D, solids-based system based on Euclid-IS.
The system automates many of the repetitive tasks for tool design,
eliminating much of the tedium from making changes.
However, the most significant indirect benefit of 3D modelling in the next
few years is likely to be its role in the nascent market for rapid
prototyping equipment.
There are at least a dozen rapid prototyping systems under development or
being sold throughout the world, although some are in an early phase. But
they share one characteristic - a 3D Cad file of a part is converted into
thousands of slices and then reassembled as a real object.
The reassembling process varies widely, but the most commercially-developed
system is produced by California-based 3D Systems, which uses an ultraviolet
laser to trace the shape of a slice on to a resin stored in a vat. As the
beam completes each layer, the part is lowered a few thousands of an inch
and the process repeated.
Apart from its owner British Aerospace, Rover is believed to be the only
industrial company in the UK to have the system. It commissioned 3D Systems'
largest model last summer.
The savings in time from the process - known as stereolithography - have
been good.
A complex prototype such as an inlet manifold would conventionally have been
made by soft-tooling for aluminium, taken some 16 weeks and cost about
Pounds 22,000 for the tooling.
With stereolithography, a manifold could be run on a testbed engine three
weeks after the Cad data was supplied, at a cost of Pounds 1,200.
Two other rapid prototyping technologies are available in the UK, laminated
object manufacturing from Helisys of the US, and the Solider instant slice
curing process from the Israeli/US company Cubital. The latter has been used
to produce a complex inlet manifold for Rover.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920605

