FT921-1479

FT  24 MAR 92 / International Capital Markets: Options market adopts revised
margining regime


   By RICHARD WATERS and TRACY CORRIGAN


A REVISED margining regime came into force in the UK options market
yesterday which, some traders claim, will have a significant impact on the
way options are traded.
For some, the revised regime - one consequence of the merger of the London
Traded Options Market with the London International Financial Futures
Exchange, which was completed on Sunday - has come as an unpleasant
surprise.
One trader complained his margin requirement - the collateral he must
provide to guard against losses on his trading positions - had jumped more
than threefold, to more than Pounds 750,000 (Dollars 1.2m), as a result of
the merger. As a result, he must unwind some of his positions to reduce his
exposure - a fact that made him reluctant to be named.
However, Liffe said the new rules had reduced the margining requirements for
most options traders. As such, they may help to encourage trading of
individual stock options, which have languished in London in the past.
The new method of assessing margining for options is one which has been in
use for some time on the futures market. It is based on the 'Span' method
for calculating margins, developed by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and
used in London by Liffe and other derivatives markets. Liffe claims the
system is more sensitive to risk than its previous version, or that used by
the traded options market.
'The intention is to assess risk more accurately. There are particular
situations where it will result in an increase in margin, but they are very
few,' Liffe said. The Span method assesses margin requirements by taking an
overall view of a trader's portfolio. Factors which determine margin levels
include market volatility over the past six months. One result of this has
been to push up margining for stocks which have fallen in recent months, in
some cases substantially. Previously, the traded options market applied only
a nominal margining requirement for options which are substantially 'out of
the money' (where the exercise price and current market price are far apart,
making exercise unlikely).
The implications of this for the market are only just beginning to sink in.
As one trader said: 'Before, you tried to get spreads as wide apart as
possible. Now, the aim will be to get them as close to the money as
possible.'
He complained Liffe had done little to educate traders or brokers about the
implications of the new rules, making it difficult to adapt a trading
strategy to the new regime.
Liffe said it had used workshops and other methods to publicise the changes
in advance. However, the full implications of the system seem only to have
sunk in the past fortnight, since Liffe first told traders what their new
margins would be.
The first day's business on London's newly-merged futures and options
markets failed to inspire a burst of celebratory trading, writes Tracy
Corrigan.
Volume in FT-SE 100 index options reached 11,300 yesterday, virtually
unchanged from Friday, against an uninspiring stock market. Index options
are expected to benefit most from the merger, partly because cross-margining
between the FT-SE futures and options contracts is now allowed - that is,
traders can net off trading positions in the two contracts.
The market in individual stock options, which the merger is designed to
revive, tailed off yesterday. Volume reached 17,700, down from 27,400 on
Friday, but in line with average daily volume in February.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

920324

