FT922-532

FT  27 JUN 92 / Operation Mickey a publicity coup for French farmers


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


HUNDREDS of French farmers in tractors yesterday blockaded the road
entrances to Eurodisney and condemned US companies for 'trying to force
Europeans out of world markets'.
The demonstration, code-named 'Operation Mickey', is the latest development
in French farmers' protests against the European Community's agricultural
reform.
Farmers have been demonstrating across France for several weeks against
planned cuts in guaranteed prices and enforced reductions in cultivated area
which small farmers fear will drive them off the land.
Mr Luc Guyau, who was on Thursday elected president of the French farmers
union, declared that his members did not 'want to see France colonised by
Euro Disneylands'.
Protest leader Jean-Louis Colas of the mainstream farmers' union FNSEA said:
'We chose Euro Disneyland because it is a symbol. It is built on
agricultural land.
'It also symbolises America. Without American pressure, the reform of the
European agricultural policy could have been different,' he said.
Operation Mickey is the latest in a long list of problems to have hit Euro
Disneyland, since its opening in April as Europe's largest and most
expensive theme park. As well as the intellectuals' attacks, the park has
been hit by bad publicity over rows with suppliers and rumours of poor
attendances.
The farmers' protest began early yesterday morning when hundreds of
agricultural workers from neighbouring areas converged on the theme park at
Marne La Vallee outside Paris. By mid-morning an estimated 500 farmers with
more than 200 tractors had encircled the park closing the access roads to
the car parks.
Two squads of riot police were dispatched to Euro Disneyland but there were
no disturbances. The farmers dispersed at lunchtime after posing by their
tractors for the television cameras and the park opened as usual. However
the road-block did trap thousands of would-be visitors including 80 coaches,
carrying 2,000 school children, and more than 100 cars.
For the farmers, who earlier this week were forced to abandon plans to stage
a similar road-block around the French government's congress at Versailles,
the Euro Disneyland demonstration was a successful publicity coup.
Euro Disneyland has been left to brace itself for the chilling prospect that
it could be a target for future French political protests. 'We are still
assessing the situation,' said a spokesman.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920627

