FT922-13383

FT  11 APR 92 / Markets soar on Tory win


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


BILLIONS of pounds poured into UK government bonds yesterday from investors
in Britain and around the world who reacted with relief to news that the
Conservative government had been returned with a clear majority.
Shares, sterling and government bonds all surged yesterday indicating the
belief within financial markets that Mr John Major's return to Downing
Street strengthens the chances of a UK economic recovery.
Mr Major's victory also sparked expectations that the government might soon
cut base rates, now at 10.5 per cent, in a bid to bolster the fragile signs
of an upturn.
However, the Bank of England, in its money-market operations, signalled that
any imminent move to shave borrowing costs was unlikely.
Banks and building societies believe the Conservative election victory has
set the stage for a recovery in the housing market in the second half of the
year.
On the London stock market, the FT-SE 100 index of leading shares leapt by
136.2 to 2,572.6, the biggest one-day rise since October 1987.
UK government bonds - or gilts - closed up to 4 points higher, enabling the
Bank of England to sell up to Pounds 4bn worth of bonds during the day. A
large proportion of these bonds, sales of which help to pay for
public-sector borrowing, were purchased by investors from Japan, the US and
other parts of Europe.
Also fuelling optimism was the overnight rise in the Tokyo stock market,
combined with a firm tone on Wall Street, which bolstered hopes that the
flagging Japanese economy would not materially affect global growth
prospects.
Investors also switched money out of other currencies into sterling, which
rose nearly 3 pfennigs in London at DM2.885. In New York it finished at
DM2.8903.
Mr Paul Chertkow, chief currency analyst at the London office of Citibank,
the US bank, said: 'The election outcome has created a much more favourable
situation for an economic recovery in the UK.'
However, Mr Michael Saunders, UK economist at Salomon Brothers, the US bank,
warned that the weak state of the economy meant that any recovery would be
modest. 'We are unlikely to see the economy steamroller away,' he said.
Yesterday's euphoric mood among investors ended a depressed four-week period
for UK financial markets.
Yesterday's buying support was aided by a resilient tone on Wall Street,
where the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at 3,255.37, up 30.41.
While sterling was little changed against a stronger dollar, closing in
London at Dollars 1.764 and in New York at Dollars 1.7655, it yesterday
climbed back against the D-Mark to heights last seen consistently in
February. The move took the pound comfortably above its DM2.78 lower limit
in the European exchange rate mechanism.
Japanese market, Page 3
City's reaction, Page 7
Inflation down, Page 14
Currencies, Page 21
London stocks, Page 23
Lex, Page 32
Long view, Weekend I
Market highlights, Weekend II
Soften the sting, Weekend III

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920411

