FT923-6637

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: The week ahead


   BRITISH GAS announces its second quarter results on Tuesday


the first since it called for a Monopolies and Mergers Commission inquiry
into the UK gas market.
The share price has slipped slightly on the resulting uncertainty and is
unlikely to be boosted by Tuesday's figures. Expectations range widely, from
a historic cost net loss of Pounds 75m to a Pounds 150m profit, reflecting
forecasting difficulties in the first year of quarterly reporting by British
Gas and a changed year-end from March to December.
However, the spring quarter is a period of slacker demand, and so cannot be
compared with the Pounds 658m profit made in the first quarter.
Interest centres on the dividend with the market looking for a signal that
the payout will not be affected by the MMC referral and recent regulatory
changes. Estimates range from 6.4p to 7.7p for the first half, with most
around 6.5p.
W H Smith is expected to report on Wednesday pre-tax profits for the year to
May 31 of Pounds 110m-Pounds 114m. This will be a healthy increase on the
previous year's Pounds 89m, helped by last summer's rights issue and the
disposal of its loss-making television division. The retailer is likely to
raise its full-year dividend to 13p or 14p from 12.5p.
Newspaper wholesaling, the subject of a MMC study launched this past week,
has continued to perform strongly. US operations have been good and UK
retailing reasonably resilient. But Do-It-All, the do-it-yourself chain
owned jointly with Boots, is likely to have made a much lower contribution.
Guardian Royal Exchange, the smallest of the UK's five leading composite
(general and life) insurers, is expected to report a cut in pre-tax losses
on Wednesday, underlining the sector's recent improvement. Pre-tax losses
are expected to fall to between Pounds 45m and Pounds 60m compared with a
deficit of Pounds 88m at the interim stage last year.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920822

