FT921-3831

FT  12 MAR 92 / Japanese securities group chief resigns after Y72bn loss


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL and EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


THE PRESIDENT of Daiwa Securities resigned yesterday after Japan's second
largest securities company reported an extraordinary loss of Y72bn (Pounds
317m). It is the latest twist of a widening scandal over the manipulation by
brokers of clients' investment accounts.
Mr Masahiro Dozen accepted responsibility for Daiwa's Y72bn loss in
settlement of disputes with five clients. Daiwa estimated that, as a result,
it would suffer a net loss of Y43bn in the year to March 31.
The revelations follow similar ones by other brokers. They could further
erode faith in the Japanese stock market, which was last year hit by
scandals involving brokers' links with gangsters and compensation paid to
favoured clients.
The Nikkei index yesterday fell by 262 points to 20,592, its lowest level
since October 1990.
Daiwa's loss is the largest so far to arise from a practice known as tobashi
in which brokers manipulated clients' accounts in order to help them dress
up their accounts. Other cases are expected to emerge as companies close
their books at the end of March.
In the past, brokers transferred losses from one client to another, with
little trouble. By using clients with different book-closing dates, brokers
could keep the network going for a long time in the hope that a stock price
recovery would eventually eliminate losses on the offending portfolio.
Although such window-dressing is discouraged by the finance ministry,
brokers acted under pressure from clients. In some cases, brokers had given
their clients illegal guarantees that their investments would not suffer
losses. So transfers were carried out to save the broker as well as the
client from disclosing losses.
However, the revision of the Securities and Exchange Law, which followed
last year's scandals, outlawed the practice of brokers' guaranteeing to buy
back stock at a preset price.
Without a guarantee, investors are refusing to accept loss-making portfolios
on to their books. So brokers cannot find new homes for tobashi portfolios.
But clients left holding stock they accepted under tobashi agreements are
demanding the brokers take the stock off their hands.
Most of Daiwa's loss is accounted for by a Y49.5bn loss arising from a
dispute with Tokyu Department Store, a leading retail group. Tokyu took
Daiwa to court claiming it had lost Y60.5bn. The court ruled that Y11bn of
the loss was Tokyu's responsibility.
Mr Peter Johnson, head of sales at Baring Securities, the UK-owned
stockbroker, said other brokers would be badly affected by news of Daiwa's
settlement with Tokyu Department Store since other clients would be
encouraged to sue.
Editorial comment, Page 20 Bowed down by a spate of disputes, Page 23

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920312

