FT923-15729

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Voice of ordinary people
demands to be heard


   By IAN DAVIDSON


   PARIS


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
IN SIX short months, the European Community has come down off its Maastricht
high, and is sunk in a slough of self-doubt and inertia. At Maastricht the
Twelve negotiated with fanfares the most ambitious programme for European
integration since the Rome Treaty 35 years ago. Today, in the wake of the
Danish referendum on June 2, they are no longer sure if this treaty can ever
come into force.
Uncertainty about the juridical future of a treaty which has been rejected
by one of the 12 partners, is obviously the most immediate reason for the
gloom, but the change of mood also goes much deeper than that. In a purely
procedural sense, the treaty could perhaps be rescued in its present form,
if the Danish government were to discover a reasonable pretext for holding a
second referendum which reversed the verdict of the first. But no new
referendum could wipe out the dramatic impact of the earlier Danish No vote.
In fact it has sent a double message to the governments of the Twelve. The
first is that the Maastricht treaty cannot enter into force unless they can
secure the support of their national electorates. The second is that, even
if ratified, the treaty will not become a reality unless the member
governments continue to enlist much greater popular national support for its
objectives than they have needed to do in the past.
When Europe's ministers invoke the concept of a 'democratic deficit', as
they do so frequently in their Community conclaves, what they usually mean
is that the European parliament should have greater powers. Seldom or never
do they admit that it is their own national electorates which are being
crucially left out of the game.
That is the first lesson of the Danish No vote. The political establishment
in Copenhagen shared a broad-based consensus in favour of the treaty; but
the people felt differently, and said so.
In its wake, the Danish vote has released a wave of criticism of the treaty,
as well as a large measure of outright opposition, in a number of other
member states, starting with the three largest.
In Britain it has precipitated the emergence of a significant
anti-Maastricht rebellion inside the governing Conservative Party, furiously
urged on by Mrs Margaret Thatcher, Mr John Major's predecessor as prime
minister. In the last resort, Mr Major may be able to reimpose party
discipline, but British officials do not sound over-confident.
In Germany it appears that the Maastricht treaty probably commands a
sufficiently large consensus among the political establishment to ensure
eventual ratification in parliament. Yet it has become the lever for a
significant renegotiation of the power relations between the federal
authorities and the Lander, while certain aspects of the treaty, starting
with the target of a single currency, are vigorously contested in the
populace at large.
In France, a very large proportion of the political establishment has
indicated its support by voting overwhelmingly for the required reform of
the constitution. But popular opinion, which will be tested in a referendum
in September, is not only more evenly divided but also more volatile.
Opinion surveys have regularly pointed to a majority in favour of
Maastricht; but the size of the expected majority has tended to fluctuate
quite widely, and is usually matched by a large unknown in the shape of the
don't-knows.
The second lesson of the Danish referendum is a salutary reminder that the
Maastricht treaty marks a political watershed in the extension of EC policy
areas. If the Community is to make a reality of the planned economic and
monetary union, for example, or of the proposed common foreign and security
policy, it will need a much greater degree of popular political support than
for the low-intensity economic objectives of the past; and it will need this
greater support, not just once, but on a continuing basis.
If the Twelve want to save the treaty in any meaningful form, and then make
it workable, they will have to give much greater thought to the democratic
deficit: not in Strasbourg, but in the capitals, regions, counties, and town
halls of the member states.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920701

