FT924-12231

FT  21 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Vietnamese turn to India for
tea know-how


   By KUNAL BOSE


   CALCUTTA


WARREN TEA, a leading producer of Assam tea, has been given the job of
developing Vietnam's export of black CTC (crush,tear and curl) tea.
The Union of Tea Enterprises in Vietnam will be making available to Warren
four tea factories equipped with CTC machines to produce tea for the export
market. According to Mr Vinay Goenka, managing director of Warren, it should
be possible to produce about 3m kg of export quality tea at the four
factories located within a radius of 250 km (155 miles) of Hanoi. Warren
will be paid a commission of 4 per cent on export sales.
In preparation Warren has already produced samples of CTC tea at the
Vietnamese factories and these have met with the approval of tea tasters and
brokers in the UK and Germany, the two principal target markets. The
feedback from the brokers is that at first the European consumers may have
some reservation about the 'origin' of this tea. This will be largely
overcome if Warren can raise the quality of to a level that will allow it to
market the product under its logo, which is registered in the UK.
Warren will start exporting Vietnamese CTC tea in volume next season. Tea
plucking in Vietnam starts in mid-February and ends in November. According
to Mr Goenka, Vietnamese CTC tea should fetch at least 70 per cent of Assam
tea prices. The quality of Vietnamese tea leaf is good, but it has to be
ensured that the tea arrives at the factory gate in a 'healthy condition'.
Moreover, there has to be a greater degree of control over the entire tea
processing system from withering to packing, said Mr Goenka.
Warren has been told that it could also develop tea plantations in central
and north Vietnam where large tracts of virgin land are available. The Tea
Research Association of India has found the Vietnamese soil suitable for
growing good quality tea. The present production of tea in Vietnam is about
40m kg a year - most of it green tea, of which Vietnam is already an
exporter. The annual domestic requirement is about 18m kg.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921021

