FT922-4202

FT  06 JUN 92 / How To Spend It: They will steal the shirt off your back / A
look at clothing which has achieved cult status among the cognoscenti


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


TELEVISION news presenters wear them, Jodie Foster wore a green one in
Little Man Tate, Catherine Deneuve buys them by the dozen, Kylie Minogue is
an addict, Dustin Hoffman picks up a couple whenever he is in London, my
children give them to each other for Christmas and birthdays, fashion lovers
collect them. What are they? Equipment shirts.
It is hard to explain their special appeal to those who have yet to become
hooked.
The first one I bought was about six years ago in a cut-price shop in the
Rue St Dominique in Paris - I had never heard the Equipment brand name but
fell for the fine quality cotton and the simplicity of the cut  - which
added up to that elusive garment, the perfect, simple, white cotton shirt.
Somebody else thought so, too, because I no longer own it and I still miss
it. I am not too sure who took it but suspect our last successful burglar is
even now cutting a dash in it somewhere in north Kensington. (Burglars
around Kensington way seem to be discerning label freaks - my husband once
disturbed one who ran off leaving a bag ready-packed with every garment with
a distinguished label that I owned. Joseph, Plantation, YSL, Kenzo, Betty
Jackson were in the bag. Marks & Spencer, Benetton, Jaeger and the lower
orders languished on the shelves.)
The classic, most sought-after of the Equipment shirts is the silk version,
the 1501. It is to the shirt what the 501 is to jeans, the 2CV to cars, the
Montblanc to pens. In other words it has joined the exclusive club of cult
objects. So much so, that our best-known chain-store has some remarkably
similar looking shirts in a small range of colours on sale at Pounds 49.95
although for the cult-worshipper nothing but the real thing will do.
They come in some 35 different colours, everything from creamy white to
black with something like five different shades of pink through to fuschia.
The cut could hardly be simpler - it is as close as possible a reworking of
a shirt that Christian Restoin (inexplicably always known as Sisley), the
man behind the label, saw Burt Lancaster wearing in the film Desert Fury. He
has never made anything else, never been tempted to elaborate - he has just
stuck to shirts, shirts and nothing but shirts.
The particular appeal seems to lie in a combination of the quality of the
silk - thick and heavy as cream - the simplicity and generosity of the cut,
the two ample pockets, the collar attached directly, without a neckband, to
the shirt body, the carefully colour-matched buttons. The shirts are worn by
men and women and come in four sizes - small, medium, large and extra large.
They are all one price - Pounds 119.
Although the 1501 is the real aficionado's shirt, there is asmall cotton
collection - always a white one (Pounds 65), a few stripes and checks, some
short-sleeved, some long.
Until now the shirts have been available from Joseph, 77 Fulham Road, London
SW3 and from Harvey Nichols, Knightsbridge, London SW1 but, on June 8,
builders permitting, Joseph Ettedgui is opening a small shop devoted to
nothing but Equipment shirts at 21 Sloane Street, London SW1. He aims to
make sure that Equipment fans can be sure of finding the shirts in all the
colours and all the sizes.
One last thing - wear them with a couple of buttons undone or buttoned to
the neck but, please, never with a tie.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

920606

