FT924-11544

FT  24 OCT 92 / Arts: Playing it safe with 'Swan Lake' - Clement Crisp finds
serious faults at the opening of the Royal Ballet's new season


   By CLEMENT CRISP


OF COURSE, the Royal Ballet began its season on Thursday night with Swan
Lake. Otherwise, how would the public know that this really was a ballet
company? 'The Rockies may tumble/ Gibraltar may crumble/ They're only made
of clay/But . . . Swan Lake is here to stay' is Covent Garden's tune. The
cancellation of scheduled Opera House performances of Prince of the Pagodas
in favour of Sleeping Beauty - why not Swan Lake, chaps? - is further
indication of the Play Safe, Play The Classics syndrome that will drag
British ballet back into the 19th century just as the 21st dawns.
Under the circumstances, the really cunning trick would be to show the
public a serious, credible production of Swan Lake.
In matter of text, The Royal Ballet has the finest staging in the world.
Scholarship, care, have restored a version of the choreography as near as
dammit to what the Mariinsky Theatre audience saw in 1895 at the first
performance. (That precious nuances might be restored to the role of
Odette/Odile would be possible if anyone chose to consult Dame Alicia
Markova, repository of the best traditions of the role).
What minimises this production is a belief that decoration is style, that
fuss is drama, and witless activity proof of aesthetic life. Some of the
more egregious bustle has been removed from the opening scene, though I
think the way the tutor is presented (paedophilia just round the corner) is
a mistake, and I am no admirer of Siegfried's companions, who are a boorish
lot.
The decision to set the piece in 1890 is a mistake, and it shows horridly in
the flustered first act merriment and in its design - what is that vast
pearl crown skewed at stage right? - but thereafter the poetic caprices of
Yolanda Sonnabend's settings give a welcome sense of the fantastic and
dream-like.
Yet there still seems a lack of belief in Swan Lake itself as one of the
great metaphors of classic dance. Production ideas encroach upon dance
ideas, erode them. 'Meaning' for the Royal Ballet comes from imposed
dramatic argument: everyone on stage must know who they are as characters,
rather than what they represent in the choreographic scheme. (The national
dances of Act 3, for the most part crassly done on Thursday, have none of
the power that they know in St. Petersburg, because they are embedded in
florid costumes and their dance style is misunderstood).
The visual neuroses of the staging - the swans' white head-dresses (somewhat
improved this season) and their creamy, drifting skirts; the often murky
lighting; the need to fill the stage with oh-so-vivacious supernumeraries
(why on earth are those two dancers' mothers fussing in Act 1?) are shadows
on a masterpiece that should be luminous with meaning because of the potency
and clarity of the dance itself.
This comment also applies, I feel, to Darcey Bussell's Odette/Odile. We saw
on Thursday a young dancer of prodigious physical skill giving an
interpretation that veered between the sublime - movement simple, grand,
exquisite both in its power and in its articulation - and the vapid, when
line was not allowed to open out, when phrases were presented as if by rote,
when a pernicious English-Miss dullness made the dance as bland as milk and
domestic as a cottage garden. It was a reading unfocussed, unawakened - and
Zoltan Solymosi's attentive but light-weight Siegfried was no spark to
interpretative fire. Bussell's natural gifts are thrilling, and so is her
native dance-intelligence. The drive and clarity she has brought to the
Balanchine repertory, and the dazzling variety she has shown in MacMillan
ballets (from Pagodas to Song of the Earth) should illuminate her
Odette/Odile. At present these qualities seem threatened by the double role.
Incidental pleasures of the evening included Tetsuya Kumakawa in the first
act trio, offering stunning, high-flying bravura; and the continuing
presence of Leslie Edwards - at the start of what must be his sixtieth
season with the company - showing yet again the dignity and simplicity that
make him a treasure of our ballet.
Swan Lake continues in repertory at the Royal Opera House during the next
two months.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

921024

