FT922-4083

FT  08 JUN 92 / Management: Sterling work in the treasury - Companies are
seizing opportunities to make their money work harder


   By CHARLES BATCHELOR


Until it was privatised just over two years ago, South West Water had
relatively little money to manage. Over the previous 10 years, the company
had built up debts of Pounds 130m, which were managed by the same man who
also ran the payroll and settled the company's bills.
Privatisation changed all that. In just two years, SW Water has put together
borrowing facilities worth Pounds 530m. It has begun using revolving
credits, signed up leasing facilities and last February, made its first
long-term sterling bond issue.
From managing SW Water's money part-time, Derek Bancroft has taken over
full-time responsibility for managing treasury operations and now has an
assistant and a money dealer to help him. Much of his time is spent
maintaining contacts with City institutions and the banks on which this more
elaborate financial framework depends.
SW Water was prompted into taking treasury management seriously by its
conversion into a public company. Other corporations are being forced by an
increasingly uncertain environment to improve their treasury management
skills.
The break-down of the Bretton Woods system of fixed interest rates in the
early 1970s and the deregulation of the banking industry have both created
greater opportunities and threats for companies with money to manage.
It is just over a year since Allied-Lyons, the UK drink and foods group,
announced a Pounds 150m loss on foreign currency operations while, in the
non-commercial sector, many local authorities are still smarting from losses
incurred from entrusting funds to the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce
International.
Every company has to manage treasury operations even if it does not apply a
formal label to the activity, says Gerald Leahy, director general of the
Association of Corporate Treasurers. Treasury may involve handling relations
with the company's banks; arranging cash transmissions; dealing in foreign
currencies; and raising outside finance. Depending on the size of the
company, these dealings may be handled by anyone from the chairman, through
the managing director and finance director to the company secretary.
Companies probably need to take on a full-time treasurer when turnover
reaches Pounds 200m-Pounds 250m, says Derek Ross, partner in charge of
treasury management at accountants Touche Ross. But they may need to move
earlier if they have sizeable borrowings or significant foreign exchange
activities, typically from Pounds 50m upwards.
Wassall, a listed manufacturing and distribution group with projected
turnover of Pounds 250m, decided to review its treasury management systems
in the wake of Allied-Lyons' foreign exchange losses. 'We got our auditors
to do a 'quick and dirty' review to see if there were any black holes,' says
David Roper, finance director.
Wassall has completed the first stage of beefing up its treasury systems by
introducing basic controls in group subsidiaries to avoid problems and to
hedge any foreign exchange exposures above agreed limits. The second stage
will be to appoint a full-time treasurer to monitor these operations
centrally and to plan ahead.
At present it hedges its foreign exchange exposure when booking an order but
it does not yet hedge anticipated exposure for the coming 12 months.
Central control will allow the company to match foreign exchange needs,
setting purchases against sales, and reducing the need to deal with the
banks. But while full-time treasury management only becomes necessary and
affordable when a company has reached a critical mass, even small companies
are becoming more sophisticated in managing their money.
Primasil, a Herefordshire-based manufacturer of silicon rubber compounds and
mouldings took out an interest rate cap on Pounds 250,000 of borrowings at
the suggestion of its bank manager. The cap means that Primasil, which
expects turnover to rise to Pounds 1.9m this year, has frozen interest rates
at 11 per cent for the next three years.
It took National Westminster Bank four months to sell its first interest
rate cap in 1987 but demand has taken off and it has sold more than 1,600
since January, says Chris Fountain, senior manager of the bank's capital
markets unit. NatWest has reduced the minimum size of cap available to
Pounds 100,000 from Pounds 5m in response to increased demand from smaller
customers, with sales of Pounds 1m or more.
Michael Pearce, founder of Pearce Management Consultants, based in
Hertfordshire, says demand from smaller, unquoted companies for treasury
advice has grown over the past year. 'Financial directors like to have a
framework to operate in,' he says. 'Before, if they speculated, they would
get it in the neck.'
But much of Pearce's work does not involve advising companies on arcane
financial transactions: it is a question of finding basic solutions to
management problems.
One British company was invoicing customers in Zambia in sterling for
supplies bought in dollars in the US, thereby running an exchange rate risk.
It did not matter to the Zambians which of the two currencies they used so
Pearce suggested invoicing in dollars to cut out the exchange risk.
Pearce spends a few hours a week with some of his clients handling their
treasury operations. Not only would the smaller company be unable to afford
the Pounds 40,000-Pounds 50,000 salary of a full-time treasurer, it would
not have enough business to keep him occupied. 'He would become bored and
tempted to play the market,' warns Pearce.
But the scope for mistakes or deliberate wrongdoing in treasury is so vast
that tight controls are necessary in any organisation. 'Problems arise when
the board does not realise what risks are being taken,' comments Leahy. 'If
the finance director or the other directors do not understand a particular
transaction, they should ask the treasurer to explain its effect on their
financial and tax position.'
Leahy advises against appointing 'a star footballer from outside who feels
he has to prove himself' but who does not understand the business. Better to
choose a senior manager from within the company and get him to recruit the
technical people, he suggests.
The smaller the treasury team the more difficult the problem of control
since there will be fewer people to oversee the work of others, says Ross.
There must be an absolute separation of the three stages of dealing,
confirmation and settlement, he advises.
Ross believes that the recent controversy over whether treasury operations
should be considered as a cost centre, merely providing services to other
parts of the company, or as a profit centre, with a mission to make profits,
really hinges on the question of control.
'People who don't understand treasury say the 'profit centre' approach
encourages speculation, but in a bigger group, it is the only way to measure
added value,' he says.
Reuters, the financial information group, aims for a middle road between the
cost and profit approaches, according to Philip Wood, director of treasury.
With 80 per cent of its revenues from outside the UK, Reuters manages its
foreign exchange exposure to avoid large fluctuations in its earnings, he
says. At the same time, it measures the success of its treasury operations
against the exchange rates laid down in its budgets. In the past two years,
treasury has made a profit of Pounds 12m.
Companies sceptical of the benefits of treasury management believe that the
creation of the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM) and the prospect of
declining interest rates will reduce its relevance. But Leahy and other
treasury specialists point out that many important trading currencies, such
as the dollar, will remain outside the ERM while there is no long-term
guarantee of cheap money.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920608

