FT923-15603

FT  01 JUL 92 / Lloyd's agencies may merge


   By RICHARD LAPPER


HAYTER Brockbank and Cassidy Davis, two of the most prominent agencies in
the Lloyd's of London insurance market, are discussing a merger.
The deal would bring some of Lloyd's best known and strongest syndicates
under common management and create one of the biggest businesses at Lloyd's
of London.
Hayter Brockbank's syndicate 861 is a market leader in shipping and oil rig
insurance, while Cassidy Davis syndicate 582 has won international renown in
the highly specialist political-risks field, where it supplies businessmen
with insurances to cover against risks such as kidnapping.
Both groups have won reputations for developing innovative methods. Cassidy
Davis recently became the first Lloyd's agency to appoint a marketing
director, while earlier this year Hayter announced that it intended to set
up a direct motor insurer, selling motor policies through a combination of
mass media advertising and telephone sales.
Lloyd's announced record losses of Pounds 2.06bn last week for the 1989 year
 -under its three-year accounting system - and its syndicates and the
agencies that manage them are under pressure to cut costs and increase
productivity.
The two groups have already reached agreement to merge Hayter Brockbank
syndicate 929 and Cassidy Davis syndicate 1114.
If the talks succeed, the combined group might be among the top five in the
Lloyd's market next year, measured by stamp capacity (the amount of premium
income the syndicates are allowed to underwrite according to Lloyd's rules).
Hayter Brockbank currently manages stamp capacity of Pounds 245m and Cassidy
Davis Pounds 90m.
Hayter, which has expanded rapidly during the past two years, has already
announced plans to increase the size of its two biggest syndicates.
Mr George Stevens, managing director of Hayter, expects managed capacity to
rise to Pounds 445m in 1993.
Both groups also own members' agents, which handle the affairs of Names, the
individuals whose assets provide the Lloyd's market's capital base. Mr
Stevens expects capacity here to amount to Pounds 330m next year.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920701

