FT921-14031

FT  17 JAN 92 / Mideast talks end close to deadlock


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


THE LATEST round of Middle East peace talks ended in virtual deadlock
yesterday after four days of negotiations in Washington.
Israeli delegates flew home, a day later than planned, to face a mounting
domestic political crisis after the withdrawal announced by two right-wing
parties imperilled the parliamentary majority of the Likud-led coalition
government.
They left behind a host of unresolved issues, after making little headway in
bilateral talks with Syrian, Lebanese, Jordanian and Palestinian
delegations.
But threats of a complete breakdown in the talks appeared to be averted.
Israeli and Arab delegates at least agreed they should meet again on
February 10, but could not agree where. Israel wants to move the talks to
the Middle East, while the Arab delegations want to keep them in Washington.
Mr Richard Boucher, a spokesman for the US State Department, said: 'We think
that this round of talks was important and that significant procedural
issues were resolved.
'The issues to be negotiated are complex, and thus the negotiations are
expected to be tough. The key is to remain on course towards achieving a
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli dispute.'
Blocking further progress is the issue of the settlements in the occupied
territories in the West Bank and Gaza: Palestinian delegates view this as a
critical obstacle; Israel sees Palestinian violence against the settlers in
the same light.
But the US, which views the settlements as an obstacle to peace, is placing
increasing pressure on Israel to curb its settlements activity or forego the
Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5.50bn) of loan guarantees it has requested from the US
over the next five years to finance the absorption of Soviet Jews.
Under growing pressure from their home constituencies - the Palestine
Liberation Organisation in Tunis and the leaders of the Intifada in the
occupied territories, for the Palestinians, and the right-wing parties for
Israel - the delegations have exchanged insults with mounting intensity, in
a process described by Mr Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman, as
'one-upmanship on pain'.
Coalition on last legs, Page 4
Book review: Mid-bridge in the Middle East, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920117

