FT924-11419

FT  26 OCT 92 / International Bonds: Borrowing surge hits fortunes of
sovereign issues


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE SURGE in borrowing needs of many European countries has caused a sharp
reversal of fortune for many sovereign Eurobonds in the secondary market.
But the widening of sovereign yield spreads in the secondary market may well
reflect a change in sentiment engendered by fears of supply, rather than any
fundamental changes in creditworthiness.
Some European countries face a sharp increase in immediate borrowing needs
in order to repay short-term debts incurred in the foreign exchange market.
Heavy intervention in the foreign exchange market in September, in an effort
to support their currencies, has also left some countries with severely
weakened foreign exchange reserves to be replenished.
The UK, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Denmark, Spain and Italy are among the
European sovereign borrowers with increased funding needs. Some of these are
also struggling to cope with growing budget deficits caused by shrinking
receipts due to economic recession.
But these factors may not be enough to jeopardise the current credit ratings
of European sovereign borrowers.
'There is a tendency to view exchange rate pressure and domestic economic
problems as synonymous with declining credit quality,' says Mr Philip Bates,
head of Standard & Poor's sovereign risk group. 'In many cases, these
problems do not directly affect countries' external indebtedness.'
The general view that European sovereigns are declining credits is not borne
out by a closer look at their creditworthiness, he argues.
Mr Bates points out that for foreign currency debt ratings, the emphasis is
on a country's external financial position. Credit analysts must consider to
what extent imbalances in the domestic economy are translating into
increases in the current account deficit.
In the case of the UK, for example, rumours of a possible downgrade of the
country's triple-A rated debt circulated widely last week, ahead of the UK's
record DM5bn Eurobond. In fact, there was never any question of downgrade,
says Mr Bates. 'The UK credit rating is not under any kind of threat.'
In addition, the UK's public finances are 'very strong' and although the
budget position has deteriorated, the UK still has 'a lot of financial
flexibility.'
Other countries seeking funds in the international capital markets are
actually improving credits. Denmark, after having its debt rating lowered
twice in the 1980s, has moved up to a AA+ credit with a stable outlook.
Ireland is another improving credit, having stepped up from A+ to AA-, after
reducing its budget deficit. Portugal has improved from A to A+, and Spain
is rated AA with a positive outlook, despite worries about the effect on
foreign investment of recently-imposed capital controls. Sweden, despite its
current financial crisis, still has a triple-A rating and has a declining
net external debt trend.
The two cases which are of more serious concern are Italy, currently rated
AA+ by S&P, where the effectiveness of attempts to control the budget
deficit remains questionable, and Finland, which has experienced a surge in
net external debt to 150 per cent of exports.
Although spreads of sovereign debt have started to recover slightly, some
debt is still trading at very wide spreads, making further financing more
difficult.
For example, the yield spread of Finland's FFr4bn issue due 2003 has widened
from 41 basis points over the curve in July to 100 basis points. For
Finland, and also for Sweden, both considering tapping the French market,
this is likely to boost the cost of new issues.
Apart from the D-Mark bond market, the focus of sovereign borrowers'
attentions, the French market is considered one of few accessible markets,
and sovereign borrowers such as the UK and Denmark are also keeping an eye
on the sector.
In the dollar market, Italy's 8 3/4 per cent issue due 2001 has widened from
57 basis points over the yield curve in mid-September to 116 basis points,
while, Norway's 7 1/4 per cent issue due 1997 has widened from 44 to 54
basis points over the curve.
From a trader's point of view, steady credit ratings are only part of the
equation. Trading performance is affected by investors' perceptions of
economic and political risk, even where they have no specific impact on
ratings.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921026

