FT921-14300

FT  16 JAN 92 / Cable & Wireless in talks with AT&T over alliance


   By HUGO DIXON


AMERICAN TELEPHONE & Telegraph and Cable & Wireless have been discussing a
global alliance between the two telecommunications groups, but negotiators
failed to make progress in talks last week.
Executives remain hopeful that a less ambitious deal - in which AT&T would
take a minority stake in Mercury Communications, C&W's UK subsidiary - can
still be concluded.
One reason that agreement has yet to be finalised is that AT&T is concerned
that UK telecommunications regulations may change if the Labour party wins
the general election. It is understood to be considering postponing any
action until after the election.
Another problem is that it has not been possible to agree whether an
alliance between the two groups should cover only Mercury, the whole of
Europe, or markets in other parts of the world. C&W wants a wider agreement
than just the UK.
Expectations in the City that a deal is imminent, which drove C&W's share
price to a record closing high of 625p last night, seem unlikely to be
fulfilled. But executives believe it is possible talks could begin again in
the next few weeks.
The central element of any deal would be the acquisition of part of Mercury
 -perhaps a quarter to a third for around Pounds 1bn - by AT&T. The US group
would also agree to invest in Mercury to build it up into a more formidable
competitor for British Telecom.
One of the main attractions to AT&T of any deal would be the prospect of
being able to operate a telephone service on both sides of the Atlantic,
instead of having to hand over most of its UK calls to BT in the
mid-Atlantic.
Such a move, though, would probably be viewed as threatening by BT which
earns more than Pounds 100m in annual profits on transatlantic calls.
BT might therefore feel it had to respond by linking up with one of AT&T's
main rivals in the US, such as MCI, so that it could also operate on both
sides of the ocean.
The negotiations between AT&T and C&W, which have been taking place in both
the US and the UK since last September, have been complicated by regulatory
considerations.
The UK government still holds a 'golden share' in C&W preventing any single
share-holder owning more than 15 per cent of the company.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920116

