FT924-6317

FT  21 NOV 92 / Finance & the Family: How to stay abreast of school fees -
As base rates fall, John Authers suggests ways to adjust planning


   By JOHN AUTHERS


FALLING base rates are making it harder to save for school fees. This area
of financial planning has always been more risk-averse than others  -
parents want to make sure that they can at least afford to pay the fees when
their children go to school, and do not mind going without any up-side
beyond that. That usually means investment products based on deposits or
fixed-interest securities.
But recent changes in rates make this harder to sustain. As Martin Jones, of
accountant Coopers & Lybrand, puts it: 'It's time to reassess investment
policy. Basically, we've just followed base rates down from 15 per cent. I'm
beginning to wonder how much longer this will go on.'
That means a slight shift from fixed interest and traditional school fees'
planning products to equity investments - particularly, unit and investment
trust personal equity plans (Peps) which are tax-efficient and allow
diversification of risk.
Planning for education costs remains a cautious business, so deposits cannot
be banished altogether. Anthony Murrell, of school fee adviser Fraser Marr,
said his company's philosophy had not altered, but added: 'Where our view
has changed is that we might now be closer to Peps than ever before for 40
per cent taxpayers. I, personally, am not that keen on locking into fixed
interest rates at this low level.'
The two crucial variables in choosing a plan are the time you must wait
before your child starts at school, and your household's tax position. If
you have time on your side, and a large tax bill, you can afford to make
moves which would be too risky for someone whose children are about to go to
school.
So what products now make most sense?
Tessas
These tax-exempt special saver accounts are free of tax and usually still
offer a better return than the top gross rates available. The maximum amount
which can be invested in the first year is Pounds 3,000 a person, falling to
Pounds 1,800 in the second year. But Tessas must be held for five years to
maintain their tax advantages, so they are less useful for people whose
children are about to go to school.
High interest deposit accounts
When one parent does not pay income tax, it is still worth using up their
personal allowance in a high interest deposit account. This pays interest
gross, which will continue to keep you respectably ahead of inflation. It
also makes sense to transfer assets if one parent pays top rate (40 per
cent) tax and the other pays basic rate. Murrell suggests this as the limit
of adventure for those whose child starts school within three or four years
 -equity-derived products are too risky over this time scale.
Capital gains tax (CGT)
It is good to use up the annual CGT allowance of Pounds 5,800. This can be
done using the zero-dividend preference shares of investment trusts, which
deliver a fixed level of interest taxed as gain rather than income. They are
offering growth of around 9.5 per cent a year, which is tax-free for anyone
who does not pay CGT. Richard Boyton, of Boyton Financial Services, believes
these can form the basis of a school fees plan, and offer secure growth.
Peps
Higher-rate taxpayers might now move on to Peps, which invest in equities,
and can accumulate free of both income tax and CGT. But the charges
associated with the plans mean that the tax advantages have a chance to
become significant only after several years.
Educational trust schemes
For 40 per cent taxpayers who have used up both their personal income tax
allowances, and their annual CGT allowance, Murrell suggests educational
trust schemes. These allow funds for children to be invested in a tax-free
environment, provided they are used for educational fees.
Educational trusts work typically by taking a large lump sum and buying
annuities with it. They then pay out income three times a year while the
child is at school to meet the fees.
But these products have been damaged by base rate cuts, as they are invested
wholly in short and medium term gilts (UK government bonds), on which the
yields tend to be very sensitive to base rates.
Annuity rates cannot be renegotiated once they have been bought, so people
investing in such a scheme now will effectively lock themselves into
historically low interest rates.
One scheme on the market does offer some improvement on this, though.
Ecclesiastical Insurance's school fees capital plan is available until
November 30, and is funded using annuities which were bought while base
rates were still at 9 per cent.
The rates involved are guaranteed, but unspectacular. As is usual, you get a
better deal if you plan further ahead.
For an investment of Pounds 10,000, Ecclesiastical will pay Pounds 1,237 a
term for nine terms starting in September 1993 - which means you will get
only Pounds 11,113 from your initial investment of Pounds 10,000. But if
your child does not start at school until September 1996, and then stays for
21 terms, Ecclesiastical will pay Pounds 759 a term - a total of Pounds
15,939.
Many advisers also recommend with-profits endowments for parents who are
able to plan a long way ahead. They are less volatile than Peps but they are
inflexible and provide poor value if cashed-in early. Also, they are loaded
heavily with commission and are less tax-efficient.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921121

