FT921-14193

FT  17 JAN 92 / Management (My Office): Pursuing policies in a very big way
 -Lucy Kellaway takes the lift to meet Mick Newmarch, the top man at the Pru


   By LUCY KELLAWAY


What matters most to the man who controls Britain's biggest pile of money?
To Mick Newmarch, chief executive of the Prudential, a big leather swivel
chair is the best aid to managing the insurance company's Pounds 50bn. 'Most
of my job is thinking, so a comfortable chair is essential,' he says.
Indeed, everything about his office, up on the tenth floor above the hi-fi
shops of the Tottenham Court Road, is comfortable; it is also big. The
panoramic view, stretching over to the City is certainly big. So are the two
leather sofas and leather arm chairs. But then, so too is Newmarch.
The building is a temporary home while the Pru spends four years and well
over Pounds 100m making its old headquarters in High Holborn 'look quite
respectable' - as Newmarch puts it. In the meantime, he has tarted up his
new office by covering the dark wood panelling in fake moire silk to make it
feel lighter.
Otherwise there is only a handful of personal touches: he has chosen a
sentimental picture of two small girls by Hornel, the Scottish painter, out
of the Pru's large art collection to hang opposite his desk. 'I am an
absolute dilettante about art, but I like that one.'
On a shelf he has a bronze owl and a sculpture of rice maiden, given to his
wife 'in the days when the Japanese still thought giving presents to
westerners was the best way to do business'. His wife considered it so
hideous, she would not have it in the house.
Newmarch - known as 'The Bruiser' in Private Eye - has the reputation of
being somewhat overbearing. He is well known for striking a tough bargain -
last year he managed to secure a pay rise of 43 per cent despite the Pru's
falling profits; earlier he persuaded the company to put more than Pounds
500,000 towards a smart flat in Regents Park.
But his office, which has a strong functional feel, does not reinforce the
impression. His desk displays signs of hard work, with an outsize brief case
and piles of papers. Next to them are three big screens and a large
calculator.
'I've got Reuters and Topic - it's a bit of an indulgence, me not wanting to
give up my roots as an investment manager,' says Newmarch, who still does
not feel quite right unless he knows what is happening in the market. He
also has a computer linked to the company's mainframe of which he makes
little use. 'I'm a two finger computer man,' he says.
Neither is he dependent on what he calls any 'printed aid'. Fifteen minutes
is enough to scan the newspaper cuttings that his staff start pasting at 7
o'clock each morning. There are none of the trendy management text books on
his shelves - indeed, there are no books at all. Newmarch, who joined the
company straight from school in 1955, believes in learning-by-doing.
Since he became chief executive two years ago he has been trying to 'develop
a total strategy for the Pru', and two or three times a week he keeps a slot
in his diary to 'liaise' and 'interface' with his team of eight strategy
experts.
He spends most of his time talking on one of the three telephones on his
desk, and walking around the Pru's many offices meeting his staff. He says
his colleagues are invited to pop in and see him whenever they like. However
Newmarch is not known for being a democrat; his office is at the end of a
corridor, protected by a secretary and a PA.
But a democrat is not what the Pru needs at the moment, as it shuts down its
estate agencies, divides and rules among its sales force, and cuts layers
out of its insurance business. A tough touch is perhaps what is called for.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Illustration (Omitted). Photograph Mick Newmarch, 'Most of my
job is thinking, so a comfortable chair is essential' (Omitted).

920117

