FT921-3675

FT  13 MAR 92 / Technology: Building a career for engineers


   By IAN HOLDSWORTH


National Westminster Bank showed off two of the most technically advanced
buildings in the City of London last week to a party of schoolteachers in a
drive to boost the image of engineering in UK secondary schools.
Some 20 staff from Sackville secondary school in East Grinstead toured
NatWest's multi-million pound dealing centre in the City's Broadgate
development and its Goodmans Fields cheque-clearing building in nearby
Aldgate on an open-day for the engineering that underpins both buildings.
The tours were part of the Engineering Council's Neighbourhood Engineers
scheme set up in the early 1980s to put local schools in contact with
engineers in their community.
'Engineering has been looked on as an oily rag profession,' says Dennis
Jones, head of technical services in NatWest's property management arm. 'I
wanted the teachers to see situations they could readily imagine. Everyone
sees dealing on TV and cheques being paid into branches. We wanted to
demonstrate the depth of engineering that underpins this process.'
At County NatWest the teachers saw how an 11,000 volt power intake was
refined through various stages to support two dealing rooms serving some 440
dealers.
The four-year-old building was one of the first in the UK to use 'structured
cabling' which means equipment can be changed or moved around the building
without ripping up the floor each time.
Dealers terminals are supported by a standby generator, and a room
containing 1,400 car-batteries which ensure a power supply free of bumps.
At the Goodmans Fields site, the teachers saw cheques being sorted by
machine in a building that generates its own power. 'This sort of experience
certainly broadens our horizons,' said John Cunnington, Sackville's head of
lower school after a debriefing session this week. It is more likely to
influence the careers department than teaching, he says.
Neighbourhood Engineers is run by the Engineering Council which was
established by Royal Charter in 1981 to set and monitor standards in the
education, training and experience of UK engineers.
The scheme aims to bring 24,000 qualified engineers into contact with some
6,000 schools across the country.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920313

