FT923-11032

FT  27 JUL 92 / Too lean for a long life: Edward Balls asks whether the UK's
manufacturing sector is strong enough to respond to economic recovery


   By EDWARD BALLS


Britain's manufacturing industry may be lean, fit and competitive; but it is
getting leaner by the week. After two deep recessions in little more than a
decade, the UK's export industries may be too small to sustain anything more
than sluggish recovery.
The government's anti-inflation medicine is certainly hurting. The recession
started in the service sector; but, as it has lingered, the damage to
industry has grown more severe. Manufacturing output has fallen by 7.8 per
cent since the recession began, a fall three times deeper than that in
service sector output. In the past fortnight, two more machine tool
companies - the Beaver group and Matrix Churchill - have gone into
receivership.
Yet the cries of pain from Britain's manufacturers have been surprisingly
muted. The latest economic forecast from the Engineering Employers
Federation paints a gloomy picture of falling employment and sluggish growth
over the next 12 months. But most industrialists support the government's
low inflation strategy and want to stay in the exchange rate mechanism.
Mr Neil Johnson, the federation's new director-general, is typical. A
'short-term quick fix' would be counter-productive, however attractive. 'It
is vital for 'UK plc' that we remain in the ERM at the current level and get
as close to the heart of the European market as possible.'
Why are manufacturers so confident that they can endure the pain? Many
believe that in the 1980s the efficiency and competitiveness of British
manufacturing industry was transformed. Productivity grew by an average 5
per cent a year, compared with just 0.9 per cent between 1975 and 1980. Only
Japan, among the main industrialised countries, had a superior productivity
growth record. Profitability was higher than at any time since the
mid-1960s; and Britain became a magnet for foreign investment.
Even the performance of the export sector has improved since 1981, relative
to that in previous decades. The share of UK manufacturing in total world
exports stabilised after 1982, albeit at a sharply reduced level in
comparison with the early 1970s. Mr Bill Martin, economist at UBS Phillips
and Drew, finds that the responsiveness of UK export volumes to changes in
world trade was greater than at any time after 1955.
'British industry achieved considerable success under the industrial
policies governments pursued in the 1980s,' argues Mr Walter Eltis,
director-general of the National Economic Development Office and soon to be
chief economic adviser to Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry
secretary. Falling capital investment must impede the rejuvenation of
British industrial competitiveness. But for optimists such as Mr Eltis, it
is a price worth paying for low and stable inflation.
'ERM membership together with a reduction in UK inflation to the best levels
achieved in Europe will create the underlying economic environment for a
sustained and durable period of expansion,' he argues.
There are dissenting voices. Mr Martin Taylor, managing director of
Bridgeport, one of the UK's largest machine tool companies, fears that the
recession and the accompanying collapse in investment are doing 'irrevocable
and irretrievable' damage. 'If you do not invest, you do not compete . . .
You cannot stop investing for three years and then expect to be competitive
when the recovery comes.'
Mr Taylor wants more than just ministerial stroking from the new management
at the Department of Trade and Industry. A package of investment incentives
to help recovery would be better. But even Mr Taylor refuses to join the
growing chorus of economists calling for a sterling devaluation.
Yet how sound are the achievements of the 1980s? Is manufacturing industry
in a state to lead a sustained upturn when consumer spending picks up?
Productivity growth was rapid. But the bulk of the gain in output per head
was achieved by shedding jobs rather than increasing output and investment.
Manufacturing employment has fallen by a third since 1979, while the real
value of manufacturing output only recovered to 1979 levels in 1987. The
share of manufacturing output, relative to gross domestic product, has
shrunk from 28.2 per cent in 1979 to 22.4 per cent in 1991.
Most of this loss in output occurred during the last recession when a
sterling appreciation, encouraged by North Sea oil output and high interest
rates, reduced export competitiveness of manufacturing by 50 per cent in
four years. Despite some gains in the 1980s, exports remain much less
cost-competitive than in the 1960s or 1970s.
A harder look at the international comparisons shows that the UK still lags
on measures other than cost competitiveness. While UK productivity was
catching up with its competitors, it started a long way behind. German
manufacturing productivity was 151 per cent of British levels in 1979. Even
in 1990, it was still 19 per cent higher.
More worryingly, UK productivity gains were dissipated through high real
wages. 'The 1980s were an excellent decade for living standards for the
great majority of those associated with industry, whether they were workers,
managers or shareholders,' says Mr Eltis. But the British paid themselves so
well that it was not profitable enough to invest in the UK in sufficient
quantities to arrest the shrinkage of the manufacturing sector.
Real wages in UK manufacturing grew at an annual rate of 2.6 per cent in the
1980s, outstripping real wage growth in all the UK's five largest
industrialised competitors. A recent NEDC study of the UK engineering
industry finds that the share of value-added output paid to employees in
1989 was still higher than in Germany, France, Italy or Japan, though not
the US.
Not surprisingly, the rate of return on capital remained lower than in any
of these five countries, in spite of the partial recovery in UK profits.
Business investment also grew more slowly in Britain.
Britain's manufacturing industry, provider of just over 60 per cent of UK
export earnings, consequently remained too small to support its citizens'
appetite for imports. The manufacturing trade deficit increased during the
decade as the growth of import volumes outstripped exports. While the
1980-81 recession produced a current account surplus of 5 per cent of GDP,
after eight quarters of recession the current account is in deficit by
nearly 2 per cent of GDP.
The shrunken manufacturing sector and the existence of a trade deficit, at
the bottom of the recession, suggest that the UK economy may experience
difficulties when the recovery finally arrives. 'A consumer-led expansion
without manufacturing investment would generate imports without the means to
pay for them,' argues Mr Ian Thompson, economic adviser at the EEF.
Unless those imports are predominantly capital goods, the foreign exchange
markets may become nervous at a growing deficit and demand higher interest
rates to compensate for the devaluation risk. 'The size of the manufacturing
sector will be a constraint on the pace of the recovery through the balance
of payments,' he says.
Implicitly, Mr Thompson is arguing that sterling is overvalued within the
ERM: UK real wages relative to other countries are too high to make it
profitable for enough companies to sell produce in Britain at the current
exchange rate.
Is sterling overvalued? The simple answer is that nobody knows. Most of the
standard tests of exchange rate overvaluation confuse, rather than
enlighten, the debate. Model simulations of the exchange rate needed to
maintain a sustainable pattern of capital inflows point towards
overvaluation. But the recent forecasting record of macro-economists does
not inspire confidence in their models.
Purchasing power parity exchange rate measures add little value. The PPP
method estimates an exchange rate at which traded goods prices would be
equivalent in different countries. On this basis, sterling is correctly
valued against other European countries, but overvalued against the US
dollar.
Yet currencies often diverge for years from these notional PPP rates, which
tend to bear little relation to trade performance. Calculations by Goldman
Sachs, the US investment bank, suggest that the only time the dollar was
correctly valued in the last 15 years was in 1984-85, when it was at the
peak of a speculative bubble, and the trade deficit was growing.
Nor does the fact that industrialists are not complaining about the value of
sterling add much of interest. The only reason they are still producing is
that they are profitable at that exchange rate. They might complain about
changes in the rate, but not the level itself. The businesses that might be
producing at a lower real exchange rate have gone.
Overvaluation does not imply that existing manufacturers are on the verge of
bankruptcy, but that they are too thin on the ground. The shrunken size of
the manufacturing sector, the unusual phenomenon of a substantial trade
deficit at the bottom of a recession, the high level of UK long-term
interest rates and the reliance on short-term capital inflows to fund the
deficit, all these suggest overvaluation.
The feeble performance of the export sector during the recession also
suggests that British companies have found it difficult to shift production
to foreign markets as domestic demand has fallen. There have been
exceptions: annual car export volumes rose by 183 per cent between 1988 and
1991. But cars make up less than 5 per cent of total exports. Overall, the
UK export performance has been disappointing, particularly in comparison
with Japan, where companies have responded to sluggish domestic demand
growth by boosting exports. Japanese export volumes grew 5 per cent in 1991
compared with 6.4 per cent in the US and 0.7 per cent in the UK.
Whether a sterling devaluation would reduce UK real wages or simply generate
higher inflation to offset the gains in cost competitiveness is another
matter. But until recovery comes, economists can only guess how long foreign
exchange markets will tolerate a large UK current account deficit. As Mr
Thompson explains: 'Ultimately the only way you can measure it is to see
whether the export capacity grows to meet the import demand that the
recovery brings.' When, that is, recovery finally arrives.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920727

