FT924-8248

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Company News: Mitsubishi Steel dips into red
in tough first half


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


MITSUBISHI Steel Manu-facturing, a Mitsubishi group company producing
springs and special steels, reported pre-tax losses of Y791m (Dollars 6.4m)
for the first six months to the end of September, highlighting the pressure
on components suppliers within Japan.
The fact that a Mitsubishi group member reported a loss suggests that other
components suppliers are under extreme pressure, as Mitsubishi Motors, a
leading purchaser of its products, has been more successful than most other
Japanese car makers over the past year.
In the first half last year, Mitsubishi Steel reported pre-tax profits of
Y720m, while sales for the first half this year were down 9.2 per cent at
Y38.6bn, as orders fell from the car and construction industries.
The continuing weakness in the stock market has meant that the company has
been unable to supplement its core earnings with an increase in financial
income, a common practice among Japanese manufacturers in the past.
For the full year, Mitsubishi Steel forecasts pre-tax losses of Y1.7bn,
compared with profits of Y1.6bn last year, on sales of Y78bn, down 5.4 per
cent. But the company indicated that the proceeds of a land sale would
contribute to a net profit of Y700m.
Mitsubishi Gas Chemical, a maker of chemicals and engineering plastics,
reported a 70 per cent fall in pre-tax profit to Y1.14bn in the first half,
as demand declined from car makers, electronics companies and the paper
industry.
Sales for the period fell 9 per cent to Y101.6bn, while after-tax profit was
down 59 per cent to Y1.17bn.
The company said that the interim dividend would be cut from the Y3.5 of
last year to Y2.5 a share.
The company has a stake in joint venture methanol projects in Venezuela and
Saudi Arabia, but its problems have arisen in supplying industrial products
to the home market, where demand from manufacturing industry is still
declining.
As part of its attempts to broaden its sales base, Mitsubishi has put
emphasis on developing engineering plastics and on supplying components to
electronics manufacturers, but the weakness of that industry has undermined
that strategy.
Mitsubishi Gas forecast a full-year pre-tax profit of Y2.5bn, 48 per cent
below the previous year's figure, on sales down almost 5 per cent to Y207bn.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

921112

