FT924-8276

FT  12 NOV 92 / Survey of Jordan (5): Nimble traders on their toes in a
troublesome corner of the world - Mark Nicholson reviews export performance
and prospects


   By MARK NICHOLSON


GIVEN the mayhem wrought by the Gulf crisis on Jordan's export markets, the
fact that the value of the kingdom's exports for 1991 shrank by just under 3
per cent to Dollars 879m is almost something to crow about.
What is more, by the end of this year, Jordan's exports look likely to reach
or exceed pre-war levels, even though the kingdom still does not enjoy full
access to its main local markets.
Exports to Iraq, historically Jordan's biggest trade partner, fell by 53 per
cent in 1991, thanks mainly to the United Nations embargo which permits
Jordan to export only food and medicines across its eastern border.
Worse, bankers and businessmen say trade has thinned further this year; a
result of Iraq's shortage of foreign currency, partly fear among Iraqi
traders after the execution earlier this year of 42 'profiteering' traders
in Baghdad and the Iraqi government's decision recently to ban the import of
more than 140 'luxury' items. Mr Basel Jardaneh, Jordan's finance minister,
puts the cost of the lost Iraqi market at Dollars 100m a year.
Exports to the Gulf also tumbled after the political embargo imposed on
Jordan by Saudi Arabia, in particular, as punishment for the Hashemite
kingdom's Iraqi leanings in the Gulf crisis.
Trade with Saudi Arabia resumed only in November last year and remains at
about 60 per cent of pre-war levels. A full political reconciliation between
King Hussein and King Fahd is almost certainly the pre-requisite of resuming
normal trade.
To compound matters, exports of phosphates - the country's biggest foreign
exchange earner - were hit quite independently by a contraction of demand in
eastern Europe, leaving the industry's exports down by 30 per cent on 1989
levels at Dollars 180m last year.
All this makes Jordan's ability to keep overall export earnings within sight
of pre-war figures the more surprising. It comes, according to bankers and
businessmen in Amman, of extreme nimbleness among Jordan's small-scale
exporting industries in finding new markets. 'The business community here is
remarkably quick on its feet,' says a local banker. 'Businesses have been
going as far as Sudan, Yemen and Tunisia with some success - they even seem
to be getting paid.'
Traders have also managed to find markets in Morocco, China, eastern Europe
and, notably, Russia, with which trade rose by more than 60 per cent in 1991
and will rise further next year under the terms of Jordan's recent agreement
to reschedule Dollars 750m of debt to the former Soviet Union. This includes
an undertaking to supply Dollars 52m worth of Jordanian-made consumer goods
which traders hope will give them a useful foothold in the market.
Aside from phosphates and potash, Jordan's main exports comprise foodstuffs,
exports of which were up 33 per cent to Dollars 117m in 1991,
pharmaceuticals, paints, cosmetics and other light chemical products,
clothing, textiles and locally assembled electronic goods.
But whatever success exporters enjoy in replacing markets damaged by the
Gulf war will not be enough alone to guarantee the home-grown economic
growth on which Jordan must depend, now that there can be no assurance that
Gulf countries will resume their pre-war aid hand-outs.
Exporters will also have to cover the foreign exchange gap left by the
return to Jordan of 300,000 returned workers from Kuwait, who will no longer
be sending home monthly remittance cheques.
The onus on Jordan's export industries is considerable, given the country's
historic appetite for imports, which include almost all its energy needs.
Jordan's merchandise trade deficit in 1991 was Dollars 934m, and its current
account surplus of Dollars 410m the result essentially of remittances rising
to Dollars 796m because of repatriated savings.
Some of this burden will be taken by Jordan's heavy industries of
phosphates, potash and fertilisers, which between them have traditionally
accounted for around half of Jordan's exports by value and which in each
case have substantial expansion plans in train. Mr Jardaneh estimates that
these industries will be earning Jordan 80-100 per cent more than at present
by 1995.
But sustainable growth will also depend on expanding Jordan's light
industries. And with this in mind, the government is - belatedly in the view
of many bankers and traders - acting on several fronts both to help
exporters find markets and to encourage investment, both domestic and
inward, in export industries.
An export credit guarantee agency is planned, and awaiting parliamentary
approval before the year end. The trade ministry is also establishing a
one-stop investment agency, meeting criticism that the government has so far
done little to inform or ease the bureaucracy for potential inward
investors. 'I've never been able to find a single investment guide to
Jordan,' remarks one banker, who says there is nonetheless strong interest
in the country from, among other sources, Cypriot clothing manufacturers.
The appeal for foreign investors lies essentially in Jordan's low-cost
labour, with semi-skilled workers earning an average of around Dollars 100 a
month and skilled workers between Dollars 150-Dollars 200.
But the disincentive, as ever, lies in Jordan's location in such a
politically troublesome corner of the world. Many bankers and traders in
Amman believe that there will be a substantial influx of foreign capital
only when there is a comprehensive and durable regional peace between Israel
and its neighbours.
The government is hoping, meanwhile, that Jordan's own entrepreneurs will
invest in exporting industries - a habit which the greater part of the
kingdom's investors have traditionally forsworn for the shorter-term, more
liquid and thus safer, returns of the financial markets.
However, there are signs that some Jordanians believe the economy's recent
buoyancy and the region's relative peace may last. Jordan's Investment
Development Bank last year approved loans worth Dollars 30m - a threefold
rise on its 1989 commitments. Also, 821 new industrial projects were
registered with the ministry of trade and industry last year, against 451 in
1990. Proposed capital for these projects is Dollars 140m, against Dollars
37m in 1990.
The test will be in the commitment of that money. And the test of that
perhaps lies in Washington, with the participants in the Middle East peace
talks.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

921112

