FT924-12177

FT  22 OCT 92 / Optimism over Jubilee extension


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


LONDON Underground is be-coming increasingly optimistic that the government
may after all give the green light to the Pounds 1.7bn extension of the
Jubilee Line to London's Docklands.
Its confidence stems from the switch in economic strategy towards growth and
employment signalled by Mr John Major, the prime minister, on Tuesday night.
Mr Major said he was determined that cuts needed to meet Treasury targets in
the present spending round should not fall on projects with a direct impact
on jobs and growth.
London Underground was yesterday intepreting that as a signal that the
Jubilee Line extension, which will create up to 12,000 jobs during its
construction and help regenerate Docklands, will be spared.
The Underground's optimism was reflected in its decision to hold an
exhibition of architectural designs for the Jubilee Line extension at The
Economist Building in London's West End.
Opening a preview of the exhibition, Mr Denis Tunnicliffe, London
Underground's managing director, said: 'Amid growing political concern both
in and out of parliament about investment-led growth, this is the only
project that can put people into jobs quickly.
'Within 45 days of the go-ahead, we will have more than Pounds 1bn worth of
contracts ready for signature. By next Easter we could have 5,000 people
directly employed on the line's construction and up to 7,000 more in related
jobs.'
Mr Tunnicliffe confirmed that London Underground was considering moving
2,000 of its staff into a building called FC6 in Cabot Square, Canary Wharf,
if the Jubilee Line was built.
The announcement appears to be aimed at encouraging Canary Wharf's bankers
to meet the government's demand of a no-strings-attached offer of financial
help towards the line's construction.
Mr Tunnicliffe said he could not guarantee that the move would take place if
the line was built. 'We are in negotiations with the administrators and
there is not yet a price that convinces us that it is the best price in
town, but we are pretty confident we are going to get a deal,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921022

