FT922-476

FT  27 JUN 92 / Markets: The pricier side of life . . . - Serious Money


   By JOHN AUTHERS


ARE YOU suffering from statistical overload? Anyone trying to take a
personal finance decision will soon find out about this distressing
syndrome.
Mountainous league tables exist for every product. The problem is applying
them. They can prove which was the best endowment to buy 25 years ago, or
the best unit trust 10 years ago. But the problem, particularly where
savings are concerned, is the choice, now, between a life product and a
straight investment product. This is trickier.
Most people want the product to perform exactly the same task for them - to
convert their savings over a long period into a big lump sum.
But statisticians face three problems. First, the new breed of unit and
investment trust savings schemes have not been around long. Personal equity
plans (Peps), in which these schemes are most tax-efficient, have existed
for only five years. This makes comparison with life plans, which have
existed for the best part of two centuries, all the harder.
Second, the two products do not set out to do the same thing. Put money into
an endowment and some of it will go towards life insurance, even if you do
not need it. Such cover is important, but it can be bought much more cheaply
and is wholly distinct from investment. Unit and investment trust schemes
also have the virtue of flexibility - you can withdraw money at any time,
and receive the value of your savings, without a penal surrender value.
Third, tax raises its ugly head - collective trusts are liable for capital
gains tax, unless they are held in a Pep, while endowment pay-outs are free
of tax.
Comparison begins to look mighty difficult. But Money Management magazine
has spent the last few months engaged in just this Herculean task. Its
conclusions might still leave you baffled.
The magazine accounts for the life cover as follows. It took the
top-performing ten-year with-profits endowment, from Equitable Life, and
asked how much the expenses of life cover had reduced its yield. The answer
was equivalent to Pounds 1.85 per month from a Pounds 50 premium policy.
It then took the top-performing unit trust over ten years - N&P UK Income -
and calculated how well Pounds 1.85 per month would have fared within this
over ten years. This came to Pounds 581, which was then deducted from their
overall figure for Pounds 50 per month, reducing Pounds 15,735 to Pounds
15,154.
This made Equitable's endowment pay-out of Pounds 13,693 look that much more
competitive. But is this a valid comparison? Life cover as part of an
endowment usually occupies much the same role as the free glasses you pick
up at petrol stations.
For example, the leaflet for Sun Alliance's Cashdate plan devotes more space
to the solar-powered calculator, compact Masterchef and free weekend holiday
which you could win after taking out a plan, than it does to the 'protection
for your family'.
These gifts might be useful to you, in which case the policy might look more
attractive, or they might not, in which case they are irrelevant. The life
cover which comes with an endowment falls into much the same category.
Endowments are sold as investments, and it is fair to judge them solely on
this basis. The Pounds 581 can fairly be reinstated to N&P's pay-out.
But the Money Management figures also show that endowments are very
creditable investment performers over 10 years. The best unit trust schemes
easily beat the best endowments. But the average unit trust scheme has only
made Pounds 10,202, while the average with-profits endowment has made Pounds
11,942, from total premiums paid of Pounds 6,000. Capital gains tax, for
which figures are hard to obtain, would increase the gap.
Over 20 years the trend is reversed and the few unit trusts which have been
going this long have managed to produce an average of Pounds 60,300 before
tax, compared with Pounds 54,274 for endowments - from total premiums of
Pounds 12,000.
So, for less experienced investors, life policies look decent value. Over
relatively short terms, those not confident in their ability to choose a
good unit trust are best sticking with an endowment.
But then comes the next statistical headache - the introduction of Peps.
Calculating results for Pep savings schemes is a nightmare.
But Money Management has produced lump sum figures for 314 unit and 57
investment trust Peps over the last five years. Top performer is Newton
income, which has turned Pounds 1,000 into Pounds 1,956. This would have
been Pounds 1,840 in a non-Pep version, showing that unit trust performance
is considerably enhanced in a Pep.
The problem? Five years is a very unflattering period over which to judge an
equity investment, thanks to the stock market crash of 1987, and 59 unit
trust Peps have actually lost money over five years. Those same market
conditions are also putting with-profits bonuses under threat.
Most sane individuals should now have keeled over with statistical overload.
Perhaps you will have to rely on logic.
Logic shows that with a Pep you will pay less tax, enjoy greater
flexibility, avoid paying for life cover and have the chance of long-term
out-performance. If you are very cautious, the ten-year figures show that
the life offices can still provide good value, in spite of tax burdens
imposed and the need to produce life cover.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920627

