FT922-527

FT  27 JUN 92 / Standard Chartered suspends key man


   By R C MURTHY and DAVID BARCHARD


   BOMBAY, LONDON


THE chief executive of Standard Chartered's Indian operations, Mr Parvesh S.
Nat, has been relieved from duty until the end of the investigation into
India's worst-ever securities market scandal.
This follows the arrest earlier this week of nine people, including two
leading brokers in Bombay, and the dismissal of two Standard Chartered
securities dealers at its Bombay office. Mr David Gardiner, executive
director, corporate banking, will take over until Mr Nat's future is
decided.
Standard Chartered, a UK-based international bank, announced on June 12 that
it was launching criminal proceedings in India to recover Rs8.9bn (Pounds
171m) from brokers and others believed to have defrauded it through the
securities market in Bombay.
Last night the bank confirmed Mr Nat had been suspended but declined to
comment. His suspension follows an allegation in court yesterday by a lawyer
of Mr Arvind Lal, one of the two Standard Chartered dismissed officials,
that a cheque for Rs1.04m had been issued by Mr Hiten Dalal, a broker, to Mr
Nat's wife.
Mr Dalal was one of the nine people arrested early this week and he and the
others are currently petitioning for bail from a special court set up by the
Indian government.
The possibility that Mr Nat, one of India's best respected bankers, may have
been involved in the securities market scandal, shocked the financial
community in Bombay yesterday. Mr Nat is a career banker in his fifties who
has spent nearly three decades with Standard Chartered, holding senior
positions in its operations in India and the Gulf. He was previously the
manager of the UAE operation in Dubai.
Standard Chartered has already had to make provisions of Pounds 50m against
possible losses as a result of the scandal. Its total exposure is thought to
be around Pounds 100m. The total losses to the nine banks hit by the fraud,
are thought to total around Rs. 30.8bn.
Earlier this month, the Indian government gave itself powers to seize the
assets of brokers and others suspected of fraud in order to assist Standard
Chartered and other banks recover much of the money owed to them without
having to resort to court action.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920627

