FT921-12045

FT  29 JAN 92 / Family quarrel at Bundesbank: The ructions that have
followed Maastricht


   By DAVID MARSH


Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the president of the Bundesbank, is not used to being
called a softie. Over the years, the long-time vice-president of the German
central bank, who took over the top job after the resignation of Mr Karl
Otto Pohl last August, has built up a reputation for being a hard-nosed and
sometimes dogmatic monetary technocrat.
During the last few weeks, however, Mr Schlesinger has come under growing
criticism within the ranks of the Bundesbank's 16-man policymaking council.
Some members accuse him of being too compliant in supporting the European
Monetary Union deal agreed by Chancellor Helmut Kohl at the Maastricht
summit last month.
Mr Kohl bowed to French and Italian pressure by giving his blessing to a
timetable for Emu which would bring about the demise of the D-Mark by the
end of the century. But he failed to achieve his stated target of linking
the move with European political union.
In the months before the summit, Mr Kohl had insisted - with Bundesbank
support - that Europe could adopt a single currency only if there was a
parallel move to a federal state. There is strong economic and political
logic to Mr Kohl's position, as monetary union is likely to be practicable
only if there is centralised fiscal control in Europe.
Only a week before Maastricht, Mr Kohl said publicly that he would not
accept giving up Germany's monetary sovereignty if the goal of political
union remained simply a 'castle in the air'. In fact, 'castle in the air' is
a good description of the relatively vague commitment to political union
that emerged.
In the past, Mr Schlesinger has made it clear that he, too, believes that
monetary union without political union will not work. Since Maastricht, his
comments on the Emu deal have been restrained; his critics on the council
say he should have been more vigorous in pointing out loopholes.
In recent weeks, several influential council members, ranging from Mr
Wilhelm Nolling, the Social Democrat chief of the Hamburg central bank, to
Mr Lothar Muller, the conservative Bavarian representative, have declared
their scepticism over Maastricht - effectively challenging Mr Schlesinger to
do the same.
After a long discussion at last Thursday's council meeting, the Bundesbank
intends to publish a special declaration next month on the Maastricht
outcome. Although the language will be cautious, the misgivings over the
lack of progress on political union are expected to be clear.
The family quarrel among the council members also has implications for
current interest rate policy. Bundesbank insiders say that disquiet over Emu
played a part in determining the size of the Bundesbank's pre-Christmas rate
rises, which upset the rest of Europe. The discount and Lombard rates both
rose by  1/2 point: Mr Schlesinger had favoured a  1/4 point increase in the
Lombard, partly because of the international sensitivity, but was overruled
by a majority of seven to six. (There were two abstentions, and one member
of the council was absent.)
There was a strong body of opinion on the council that Mr Kohl's agreement
to a firm date for the start of Emu made it vital for the Bundesbank to to
emphasise its anti-inflation credentials. Pointing to concern about
Germany's 4 per cent inflation rate and high wage claims, one council member
said yesterday: 'If Germany does not have price stability, the rest of
Europe cannot be stable. A high inflation rate in Germany leads to higher
inflation in the rest of Europe.'
Understandably, the Bundesbank is trying to keep the dispute as far as
possible under wraps. The issue of the Bundesbank's degree of independence
from government caused ructions during the 1990 introduction of the D-Mark
into east Germany. It was one of the factors behind the acrimony between Mr
Pohl and Mr Kohl that helped spur Mr Pohl's departure last year. Charges
that the Bundesbank is trying to interfere in a political process are one
reason for Mr Schlesinger's diplomatic silence in the last few weeks.
The row over German monetary union centred on the conditions under which the
Bundesbank would extend the sovereignty of its monetary policy eastwards.
This time the debate is potentially far more virulent: how and when the
D-Mark would be abandoned in return for a new European currency.
The Bundesbank's misgivings about giving up the D-Mark appear to be shared,
according to opinion polls, by a large percentage of the German population.
The Bundesbank cannot - and indeed does not want to - sabotage Emu directly,
but it can contribute to a climate of opinion in which parliamentary
ratification of the Maastricht treaty becomes difficult.

The Financial Times


London Page 18 Photograph Schlesinger, accused of being too compliant
(Omitted).

920129

