FT924-8121

FT  12 NOV 92 / UK-German initiative on Bosnians


   By DAVID MARSH and AGENCIES


BRITAIN and Germany yesterday announced joint action to ease the plight of
Bosnian refugees trapped after fleeing fighting in the former Yugoslavia.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, the German foreign minister, said after bilateral talks
near Oxford, England, that his country was ready to take 1,000 of the
roughly 6,000 people marooned in camps on the border with Croatia. Mr
Douglas Hurd, British foreign secretary, said Britain would take 150 heads
of families from the camps, making, with dependents, a total of around 400.
Mr Hurd said the EC foreign ministers discussed the refugees' predicament at
their meeting on Monday, and expressed 'willingness to do more'.
Mr Kinkel pointed out that Germany was already bearing the main burden of
dealing with refugees trying to escape the fighting by fleeing outside the
borders of former Yugoslavia. But he said Bonn was determined that the camps
should be cleared before winter set in.
In Sarajevo, the planned evacuation of thousands of people from the besieged
Bosnian capital appeared to be ready to resume yesterday after it was halted
by the local military commander on security grounds.
The Bosnian military, citing security concerns, ordered a halt to convoys
leaving Sarajevo on Tuesday after 1,500 Moslems and Croats had left for the
Croatian Adriatic port town of Split and a bus-load of Serbs had headed
north for Belgrade.
Hundreds of other people wanting to go to Belgrade were left milling around
the city centre after the Red Cross, which is organising the exodus, failed
to provide any more buses or drivers. After spending the night in freezing
cold outside the main railway station one bus and six cars left for Belgrade
after midday yesterday, and the Red Cross assured the waiting crowd other
buses were on the way and they would all get out. Red Cross officials said
they had been assured by the UN forces that they would keep open the airport
road, a notoriously dangerous stretch known as 'Sniper Alley', until last
night for the convoy to pass.
As was the case on Tuesday, most of the evacuees were elderly who said they
were as much concerned about surviving the winter as the war.
The Bosnian Red Cross expects to remove 6,000 people altogether, but not
able-bodied men of fighting age, 18 to 60, who have been banned from
leaving. Rival Moslem, Croat and Serb forces refrained from serious military
action ahead of a ceasefire due to come into force at midnight last night,
Bosnian radio reported.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921112

