FT924-907

FT  21 DEC 92 / Common thread of reform


   By IAN DAVIDSON


The separation of Prince Charles and Princess Diana, we are told, will have
no constitutional consequences for the UK. Some people have found it
difficult to believe these assurances, even though they have been pronounced
with the greatest solemnity in the House of Commons by the prime minister.
Indeed, it is difficult to believe something which is impossible, especially
if (like Alice in Wonderland) one is out of practice in believing impossible
things. We should just recall the first rule of British official doxology,
that no part of the constitution (whatever that may be) can ever be changed,
for fear that the whole of it should have to be changed immediately.
In other European countries people are less rigid about these things. As a
matter of fact, constitutional reform is in the air in several European
countries this Christmas, most notably in France, Germany and Italy. In each
of these three countries the changes adopted or under discussion should
improve the effectiveness of their parliamentary democracies.
It is not a coincidence that constitutional reform is now under way in these
countries. Directly or indirectly, the common thread is Europe. France and
Germany have reformed or are reforming their constitutions to adapt to the
requirements of the Maastricht treaty, including achieving the objective of
economic and monetary union (Emu). But in the process, they are also
introducing extra changes which will strengthen the role of their national
parliaments.
In addition, President Francois Mitterrand has also called for discussion of
a second and quite separate set of constitutional reform proposals, along
lines he first elaborated a year ago. Critics say that his main objective is
to embarrass the opposition in the run-up to the March elections; yet his
proposals should strengthen the role of the parliament and might reduce the
overweening role of the French president.
The Italian context appears quite different. The heart of its problem is a
system of political parties through which patronage and corruption have
brought public finances to the verge of bankruptcy and the state to the edge
of the abyss. The longstanding parliamentary monopoly of the dominant
Christian Democrats and their revolving coalition partners on the
centre-left was deeply shaken in the April general elections. Soon
afterwards, the feudal powers of the parties were severely weakened by
judicial revelations of wholesale corruption. The power of the Lombard
League party, which denounces the decadence of the traditional political
establishment and challenges the integrity of the Italian state, is growing
fast.
It may be thought that Italy's political bosses had it coming to them,
sooner or later. Yet the European nexus has also played its part. The most
consistent consensus in Italy is on the central importance of the EC. If
Prime Minister Giuliano Amato is managing to make heroic cuts in the budget
deficit, it is partly because failure to do so would keep Italy out of Emu.
When the constitutional reform plan is finally hammered out, it will
probably include limits on proportional representation in an effort to stem
political fragmentation, as well as reform of parliamentary rules to
strengthen government decision-making. But the most interesting idea under
discussion would be a move towards a more federal system, in which the
competences of the national state would be explicitly defined, and the
regions would be given taxation powers to run everything else.
In France and Germany, the national parliaments have used the pressure to
ratify the Maastricht treaty as a lever to seize more powers for themselves.
The French government will be required to table proposals for EC
legislation, on which the National Assembly and the Senate would be able to
pass resolutions. The Senate has also secured a veto over the granting of
votes to EC citizens in French local elections.
The German parliament has laid down that any move towards European union
must secure a two-thirds majority in both the Bundestag and the Bundesrat.
The European committee of the Bundestag will have to be consulted on all
proposals for Community legislation; and the Bundesrat has gone even further
than the French Senate, by securing the right to be consulted whenever the
provincial responsibilities of the lander are affected. Finally, the
Bundestag can stop any move to a single European currency if the house is
not satisfied that the treaty conditions have been met.
In France, public comment (and private mockery) have focused on President
Mitterrand's proposals to shorten the presidential term, which is currently
seven years. In the event, however, he has timidly suggested a six-year
term, which will change little. More interesting is a proposal to spell out
explicitly the respective policy responsibilities of the president and the
government, which should limit the temptations for the president to behave
like an absolute monarch.
The European thread in all these reforms is clear. The Maastricht model for
the next phase of European integration would require unprecedented assent
from Europe's voters. The French and Danish referenda, and polls in other
countries, show that popular support is either lacking or ambivalent. Most
parliaments have manifestly fallen short, or have not been allowed to act,
as the interface between the Community and the electorate. If there is a
democratic deficit, it cannot be filled by the European Parliament.
Therefore the national parliaments must play a bigger role in providing
political legitimacy. And about time too.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

921221

