FT924-1037

FT  21 DEC 92 / When only the small karaoke machines are sold out . . .:
Gary Mead misses the jingle of tills in the absence of feverish Christmas
shopping


   By GARY MEAD


   THE car park at Lakeside


the 2m sq ft retail complex some 20 miles along the Thames east of London -
was bursting at the seams yesterday. But it would still have been possible
to take a comfortable nap in some stores. People were shopping, but with
caution rather than fierce passion.
Yesterday, no one was struggling out of the stores, bent double under a mass
of plastic bags.
Apart from a few key areas, particularly toy, game and electrical goods
shops, there was a sense almost of tranquillity. No elbowing and shoving to
get at the counters; no trouble finding sales staff; no difficulty finding
'sale' signs.
'We tend to peak at the beginning of December,' said Ms Heather Davis,
Lakeside's marketing manager. November was a good month, with turnover for
the whole complex - 280 shops - up 20 per cent on November 1991, Ms Davis
said, although she declined to give cash figures.
Lakeside has 250,000 shoppers on a typical week, with each adult spending an
average of Pounds 64 a visit. During the Christmas build-up, the visitors
increase to 350,000 a week and the average adult outlay doubles to about
Pounds 130.
The mood of shoppers yesterday was cautious. 'We might spend Pounds
150-Pounds 200 today, a bit more than last year,' said Mr Toby Howlett and
Ms Joanie St Cliere. Mr John Gittings and Ms Sandra Owen said: 'We've just
come to look around. We're definitely spending less than last year. We're
both working, but it is tighter than last year - we've cut out lots of
treats.'
Mr Derek Summers said: 'My wife and I are here today to look for some
bargains. This year is tougher than last, absolutely, tougher all round.
That's shown in the fact that all the sales are on before Christmas.'
Another shopper, Mr Stan Kinnear, agreed: 'Since when have (the shops) had
sales giving 10 and 20 per cent off just before Christmas? I don't really
see any signs of recovery.'
Some shops were clearly trading well. 'We've sold out of small karaoke
machines (Pounds 80) but we've got some of the big ones (Pounds 120) left,'
said a salesman at Dixons. Some shops were clearly attracting plenty of
browsers, at least. The Leading Edge, selling trendy gizmos and gadgets, was
packed, as was Game, selling electronic and board games.
But at lunchtime, the BhS outlet looked very empty, with signs offering '
1/3 off dinner sets' and '20 per cent off bedding collections'.
Sale signs particularly dominated the windows of clothing stores; Richards
were offering 'half price off many items'.
In Superdrug the aisles were almost empty; the one counter doing strong
trade seemed to be that offering 'up to 30 per cent off fine fragrances'.
In House of Fraser, the empty children's clothing section had signs offering
'25 per cent off'; its bedding, furniture, perfumery and women's clothing
sections were a paradise of peace and tranquillity.
Mr Peter Doherty, House of Fraser's store manager, said: 'Our growth
compared to last Christmas has been very good, with 30 per cent increases.
We've found that the browsing was happening in late October and now people
are here only if they are buying.'
Mr Bob Kurring, chairman of Lakeside's merchants' association said: 'It's
busier than we thought it was going to be, and Sundays have helped
enormously. But people have looked for value all the way through. Any
high-priced goods have been very slow.'
Meanwhile, outside a shop called Data Base, Father Christmas was
determinedly upbeat: 'There seems to be a lot more money about than people
like to let on.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921221

