FT923-6412

FT  25 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Bush's China trade policy a sure winner


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE new hardening of US trade policy towards China is a sure winner for
President George Bush. As Mrs Carla Hills, US trade representative, made
clear last week, either China caves in by October 10 and agrees to US
demands that it should open its markets, or Mr Bush will announce billions
of dollars in sanctions.
If China does yield to US pressure, the president will have another foreign
and economic policy success; if not, Mr Bush can prove that he is no longer
rolling over to the communist superpower as he did in the days after the
Tiananmen Square pro-democracy demonstrations were suppressed.
How tough the sanctions will be must still be seen. The American Textile
Manufacturers Institute is convinced the administration was 'pulling its
punches' when last week it released a Dollars 3.9bn (Pounds 2bn) proposed
'hit list' of possible sanctions targets.
The list had been drawn up in response to industry comment from all sectors
as the trade representative had requested. Honey made the list, as the
American Honey Producers' Association had asked, as did bicycles and other
targets suggested by their industry associations, but textiles and apparel
were barely represented, though both have been severely hit over the years
by Chinese competition.
'We never received any good reasons why we were turned down,' said Mr Carlos
Moore, executive director of the American Textile Institute. 'They claimed
the consumer would be hurt because it would create short supply, but we took
care to ask for products which could have substitutes readily available.'
Instead, the list included only silk, or apparel with a silk component
(items for which demand exists all over the world), Mr Moore said. The other
items on the list are now more easily transshipped through third countries,
because the US Customs Service has focused most of its efforts on textiles
and clothing.
In an election campaign, one of the advantages of being an incumbent
president is the ability to control timing, Mr Harry Freeman, a prominent
trade lobbyist, said.
It was no coincidence that the North American Free Trade Agreement between
the US, Canada and Mexico was announced the week before the Republican
convention. An administration press aide confirmed the White House had had
the Nafta press conference scheduled during 'a window of opportunity' in the
president's schedule, even before the negotiations were completed.
The administration had promised a worker adjustment programme would be
included in Nafta legislation, but a few weeks ago it had only begun to
gather opinions about its shape. Yesterday, however, Mr Bush announced a
grand restructuring of worker training schemes, a move he could have made
months ago except there was no political campaign to drive events.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920825

