FT921-629

FT  28 MAR 92 / Books: Schoolgirl in a timewarp - FT Children's Book of the
Month


   By MICHAEL GLOVER


CHARLOTTE SOMETIMES by Penelope Farmer The Bodley Head Pounds 8.99, 200
pages
THE SCHOOL story is a mould into which many writers for children have poured
their unequal talents - Talbot Baines Reed, whose Fifth Form at St Dominic's
established many of the most familiar features of the genre in the late 19th
century, to the noisy, up-to-the-minute battlefields of Grange Hill. This
month the Bodley Head has re-published what can fairly be described as a
contemporary classic of the genre, Charlotte Sometimes by Penelope Farmer, a
writer whose first book, The Summer Birds, was short-listed for the Carnegie
Medal.
Charlotte Sometimes was first published in 1969, but the feel of the story
and its narrative density suggest an even earlier epoch. It is Charlotte
Mary Makepeace's first day at her new boarding school, a day full of
loneliness and misgivings. First into the dormitory, she is given the pick
of the beds and chooses an old-fashioned and yet oddly appealing thing with
cast-iron wagon-wheels.
When she wakes up the following morning, the view from Charlotte's window is
shockingly different from what she remembered. The school's new brick
extension has been replaced by the spreading arms of a dark and ancient
cedar tree and the hump in the bed beside hers (which proves to be a funny,
abrupt creature by the name of Emily) insists on calling Charlotte by a
different name, while all the time emphasising that Charlotte, is in fact
Emily's sister, Clare.
The shocking truth is that Charlotte has travelled back in time to a school
which is now caught up in the dreary regimen of the Great War. Instead of
neatly-mown lawns, there are market gardens teeming with cabbages, and,
flying from the school gates, a pair of faded Union Jacks. Everything about
the place is strict, drab, austere, scarce and nasty - from the ferocious,
starch-aproned Nurse Gregory to the meagre, disgusting rations.
The next morning, however, Charlotte wakes to discover that she has been
catapulted back into the late 1950s again, and for that dispensation she
feels mightily relieved - both for her own sake and that of her younger
sister, Emma. Unfortunately, the next day she finds herself again in that
same world of cold-tar soap, fizzing gas burner and photographs of dead
young men. And so it goes on, day after troubling day, this shuttling back
and forth in time, with the one girl taking the place of the other.
Then a terrible thing happens. Clare's status is changed to that of a
day-girl. She and Emily will be moved out of the school - and the magical
bed left behind. Unfortunately, the move takes place on the wrong day and
Charlotte finds herself stuck in the past, boarding with a family that has
lost its son to the battlefields of France.
Her loneliness and desperation increase when, some days after her arrival,
the family call upon a medium in an attempt to get in touch with their dead
soldier-son - but it is the voice of Clare, Emily's sister, that escapes
from the medium's mouth, screaming out to her. Clare - like Charlotte
herself - is locked, sorrowing, into an alien age, desperate to claw her way
back to her sister in the past.
Some of the details of the novel bring to mind Tom's Midnight Garden, that
children's classic of the late 1950s, in which time-travel plays a crucial
part. But Penelope Farmer's ability to write as if from deep within the mind
of an 11-year-old girl, to delve into her emotional anxieties, to capture
with such sureness the emotional vicissitudes of the relationship between a
real girl and her ghostly counterpart in the past, and even to give great
symbolic importance to small, individual details - the glass of water that
Emily fills with marbles, the huge handbell, rung on Armistice Day, that
proves so disappointingly to have a 'dull, small, thudding sound' - set this
profound, disturbing and intellectually-challenging novel in a category of
its own.
It is a piece of taut narrative writing that moves and troubles in almost
exactly equal proportions.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920328

