FT922-4184

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: Off the Wall - Heritage wagered on tax advantages


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


   IT ALWAYS seemed highly unlikely


Heritage Secretary David Mellor's pledge that he would go into purdah for
three months, mugging up on his briefs before he played God in his empire of
fun: the arts, heritage and sport. He enjoys doing things too much.
This week Mellor acted, and it is good news for art connoisseurs who support
Halifax Town Football Club. Wearing his cloth cap, as sports supremo, he
decreed that lower division clubs will not have to convert their terraces to
expensive seating, and, swiftly donning his top hat, he disclosed yesterday
that he was abandoning the policy of his predecessor, Tim Renton, that there
should be a list of art works of such national importance that they could
never be exported.
The idea of a List was at odds with Tory theology that owners could do what
they liked with their own; it also precipitated a flood of important Old
Master pictures on to the market - just in case the list became law and
reduced the value of their property. In short order a Holbein, a Canaletto
and two Rembrandts were allotted from aristocratic collections to the
salerooms. Mellor has stopped all this nonsense.
Instead of a list, he is promoting the alternatives. There are the
acceptance-in-lieu and private treaty sale schemes, with tax advantages if
heritage minded owners sell their works of art to museums rather than take a
gamble on the salerooms. There is Gift Aid, which to date has been more of
an idea than a reality. There is the financially bolstered National Heritage
Fund which helped save the Holbein for the National Gallery.
But significantly Mellor took on board the recommendations of Jonathan
Scott, chairman of the Export Committee on Works of Art. Last year the
Committee had its arm twisted and reluctantly came down in favour of a list
of unexportable treasures. What it really wanted was an extra Pounds
15m-Pounds 20m a year for the Heritage Fund from the Government. This would
enable it to keep in the UK most of the major works of art threatened with
export. Mellor did not promise an uplift, but he said that he would do his
darndest to get the money from the Treasury. In the longer, 1994 term, of
course, revenue from a national lottery would come to the aid of the
heritage.
Mellor is confident that he can save the Lottery from the claw of the
Treasury. He envisages an income of up to Pounds 1.5b a year, with tax,
administration and prizes consuming not much more than half this sum. The
arts, heritage and sport will receive fixed percentages of the remainder,
with a little going to charities and the Millennium Fund. All the
government's plans for the arts depend upon a successful Lotteries Act.
                         *      *      *
So farewell Basildon Theatre - there is more drama at your passing than
anything that appeared on your stage. The decision by the newly elected
Conservative council in the Essex town to make its first act the curtailing
of its annual grant of Pounds 425,000 to the Towngate Theatre must have sent
a shiver through all the other local authority funded theatres. The Towngate
proved the point that such a theatre could not survive without subsidy by
peremptorily closing down.
But by a happy chance, just as one theatre in a London satellite town goes
under another surfaces. The curtain rises on the New Victoria, the main
auditorium at the Peacocks Arts & Entertainment Centre in Woking next
Tuesday. Here is a very different approach to supplying the cultural needs
of the community - Woking has handed over the job to private enterprise by
insisting that an arts centre was included in the retail development of the
town. The Peacocks has two theatres, three cinemas, a nightclub, a couple of
restaurants and a library.
The most interesting part is the main theatre which, with 1300 seats, is the
largest to be built in the UK for years. Suddenly Woking, from being a
hotbed of amateur theatricals, becomes the natural last post for plays bound
for the West End. On June 16 Shades by Sharman Macdonald (of When I was a
girl . fame) opens there, starring Pauline Collins and directed by Simon
Callow, prior to London. With its big potential box office, technical
facilities and nearness to London (which means that a cast does not have to
be bed and boarded), Woking will soon become familiar to critics, actors and
theatrical groupies.
The New Victoria is run by Woking Turnstyle, a subsidiary of Howard Panter's
Turnstyle Group. He has forged links with the Theatre Royal Bath, and aims
to produce three or four new productions a year to visit these two, and
other theatres. New drama product is in short supply and regional theatres
increasingly depend on touring ballet companies to pay the bills: the New
Victoria's first offering is the Northern Ballet Theatre's controversial
Swan Lake. Panter is also talking to Glyndebourne Opera, which is interested
in alternative venues during 1993 while its new auditorium is being
constructed.
                         *      *      *
The attendance on the first day of the Olympia Antiques Fair on Thursday
approached 6,000, almost double the level of a year ago. How very wise of
the antique collecting classes] This Olympia is bursting at the seams, with
400 dealers desperate to sell. Business in the past 18 months has been
abysmal, and if they cannot shift stock during the next eight days it could
be curtains for many dealers. So get haggling.
Olympia panders to the middle market. On Wednesday the Grosvenor House Fair
opens, geared to big money collectors. Its symbol this year is a bronze
American 19th century weathervane, shaped as an Indian archer. It is on loan
from the American Museum at Bath and symbolises the Grosvenor theme, '500
Years of American patronage', a brave ploy to tempt over American buyers,
absent in recent years. By a nice irony an identical archer can currently be
bought in London - for Pounds 16,500 from John Bird and Lennox Catto's stand
at Olympia.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

920606

