FT921-14371

FT  16 JAN 92 / Coca-Cola claims first US-owned private sector company in
Russia


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


COCA-COLA will today announce in Moscow the formation of Coca-Cola
Refreshments-Moscow (CCRM). It claims CCRM is the first private sector joint
stock company in Russia that will be majority controlled by a US
multinational corporation.
The new company will manufacture soft drink syrups as well as control a
retail distribution network, which will begin operations in 18 months with
400 kiosks in the greater Moscow area. The ultimate target is 2,000 retail
outlets.
Mr Neville Isdell, president of the Coca-Cola division that covers eastern
Europe, said the significance of the Moscow company 'is that for the first
time we will have a fully integrated system for consumer goods, all the way
through to the individual consumer.'
Coca-Cola will own more than 95 per cent of the shares in CCRM. The
remaining shares will be held by Professor SN Fyodorov, a Russian
businessman.
Coca-Cola's initial capital investment of Dollars 12m (Pounds 6.7m) is
small, but Mr Gavriil Popov, the mayor of Moscow, said the investment should
stimulate economic activity. He said it would 'attract additional
international investment and would signal to others that the City of Moscow
is ready to do business.'
Coca Cola said the new syrup plant, to be built on a five-acre site, would
create 200 jobs.
Pepsi-Cola, the second largest US soft drinks company, sells its product by
licence agreement with some 40 state bottling companies. Mr Christopher
Sinclair, president of Pepsi-Cola, said the company was negotiating new
joint ventures in the former Soviet Union, including a resin fibre producing
venture in Belarus that would manufacture plastic bottles.
The first Coca-Cola product available in the Soviet Union was Fanta Orange
in 1979. Soviet state bottling companies began making Coca-Cola in 1985.
Mr Isdell said Coca-Cola would provide the new retailing force with
equipment, training and management assistance.
Ascent of Everest, Page 13

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920116

