FT922-7303

FT  19 MAY 92 / Parliament and Politics: Senior Tory seeks key Euro post


   By ALISON SMITH


SIR PETER HORDERN, MP for Horsham, is to be the 'elder statesman' candidate
for chairmanship of the Tory backbench European affairs committee, and many
colleagues are tipping him to get the post even if the election is
contested.
Elections to the Tory backbench committees are usually low-key, but the EC
affairs committee rose to unprecedented prominence last November when Sir
Norman Fowler, now the Tory party chairman, stood and won against the former
incumbent, Mr William Cash, MP for Stafford and a noted Euro-sceptic.
Downing Street officially played no part in the contest, but was clearly
satisfied with Sir Norman's victory.
Mr Cash is said to be considering whether to stand in the forthcoming
contest, which will take place on June 3.
Although the present election is most unlikely to reach last November's
dizzy heights of activity and notoriety, Sir Peter would certainly be a
reassuring presence as the official voice of backbench opinion so far as the
government is concerned.
The Maastricht bill will have received its second reading by the time of the
elections, but the future of European union will still be in front of MPs
during the summer, as the legislation is considered in detail.
Sir Peter has been an MP since 1964 and is a long-standing member of the
1922 committee of Tory backbenchers. In the last parliament he was chairman
of the Public Accounts Commission, a cross-party committee that oversees the
National Audit Office's spending plans.
He describes himself as a convinced Maastricht supporter who is very anxious
to keep the party together. He said that the committee has to be 'a very
reasonable one, listening to every point of view, and making sure that it is
not taken over by one faction or another'.
The elections will not take place until the Commons re-assembles after the
Whitsun break, but the preparations are in hand now as MPs disperse for the
recess on Thursday.
One Euro-sceptic suggested yesterday that they should not bother putting
forward a candidate on the ground that they were likely to lose, and would
be better employed organising themselves for the rest of the bill's passage.
The government yesterday signalled that it might accept the European
Community's controversial proposal for a 48-hour maximum working week - if
individuals are given the right to choose to work longer hours.
Mrs Gillian Shephard, the employment secretary, said a proposed EC directive
should include a clause allowing people to work more than 48 hours 'on their
own free will and in agreement with management and workforce'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920519

