FT922-4353

FT  05 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: European fault line unearths
divisions - The mood in a much divergent Labour camp


   By IVO DAWNAY


MR George Robertson, Labour's staunchly pro-Community European spokesman,
was touting his solution to the Danish question on a crumpled postcard
yesterday.
It read: 'Danish referendum Number Two: Do you agree to change your mind on
the Maastricht treaty?' Underneath were two boxes - both marked: 'Yes.'
Mr Robertson's chuckles could not disguise the fact that the crisis has
provoked a reassessment of the policy quandaries facing his party. Last
month, the party leadership had to watch some 60 of its MPs defy a
three-line whip and oppose the second reading of the Maastricht Bill.
Now the Danish decision can only be expected to widen what Mr Robertson
concedes is a 'European fault line that runs through both parties'. Party
business managers agree that on Europe, they have little control over the
rank and file. Moreover, there is a growing momentum behind the view that
Labour should press for a referendum if the government persists in pushing
on with the ratification process.
With Labour freed from the pre-electoral discipline demanded by the outgoing
leadership, its internal divisions over Europe are potentially as
wide-ranging as those of its Tory opponents. They are just less on public
view.
The parliamentary party's position is further confused by tactical
considerations over how to maximise Labour's advantage in the Commons and
the additional complication arising from the leadership election still
rumbling on in the corridors and tearooms or Westminster.
Nonetheless, the jubilation with which the result of the Danish vote was
greeted among some backbench Labour MPs indicates that internal opposition
to the leadership's firmly pro-EC line is more deeply seated than might
initially have seemed the case.
And while the pure anti-community fundamentalists may count for little more
than 20 or so of Labour's 269 MPs, many more would agree with those such as
Mr Nigel Spearing who said: 'It is possible the high tide of centralist
European thought in the Labour party has now been reached.'
Yesterday Mr Robertson - known to his opponents as 'The Ambassador from
Strasbourg' - was more cautious. He suggested that the first requirement
before any policy conclusions are drawn was to ascertain the legal status of
the treaty: that is, whether it is now dead or not.
Others believe there is a new opportunity to prosecute Labour's vision of
Europe.
A motion tabled by prominent 'soft-left' MPs last night - most of them
avowedly pro-Europeans - called for the reopening of talks on the largely
monetary criteria for economic convergence.
That view was echoed by Mr Bryan Gould, who argued in a speech to his
constituency that the terms agreed, and endorsed by Labour, were 'seriously
defective' and would hand Europe over to the non-accountable 'exclusive
control of central bankers'. Later he said Labour should vote against the
Maastricht bill if it returned to the Commons.
Mr John Prescott, the deputy leadership contender, said that the Maastricht
treaty was dead and that the UK should now pursue a free-trading Europe of
nation states.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920605

