FT924-786

FT  22 DEC 92 / Novell to purchase Unix for Dollars 350m


   By LOUISE KEHOE and ALAN CANE


   SAN FRANCISCO, LONDON


NOVELL, the largest publisher of software that links computers on networks,
has signed a letter of intent to acquire Unix Systems Laboratories, an AT&T
unit responsible for the licensing and development of the widely used Unix
computer operating system.
The proposed Dollars 350m (Pounds 230m) acquisition will have profound
implications for vendors and users of 'open systems' computers. It also
signals an intensifying battle between Novell and Microsoft, the world's
largest software company, over control of the market for operating systems
and networking software.
USL is 77 per cent owned by AT&T, which formed the unit in 1991 in response
to rising concerns about AT&T's control over development and licensing of
Unix, which has become the standard operating system for 'open systems' in
which computers from different manufacturers work together.
AT&T encouraged other computer companies to acquire minority stakes in USL
to provide them some control over the development of Unix.
Novell already owns 5 per cent of USL and 11 other computer-industry
companies together own 18 per cent. The deal has been approved by the boards
of Novell and AT&T, but it has not yet been approved by the other Unix
System Labs owners, which include Amdahl, Fujitsu, ICL, Motorola, NEC, Sun
Microsystems, Oki Electric, Olivetti and Toshiba. Initial reactions from
these ranged from 'neutral to positive' said Mr Roel Pieper, president and
chief executive of USL.
For AT&T and other USL shareholders, the exchange of shares will be tax
free. Based on current Novell stock price, AT&T expects to recognise a gain
in excess of Dollars 100m and will own about 3 per cent of Novell's stock.
Novell will account for the transaction as a purchase and expects to record
a write-off of Dollars 250m.
Mr Peter Stuart, head of midrange marketing strategy for ICL, the UK-based
computer company which has been a European leader in open systems, said it
was beneficial that USL's owner should be a software house which understood
the business and had a long-term view of the market. It would be
disadvantageous if Novell attempted to focus on the desk-top.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921222

