FT921-15453

FT  10 JAN 92 / From tight corner to high wire: The chancellor is beginning
to prepare his Budget under heavy political pressure


   By PETER NORMAN


British chancellors of the exchequer do not usually attract much sympathy.
The person responsible for taxing the nation must also cultivate an aura of
aloofness and gravity to reassure financial markets.
But it is difficult not to feel sorry for Mr Norman Lamont as he sets off
today for a two-day meeting with Treasury ministers and senior officials at
Chevening in Kent to start preparing his second Budget in March. Decisions
made before the chancellor's appointment in November 1990 give him little
scope to revive Britain's depressed economy, even though its plight is
central to campaigning for the general election that must be held by July.
Mr Lamont is boxed into a very tight corner.
Britain's membership of the European Monetary System has placed monetary
policy largely in the hands of the Bundesbank. The sharp increase in German
interest rates before Christmas and sterling's position at the bottom of the
EMS exchange rate mechanism mean that he has little hope of repeating last
year's feat of cutting interest rates before the Budget.
The chancellor's scope for fiscal action - already limited by the move back
into budget deficit this year - may be further constrained following his
admission that the growth forecasts in last November's Autumn Statement were
'over-optimistic'. That implies lower tax revenues and higher benefit
payments and is bad news for the government's finances in 1992-93.
Unlike previous Conservative chancellors since 1979, Mr Lamont must draw up
his Budget during a fierce election campaign. The 1983 and 1987 Budgets were
announced before it was clear that there would be an election in those
years. The prime minister's decision to leave polling day until the final
year of this parliament raises the already strong political pressures on the
chancellor.
Mr Lamont has also excluded various policy options - in part to reassure
financial markets and partly from political conviction.
He has rejected devaluation of sterling in the EMS, even in the context of a
broad realignment of member currencies.
He has ruled out emergency measures to give the economy a boost, even though
the government has powers temporarily to lower value added tax and so
stimulate consumption.
The chancellor has insisted that the government's pre-Christmas move to
abolish stamp duty on most house sales until August does not presage a more
active fiscal policy.
At a meeting this week of the National Economic Development Council he
stressed the government's commitment to a balanced budget over the medium
term and rejected calls for emergency state spending on training and
infrastructure.
In the face of continuing bad news about the economy and pressure for the
government to 'do something' to boost activity, Mr Lamont has stuck to his
belief that lower inflation, rising real incomes, healthier corporate
finances and last year's fall in bank base rates to 10.5 per cent from their
previous 15 per cent peak will bring recovery this year.
In a normal year, Mr Lamont might have pursued his interest in tax reform in
the Budget. But this is unlikely in 1992 because of the election.
To some, Mr Lamont seems more like a harassed technocrat than a holder of
one of the great offices of state. 'By having made the decision to join the
EMS, it is questionable whether we need a chancellor,' scoffs Mr Jim
O'Neill, head of capital markets research at Swiss Bank Corporation.
However, the limitations on the chancellor's freedom of action do not mean
that his weekend in the elegant ancestral home of the Earls of Stanhope will
be limited to enjoying the food and listening to Treasury officials play
woodwind instruments.
Budget Day is, after all, one of the great events in the British political
calendar. If the Conservatives are to win the election, and so save the
careers of the prime minister and Mr Lamont, they must make it a success.
The political pressures on the chancellor are already apparent. Mr Lamont
was to be found this week in front of a large billboard in south London,
helping to launch the Conservative party's onslaught against Labour's tax
policies. Although he has so far ducked all questions about his own tax
plans, the Conservative campaign risks building up expectations of a tax
cutting Budget among ordinary voters and party activists that may have to be
disappointed.
Whether the government's finances can meet such expectations will be high on
the Chevening agenda. Here, the outlook may not be as bleak as implied by
the sluggishness of the economy.
of government gilt-edged securities have been strong in recent months,
suggesting that this year's public sector borrowing requirement will be
funded with ease, even if it exceeds the Pounds 10.5bn Autumn Statement
forecast. Although a bigger question-mark must now hang over the PSBR for
1992-93 (which is already expected to rise to around Pounds 20bn), the City
seems to have overcome its earlier fears that the UK might be heading for
several years of chronic deficit with the Conservatives in power.
Mr Lamont will therefore be studying some tax-cutting options at Chevening.
One of the most politically attractive must be cutting the basic rate of
income tax by one penny from 25 pence in the pound. This would inject funds
into the economy, mark out the Conservatives as the party of lower taxation
and put Labour on the spot by challenging the opposition to raise taxes
again, should it win the election.
However, a one penny tax cut would be expensive - costing Pounds 1.95bn in
the coming financial year. Its electoral appeal is uncertain. An opinion
poll for the Independent newspaper and BBC television's Newsnight programme
this week suggested that most voters would prefer higher spending on public
services.
Another option could be to raise the thresholds at which income is taxed by
more than the statutory rate of inflation. Such an increase in personal
allowances would have the advantage of taking some lower paid voters out of
taxation altogether. The cost to the Treasury of changing all main
allowances by 1 per cent would be Pounds 210m. With inflation at about 4 per
cent, it would therefore be relatively cheap to increase the allowances by,
perhaps, twice the rate of inflation. However, such an approach to tax
cutting has less political impact than a simple tax rate cut.
The Independent/Newsnight survey found that voters would prefer a lowering
of value added tax from its present 17.5 per cent to a cut in income taxes.
But VAT changes are expensive - a 1 percentage point change in the VAT rate
would cost Pounds 1.73bn in 1992-93. Any cut would also look like a
climbdown by Mr Lamont because he raised VAT in last year's Budget.
Like all chancellors, Mr Lamont has come under pressure from lobbying groups
to help industry by introducing tax incentives for investment or, in the
case of the motor industry, by abolishing the special car tax. The Treasury
has always been hostile to the first idea because it would undermine the
corporation tax reforms of the 1980s, while the car tax move would be
expensive, costing about Pounds 1.3bn.
A more imaginative approach for helping business has been put forward by Mr
Andrew Dilnot, the director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies. He suggests
easing the burden of the uniform business rate. This is levied on companies
whether they are making a profit or loss. The valuations underlying the rate
were based on the boom conditions of the late 1980s and are now hurting many
businesses, particularly in the south east, which have suffered declining
property values during the recession.
However, it is unlikely that Mr Lamont will make any final decisions about
taxes at Chevening. What is certain is that the meeting will mark the start
of a difficult period for the chancellor. On Sunday, Mr Lamont said: 'I am
determined to do everything I can to help the Conservative party to win the
election, but what I'm not prepared to do is take risks with the economy'.
His is a high-wire act, which the voters will judge later this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 13 Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph
(Omitted). Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted).

920110

