FT924-8215

FT  12 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Car distribution buy for Tibbett


   By ANGUS FOSTER


TIBBETT & Britten, a distributor and warehouser to the garment and retailing
industries, is moving into car distribution through the proposed acquisition
of Silcock Express, a private company.
Mr John Harvey, Tibbett's chairman, said the two companies had much in
common.
Both rely on long-term contracts and have developed added-value products in
distribution service.
Tibbett will pay an initial Pounds 31.2m to Mr Bernard Holmes, Silcock's
founding shareholder. Depending on Silcock's profitability up to 1994, the
maximum possible price will rise to Pounds 52.6m.
Tibbett is launching a 1-for-5 rights issue, underwritten by Hill Samuel, at
465p to raise Pounds 30.8m after expenses.
Mr Holmes will receive Pounds 7m of the initial consideration in new shares,
giving him a 3.5 per cent stake. This will leave the company Pounds 6.4m of
the rights money as working capital.
The stock market reacted well to the news. Tibbett's shares ended 1p lower
at 547p, after recovering from 535p.
Silcock operates about 550 transport vehicles and 31 rail wagons with
businesses in the UK, France, Belgium, Spain and Portugal.
As well as transport and storage service, Silcock provides special services
such as repairs, customisation and de-waxing. Its biggest clients are Ford,
Volkswagen/Audi and Peugeot.
Tibbett will use Silcock's European network to expand its distribution
services into Europe, where it is poorly represented. It also hopes to
introduce more sophisticated distribution and warehousing practices from the
retailing sector into car distribution.
Silcock made pre-tax profits of Pounds 5.8m on turnover of Pounds 94.5m in
the year to December 28.
Under the terms of the acquisition, the purchase price will be reduced if
Silcock's pre-tax profits this year fall below Pounds 5.5m or if
shareholders' funds are less than Pounds 15.2m by the year end.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921112

