FT924-6298

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: A narrow view of art - Gloom sets in as William Packer
views the Turner Prize candidates


   By WILLIAM PACKER


OH DEAR: round comes the Turner Prize again, and now we may all look forward
to Christmas, to cheer ourselves up. On Tuesday next, the English art world
assembles en fete at the Tate Gallery, to eat, drink and gossip, and to
witness the award of what should be contemporary art's most coveted prize.
The eighth Turner Prize will be awarded to 'a British artist under 50 for an
outstanding exhibition or other presentation of their (sic) work in the 12
months preceding 30 June 1992' runs the general citation, and what could be
fairer than that?
But wait a minute. As always, a representative if exiguous example of each
candidate's work has been on show at the Tate throughout the month, which is
where and when the gloom sets in. This is hardly the artists' fault.
Whatever the nature or quality of their work - and I shall come to that -
they were all put up by someone else, entered onto the short-list by the
jury, put on show by invitation and publicised further by the sponsor. And
in the longer term it is the artists themselves, good and bad alike, who
suffer for being so closely identified with the received attitudes and
prejudices of an evidently narrow-minded and exclusive curatorial club.
We live now in what the jargon has it are pluralistic times - which is only
to say that the old narrow and successive 'isms' of avant garde
pre-occupation have given way to a more open and catholic interest. If so,
it can only mean that the fellow sitting in the field, painting the
landscape, may be no less radical and true to himself and his times than the
severest conceptualist or the wildest neo-surrealist. What the Turner Prize
has been saying to us these eight years past is that, even so, the only
truly radical, relevant, essentially serious work can still only be of this
narrower sort - minimal, or conceptual, or conforming at least to the
international critical consensus.
Artists from two London dealers, d'Offay and Lisson, have dominated the
prize hitherto. Latterly, with the imposition of an age limit, half the
short-listed candidates have been recent graduates of a single art school,
Goldsmith's College. In eight years only two winners have been figurative
artists in any sense - Malcolm Morley and Gilbert & George - and only one
other short-listed as I remember - Stephen McKenna. So much for any generous
trawl through the currency of British art.
And who are entered in this year's Turner Stakes (Pounds 20,000 added)?
Grenville Davey (31) is a minimalist sculptor cited for the 'cool beauty'
that underlies 'his fascination with the form of the circle, and a refined
sensibility in the handling of materials.' He is showing a pair of tall
patinated steel cylinders, one somewhat dented, and a lower, kidney-shaped
bench topped with an inch or so of asphalt.
David Tremlett (47) has painted one wall of the gallery dark brown, with a
red border and an asymmetric, light-violet parallelogram in the middle. His
drawings 'appear abstract but often refer to architectural features, or
ground plans . . . His work marries a powerful feeling for pure form with an
equal response to earthy reality.' He is also showing a series of drawings
of three-letter words.
Damien Hirst (27) shows two wall cabinets loaded with fish, each specimen
set in its individual tank of formaldehyde. He also shows one of his larger
glass-and-steel cabinets, this significantly occupied by a pile of discarded
clothes, ash tray, plastic cup etcetera. 'His elaborate titles offer the
spectator the opportunity to construct a network of meanings, but his works
often confront us . . . with the stark facts of existence.'
Alison Wilding (44) is another minimalist, whose sculpture has moved away
from the oddly fetishistic and idiosyncratic as it has grown larger and more
self-conscious. Here are two tall curved metal sheets enclosing a red
perspex tube with a ball on top. She also shows a flat metal cover or
shelter as though drawn away to reveal an internal structure of slotted
perspex. She 'works slowly, moving towards the realisation in sculptural
form of deep-seated experience: 'I like to make something I don't know
about', she says.'
It is too easy to mock, but it is a sad business. I have admired Alison
Wilding's work in the past and hope she wins. Davey, too, evinces a certain
formal integrity. But I fear the favourite must be Hirst, he of the shark
and dead flies and irresistible momentum, with Tremlett to give him a run
for his money.
The Turner Prize Tate is at the Tate Gallery until November 29, sponsored by
Channel 4.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921121

