FT922-477

FT  27 JUN 92 / A fatal love affair with danger: Richard Cowper traces the
final steps of the climber Wanda Rutkiewicz, who vanished in the 'death
zone' of icy Kangchenjunga


   By RICHARD COWPER


THE DIVIDING line between heroism and folly, passion and obsession, success
and failure, can be perilously thin. So it was with Wanda Rutkiewicz, a Pole
of striking beauty and power and the greatest woman high-altitude
mountaineer of her time.
She died, aged 49, while driving herself beyond human limits during a final
push to the summit of Kangchenjunga in the border region between Nepal and
Sikkim last month. Her mysterious disappearance in the 'death zone' above
8,300 metres (26,560 ft) on the world's third highest peak seems destined to
transform this controversial personality into a climbing legend.
She was a mountaineer of heroic stature who led the way for women in a man's
domain. In 17 years she made 22 expeditions to the Himalayas, ascending
eight of the world's 14 highest peaks, a feat achieved by just 13 men. She
was the third woman to climb Everest and the first to conquer K2, the
world's second highest mountain.
Yet she could appear a lonely, driven person whose domineering style
alienated some fellow climbers and whose passion to reach the top may have
led her to step beyond the bounds of prudence. Her obsession had already
cost her two husbands. Some were shocked that she carried on climbing after
colleagues had died - but perhaps she had lived close to death for so long
that she had become inured to its horror.
Kangchenjunga is justifiably feared by climbers. The 8,568m mountain calls
for highly technical vertical climbing, requiring ice-axes, crampons, ice
screws and ropes. This spring Wanda launched her third attempt on the peak.
A year earlier her first effort had ended when she discovered the bodies of
two Slovenian climbers at 8,000m. They had reached 8,400m, but had fallen.
She was furious when the Yugoslav leader halted the expedition.
In early March, accompanied by Arek Gasienica, a young Pole, Wanda joined a
Mexican expedition to climb the north ridge route pioneered by Doug Scott,
the British mountaineer, in 1979. The team was led by an experienced
climbing acquaintance, Carlos Carsolio, 28, and included his wife, Elsa, his
brother Alfredo and Andres Delgado, another Mexican.
Their first summit push ended in disarray at Camp IV at 7,950m on April 23
during a storm. Elsa and Alfredo had to be evacuated by helicopter to
Kathmandu, with Elsa facing the amputation of a finger due to frostbite.
Carlos and Wanda decided to make a second attempt. They set off on Thursday
May 7, reaching Camp II On May 10. From there Wanda set off alone at 11am
only to find that Camp III had been destroyed by storms. She spent the
night, at 7,400m, in an ice hole.
Carlos set off at 6pm, climbing through the night, and passed her to arrive
at Camp IV (also an ice cave) 550m higher. He rested during the day and
Wanda arrived at 7pm. They started for the summit together in the dark at
3.30am on Tuesday May 12, but soon split up.
'Snow conditions were bad. Wanda was very slow,' said Carlos. 'We had agreed
to go at our own pace. I reached the summit at 5pm and met her on the way
down at 8pm at around 8,300m, where she was preparing to bivouac in a hole
in the snow, ready to go for the summit next day.'
Wanda, dressed in a down suit, was lying outside her bivouac sack 600m short
of the summit. She had drunk all her water, had no gas, no stove, no food
apart from a few sweets, and no sleeping bag.
Said Carlos: 'I spent about ten minutes with her. She looked cold but seemed
in good spirits. We talked of the technical moves - the two couloirs above
Camp IV and the 20m of crumbling rock just before the top. She was pleased
she had my tracks to follow. She kept looking toward the summit. She was
very excited.'
It was the last time anyone was to see her alive.
'I was thinking maybe I should try to persuade her to come down. But I
didn't. She was very determined. This was her third attempt at
Kangchenjunga. I think she felt she would never get another chance. She knew
what she was doing.'
But did she? To stay alive at that altitude it is essential to drink large
amounts of liquid, but she had no water and no means of melting snow. At her
pace it would have taken her another day to reach the summit. Even Carlos
was so dehydrated and exhausted that he suffered hallucinations on his
descent. First he 'saw' two sherpas from a German expedition who had died
two weeks before. Then he held a conversation with an imaginary Wanda. He
believes now that that marked the moment of her death.
Carlos stayed at Camp IV until midday, then descended and waited for her at
Camp II for three days, leaving her the tent, a sleeping bag, fuel and a
walkie talkie. He left base camp on May 21, eight days after Wanda had
disappeared above 8,300m. No one could have survived at that height for so
long.
How or where she died is a mystery. She may have died of cold or exhaustion.
Possibly she set off in the dark, reached the summit, but fell to her death
on the descent. In spite of her experience and her reputation for careful
climbing, she had made a fatal error of judgment  - all too easy at a height
at which lack of oxygen makes breathing a struggle, every step an
achievement and rational thinking difficult.
Wanda knew that climbers can stay alive for only a limited time above
8,000m. After her historic ascent of K2 in 1986 two of her companions, the
French team of Lillian and Maurice Barrard, perished on the descent after
the three of them had bivouacked at 8,300m without sleeping bags, but in a
tent. Wanda wrote afterwards: 'The weather was still good and I was not
worried. But I should have been. One should remain at that altitude as short
a time as possible. I didn't know in the sunshine that death was following
us down. I didn't see any signals of something wrong.'
Why, six years later, did she fail again to read the signals? Was it the
young climbers' unkind joke at base camp about her being a grandmother -
even though she had no children - which stung her into refusing to descend
with Carlos? Perhaps she finally paid for continuing for too many years with
her addiction.
Some may ask why Carlos did not order her off the mountain, but he was
exhausted and probably not fully aware of her predicament. Even if he had
been, the concept of a mountain leader whose word is law has passed  - and
Wanda was not the type to be ordered around.
Or again, why were they not joined by that 'holy rope' which has physically
and psychologically linked climbers from the earliest days? If they had been
tied together Carlos would never have reached the summit. They would jointly
have been forced to retreat, but both might have survived. However, these
traditional bonds are now widely ignored in Himalayan mountaineering. Above
8,000m, many climb alone. At that height, they say, a partner could not
rescue you without risking death. The image of the inseparable pair, Hilary
and Tensing, striding towards the summit of Everest, is now rare.
For Wanda, however, the obsessive determination which killed her also
produced some of the glories of her career. As a mountaineer, she had no
equal among women and few among men. She climbed in enviable style, often
reaching her summits alone and by difficult routes. In addition to her eight
8,000m-plus peaks she made the first ascent in 1975 with Alison Chadwick, an
English mountaineer, of Gasherbrum III (7,952m) in Pakistan, then the
world's highest unclimbed mountain. She conquered many other demanding
routes, including Messner's route on the north pillar of the Eiger, the
north face of the Matterhorn and the eastern pillar of the Trollriggen in
Norway.
Once on a mountain she led by example, seeing herself as a natural leader,
though others could find her difficult and bossy. One of her best friends
called her the 'Princess'. On Annapurna last October she so annoyed
Krzysztof Wielicki, a renowned Polish mountaineer, that he challenged her
claim to have ascended the mountain just a day after he reached the top -
but Wanda's summit photograph proved that she had.
Her physical strength and determination were legendary. In 1982 she fell off
the face of Mt Elbrus, in the Caucusus, slipping 300m and breaking her leg.
A few months later she led the gruelling two week walk-in to K2 base camp on
crutches and attempted to co-ordinate the summit push from there.
Her two husbands, neither 'professional' climbers, tried to persuade her to
cut down on her trips, but settled for divorce when it became clear that she
would never give up her real love. To some she was distant, vulnerable, and
rather a lonely person, but to others she was charming, and in her late 40s
received invitations from all over the world to join expeditions.
Even in the midst of the disasters that dogged so many of her big climbs she
expressed her passion for high places. Writing of her success on K2, during
a season in which 13 people, including her two climbing partners, died on
the mountain, she said: 'At about 10.15am I reached the summit. It was my
third attempt. I was excited and happy, happy to be alone there, because I
could express my enormous gratitude. I knelt and prayed. I said a big thank
you for the summit, for good weather and for feeling good.'
It was her success on K2 that some suggest gave her a false sense of
invincibility. A few years later she announced she would become the first
woman to complete all 14 8,000 metre peaks, a feat achieved by just two men.
She called it her 'Caravan to Dreams'. Her determination to do this by
spring 1993 led her to attempt two, even three expeditions in a season,
sometimes with people she did not know well. It was then that some came to
fear that her determination might end in death.
One of her few very close friends said: 'She didn't want to die; she didn't
intend to die; but somehow she had nothing against it. She was slowing. Her
soaring mind could no longer correlate with her body.'
Wanda may have had a premonition about death before she disappeared. At
Kangchenjunga base camp she is reported to have said: 'For me to die up
there will not be at all strange. It will be easy. After all, most of my
friends are waiting for me there, in the mountains.'

The Financial Times


London Page I

920627

