FT921-431

FT  28 MAR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Polling news triggers market slide


   By STEVE THOMPSON


THE three-day rally in London's equity market was effectively knocked on the
head by the latest opinion polls and fears that Labour may emerge with a
clear lead over the Conservatives in a batch of polls published tomorrow.
Topping a generally miserable session was news that Heron Corporation, the
privately-owned conglomerate headed by Mr Gerald Ronson, may have run into
financing problems, adding to the seemingly never-ending list of worries for
the big banks.
The Heron news came hard on the heels of a recent announcement of problems
at international property developer Olympia & York, controlled by the
Reichmann brothers, and builder of the massive Canary Wharf development in
London's docklands.
There was no respite for the Gilt-edged market, where long-dated stocks
retreated around a half-point, despite a relatively stable performance by
sterling against the D-mark.
Some of the equity market's big dollar earners were given a rough ride as
the US currency retreated against Europeans on hints from Germany that rates
will not be cut near-term.
The pressure was on equities from the outset with the stock market
responding on the downside to reports of a poll giving a substantial swing
to Labour in London, indicating a 2 points-plus lead over the Tories.
This story triggered a widespread mark down of share prices by dealers
anxious to maintain level books over the general election campaign period.
The footsie future gave no real support to the cash market, remaining at a 4
to 5 point discount throughout the day with traders in this market reluctant
to undertake big trades ahead of next Tuesday's expiry of the March series.
Opening over five points lower the footsie retreated in the face of some
determined selling pressure, partly caused by the opinion poll worries but
also by selling from local and overseas institutions said to have decided
that the most likely outcome to the general election will be at best a hung
Parliament or more likely a Labour-dominated government.
The market mood deteriorated substantially as the session wore on, hit by
more election nervousness and latterly by a poor opening performance by Wall
Street.
At its worst, the footsie showed a fall of 30.4 at 2,441.8, but it later
eased off the bottom to close a net 24.3 down at 2,447.9.
Retail, or customer, volume, in equities picked up over the week as
institutions began to rethink their portfolios as election day nears.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920328

