FT921-384

FT  30 MAR 92 / Lombard warrior sets out to slay giants: A populist party is
upsetting Italy's traditional voting pattern


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


THE MESSAGE of the Lombard League is brash and combative.
The populist movement, certain to disrupt the traditional voting pattern in
northern Italy in the April 5 general elections, has chosen as its symbol a
12th century Lombard warrior brandishing a sword. Every poster mixes demands
for autonomy with defiance of the Christian Democrat-led government in Rome.
'They are all ruffians in Rome,' says Mr Luigi Moretti, one of the League's
two Euro-MPs and secretary for the Bergamo region. 'We want to make the
Christian Democrats die of fright in these elections,' he adds, echoing the
bellicose contempt of the Italian political establishment shown by the
league's leader, Mr Umberto Bossi.
In an office above a pizzeria in Bergamo inaugurated a year ago, Mr Moretti
and a small group of volunteers are preparing to deliver a shock to the
Christian Democrats who have long dominated this rich northern industrial
city. Volunteers such as Mr Francesco Bruletti, a marketing executive, have
taken a month's leave to work free for the league.
The Bergamo office operates on a shoe-string budget, supplied by
contributions and subscriptions from 12,000 local members each paying
L70,000 (Pounds 32.50) a year. 'The local media ignore us and we can afford
little publicity. We have to rely on word of mouth and our message,' says Mr
Bruletti. 'But we are well organised and confident of our support. This is
not a movement dreamed up by university graduates - it comes from ordinary
people.'
Most of the activitists like Mr Bruletti have never been involved in
politics before. They are fed up with being ruled by a distant, incompetent
state apparatus from Rome which ignores local needs.
In Bergamo in the 1990 regional elections the league became the second
largest party, with 26 per cent of the vote against the Christian Democrats'
39 per cent. Officials have set their sights on rivalling, if not
overtaking, the Christian Democrats in next week's general elections. The
movement just squeezed ahead of the Christian Democrats last year in
municipal elections in neighbouring Brescia.
Throughout Italy's hard-working northern industrial belt in cities like
Bergamo the League has emerged as a big new force and is certain to remove
votes not just from the Christian Democrats but across the traditional party
spectrum. Nationwide, it could get 10 per cent of the vote.
Although Mr Bossi, the League's 50-year-old leader, is being ignored by the
national media, his abrasive, emotional speeches decrying corruption of the
traditional parties and demanding greater regional autonomy have struck a
chord among workers, the professional classes and small businessmen.
The league has even formed its own employers' organisation and its own union
(the Milan taxi drivers are members en bloc and provide free one of their
number as Mr Bossi's chauffeur).
Typical of Mr Bossi is a comment in a written interview for the FT. 'The
league has threatened a campaign of non-payment of taxes to show the state
that those producing the nation's wealth are exasperated: that they will no
longer agree to work for a political class which sustains its absolute power
enriching and swelling the numbers of its clientele; that they will no
longer work for a free-spending state which survives by devouring its own
citizens like Saturn devouring his children.'
The son of a textile worker who moved from a small northern town near Varese
to Milan, Mr Bossi, like many of his generation, was the first to experience
higher education and grow up with the industrialisation of the north. A poor
student, he gravitated into local politics formally founding the 'Autonomist
Lombard League' in 1984. On this ticket he was elected a senator for Varese
in the 1987 general elections.
The initial stamp of the league was distinctly 'autonomist' with a platform
of demands having parallels with that of the Scottish Nationalists' calls
for greater independence from parliament in Westminster.
Mr Bossi encouraged the formation of 'autonomist' leagues in other regions
of the North - in Emiglia Romagna, Liguria, Piedmont, Tuscany and the
Veneto. Together in February 1990 these formed with Lombardy the Northern
League as a federal movement, and subsequently leagues have been added
covering central Italy and the south.
Thus while the movement is popularly referred to as the Lombard League it
consists of a number of associated autonomist groupings headed by Mr Bossi.
He is proposing a radical constitutional shake-up of Italy into three blocks
 -the North, Centre and South. 'The league wants a federal constitution with
a central parliament that co-ordinates the activities of the parliaments of
the three (blocks) which have a degree of autonomy which will be modelled on
the experience of the Swiss, American and German models. . . to avoid the
current damaging experience of centralism.'
The essential aim is to ensure that northern savings cease to finance the
nation's huge public sector deficit, much of which goes on ill-controlled
transfers to the south.
Its most seductive slogan is 'further from Rome and closer to Europe'. This
underlines Mr Bossi's threat to found a republic of the north, linked to
Europe but separate from the rest of Italy, if the Rome politicians fail to
reform their ways.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920330

