FT924-967

FT  21 DEC 92 / Arts: Martyred to concrete - Colin Amery samples the
architecture of Jean Nouvel


   By COLIN AMERY


DELPHIC utterances about the future of the world ring out in the darkened
galleries of London's Institute of Contemporary Arts, as 12 flickering
videos and a multi-screen of giant slides evokes the world of the current
darling of French architecture Jean Nouvel.
M. Nouvel, although he was only born in 1945, is an architectural agent
provocateur of the old school. He is pleased to be described as ruthless and
is one of those architects who tells the residents in his buildings exactly
what colour their walls and blinds are to be.
One of the video presentations shows the bare concrete walls of some public
housing that Nouvel designed and the subsequent treatment of the same walls
by the tenants . . . I am sure the ICA hopes we will all side with the
artistic purity of the architect, but I was entirely on the side of the
bullied tenants who did not want to live in monastic cells, martyrs to the
cause of varnished concrete.
Jean Nouvel's best known building is L'Institut du Monde Arabe on the left
bank of the Seine in Paris, the first of President Mitterrand's Grands
Projets. It is a beautiful and ingenious creation. The element of the
building that has become famous is the south wall which is a modern version
of an Arabian screen. This is not built of stone, but of steel and glass,
controlling the light entering the building by means of elaborate moving
parts.
Opening and closing diaphragms that work like the eyes of a camera also
compose themselves into traditional geometric patterns.
A great hypostyle room in the building is reminiscent of the great mosques
of the Islamic world. Nouvel's success in this building is to have linked
two cultures, both visually and technologically, in an apparently simple
way. A panel from the facade of the institute is on show in the ICA which
looks both beautiful, complex and expensive.
Eight key buildings are displayed in the exhibition, all shown in slide and
video form with little comprehensible commentary. This perverse way of
exhibiting has been devised by the architect himself. He designed a similar
exhibition in Paris a few years ago, in an attempt to convey his belief that
architecture and cinema are closely related.
Architecture does indeed exist as part of a dimension of time and movement
and I am inclined to agree that much of the architectural experience is to
be enjoyed as part of a movement through a succession of spaces. However,
Nouvel tells us this as though Baroque, Mannerist and indeed Gothic
architecture had never existed.
The eight buildings show the range of Nouvel's work. His public housing,
Nemausus in Nimes, resembles a boat with staircases and balconies running
around the outside of the 'hull'. The architect explains the appearance as
'drama and narrative of voyage where space and light contributes to the
dignity of each dwelling'. Of course . . .
It is possible to enjoy the full Nouvel cuisine by staying at one of the
hotels he has designed. The Hotel les Thermes at Dax in France is a simple
glass box covered in wooden shutters, 'the narrative of light and shade . .
.'
More interesting is the Hotel Saint-James on a hillside site overlooking the
Garonne in Bordeaux. Here the modern sets of rooms are clad in rusting metal
duckboards so that the whole complex resembles the tobacco drying sheds of
the area. The hotel rooms are simple with waxed concrete walls and plaster.
The sensual gratification comes from the food of the brilliant young chef,
Jean-Marie Amat, who commissioned this hotel at Bouliac.
One room at the ICA is furnished with chairs and tables by Jean Nouvel where
you can immerse yourself in the Nouvel experience by reading every known
article and book about him. It is important not to miss two projects. The
giant Tour Sans Fins the tallest and most slim tower in Europe. It will soar
transparently against the skies of Paris, alongside the arch at La Defense,
to a height of over 420 metres. The renovations of the Lyons Opera House
will open next spring, and they show a sensitivity to the old house as well
as some exciting additions.
Apart from the pretentiousness of this exhibition it demonstrates that Jean
Nouvel is an interesting architectural figure. His work is beautifully
executed and sometimes original and he draws upon a rich range of
contemporary cultural experiences. The work has a confidence and pragmatism
that is admirable.
Jean Nouvel Emmanuel Cattani et Associes, Institute of Contemporary Arts,
The Mall, London, SW1 until February 14

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921221

