FT923-6471

FT  24 AUG 92 / UK Gilts: Market falls under sterling's shadow


   By PETER MARSH


STERLING'S weakness cast a shadow over the gilt market, forcing up yields
for short-dated bonds owing to expectations that the UK government may soon
be forced to lift base rates.
For longer-dated gilts, buying pressure was depressed ahead of the auction
by the Bank of England this Wednesday of Pounds 2.5bn of 8.75 per cent
Treasury stock payable in 2017. That put a ceiling on price rises at this
end of the yield curve.
Meanwhile, gilts were hardly helped by indications from opinion polls of a
substantial likely 'no' vote in the French referendum on the Maastricht
treaty on September 20.
An outcome of this sort would make unlikely a move to economic and monetary
union around the turn of the century. That would probably lead to
significant selling of gilts by investors, along with other European
government bonds denominated in weak currencies.
Sterling closed on Friday night at below DM2.80 in the European exchange
rate mechanism, within a whisker of its permitted floor of DM2.778. The
pound's fragility was in spite of concerted government action on Friday to
weaken the D-Mark. That took the form of intervention by 16 central banks
led by the US Federal Reserve to sell the German currency for dollars.
While much of sterling's recent fall has been linked to the dollar's
weakness and the consequent strength of the German currency, investors are
worried about the lack of any UK recovery.
Although weak economic activity helps gilt prices on the grounds that
inflationary pressures should stay weak for the foreseeable future, the
ensuing lack of confidence in sterling reduces demand pressure for UK
government bonds.
Such an interpretation was supported by events in the gilt market last week
when in thin holiday trading the benchmark short-dated 10 per cent Treasury
stock maturing in 1994 lost more than  1/4 point, closing on Friday night at
100 5/16 . Its yield was pushed up during the week from 9.47 per cent to
9.75 per cent. The longer dated 9 per cent Treasury stock due in 2008 closed
little changed at 99 23/32 , for a yield of 9.03 per cent.
Much weaker economic expansion than that expected by the government will
make a nonsense of the treasury's calculations about the public sector
borrowing requirement, which is pushed up at times of economic fragility.
The PSBR is now thought likely by City economists to be about Pounds 33bn
this financial year and around Pounds 40bn next year - as opposed to the
treasury forecasts of Pounds 28bn and Pounds 32bn.
Such arithmetic explains why the Bank of England is under strong pressure to
keep up the pace of gilt sales. Assuming this week's auction is successful,
the Bank will have sold an estimated Pounds 16bn-Pounds 18bn out of the
Pounds 35bn or so gilts for which it will need to find buyers this financial
year.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920824

