FT924-6034

FT  24 NOV 92 / World Trade News: Farmers single out Coca-Cola factory in
anti-US protest


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


COCA-COLA yesterday became the latest US-owned company singled out for
attack as a symbol of US capitalism by militant French farmers stepping up
their protests against last Friday's EC-US farm trade deal.
A group of 300 angry farmers demonstrated outside the Coca-Cola factory at
Grigny, southern Paris. They occupied the plant, halting the production
process, and burning tyres beside the Coca-Cola symbol nearby.
For the militant French farmers, the Coca-Cola blockade was one of a series
of demonstrations staged yesterday ahead of tomorrow's nationwide protest
against the trade deal. But for Coca-Cola and other French subsidiaries of
US groups, the demonstration poses a serious threat to the stability of
their businesses.
Demonstrations are part of daily life in France. About 6,000 protests a year
are held in Paris alone. The farmers are particularly inventive. One of
their favourite ploys, the Operation Escargot, whereby convoys of farmers
drive tractors at a snail's pace, has been highly successful at generating
media coverage and creating chaos on the French roads.
Recently, the farmers have taken to aiming at carefully selected targets.
One of the most successful Operations Escargots took place this spring when
a group of farmers sealed off the roads around the EuroDisneyland theme park
outside Paris as part of their campaign against EC farm reforms.
The latest round of Gatt demonstrations have been more aggressive and
overtly anti-American in tone. The farmers started last week by burning the
US flag outside the American embassy in Paris, continuing this weekend with
demonstrations outside French branches of McDonald's fast food chain.
McDonald's at Amiens was forced to close on Saturday night; angry scenes
occurred outside the Lille branch as farmers set fire to piles of straw.
The farmers have continued to hit other targets, such as government
buildings. There were other protests at Chalons-sur-Marne, Arles and Blois
yesterday. But, as the French farmers are well aware, assaults on US
corporate targets attract most media attention, causing maximum
embarrassment for the French government.
The US embassy has stepped up its security and McDonald's has circulated
emergency instructions to its 236 French branches. McDonald's has, somewhat
belatedly, begun an 'information campaign' directed at the farmers' unions,
pointing out that its French branches buy most of their meat, grain and
vegetables from farms in France.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921124

