FT924-6053

FT  24 NOV 92 / ERM states act to aid currencies: EC ministers agree to
consider proposals for co-ordinated package to boost growth


   By JAMES BLITZ, LIONEL BARBER and ALICE RAWSTHORN


   LONDON, BRUSSELS, PARIS


SEVERAL European govern-ments yesterday threw a protective ring around the
beleaguered exchange rate mechanism in an effort to prevent another crisis
by sharply raising domestic interest rates.
The moves to forestall the kind of intense selling which drove sterling and
the Italian lira out of the ERM came as finance ministers of the European
Community agreed to explore proposals for a co-ordinated growth package in
response to fears of a 1930s-style slump in Europe.
The ministers will seek to find a common Community position on ways of
stimulating EC growth ahead of next month's Edinburgh summit.
As tension remained high in currency markets yesterday in the wake of the
weekend ERM realignment, Denmark, Ireland, Spain and Portugal sharply
increased their short-term money market rates to stem a tide of speculative
selling of the more vulnerable currencies.
Germany, however, appeared to be resisting pressures to cut its official
interest rates, a move which would significantly ease current tensions
because it would staunch the buying of D-Marks.
As high German rates again came in for criticism from Mr Norman Lamont, the
UK chancellor, Mr Horst Kohler, a senior German finance ministry official,
damped hopes of an imminent cut. He said any decision on rates was for the
Bundesbank alone, and that conditions were not necessarily appropriate to
lower the cost of borrowing at the present time.
In Brussels, Mr Kohler said he hoped that the 6 per cent devaluation of the
peseta and escudo at the weekend would bring some relief to the ERM, but he
went on to say: 'We reject any idea of linking automatically realignments
with interest rate cuts.'
The need to tighten monetary policy to fend off speculation against the
weaker currencies in the middle of a Europe-wide downturn led to renewed
worries about whether the eight-member ERM, which has been existence for 13
years, could continue to survive for much longer without a radical overhaul.
There was particular concern about the French franc - which with the D-Mark
is one of the linchpins of the ERM. The franc weakened against the German
currency yesterday, forcing commercial banks to raise the price of
short-term lending in francs.
Outside the ERM, Norway and Greece raised borrowing rates, while Iceland
devalued its currency by 6 per cent.
After the 6 per cent devaluation of the Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo
at the weekend, the chief focus of foreign exchange dealers yesterday was
the Danish krone - seen as a possible target for devaluation, because of
Denmark's trade links with countries which have already devalued.
Dealers argue that, unless Denmark devalues, its exporters will lose ground
to European countries which have already devalued.
Denmark let overnight rates rise to around 50 per cent to give the krone
support. However, the currency closed against the D-Mark at DKr3.8818 ,
close to its ERM floor of DKr3.9016.
In Ireland, the central bank said that it would offer overnight funds to
banks at a rate of 30 per cent and said it was suspending its normal
short-term facility rate of 13.75 per cent.
The Irish punt closed at DM2.6297, but dropped below its ERM floor against
the strongest currency in the system, the Belgian franc.
There was concern that a speculative attack on the Danish krone could herald
similar assaults on other currencies, such as the franc. The franc weakened
sharply against the D-Mark to a close of FFr3.394 from previous FFr3.386.
Three-month money, which was quoted at 9 1/2 per cent a week ago, stood
yesterday at 10 1/16 per cent.
Reflecting the continuing pressure in currency markets yesterday, Spain
acted to tightened its key money rate by three-quarters of a percentage
point to 13.75 per cent, while Portugal's central bank was reported to have
intervened in its money markets to prop up its currency.
Punt hangs on Page 2
Bonn U-turn on intervention in east Germany Page 3
Editorial Comment Page 20
Observer Page 21
EC growth plan Page 22
Lex Page 22
Government bonds Page 30
Currencies Page 33
World stocks Page 39
London stocks Page 42

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921124

