FT924-5966

FT  24 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Mr Clinton's medium term


ONE ADVANTAGE of the US system of economic governance is that the executive
has little discretionary power to fiddle with the levers of macroeconomic
policy. Not that the president-elect should be tempted to indulge in the
transitory pleasures of monetary and fiscal measures for short-term
gratification. Mr Bill Clinton was elected on promises to reverse America's
relative economic decline by using effective government policies to foster
sustainable growth in the medium term. His presidency will be judged on
whether he has begun to do so.
The intellectual pedigree of Mr Clinton's economics transition team derives
from policy research aimed at medium-term economic fitness, rather than
short-term macroeconomic gymnastics. After a hard day's memo-writing, they
will find much of interest in the OECD's latest report on the state of the
US economy, which makes the need to boost medium-term productivity growth
its theme.
The OECD's latest short-term forecast, for what it is worth, suggests a
sluggish recovery has already begun. Yet this slow growth is important not
for what it implies about the US economy today - that it is burdened by the
heavy debts mistakenly accumulated in the past - but because it makes it
harder to sell tough medium-term policies which will deliver rising living
standards in the future.
Steady decline
The OECD spells out, in chilling detail, why Mr Clinton's promise of change
fell on listening ears. Disposable incomes per head rose by a sluggish 1.5
per cent a year, on average, between 1979 and 1989 in constant prices. For
people in work, real hourly wages did not rise at all in the 1980s, while
the real wages of production workers fell by an average 0.7 per cent a year,
partly because productivity growth was sluggish and partly because of the
growing gap between the total wage bill employers face and the pay workers
receive once health-care contributions are deducted.
Health-care reform offers one way of raising real living standards among the
working population. The OECD tracks, in detail, the astonishing rise in
resources absorbed by America's greedy and ineffective health-care industry.
While politely avoiding direct prescription, the OECD advises the US to
ditch its decentralised system and shift to European-style rationing in
which costs and salaries are controlled centrally.
Yet faster productivity growth is the only route to rising living standards
for the whole population. The problem for the president-elect is that
investment in human capital through education will take many more years to
work than he has at his disposal. Mr Bush's attempt to be the education
president, however laudable in theory and vacuous in practice, could not
have borne a harvestable fruit in one or even two terms of office.
Investment boost
A rise in private investment is more likely to show medium-term results. The
OECD rightly argues that if the US is to lift itself off the bottom of the
investment league, it must also raise national savings as a percentage of
gross domestic product by sharpening tax incentives to private savings and
reducing the federal government deficit.
The OECD's report states clearly that the US needs higher taxes. The US
federal, state and local governments together spend less as a percentage of
national output than most OECD countries; most federal programmes, with the
exception of health, have already been squeezed hard; the US government has
lower taxes than any OECD country except Turkey; and indirect taxes are
particularly low by international standards - a 5 per cent federal
value-added tax would eliminate two thirds of the structural deficit.
This is the crux of the transition team's dilemma. Mr Clinton must close the
deficit but higher taxes now, while recovery is so sluggish, look counter to
the economy's short-term need for growth. One option is to legislate now for
tax change in the future. Announcing now a VAT that will be effective in a
year's time would encourage consumers to bring consumption forward while
reducing long-term interest rates. Combined with tax incentives for
investment, Mr Clinton would have achieved what he needs: a growth package
with medium-term benefits.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921124

