FT923-6337

FT  25 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Tomkins chief salary hoisted to near Pounds
1m


   By ROLAND RUDD


MR GREG Hutchings, chief executive of Tomkins, the industrial conglomerate,
had his pay hoisted 54 per cent to Pounds 995,000 in the year to May 2,
according to the annual accounts published yesterday.
Mr Hutchings defended the increase which was significantly larger than the
18 per cent rise in full year profits to Pounds 132m.
He said 'I am judged continually by results which are in the interests of
shareholders; if there is nothing for the shareholders there is nothing for
management.'
Mr Hutchings said there were no service contracts for any of the managers,
making it clear that the group would not put up with poor performance.
The main reason for Mr Hutchings' biggest ever pay award was the increase in
incentive compensation  - calculated by the increase in share price,
earnings per share and dividend  - which rose from Pounds 203,000 to Pounds
492,000.
'Its been a very good year for us which has obviously benefited me. One
shareholder has already congratulated me on my salary increase.'
With more than 70 per cent of profits and sales in the US, Mr Hutchings said
he was keen to make a UK acquisition which was beginning to look a more
realistic objective as the recession continued.
'It is interesting that the share prices of many UK companies have come back
to more realistic levels over the past few months.
'The price of some of the companies we are looking at still need to fall a
bit but there are now more opportunities'.
Ideally, he wants to make his enterprise 40 per cent UK, 40 per cent US and
20 per cent from the rest of the world, which implies sizeable acquisitions.
However, he made it clear that he would not be rushed into a big UK
acquisition.
'We have been lucky enough to generate sufficient cash not to need an
acquisition. If we had been forced to do one in the UK six months ago we
would now look pretty stupid.'
Tomkins has not made any substantial acquisitions since it bought Philips
Industries of the US in 1990. Mr Hutchings said it does not need another
sizeable acquisition to meet its target of out-performing the UK market in
earnings per share growth.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920825

