FT923-9613

FT  04 AUG 92 / Bond markets await debut of Treuhand: David Waller and Sara
Webb on the German agency's plans to raise DM10bn


   By DAVID WALLER and SARA WEBB


The after-shocks of German unification will reverberate around the European
bond markets once again this autumn. The Treuhandanstalt, the German
government agency charged with the privatising the east's old state-owned
enterprises, is due to make its debut in the bond market to raise up to
DM10bn (Pounds 3.4bn).
The inevitable result of this and other cash-raising by the German
government or its agencies is continuing upward pressure on long-term
interest rates across Europe.
The DM10bn will not, in itself, test the patience of investors. Most bond
issues by the federal government are around the same size. However, it will
be an additional burden to what was already due to be a hefty borrowing
programme.
The Unity Fund, set up to support the new federal states in the east, has
already raised most of the DM25bn it plans to borrow this year. But almost
all of the federal government's fiscal deficit of some DM40bn has yet to be
financed. This demand for cash will make it harder - and thus more expensive
 -for other European governments to raise money.
When the Treuhand was set up in February 1990 by the East German government,
it had about 8,000 companies to sell, restructure or simply close. Following
reorganisation, this number increased to about 12,000. Of these, just over
7,600 have already been sold, raising DM29.3bn.
However, this is not enough to make the Treuhand self-financing. Analysts
estimate that the combined costs of restructuring companies, paying social
compensation and environmental costs, as well as rolling over old debt from
the state companies to the Treuhand far exceed revenue from the sale of
assets.
'Privatisation and restructuring of the former East German state-owned
properties will necessitate considerable borrowing by the Treuhand over the
next few years, both to fund continuing large cash deficits and to refinance
the former state-owned companies' existing debt,' according to Standard &
Poor's, the international credit rating agency.
The Treuhand plans to tap the international capital markets towards the end
of September or early October, depending on market conditions. It wants to
borrow between DM8bn-DM10bn.
The bonds will be part of the Treuhand's own financing programme and will be
separate from other government-backed issues. These include bonds issued by
the Unity Fund, for which the outstanding volume at the end of May was
DM41.2bn.
Although, in theory, German government bunds and bonds issued by agencies
such as the German state railways or post office should be equally
attractive, investors prefer to hold ordinary government bonds as these are
much more heavily traded, and hence more liquid. As a result, government
agency bonds tend to trade at a slightly higher yield than the plain
government issues.
Steps have already been taken to prepare the way for the Treuhand issue. On
June 26, the government passed a law which permits the agency to use the
international capital markets. The government has set a borrowing ceiling of
DM30bn for 1992 for the Treuhand.
At the same time, the two leading credit rating agencies - Standard & Poor's
and Moody's - announced they would assign their top ratings for debt issued
by the agency. The Treuhand already has a DM10bn German commercial paper
programme, of which about DM7bn has been issued. This existing short-term
debt has been assigned a top rating, and both agencies have said that bond
issues by the Treuhand would be rated Triple-A.
Because of the government guarantee, any creditor would have a direct claim
against the Federal Republic of Germany. As the Treuhand is due to be wound
down by the end of 1994, any outstanding obligations will be taken over by
the government.
At least one other important question remains. Treuhand bonds would be of
much greater interest to investors if they were 'deliverable' into the
German government bond futures contract traded on the London International
Financial Futures and Options Exchange (Liffe) - in other words, if they
could be used to settle bund futures contracts when they expire. The
Deutsche Terminborse, the German futures and options exchange, has already
taken this step.
Bond dealers hope that Liffe will amend its specifications to include
Treuhand bonds - which would almost certainly smooth the launch of the
Treuhand issue.
However, this autumn will be a testing time for the bond markets. The
Bundesbank's July 16 decision to raise the discount rate to 8.75 per cent,
coupled with doubts over the future of European economic and monetary union,
has shrouded the European bond markets in uncertainty.
'At the moment the whole of the market interest rate structure is in
disarray, so the Treuhand may be forced to wait for stability to return to
the markets first,' says Mr Michael Buneman, assistant vice-president at
Moody's German office.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920804

