FT923-9517

FT  05 AUG 92 / White House vetoes plan for rationing health care


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


THE BUSH administration has vetoed this week a plan by the state of Oregon
to expand access to health care by rationing the provision of services,
highlighting the legal and political obstacles facing US social reformers.
The decision also casts doubt on the administration's commitment to social
experimentation by individual states. The White House has frequently argued
that states should serve as 'laboratories', pioneering policies that might
become adopted nationally.
Dr Louis Sullivan, federal health secretary, rejected Oregon's plan on the
grounds that it might have violated the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990, which President George Bush had strongly backed.
Supporters of the plan, however, vigorously rejected the federal criticism.
Senator Bob Packwood, an Oregon Republican, said the state had been 'stabbed
in the back.' State Governor Barbara Roberts, a Democrat, said nothing in
the plan was intended to discriminate against the disabled.
Like other US states, Oregon is struggling to cope with the rising costs of
its Medicaid programme of health services for the poor. Under existing
rules, certain categories of the poor - for example, women with children -
are granted unlimited access to services, while others, such as poor single
adults, qualify for nothing.
This form of rationing has existed for decades in the US.
The Oregon plan has provoked intense controversy because it proposes a
different form of rationing. In essence, it says that the services received
by all poor people must be rationed so that, with a limited budget,
everybody shall be guaranteed access to a basic level of care.
The plan divides all health services into a total of 709 condition/treatment
pairs. The ranking is determined partly by medical effectiveness (treatments
that rarely work are at the bottom of the list) and partly according to
value judgments expressed by Oregonians in surveys. The legislature was
presented with the list last year and with a series of costings prepared by
an independent actuary.
It then faced a simple task: to find how far a limited budget would stretch.
The cut-off point was treatment pair 587 - nothing ranked lower was to be
made available. Rejected treatments range from the trivial - such as viral
sore throats - to serious conditions such as Aids and some cancers, where
prospects of survival are rated as very low. Hospice and comfort care for
the dying, however, is provided.
Dr Sullivan said the priorities in the list appeared to reflect a 'bias
against persons with disabilities', and that many treatments which would
help the disabled had received a low ranking. He urged Oregon to correct
these biases, then resubmit its plans.
The ranking of treatments proposed by Oregon may be questionable, but its
determination to improve access to care, and to set priorities for
treatment, contrast favourably with a refusal elsewhere to accept that
choices have to be made. Most health care systems ration care, but do so
behind closed doors. Oregon has been penalised for open acknowledgement of
its priorities.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920805

