FT922-707

FT  26 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Helping India


   THREE GIANT economies


China, India and Russia - are now engaged in the same task: turning away
from central planning and towards the free market. With 40 per cent of the
world's population between them, what happens in these three economies is
more important for the world's future than almost anything else. All three
face huge problems. But all three also possess certain advantages. India's
is the possession of a sophisticated, if distorted, market economy.
What India has needed is a government that would stop stopping things from
happening. Mr Narasimha Rao's appears to be such a government. It deserves
continued, if highly conditional, support from the group of western aid
donors meeting in Paris today.
The payments crisis of June 1991, which started off the unprecedentedly deep
round of reforms, was, as the government of India's own Economic Survey
notes, a reflection of a 'loss of confidence in the government's ability to
manage the situation'. Behind that loss of confidence was India's
progressive fiscal deterioration. Its economy grew faster in the 1980s, at
some 5 1/2 per cent a year, than it had in the 1970s, but it did so on
borrowed money and was, therefore, living on borrowed time.
Fortunately, the new government - under the intellectual leadership of Dr
Manmohan Singh, the finance minister - seized the opportunity to introduce
not only stabilisation measures, but structural reforms as well. Long needed
liberalisation of trade and industrial policies were, therefore, added to a
sharp fiscal correction and devaluation of the rupee.
The package was judged worthy of additional external support and this it
duly received, notably from the International Monetary Fund and the World
Bank. Now the government seeks another Dollars 3bn in exceptional aid -
Dollars 2.4bn from the IMF and the World Bank and Dollars 0.6bn from
bilateral donors.
Has India done enough to justify continued support? It has. Has it done
enough to set India on the sustained high growth path that its people
deserves? It has not. Now, in fact, comes the hard part.
The two budgets put forward by Dr Singh have reduced the budget to a
projected level of 5 per cent of gross domestic product in 1992-93, but
important forms of waste - the fertiliser subsidy, for example - remain.
Monetary policy is too loose and, with a poor monsoon feared, inflation may
be higher than the people will tolerate.
The financial scandal in Bombay demonstrates the need for still more
financial reform, combined with fiercer supervision. No less important are
unification of the exchange rate, along with a depreciation to compensate
for the lowering of India's excessively protective tariffs. Only thus can
India hope for what it needs most: an export miracle rivalling those of
countries to its east. In addition, both privatisation and an exit policy
for unviable enterprises must be put in train, regardless of the political
difficulties.
The challenges are great and the lobbies opposed to the changes - farmers,
industrialists and organised labour - are politically formidable. Bringing
about radical reforms in a huge, poverty-stricken democracy could never be
straightforward. There is already fear that the government is drifting. But
there are no realistic alternatives, as the government knows. The west, for
its part, should make it clear that it will support reform, but only so long
as it is reform that it supports.
As has been true of many other developing countries, it was the threat of
default that concentrated the government's mind. For this reason alone,
support must not only be conditional, it should also be limited both in
extent and in time. India should be given exceptional aid now, but the aim
must be for India to stand soon on its own two feet.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920626

