FT922-3969

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (20): Marketing a brain-wave
 -Management


   By PAUL TAYLOR


PROFITING FROM INNOVATION edited by William G Howard and Bruce R Guile The
Free Press Pounds 15.95, 150 pages
ON BOTH sides of the Atlantic, corporate research and development
departments are renowned for their innovation and technological
breakthroughs. They are equally famous for their frequent failure to bring
the fruits of these brain-waves to market.
This is not a new problem. In 1967 an advisory panel of US technical
business leaders chaired by Robert Charpie, then President of Union Carbide
Electronics, produced a report in which one of the main conclusions was that
a major effort should be made to help managers and executives to 'learn,
feel, understand and appreciate how technological innovation is spawned,
nurtured, financed and managed . . . ' But two decades later American
business was still chalking up failures, exemplified by the success of
foreign competitors in the steel, car, consumer electronics, semiconductors
and production equipment sectors.
It was against this background in the late 1980s that the Washington-based
National Academy of Engineering set up the nine-man study committee on
'Profiting from Innovation' chaired by William Howard Jr, a former corporate
director of research at Motorola.
At the end of the three-year study the committee could have produced a
weighty account of its findings which no doubt would have been highly
praised - and then consigned to the shelf to gather dust. Instead, Howard
and Bruce Guile, director of the Academy's programme office, have produced a
nuts-and-bolts handbook to 'demonstrate how managing technical resources is
as important to the paper clip business as it is to microelectronics,' and
which succeeds in describing and illustrating tools and techniques to help
managers commercialise technology.
The book is peppered with examples, including some of some of the most
notable, such as the legendary failure of Xerox to recognise the commercial
potential of the Alto, the first personal computer, built by researchers at
its Palo Alto Research Centre (Parc) in 1973, long before Apple and IBM
began putting PCs on desktops.
But the book is not just a catalogue of good and bad practise. It analyses
how innovation occurs in cycles; how, in the early stages of a new
technology, the value lies in identifying applications and getting products
to market; how,later, it is essential to make improvements quicker than
others; and it stresses that a static monopoly of a particular technology is
unsustainable in the long term.
This book is not just for academics; it is also a practical guide to help
managers and engineers become better at managing and exploiting technology.
It continues where the Charpie Report left off.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920609

