FT921-524

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Old barbers' shops by the boat load - A look
at a company selling antiques by the room full


   By HELEEN DE GRAAF


ST MICHAEL'S Church nestles among old warehouses and workshops in
Shoreditch, an old furniture manufacturing district just north of the City
of London, Today, visitors to the church do not come to pray, but to worship
antiques.
They come to buy Victorian doorknobs, marble bathtubs, even complete
barbers' shops. The old Anglican church, built in 1865, has been home to the
The London Architectural Salvage and Supply Company (LASSCo) since the
company started up in 1978.
The church is filled with objects. By the entrance stands a cuirass; next to
it are four marble pillars. The collection can range from 19th century
firebacks to Victorian lamp posts, from bronze entrance doors to a capital
from London's Waterloo railway station.
'The rich will always be with us', says Tony Brook, director of LASSCo.
'Even in recession.' The foreign rich, especially - no bad thing, for the
state of the UK economy has brought the domestic antique market to the point
of collapse. LASSCo's international contacts help it survive. 'A lot of our
customers are foreign. We also have contacts with other dealers abroad, and
we travel ourselves to look for trade,' says Brook.
Even so business suffered: turnover fell from Pounds 850,000 in 1989 to
Pounds 450,000 in 1991. LASSCo cut staff from 12 to eight.
But, says Brook there have been benefits. 'Sales have dropped by 40 per
cent, but the prices we pay for our goods have gone down dramatically, while
our selling prices have stayed the same. Furthermore, the cost of
professional restorers' work has dropped, because of unemployment.'
Most of LASSCo's stock is bought from demolition sites; some comes from
people clearing out their sheds. Recently Brook followed an advertisement in
a local paper and bought a complete 1930s US barber's shop. The shop was
transported across the Atlantic and rebuilt in St Michael's.
Sales of timber make up 50 per cent of turnover. 'People want something
stylish and classic on their floors. Strange, though, that demand did not go
up until we started spending more time and energy on getting good floors,'
says Brook. Wood for the floors is imported from all over the world. LASSCo
also takes flooring from old houses.
The church contains small items for sale; but most customers have their own
projects, and come to browse. 'People designing their restaurants'
interiors, for instance. The obsession with style has survived the
recession.'
Some buy on impulse. 'A Japanese lady once fell in love with a complete 1890
chemist shop, and bought it for Pounds 16,000. But now it's in storage
because she can't think of a way to re-use it. In the end we might buy it
back,' says Brook.
The Japanese have taken over from Americans as LASSCo's most important
customers. 'In the begining they bought everything without a clue what to do
with it. Now they are learning to buy more carefully,' Brook says. 'But the
average Japanese buyer does not know whether to put it up or down.'
One Japanese company bought an arch from a synagogue for a discotheque.
'Because it did not fit properly, they cut a piece off each of the columns.
Of course that completely destroyed the whole thing.'
Brook is cautious about the Japanese hunger for antiques. 'We care about
what happens to our trade - often it is part of the English heritage.
Sometimes we really feel that some of our pieces should go to a museum, but
museums have no money, and we're no charity. But it's one reason we do not
always sell, and may ask a customer to leave.'
LASSCo can afford to do that. It has little competition in the UK; none at
all in London. 'About four years ago, when the market was at its peak, there
were a lot of people in the business,' says Brook. 'We called them
'runners'. They drove around in vans looking for old buildings which were
being demolished, so that they could buy stuff and sell it to us. They
started their own business wanting quick and easy money, but they didn't
realise what they had got themselves into: storage, repair, and sometimes
months or years of waiting before you sell an important piece. This
recession, like a good frost, killed them off.'
LASSCo, St Michael's Church, Mark St, London EC2A 4ER, 071-739-0448.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920328

