FT921-3994

FT  11 MAR 92 / HSBC earnings rise 83% as subsidiaries improve


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


HSBC Holdings, the London holding company of the Hongkong and Shanghai
Bank's worldwide assets, yesterday reported an 83 per cent growth in
earnings - after tax and transfers to secret inner reserves - to a record
HKDollars 5.66bn (Pounds 424.2m).
The result compares with earnings of HKDollars 3.1bn in 1990, and a previous
record profit of HKDollars 4.77bn in 1989.
The bank's earnings were at the upper end of analysts' expectations and Mr
William Purves, chairman, quashed rumours of a rights issue saying he did
not think the bank would go to shareholders this year.
But he would not preclude 'spinning off' the bank's main subsidiary,
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, which consists of the bank's Asian and Pacific
assets. 'But this is not on the agenda and has not been put before the
board,' he said.
Mr Purves also scotched rumours of a European acquisition. He said the bank
was interested in forging an alliance with a European bank along the lines
of its successful relationship with Wells Fargo in the US.
He said the bank was having discussions with a number of continental
European banks, but he did not hold out hope of any imminent agreement.
Hongkong Bank remained a long-term holder of its near 15 per cent stake in
Midland Bank, the UK clearer, he said.
Mr Purves thought the outlook in 1992 was uncertain, particularly for the
main industrial nations. However, he expected Hong Kong and east Asia to
maintain their momentum and grow faster than the rest of the world.
He predicted dividend growth of at least 8 per cent this year. Directors
declared a final HKDollars 1.31 a share dividend which, with the interim of
54 cents, makes HKDollars 1.85 for the year - up 19.7 per cent on 1990's
payout.
Hong Kong banking law allows banks to maintain hidden reserves and they
therefore do not report their true profits. However, Mr Purves denied that
the bank manipulated its profits and said it had attempted to give a picture
of the trend in profits growth. The bank faces full disclosure by 1994 at
the latest, as required by European banking law.
The source of growth in the bank's reported profits seems to have come
mainly from the effect of lower losses in its US and Australian
subsidiaries. The difference between these losses in 1991 compared with 1990
added more than HKDollars 2.2bn to the bank's 1991 profit.
Mr Purves said Hongkong Bank's Asian operations - mainly Hong Kong -
reported improved results. He said the bank's profits derived from the
colony were in line with what other Hong Kong banks had reported -
indicating a 30 per cent profit improvement at least.
The bank's main subsidiary in the Middle East, the British Bank of the
Middle East, lifted profits 20 per cent to Pounds 37.4m from Pounds 31.1m.

The Financial Times


London Page 41

920311

