FT923-9562

FT  04 AUG 92 / The quest to avoid political Tweedledeedom: Ivo Dawnay on
the tough and uncertain road ahead for Labour


   By IVO DAWNAY


AS Mr John Smith retreated to southern France for a well-earned break last
Friday, he could be forgiven for switching his attention to his beloved
airport thrillers and forgetting all about politics.
But the three weeks of rest and relaxation for the opposition leader may be
disturbed by one nagging thought: what exactly is it that Labour now plans
to oppose?
The irony is that - leaving aside temporarily the grander question of
'Whither Labour?' - the most immediate policy questions that confront Mr
Smith are almost exactly the same as those facing the prime minister. What
is more, his gut responses are close, if not identical, to those of Mr
Major.
On both Europe and the UK's gloomy economic outlook - the two issues set to
dominate the autumn session of parliament - Labour can and does point to
some differences with the government. But if the detail is perused
carefully, many of those differences are more of tone and presentation than
of policy. When it comes to general strategy, Mr Smith and Mr Major are, in
many respects, of one mind.
On Maastricht, for example, the dust kicked up by the Danish referendum's
'no' vote is insufficient to camouflage the similarity of position between
the Labour and Conservative parties' ruling establishments.
Certainly Labour will make the most of its insistence on British adherence
to a common environment policy. Its backing for the social chapter of common
workplace rights - vigorously opposed by the Tories - is and will remain the
chief virility symbol of its more-communautaire-than-thou European Community
policy. There will also be much talk of Labour's demands for greater
democratic accountability of EC institutions.
But when it comes down to whether to ratify the treaty - leaving the Danish
problem until later - Mr Smith will, like Mr Major, fight to the death for
ratification.
In the short term, Labour will take up the tactical option of opposing a
guillotine motion that curtails debate on ratification. Thereafter, Mr Smith
is determined that Labour must remain firmly behind its pre-election
position and either openly support endorsement of the treaty or abstain from
obstruction.
Then there is the economy. The so-called summer onslaught, launched by the
shadow cabinet last week, was full of sound and fury about the need for
measures, a more active government approach and such like.
More closely questioned, Mr Gordon Brown, the new shadow chancellor, will
talk of limited fiscal measures - investment incentives, for example, or the
'phased release' of some local authorities' capital receipts from housing
sales for new building projects. Behind the bluster and righteous
indignation, Labour is far from advocating a spending free-for-all.
Does the party argue for a policy of full-blown Keynesian reflation,
unilateral interest rate cuts or abandonment of sterling's DM2.95 central
parity rate in the exchange rate mechanism? It most certainly does not.
On the day the new shadow cabinet met for the first time, the most
vigorously argued case for more government spending was coming not from the
official opposition but from the Confederation of British Industry.
Labour officials were briefing that there were 'no easy answers' on the
economy.
During the leadership election campaign Mr Smith was goaded by his rival, Mr
Bryan Gould, into making a few gestures towards the idea of a UK initiative.
For a short while he argued that the British presidency of the European
Community should use its clout to mobilise its EC partners into a pressure
group on Germany to revalue and for 'co-ordinated steps' to cut intererst
rates.
Yesterday Mr Robin Cook, the trade and industry spokesman, was trotting out
those ideas once again.
Yet it seems clear that Mr Smith, whose European contacts are well nurtured,
has all but abandoned such gestures. He and his aides are more than aware
that no just pressure can be brought to bear without the support of France
and, socialist or not, President Francois Mitterrand has made clear he is
not playing that game.
The new Labour leader has long argued that there should be no rush into a
policy review. The lessons of this year's election defeat were that the
review, launched in 1987, left the party with polices that were drawn up in
a boom and had to be sold in a recession.
Labour must fill the void somehow. It will do so with a new document on its
aims and values, intended to broaden out the until now half-hearted
post-mortem on the April defeat into a general debate about the goals for a
left-of-centre party as the millennium nears.
But we already know that there will be only partial reform of Labour's union
links, that the party leader is sceptical about any formal accommodation
with the Liberal Democrats and equally in two minds about proportional
representation.
Perhaps, like Mr Micawber or, dare one suggest, Mr Major, Mr Smith believes
something will turn up. But at the moment he appears ready to play Prime
Minister Tweedledum's more socially conscious twin brother.
For the meantime, the government's real opposition will remain on its own
back benches.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920804

