FT922-4287

FT  06 JUN 92 / School's out - and nowhere to go: Graduates of the 1990s are
facing gloomy prospects


   By ANDREW ADONIS, WILLIAM DAWKINS, GEORGE GRAHAM, ROBERT THOMSON and
DAVID WALLER


It is a tough time for new graduates across the developed world. The halcyon
days when bright young things brandishing degree certificates had the world
at their feet are over. Change in the pattern of graduate employment extends
beyond recession-induced pressures. Graduates are not simply flooding a
saturated market: after decades of steadily increasing supply, they have
fundamentally changed the nature of the market itself.
Let the numbers speak. In the mid-1960s Britain had 220,000 full-time
students. It now has nearly 700,000, and numbers have risen by 200,000 - 40
per cent - in the past five years alone. By the year 2000, its university
population is projected to be close on 1m, with one in three 18-year-olds
proceeding to higher education.
In the former west Germany the numbers graduating from universities with
degrees have risen from 47,800 in 1960, to 87,000 in 1970, 123,680 in 1980,
and nearly 170,000 last year.
Growth rates are similar in the rest of Europe, Japan and the US. So are the
hard-luck stories among recent graduates.
In Britain, unemployment among new graduates has virtually doubled in the
past two years, with more than one in 10 of last year's crop out of work six
months after graduating. According to the Incomes Data Services research
group, graduate vacancies are slightly up this year, but by barely half the
amount needed to make up for the increase in numbers graduating - let alone
for the 20 per cent drop in graduate vacancies last year. Unlike the 1980-82
recession, this one has hit hard in the prosperous, degree-rich south-east,
with few employers prepared to risk a return to the high recruitment levels
of the late 1980s.
'It is not just unemployment: under-employment is as marked among recent
graduates,' says Mr Richard Pearson, director of the Brighton-based
Institute of Manpower Studies. The number downgrading their aspirations -
from scientist to technician, administrator to clerical officer, and so on -
is growing; so is demand for second degree courses.
In Japan, too, companies are correcting for over-ambitious recruiting in the
late-1980s and a sharp fall in profits last year. The steel industry has
announced reductions of up to 50 per cent in graduate hiring; other sectors
are healthier, but almost all are down on last year. Faced with growing
inventories, 'sales' is the watchword, and with it a readiness to hire
less-qualified young people more prepared to do the cold-calling. Doda, an
employment information company, reports sales and marketing vacancies are
growing, while occupations considered important during the boom, such as
design and other creative work, are less in demand.
Prospects are no brighter for the 1.1m graduating this year in the US. 'It's
probably the worst market in two decades,' according to Mr Victor Lindquist,
director of career placement services at Northwestern University, Illinois.
His surveys of employers show 47 per cent expecting to recruit fewer
graduates than in 1991 - itself scarcely a bonanza year. The US economy,
struggling to emerge from two years of sluggish growth, is going through a
wave of 'downsizing', hitting white-collar workers much more than previous
recessions.
Starting salaries are suffering accordingly. After years of outstripping the
national earnings increase, this summer's projected average for new UK
graduates of Pounds 12,700 (Pounds 11,664 in the public sector) is just up
with inflation. In the US, universities in the Washington area report offers
little or no better than 1991. Chemical engineers are faring best, with
offers around Dollars 39,000 (Pounds 21,400); offers to economics and
finance graduates are down at an average Dollars 25,600.
For all that, doom merchants should be kept at bay. 'Few question the
lifelong advantage to individuals and the economy conferred by higher
education,' says Mr Pearson. Among the entire graduate population,
unemployment in most countries is well below the national rate. Salary
differentials remain wide, and widened in the 1980s. Longer-term
consequences are likely to be cultural and career shifts among graduates.
One simple fact stands out: the rapid increase in the numbers of women at
college. In 1990 women accounted for half of Britain's university applicants
 -up from 40 per cent in 1979.
More nebulous, but still pronounced, is a shift in fashion. Research among
German students by Messrs Gotz Schindler and Joachim Schuller, published by
the Bavarian state's higher education institute, identifies profound changes
in outlook between contemporary students and their forebears of 20 years
ago. Whereas the early 1970s cohort was markedly conservative, emphasising
values like stability, security, duty and protection of the existing social
order, today's students give priority to values like emancipation,
independence and self-fulfilment.
Generalisations about cross-country trends must be treated with scepticism.
Some trends, like the continuing UK aversion to manufacturing industry, are
country-specific. But a reaction against get-rich-quick graduate options is
evident across frontiers. So, with notable exceptions, is a longer-term
drift away from the public sector, indeed from the whole notion of 'public
service'.
Until the current recession, the Civil Service Commission was experiencing
difficulty recruiting sufficient high-calibre candidates to fill Whitehall's
fast stream. Even in France, where the brightest and best French graduates
invariably used to dream of life in the public administration, aspirations
have changed over the past decade, with a corporate career now almost as
highly valued as serving the state.
A typical member of the French old guard is Mr Jacques Attali, president of
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, who went to both the
Polytechnique and the Ecole Nationale d'Administration (Ena), the two best
known of the Grandes Ecoles, the elite civil service colleges which train
the brightest youngsters for the public service. 'Ena is a magnificent
school because people there put the state, not money, at the forefront of
their preoccupations,' says Mr Attali. That, however, is becoming less true
as more Grandes Ecoles alumni leave straight after graduation, either to
business schools - which report a big rise in attendances - or straight into
industry. Young civil service-trained graduates can now be found in groups
as diverse as Bouygues, in construction, Rossignol in skis and Peat Marwick
in accountancy.
The state has never starred in the American dream, but US graduates are
reacting against the 1980s all the same. Says Mr Lindquist: 'The expectation
of working 70 or 80 hours a week in a fast-track environment, albeit with a
great deal of money, is not the kind of pursuit that is going to attract as
many as it did a few years ago.'
As for Britain, a poll by Mori last year showed that for the first time
since 1983 graduates were less greedy in their average salary expectations
than those in the previous year. Only a fifth of graduates volunteered high
starting salary as important in their career choice; long-term pay and
benefits were valued by twice as many as starting salary, with a third
highlighting opportunities for foreign travel.
The travel bug is catching. Fresh from a packed session on opportunities in
the UK diplomatic service, Mr David Chamberlain, of Oxford University's
careers service, talks of the 'anywhere but here syndrome'. 'The number
wanting to get abroad, mostly for a few years before starting a long-term
career, is shooting up.' Graduates are gaining most from the 'Europe without
frontiers'.
The enthusiasm of graduates for moving about in their 20s is increasing more
generally. Half of all entrants to secondary-level teacher training courses
in Britain are now 'mature', with the average age of entrants to the
profession at 26. Few have even graduated by that age in Germany, but even
there the attraction of 'time out' is rising. The Bavarian state survey
found almost 80 per cent of those studying scientific subjects to be between
20 and 25 when they start their studies, as opposed to 57 per cent 20 years
ago.
The big increase in graduate supply is itself shaping the market. Most
obviously, the professions are now graduate preserves. Careers like
personnel, which attracted few graduates 20 years ago, have now all but
closed their doors to those without degrees. Barely 2 per cent of Britain's
trainee accountants are now non-graduates. Between them, accountancy and the
legal profession, which 25 years ago took some 6 per cent of Oxford
University's annual output, now consume about a fifth.
That is the reverse image of the placement trend for the largest of the
traditional graduate professions - teaching, the attraction of which to
Oxbridge graduates plummeted in the 1980s. In many countries, of course,
teaching has retained high status, but the point brings out a larger one
more generally applicable: the growing differentiation between elite
colleges and the plethora of higher education institutions beneath them.
If anything, the relative prestige of elite institutions has increased, as
in most countries the brunt of expansion has been borne by polytechnics or
liberal arts-style colleges. Sir Ralf Dahrendorf, warden of St Antony's
College Oxford, fears for the future of Britain's universities as they go
down the continental road of mass higher education. But his alma mater is
proving resilient in self-defence. While in the three years to 1991,
Sheffield Polytechnic increased its full-time numbers by more than a third,
numbers at Oxford expanded by less than 5 per cent - and the university
plans no net growth in the next decade.
Across the Channel, the Grandes Ecoles still account for only 53,000
students out of 1.1m throughout France - far more exclusive, in relative
terms, than the Ivy League or Britain's elite institutions. In Japan,
similarly, the university attended by a graduate is generally more important
than his or her results, with Tokyo, Kyoto and Waseda at the top of most hit
lists.
Greater diversity and differentiation, then, are on the cards for the 1990s.
And what if graduate unemployment fails to abate? According to one
celebrated thesis, a prime cause of the 1848 revolutions in Germany was an
excess of highly educated unemployed. Another revolution of the
intellectuals? Stuff and nonsense to the British, of course. Says Mr Pearson
of the Institute of Management Studies: 'At the moment there's only one
fashion - to get a job.'
Additional reporting by William Dawkins, George Graham, Robert Thomson and
David Waller.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920606

