FT921-1333

FT  25 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Taiwan, China could join Gatt on same day


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


CHINA and Taiwan could both be members of Gatt a year from now, following an
informal deal between China, the US and EC over Taiwan's application to join
the 103-member world trade body.
Officials said yesterday the next meeting of Gatt's governing council, on
April 30, was likely to set up a working party to consider Taipei's
membership bid. Taiwan applied in January 1990 as a 'separate customs
territory', the formula used by Hong Kong and Macao, already Gatt members.
But China first opposed the application, then insisted Taiwan could not join
before it did.
The working party drafting China's membership terms, set up in 1987, was
reactivated in February after a long hiatus thatfollowed Beijing's 1989
clampdown on the pro-democracy movement and a slowing of economic reform.
The US, Taipei's principal sponsor, opposed a link between the two sets of
membership talks but failed to gain the support of other Gatt members. Under
the terms of the informal understanding, China will join Gatt first,
possibly only minutes ahead of Taiwan. 'The most probable scenario is that
they will join on the same day,' one trade official said.
Since Taiwan is a market economy which has already taken steps to liberalise
its trade regime, the negotiation of membership terms could be finished
within 12 months. Officials said yesterday a special protocol of accession
for China, taking account of its largely state-controlled non-market
economy, could also be completed in that time.
Despite recent moves by China to make its trading system more
Gatt-compatible, special membership provisions are seen as essential since
normal Gatt rules cannot apply to an economy where prices may bear no
relation to output costs. The accession protocol is likely to include
special safeguards to protect trading partners against surges of imports
from China.
The understanding reflects the desire of most Gatt members to have China in
the fold, which they hope will cement economic (and potential political)
liberalisation. But it could spark opposition in the US Congress, which
wants tougher action against Beijing over human rights abuses and unfair
trading practices.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920325

