FT924-7988

FT  13 NOV 92 / The Autumn Statement: Measures aim to help construction
industry


   By ROBERT PESTON and ANDREW TAYLOR


A PACKAGE of measures was announced to boost the construction and transport
industries.
The chancellor said the Pounds 1.6bn extension of the Jubilee Line to
London's Docklands would go ahead if final agreement on a Pounds 400m
private-sector contribution was reached with a consortium of banks.
But other government funding for London Transport next year will be 30 per
cent less than it had been expecting, prompting furious criticism from Mr
Wilfred Newton, London Transport's chairman.
Mr Newton said: 'We now face the real prospect of . . . the loss of 7,000
jobs in supply industries.'
A separate series of measures should help the construction industry. These
include the temporary suspension of restrictions on local authorities'
ability to spend receipts from the sale of capital assets.
From today until the end of 1993, all the proceeds from sales of assets such
as council houses will be available for spending on housing, schools, roads
and other projects. Previously, councils could spend only 25 per cent of
these proceeds. The newly available funds, which the Treasury estimates will
total Pounds 1.75bn, must be spent in the coming three years.
In addition, a special tax allowance is being introduced for a year to
encourage the construction of new industrial and agricultural buildings,
including hotels. Twenty per cent of the buildings' costs will be tax
deductible, if contracts for their construction are signed in the coming
year and they are brought into use by the end of 1994.
The construction industry will also be helped by a decision not to cut the
national road-building programme. In the longer term, the government hopes
to boost construction activity further by allowing private companies to form
joint ventures with the public sector to invest in roads, railways and other
infrastructure projects. It also held out the possibility of more motorway
toll roads.
The government also loosened restrictions on private-sector financing of
public-sector projects. Mr Lamont said privately financed schemes would now
be permitted so long as they were profitable.
The construction industry welcomed the package, including funds made
available to help the housing industry. Mr Joe Dwyer, chief executive of
Wimpey, a leading construction company, said: 'I am encouraged by what I
have heard.' Mr Neville Simms, chief executive of Tarmac, gave the changes
qualified approval.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921113

