FT923-9857

FT  03 AUG 92 / Arts: Michael Jackson


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


Life has proved too much for Michael Jackson; he cancelled his Saturday
concert to the anguish of 72,000 fans. But on Thursday there had been so
signs of trouble. He arrived as Jumping Jack Flash, ejected on to the stage
from below through a blaze of rockets, like the Good Fairy of the Panto; he
left over two hours later as Rocket Man, flying over the earthlings,
projected by his personalised jet pack, symbolically quitting this planet
which is so obviously alien to him.
When the penny finally seems to be dropping among the public that assembling
near a pop star at a vast stadium is marginally less rivetting than watching
Tracey sing 'My Way' on karaoke night at the pub, along comes Jackson, with
a payroll of 235, 1,000 tons of equipment, and an investment equal to the
GNP of Burundi, to prove that while Wembley is hopeless at laying on music
it is a fine setting for spectacle.
The cameos keep coming like prize rock videos. There is Jackson the Monster
Man as he recreates 'Thriller' with dancing skeletons and ghouls; there is
Jackson the hoodlum, gunning down his troupe in a hail of stuttering
crackers at the end of 'Smooth Criminal'; there is even Jackson, the pop
star, gliding and sliding backwards through his Moonwalk to the pulverising
rhythms of 'Billie Jean'. One moment he is hauled on a crane above the
ecstatic fans in 'Beat It'; the next he has literally disappeared, the
crouching heap at the back of the stage turning to nothing while Jackson has
somehow transposed himself to the front.
It helps that the eyes are transfixed because the ears are in for a bad
time. Jackson could profitably spend a million dollars or two fixing the
acoustics, and his voice will never progress beyond the piping. When he is
on stage alone, ruefully feeling his crotch as if searching for the first
signs of puberty, he looks a lost waif.
Only with the bangs and the rockets; the lasers and the ascending and
descending stage; the dancers and the band fleshing him out does Jackson
transform into the mega star of pop. His inspired showmanship sees him
through, especially when he gets the tallest, blondest, thinnest, female
guitarist in the world, dressed of course in the head-dress of a New Guinea
chief, to boogie with him on stage.
But when the images on the vast screens that side the stage show home movies
of the early Jackson Five, and this little black kid stares out at you, you
start at the contrast with the present, at the blanched androgynous sylph
uncomfortably coping with the besotted girl he has rashly hauled on stage
from the crowd. That has become this; that is childhood and perhaps this is
the ultimate kid's party.
And near the end, as a band of children, dressed in costumes of the nations,
hold hands and circulate round a giant inflatable globe in the bathetic
'Heal the World', your heart goes out in a sentimental gush.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920803

