FT924-11272

FT  27 OCT 92 / LDP wriggles on the hook of political reform: Robert Thomson
meets a Japanese opposition MP who does not want to be a politician like the
others


   By ROBERT THOMSON


FROM atop a truck in Tokyo's more fashionable shopping districts, Ms Yuriko
Koike has been damning with lavish praise the disgraced godfather of
Japanese politics, Mr Shin Kanemaru, whom she lauds for 'valuable
contributions' to reform of a scandal-tainted political system.
Ms Koike, a TV commentator turned politician, is the star of the Japan New
party, formed before a recent upper house election and rewarded with four
seats for its middle-of-the-road opposition to excesses of the ruling
Liberal Democratic party (LDP).
The resignation of Mr Kanemaru and the factional farce over the selection of
a successor have provided Ms Koike with an attentive audience for her
homegoroshi, or praising to death. She has praised the godfather for
generosity in distributing an illegal Y500m (Pounds 2.42m) donation to 60
LDP colleagues and thanked him profusely for stirring enough public anger to
put political reform back on the agenda.
'It is all a rather cheap drama. The longer the faction fight goes on, the
more ridiculous it seems. It reminds me of a sinking boat on which the
passengers and crew are arguing over who should be the next captain,' Ms
Koike explained, in between mouthfuls of noodles in the parliamentarians'
canteen.
Faction-fighting continued yesterday, as supporters of Mr Keizo Obuchi,
chosen to replace Mr Kanemaru at the helm of the LDP's largest faction,
continued a whisper campaign aimed at undermining the authority of his
opponent, Mr Ichiro Ozawa, who still has the support of a majority of the
faction's members.
The inability of the largest opposition party, the Social Democratic party
of Japan, to score political points has allowed the Japan New party to lift
its profile by tapping into popular discontent with the apparently
unchanging ways of the ruling party and its five fractious factions.
As a recently elected parliamentarian, Ms Koike is still enthusiastically
pushing at the apparently immovable Japanese political hierarchy. But she
does not have much faith in the LDP's public embrace of 'political reform',
which surfaces each time the party faces one of its periodic crises.
'I am very pessimistic. We are the lawmakers, but look at the laws we have
made,' she said referring to the meagre Y200,000 fine imposed on Mr Kanemaru
for illegally receiving Y500m. 'It's easy to say we should have a
redistribution of seats, and then argue over an increase of four seats here
and a decrease of four seats there, but this is a technical thing and has
nothing to do with the philosophy.'
If Japanese politics were run by Koike rules, the first change would be made
to parliamentary debate. She complains there is 'no debate' in Japanese
politics, and that opposition parties are restricted because they can only
ask pre-arranged questions and not outline policy alternatives. She said.'
Parliament should be a place of debate, but now it is like kabuki (the
Japanese traditional theatre). Sometimes a minister will say, 'Oh, this
question is too important for me to answer, I'll ask the bureaucrat to
speak.' It is a farce.'
Her own public performances are coloured by a feeling for the theatrical, a
sense acquired during 14 years of television work. As anchor-person at a
popular current affairs programme called 'World Business Satellite,' Ms
Koike, 40, was frequently profiled in the Japanese press as the thoroughly
modern woman, trilingual and single.
She speaks English and Arabic, a skill which got her noticed after an
interview with Mr Yassir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organisation
leader, in which she did her own live-to-air interpreting. Her father, an
oil man, worked in the Middle East and she stayed on to complete a degree in
sociology at Cairo University and to write 'Climbing the Pyramids in a
kimono', an account of her experiences.
'I remember in the early 1970s at the time of the first oil shock that the
Japanese politicians who came to the Middle East had no understanding of the
politics in the region. For 20 years I had seen the same problem, and I
decided to do something about it, to use my profile to create momentum for
change.'
Ms Koike is not exactly sure how the electoral system should be changed. Her
recently born party is still drafting a proposal but she is certain that the
present system does not properly represent the aspirations of Japanese
voters.
On political funding, her policy is already decided. The present limit on
corporate donations to individual politician is Y1.5m, which she wants
reduced to Y100,000, while transgressors would be subject to a maximum
penalty of Y3m and a jail sentence.
'It is best to send violators to jail. We also have to make the system more
transparent. Politicians have so many support groups and study groups, so
many pockets, that it is difficult to know where all the money is going. We
should limit the number of pockets, two pockets per politician.'
Ms Koike likes standing atop trucks praising her political opponents but she
does not intend to stay on beyond her present six-year term: 'I don't really
want to be a politician like the others. I am interested in changing the
system, not in becoming a part of it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921027

