FT924-12171

FT  22 OCT 92 / Labour rounds on abstainers: Six rebel Tories oppose
government but motion to keep pits open is lost by 13 votes


   By IVOR OWEN and DAVID OWEN


ANGRY Labour backbenchers rounded on eight Ulster Unionist MPs whose
abstentions ensured the government a comfortable majority of 13 at the end
of the fiercely argued debate on the government's pit closure programme in
the Commons last night.
A Labour motion demanding that no pit should be closed until the completion
of a report by the trade and industry select committee was defeated by 320
votes to 307.
Six rebel Tories voted for the motion and five others abstained, but
Labour's hopes of defeating the government disappeared when Mr David Hunt,
the Welsh secretary, sealed a deal reached with the Ulster Unionists in the
closing speech for the government.
Mr Roy Beggs, Ulster Unionist MP for Antrim East, asked if an extended
review of energy policy promised by the government would take account of the
needs of Northern Ireland.
Mr Hunt answered: 'Without any qualification I can give that assurance'.
In a second vote a government amendment which would permit some of the pits
to close where agreement is reached with the workforce was carried by a
majority of 15 (320-305).
The Tory MPs who voted against the government were Mr Richard Alexander
(Newark), Mr Michael Clark (Rochford), Mrs Elizabeth Peacock (Batley and
Spen), Mr Richard Shepherd (Aldridge Brownhills), Mrs Ann Winterton
(Congleton) and Mr Nicholas Winterton (Macclesfield).
The abstainers were Sir Richard Body (Holland with Boston), Mr Peter Fry
(Wellingborough), Mr David Nicholson (Taunton), Mr Toby Jessel (Twickenham),
and Sir Patrick McNair-Wilson (New Forest).
Earlier Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and industry secretary, reassured
some of the Tory backbenchers who had earlier threatened to vote against the
government.
He promised that the extended review would ensure that British Coal was not
being deprived of its fair share of the energy market through preferential
treatment accorded to nuclear power and the privatised electricity
companies.
Mr Martin O'Neill, Labour's energy spokesman, complained that Mr Heseltine
had inadvertently misled the House by implying that even the 10 worst
loss-making pits already earmarked for closure might remain in production.
Mr Winston Churchill (C Davyhulme), who emerged last week as a leading
rebel, ran a gauntlet of Labour derision when he confirmed that he would,
after all, vote for the government.
Reacting angrily to taunts from the benches of 'hypocrite', he claimed that
Labour had closed pits 'twice as fast as any Conservative government' when
it was in office.
The cost of throwing 30,000 miners on the dole would 'far exceed' the Pounds
1bn cost of subsidising each tonne produced by British Coal to the level of
world prices, he said.
It was not just the miners who had been granted a 90-day stay of execution -
so had Mr Heseltine.
Mr Patrick Cormack (C Staffordshire South), emphasised the significance of
the expanded review by telling Mr Heseltine 'it is for that reason and that
reason alone' that many Tory backbenchers would vote in the government lobby
at the end of the debate. In an ominous rider, he noted that if the review
proved to be of a different character, the Tory critics would have an
opportunity to vote against the government on a subsequent occasion.
Mr Malcolm Bruce, Liberal Democrat trade and industry spokesman, demanded
that the government implement a moratorium on new gas-fired power stations
until the coal review was completed.
The genuineness of the extended review was strongly challenged by Mr Robin
Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary. To a roar of approval from the
Labour benches, he called for the closure threat to be removed from all 31
pits, and a frank admission from Mr Heseltine that in making his original
proposal he had got it wrong.
Mr Cook declared: 'We will mobilise the deep public anger you have aroused
until you do admit you were wrong, and until you do admit that the British
economy needs the British coal industry.'
Mr Tony Benn, Labour MP for Chesterfield, accused ministers of having 'lied,
lied and lied about the mining industry'.
He forecast that the vote at the end of the debate would not determine the
issue.
Mr Benn said: 'The British public has been reawakened not just about the
mining industry but about the whole rotten philosophy of the 1980s.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921022

