FT921-1429

FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Uncertain start forces Tories to change tack
 -John Major's switch to a more strident style is a gamble


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


MR JOHN MAJOR has had a rough start to what may prove the pivotal week of
the campaign. The strategy shaped around him has looked uncertain and
defensive. The prime minister has discovered that rousing receptions from
the party faithful cannot insulate him from the bruising exchanges with the
media which inevitably follow a Labour opinion poll lead.
There are two roles for a leader during an election: the first is to fire
the enthusiasm of supporters; the second to win the votes of the
uncommitted. Just 10 days into the campaign, Mr Major has swerved in an
attempt to do both.
For months, the senior members of Mr Major's campaign team have been pumping
out a single message. The Conservatives would defy economic gravity and win
an election in the depths of a recession because the voters liked and
trusted the prime minister and feared Labour's tax plans.
Mr Major would harness the mood for change in the country to the
Conservative cause - robbing Mr Neil Kinnock of one of his most precious
assets during Mrs Thatcher's leadership. The voters would opt for Mr Major's
caring Conservatism rather than Mr Kinnock's wallet-threatening socialism.
The opinion polls still carry the message that the prime minister is one of
his party's strongest assets. Voters who blame the government for the
recession, decry the poll tax and worry about the National Health Service
still speak of 'that nice Mr Major'.
His popularity, though well below the levels achieved during the Gulf war,
has remained consistently above that of Mr Kinnock. The latest NOP poll puts
the prime minister's personal-approval rating at 53 per cent, 20 points
clear of the Labour leader. The contrast with his predecessor could not be
starker. Mrs Thatcher won elections almost in spite of herself. She was
adored by party activists and never greatly liked by voters. But her
outspoken clarity conveyed to enough of the electorate the message that her
policies were right.
Mr Chris Patten, party chairman, and the other senior ministers in charge of
mapping out the campaign, were convinced that the prime minister should play
to his different strengths. He would stand above the fray, while the likes
of Mr Michael Heseltine destroyed the Opposition's prospectus. But Mr John
Smith's shadow Budget undercut the ground on tax. Senior ministers realised
that if they could not begin to climb back this week the election might be
lost before the votes were cast.
The result has been an abrupt change in tactics. Almost overnight, the prime
minister who offered a soft-focus vision in which wealth creation and
welfare went hand-in-hand has embraced the harsher language of Thatcherism
in an all-out drive to discredit the Labour party.
Party strategists acknowledge two serious mistakes in the earlier approach.
The first was to forget the simple fact that, during a campaign, about two
thirds of the images that a party conveys to the voters are channelled
through its leader. So, if Mr Major was excluded from the assault on
Labour's tax plans, the Conservatives would be denying themselves their most
important link with the electorate on what they regard as the most important
issue of the campaign. The second error was a calculation that Mr Smith's
shadow Budget could be attacked on its own terms. When he did enter the
fray, the prime minister who had advocated a classless society emerged as
the champion of the middle classes.
That has now changed. Mr Major has been at the centre of the battle since
the weekend and the focus of the attack on Labour's tax policies has been
recalibrated to underline the 'threat' to the incomes of the skilled working
classes - the C2s at the centre of the election battle.
The shift has pleased the party faithful. Their message to Central Office
during the opening days of the campaign was that they wanted a more vigorous
defence of the party's record in government. But Mr Major's colleagues
acknowledge that it is far less clear how the shift will be greeted. Some
candidates are already reporting complaints from voters attracted by his
less partisan approach.
The new approach has brought another set of problems. Mr Major,
inexperienced in election campaigns and lacking the combative rhetorical
style of his predecessors, insisted on the switch. But he has sometimes
looked ill at ease. Television images of his vituperative attacks on Mr
Kinnock have jarred. He has been caught off-guard when journalists have
probed the negative campaigning and have pressed him to differentiate his
policies from those of his predecessor.
Party strategists insist that both Mr Major and his campaign are now
settling into a more comfortable rhythm. But they have lost more than a week
of the campaign. If they do not regain the ground, Mr Major risks becoming
one the most popular prime ministers to lose an election.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920324

