FT922-519

FT  27 JUN 92 / Unsettled on West Bank: This week's election caused dismay


   By HUGH CARNEGY


For Rabbi Moshe Levinger, this week's Israeli general election was both a
crushing personal defeat and a stinging setback for the Jewish settlements
in the occupied territories which he helped pioneer.
An election broadcast in which the bearded, bespectacled rabbi, once jailed
briefly for shooting dead an Arab shopkeeper, was seen blasting away with a
pistol did not make the desired impact. Not only did his campaign for the
Knesset, the Israeli parliament, fail, but he was blamed by other settlers
for splitting the right-wing vote and aiding the victory of Mr Yitzhak Rabin
and the Labour party.
But Rabbi Levinger is not about to abandon the militant ideology that drove
him in 1968 to lead a band of settlers into the centre of Hebron, an Arab
town in the then recently captured West Bank. 'Rabin contradicts the whole
of Jewish history,' he exclaimed in his home in the Hebron settlement, a
cluster of heavily-guarded apartments that sits alongside the town's
dishevelled Arab souk.
To make his point, the rabbi spread a map over the table. Alongside, an M-16
rifle leant against a lectern used for family prayers. West Bank places like
Hebron, Nablus, Jericho, Eli and Shillo were all in the heart of Eretz
Israel, the biblical Land of Israel, he said. Jews lived in Hebron until
1929 from ancient times when they were driven out following a massacre.
'This is our country and we cannot stop settlements in Eretz Israel.'
Mr Rabin's promise to halt expansion of most settlements has alarmed the
settlers. They had grown accustomed to unstinting patronage from the
outgoing government led by the Likud party. Their numbers have increased
sharply over the past five years from 60,000 to about 100,000, and there is
space for another 35,000 in houses still under construction.
The settlers are also agitated by Mr Rabin's plan to grant significant
Palestinian self-government as an interim step in Middle East peace talks
before eventually returning most of the occupied territories to some form of
Arab sovereignty. The settlers see this as the path to a Palestinian state.
In Kiryat Arba, the 6,000-strong settlement just outside Hebron, Keren
Maman, who runs a cafe and video shop said: 'There will be bloodshed. We are
not prepared to let the Arabs enter Kiryat Arba.' Shimon Tourgeman, an
elderly grocery store owner, said there would be mass demonstrations by
settlers. 'Palestinian autonomy will never happen because the people here
will never allow it. There are extremists among the residents here.' His
brother, pistol stuffed in his belt, nodded agreement.
The well-armed settlers are capable of violent disruption. Mr Rabin is known
to fear it, remembering the murderous 'Jewish Underground' which sprang up
in the settlements in the early 1980s. But their bark may prove to be more
fearsome than their bite.
For the moment, they refuse to accept that the political tide has turned
against them. Repeatedly in Hebron and in Kiryat Arba, settlers sought to
explain away the election result as anything but a dramatic shift to the
anti-settler Labour and Meretz parties.
Keren Maman blamed the new immigrants from the Soviet Union, most of whom
voted overwhelmingly for Labour and Meretz. Rabbi Levinger said he did not
believe public support for the settlers had been eroded. 'I don't think
attitudes towards Eretz Israel have changed,' he said.
But the election results do suggest a significant swing. The parties which
clearly support settlements slipped back to 49 seats from 52 won at the last
election. The most active pro-settlement party, Tehiya, lost its place in
the Knesset altogether. Labour and Meretz, meanwhile, increased their
combined share from 49 seats to 56.
Beyond their belief in a God-given right to the territories, the settlers
are divided over what future political arrangements might be practical.
Rabbi Levinger talks of favouring a limited form of Palestinian autonomy.
But anything remotely acceptable to the Palestinians is loudly declaimed by
him and other settler leaders.
Some settlers even support the current peace process. Labour and Meretz
outpolled Tehiya and Rabbi Levinger in the settlements. Others espouse
'voluntary transfer' - the removal of the Arab population. Their message is
a barely disguised racism. 'The Arab mentality is like a donkey,' confided
Mr Tourgeman. 'You have to hit him with a stick to keep him going straight.'
In the end, the greatest threat to the settlers is not their nightmare of
the army - or a Palestinian government - one day arriving and forcing them
to evacuate. More serious, is the threat that their communities may be
gradually undermined
Mr Rabin's pledge to halt the Shk3bn (Pounds 660m) a year in direct
investment and remove the high subsidies available to settlers may cause the
many people who move to settlements in search of cheap housing within
commuting distance of Jerusalem or Tel Aviv to think again.
Keren Maman in Kiryat Arba has already sensed this. 'Our cafe depends on
trade from soldiers,' she said. 'If they withdraw, we will have no business.
We are going to be screwed. Everything the Likud did, Labour will ruin.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920627

