FT922-7100

FT  20 MAY 92 / Bosnia holds secret talks on Croatia link


   By LAURA SILBER and ROBERT GRAHAM


SECRET talks on a confederation between Croatia and Bosnia-Hercegovina were
revealed yesterday as Serb irregulars tightened their noose around Sarajevo,
the ravaged capital of Bosnia.
News of the negotiations came as Bosnia's rival ethnic leaders were due to
resume European Community-brokered peace talks in Lisbon tomorrow. Diplomats
however held out little hope that the talks would take place as planned.
Croatia's pro-government media yesterday reported that Croat and Moslem
leaders from Bosnia last week held secret talks in Split, the Croatian port,
on a confederal relationship between the two republics and on the internal
arrangement of Bosnia. 'Confederation of Croatia and Bosnia is acceptable to
both the Croatian and Moslem people of Bosnia,' a statement said.
Bosnian leaders did not confirm yesterday's disclosure, but talk of a
confederation is a sign of the desperation gripping Bosnia's Moslems reeling
from the Serb onslaught on Bosnia.
Mr Frederic Maurice, 39, a Swiss relief worker from the International Red
Cross, yesterday died in hospital after a mortar attack, which wounded two
other relief workers on Monday.
Meanwhile the announcement by Serb leaders of plans to form the army of the
self-proclaimed Serb Republic of Krajina, southern Croatia, yesterday
threatened the UN peace plan. The plan calls for some 14,000 peacekeepers to
monitor the demilitarisation and disarming of three crisis areas in Croatia.
The Yugoslav army, which is withdrawing from Croatia, is due to complete its
withdrawal from Bosnia. But the bulk of its weaponry and personnel are being
transferred to the newly-proclaimed Serb army of Bosnia.
The army yesterday left the military airport in Tuzla after evacuating the
military barracks, reported Tanjug, the Belgrade-based news agency.
Serb irregulars, backed by the federal army, have seized control of some
two-thirds of Bosnia's territory. Relief convoys have been blocked from
distributing aid throughout the republic of 4.35m Moslems, Serbs and Croats,
who are desparately short of food and medicine.
The Italian government yesterday approved a series of administrative
measures to cut red tape in the handling of refugees from the fighting in
Bosnia.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920520

