FT922-4535

FT  05 JUN 92 / Management: Confrontation up against collaboration - Sharply
differing attitudes to works councils in the UK and in Germany / Social
Europe


   By DAVID GOODHART


Wilfred Kuckelkorn has worked for Ford all his life and is now
deputy-chairman of Ford Germany. Jack Adams, a former communist shop steward
at British Leyland, is deputy-general secretary of the Transport and General
Workers Union.
The abbreviated biographies of the top trade union officials at,
respectively, Ford Germany and Ford UK demonstrate the differences between
the industrial relations and worker representation traditions of the two
countries.
The German system of co-determination, with workers on the board at company
level and powerful works councils at plant level, integrates the workforce,
giving it power and responsibility.
To some British trade unionists, this is no more than 'company unionism',
albeit of a powerful kind. They claim their system of external union
officials and plant-based shop stewards is more flexible and representative.
The differences between these two traditions are currently holding up
agreement on forming a European works council at Ford, aimed at giving a
collective voice to workers from all six European countries where Ford has a
presence.
The Germans want Euro-works council representatives to be elected only from
Ford employees. The British want some full-time union officials to sit on
the 20-person council. A compromise will probably be worked out, and could
become a model for other Euro-works councils. How do the contending systems
work at Ford?
In the German plants, the employee-only, legally constituted, works
councils, elected from the whole workforce, have veto power over everything
from working time to bonuses and redundancies.
Kuckelkorn is head of the works council at the Cologne factory, which
employs about half of Ford Germany's 36,000 employees, and he also heads the
less important Germany-wide works council.
In his plant - 'the size of a small town,' he says - he is effectively a
co-manager alongside the plant manager. He cannot call a strike - that can
only be done by IG Metall, the national union, when industry-wide
negotiations break down. Unresolved disputes at plant level go to labour
courts, but this rarely happens.
Does he have too much power? 'I've never seen a works council destroy a
German company but I've seen managements do it,' he says.
Neither Kuckelkorn nor Ford are directly involved in the industry pay
negotiations. But Kuckelkorn sits on the board of Ford Germany and has
access to information affecting the company's future.
That encourages a pro-active attitude to management. 'We put forward a plan
for a slimmer management structure and pushed the adoption of a plan cutting
innovation time. Not all our ideas are thought through but we do affect
management thinking,' he says.
Adams and many British union officials do not approve of such role
confusion. 'Mr Kuckelkorn has a conflict of loyalties. Our priority is to
the members and not the company, although the interests usually coincide,'
says Adams.
At Ford UK, the most senior union representatives, such as Adams, 57, are
full-time union officials not employed by the company. Adams leads the union
side at Ford's annual pay negotiations but is also involved in any large
issue, like redundancies.
He claims to get as much information about the company from Ford UK as
Kuckelkorn, 49, gets as deputy chairman of Ford Germany. 'But I can use it
for bargaining, whereas he is often bound by confidentiality,' says Adams.
The Ford National Joint Negotiating Committee (NJNC) is the pinnacle of the
UK system - combining elements of the all-German works council and the IG
Metall negotiating committee.
On the UK's 50-man NJNC sit the country's top shop stewards and the motor
industry's most senior full-time union officials.
Inside each of Ford UK's 20 plants is a joint works committee with half a
dozen shop stewards and a similar number of management representatives. This
is similar to the German works council, except that the latter has
legally-defined powers and does not include management in its routine
deliberations. What the shop steward can demand in the UK depends on how
militant shop-floor workers are ready to be. The strike weapon, banned at
plant level in Germany, remains crucial in the UK - even if rarely used.
At Cologne, the works council, which meets at least once a week, has 41
members of whom 35 are full-time. Beneath them are 800 informal
representatives for individual areas of the plant.
At Dagenham in Essex, which has 11,000 employees, compared with Cologne's
17,000, there are 250 shop stewards elected by union members. Only three -
the senior shop steward for each sub-plant - officially work full-time on
union matters. Adams admires the power of IG Metall but believes UK union
officials are more accountable because they negotiate on pay at plant level.
The works councils in Germany are trying to become involved in pay, to the
irritation of IG Metall officials. But Kuckelkorn's influence on non-pay
matters is greater than the most powerful shop steward at Dagenham or
Halewood. He believes that power is part of the explanation for higher
productivity at Ford's German plants.
Eventually, the German model of the works council will probably prevail  -
because of its wider support in Europe. But a Ford Euro-works council, even
if it is recognised by the company, is no guarantee of harmony between
Ford's European workforces.
Co-ordination between countries to stop strikes is being undermined by the
transfer of work. When jobs are transferred - 350 research jobs recently
moved from moving from the UK to Germany - common interest soon
disintegrates.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920605

