FT924-11385

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (5): Risk factor too
high / A look at emerging markets


   By PHILIP COGGAN


RETURNS in principal stock markets such as Britain and Japan have been
disappointing in recent years as economies paid the price for the
debt-financed excesses of the 1980s.
But some stock markets have shown spectacular returns. In Brazil, for
example, the IFC Index more than quadrupled between the end of 1990 and
April 1992. The Mexican market rose by 138 per cent in 1991.
Some believe that such so-called 'emerging' markets represent the best
chance for attractive investment returns in the 1990s and beyond.
There is a plausible rationale for this view. Emerging economies have faster
growth rates than industrialised nations and many are opening their markets
to the private sector and to overseas investors. The prospects for corporate
earnings growth and for investment returns should thus be greater.
Emerging markets are also less 'efficient' than stock markets in developed
economies and therefore present greater opportunities for exploiting pricing
anomalies for profit.
There is no universally-agreed definition of an emerging market but the
areas which normally fit into this category include Latin America, south
Asia, eastern Europe and some small Mediterranean countries.
Nick Train of GT Management, says research has shown that these markets have
little or no correlation with each other, or with the stock markets of
developed economies. Of course, this is not always a positive factor, since
it means emerging markets can fall when developed markets are rising. But it
does mean emerging markets represent a genuine diversification of risk.
To date, most institutional investors have little exposure to the emerging
markets sector. Fund Research, the group which analyses collective funds,
said in a recent report: 'Although emerging markets account for 13 per cent
of the world's GNP and perhaps 80 per cent of the world's population, their
market capitalisation is only 6 per cent of total world capitalisation and
they probably represent only around 0.5 per cent of institutional investors'
total portfolio holdings.'
So will pension fund managers move more aggressively into this area, and
just as importantly, should they do so? There are plenty of
counter-arguments to the bull case.
The main problem is stock markets in such countries are normally
underdeveloped. It can be difficult to gain access to the kind of
information pension fund managers would expect to receive from companies in
industrialised nations. And liquidity is a particular problem, creating the
risk that managers buy into markets when they are fashionable, only to be
stranded when the area falls from favour.
Often, there are only a few shares in which institutional investors can
realistically buy holdings. In Colombia, for example, 82.5 per cent of the
market's capitalisation at the end of June consisted of just 10 stocks.
These difficulties have not stopped pension funds from investing in some
emerging markets. According to Tim Gardener, head of asset planning at
actuaries Mercer Fraser, there is already investment in the lesser-developed
Pacific basin countries such as Korea, Thailand and Malaysia of around 1.5
to 2.5 per cent of pension fund assets.
The Pacific basin has established its reputation as an area with superior
GDP growth performance, says Mercer Fraser's Gardener. But he believes
investment interest in other areas such as Latin America and eastern Europe
has been more supply-led with well-established names bringing out funds in
an attempt to attract investors.
'Projections of GDP growth in these areas are more speculative,' says Mr
Gardener. 'The illiquidity of markets is also an issue, and the charging
structure within these funds tends to be high.'
When closed-end funds are launched in temporarily fashionable areas,
investors have frequently found that the shares trade at a heavy discount
when the excitement dwindles. The average discount on UK-listed country
funds was around 32 per cent in October.
Nevertheless, for most pension fund managers who want exposure to emerging
markets, a fund still represents the most logical route. Given the likely
size of investment in any individual market, it would be hard to justify the
time and effort involved in researching the companies involved.
If the recent problems of the world economy continue, some would expect
interest in emerging markets to increase, as they are one of the few
investment sectors offering the prospect of exciting returns.
But Mr Gardener doubts whether pension funds will see a significant increase
in exposure to emerging markets in the near future. 'Many pension funds see
this field as akin to venture capital,' he says. 'And with so much
uncertainty in major economies, this is not a climate for taking big risks.'
And he makes a more general point. This could be the wrong time for pension
funds to move into such a high risk area since the funds are getting more
mature and thus likely to realign their portfolios in favour of bonds rather
than equities.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921026

