FT921-1400

FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Labour unveils proposals for London


   By DAVID OWEN


LABOUR yesterday played down its plans to remove the Corporation of London's
local-government powers over the City as it launched its manifesto for the
whole of London.
The 10-page document did not mention the proposed transfer of powers,
although the party later insisted it would implement the plan. It described
the transfer as 'not a high priority'.
The party also predicted that its proposed strategic London government would
be in place within about two years.
The cost of the body would be met partly by taking over the budgets of the
joint boards which have replaced the Greater London Council. Mr Bryan Gould,
shadow environment secretary, said joint-board functions and budgets would
be taken over by the proposed Greater London Authority 'in most cases'. The
rest of its funding would be provided by government grant.
The authority is the centrepiece of Labour's plans for the capital. They
also involve a new London Development Agency and a range of transport
measures, including reforms to maximise the use of travel and network cards
and new regulation of taxis and minicabs.
Mr Gould said the authority would be elected by 'a new and more proportional
electoral system' guaranteeing equal representation for women. It would have
approximately half the number of elected members the GLC had.
The GLA would be the basis of a wholly elected London police authority.
Labour wants the authority to be based at County Hall, the former GLC
headquarters. Its planned sale to a Japanese developer was announced earlier
this week.
The Conservative London manifesto, unveiled last week, proposes a cabinet
sub-committee for the capital, a London transport minister and a
private-sector forum to advise on promoting the city as a cultural and
business centre.
The Liberal Democrats want a strategic London authority to be elected by a
system of proportional representation.
Editorial comment, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920324

