FT921-1347

FT  25 MAR 92 / Lenin's revenge on the ad men


   By GARY MEAD, Marketing Correspondent


ONCE there were the privileged nomenklatura, the well-off speculanti, the
herdlike narod (people) and the hopeless and hapless bedalagi (poor). But
then Boris Yeltsin arrived and the Russian class structure went topsy-turvy,
utterly ruining the crafty but rather stereotyped marketing plans dreamed up
by westerners hoping to make a fast buck.
Russian consumers no longer fit the patterns of yesteryear, according to
'The Russian Consumer', a report published yesterday by the international
division of the advertising agency DMB&B, which has an outpost in Moscow.
Purveyors of western goods should accustom themselves to new categories.
They include:
The kuptsi, or merchant-minded class, who mix self-reliance, hard work and
decisiveness with self-centredness, greed, smugness, narrow-mindedness and
intolerance. Their preference is to 'buy Russian rather than foreign goods'
and they are biased against marketing on foreign appeal only.
The Cossacks, who are as 'fiercely Russian' as the kuptsi but 'hanker after
bright western imagery', and given their interest in 'brands which are
difficult to obtain, unusual, expensive or of high status' hanker after
goods which enable them to show off.
The students, who are guided in their purchases by an idealism which wants
'society to be healthy, rich and open for all'. The bad news is that they
possess 'a relatively high aversion to hard work . . . they are in search of
western symbols of prestige - but on the cheap'.
The businessmen, who are less work-shy; indeed they are preoccupied with
making money.
They look for products which are easily found ('no time for shopping
around') and which have 'strong functionality' - the Mercedes is bought
because it is thought to be reliable as well as socially prestigious.
Finally, the Russian souls, 'a rather sad group, consisting of people with
low material status who are likely to remain so . . . they are happy to join
a queue without knowing the object'. Thus, says the report, 'classic
marketing techniques are very difficult to apply to Russian souls. The very
idea of choice frightens him or her'.
Although many of the categorisations sound rather tongue-in-cheek, DMB&B's
study is the result of 18 months research in urban and rural Russia, based
on 'hundreds of hours of discussions' with bankers, consumers, local and
international advertisers and businessmen.
While insisting that western businesses need to shake up their ideas on
Russian consumers, the report admits that any hope of mass marketing is
still a pipedream. 'Markets and consumers do not as yet exist in any real
sense in Russia.'
The Russian Consumer: a new perspective and a marketing approach. Available
from DMB&B Ltd, 2 St James's Square, London SW1Y 4JN. Price Pounds 48.50.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920325

