FT924-1010

FT  21 DEC 92 / Rate cuts would be effective, says Waigel


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


CUTS IN German interest rates would be the most effective single measure to
revive the flagging German economy, Mr Theo Waigel, finance minister, said
in an interview published yesterday.
At the same time he said there must be 'no taboo' in considering cuts in
public sector spending in any area, including social spending, in a package
of measures to be finalised in January. The package is supposed to be part
of a 'solidarity pact' between the central government, opposition, trade
unions, employers and local government.
While he ruled out any increase in taxation before 1995 as 'totally wrong'
in the present economic situation, Mr Waigel said the abolition of a range
of tax allowances was under consideration.
The government is considering three lists of savings measures to reduce the
public sector deficit and enable more cash to be found to help revive the
collapsed economy in east Germany, according to weekend reports.
They include central government cuts, state government cuts and reduction in
tax allowances.
In an interview with Welt am Sonntag, Mr Waigel admitted there might be zero
growth in the German economy for 1993, although he was confident there would
be a recovery in the second half, thanks largely to a recovery in the US,
and other German export markets.
He stopped short, however, of calling on the German Bundesbank directly to
cut its base interest rates to stimulate the economy.
He merely repeated that rigorous public sector spending control and wage
restraint in the current round of pay negotiations were essential to give
the central bank 'room for manoeuvre' to cut its rates in the new year.
The finance minister promised to have his package of savings measures,
involving the 16 federal Lander and local authorities, as well as the
central government, ready for publication in January at the latest.
Selective leaks of measures in the savings lists have caused a storm of
political criticism over the weekend, with the opposition Social Democrats
charging the government with seeking to finance unification at the expense
of the poorest members of the German population.
Cuts cited include a reduction in unemployment benefit, child allowances and
maternity benefits, and a freeze on student grants, right down to details
such as a cut in the temperature of municipal swimming pools, or an increase
in entry prices for museums and art galleries.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921221

