FT921-14374

FT  16 JAN 92 / Sweeping reforms at Lloyd's to limit losses: Proposals offer
little help for insurance market's worst-hit Names


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S of London yesterday unveiled one of the most far-reaching reform
programmes in its 300-year history which could sharply reduce the importance
of unlimited liability on which the insurance market is built.
The reforms aim to strengthen Lloyd's capital base, cut costs, improve
competitiveness and help it increase its share of the international market.
They come as Lloyd's faces some of its worst trading losses - estimated at
more than Pounds 2bn in the three years to 1990.
However, the proposals, drafted during the past year by a 14-strong task
force, contain little to relieve the position of those 'Names' who have
borne the brunt of the market's losses. The Names are the individuals whose
wealth provides the market's capital.
The Lloyd's council, the market's governing body, has accepted the bulk of
the recommendations and will act quickly to implement a number of them.
The first of the reforms, modifying unlimited liability rules, is expected
to be introduced next January. That would cap the losses for which Names,
who can be bankrupted under the present system, are liable.
Names will be personally liable for all losses during a four-year period up
to an amount equivalent to their overall premium limit, the amount of
premiums they are allowed to accept under Lloyd's rules.
A Name accepting Pounds 500,000 in premiums, for example, would be liable to
pay insurance losses up to this amount. Losses above the individual's limit
would be payable from a central fund financed by contributions from all
Names. However, if this fund were to be exhausted, liability would revert to
the individual. The task force believes that may make Lloyd's a more
attractive investment and help stem the decline in membership.
Over 4,000 Names have left Lloyd's in the last 12 months, reducing
membership to about 22,500 and cutting Pounds 1bn from the market's capital
base.
Other proposals include:
The introduction of a system allowing less well-off Names to spread their
investments more widely, diversifying their risks.
Measures to increase Lloyd's ability to draw corporate capital into the
market. The task force suggests that Lloyd's should press for legislative
changes to allow 'corporate names' to underwrite at Lloyd's. If Lloyd's is
unable to attract sufficient capital from Names, it should increase its
reliance on corporate capital.
A charter of rights for Names, giving them the ability to hold regular
meetings of the syndicates in which they are grouped, direct access to
syndicate information and the right to veto big transactions.
Names have welcomed the changes in the report, which explicitly recognises
the 'primacy' of their interests. According to Mr Mark Farrer, the chairman
of the Association of Lloyd's Members, which represents 9,000 Lloyd's Names,
'the proposals go a long way towards correcting the imbalance between Names
and syndicate management. They are a blueprint for genuine change and
progress'.
Mr Tom Benyon, of the rival Society of Names, said that for the first time
Lloyd's was putting 'the outsiders first, and not the insiders', but it had
done 'nothing to help' the badly hit Names.
ANALYSIS
Page 10
Evolutionary rather than revolutionary overhaul
Spreading risks and rewards
REACTIONS
Page 11
Cautious optimism
Parties divided
Editorial comment, Page 20
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1 Photograph Lloyd's of London, reforms could sharply reduce the
importance of unlimited liability (Omitted).

920116

