FT924-11372

FT  26 OCT 92 / W German growth put at 1.5%


   By DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


WESTERN Germany is not in recession and its economy will grow by 1.5 per
cent this year, Mr Otmar Issing, a director of the Bundesbank, said at the
weekend.
However, Mr Issing acknowledged there had been a 'perceptible slowdown' of
economic growth, mainly because of a lack of demand for German products
abroad.
This was leaving an ever-clearer mark on the west German economy.
His comments, given during a lecture delivered at the Edinburgh and Stirling
University, come at a time when there is mounting evidence of stagnation in
the whole German economy. Retail sales and industrial orders have fallen for
the sixth consecutive month and a number of large companies have responded
to deteriorating conditions by announcing job cuts.
Mr Issing said that although recent figures showed real gross domestic
product in western Germany in the second quarter dropped by 0.5 per cent
compared with the first quarter, it exceeded GDP for the second quarter of
last year by 'a good 1 per cent'.
These figures 'indicated clearly that the west German economy is not in
recession'.
Productivity utilisation had remained above average 'right up to the
present'.
He acknowledged that persistent sluggish demand had hit the manufacturing
sector particularly hard; the business climate had clouded over perceptibly,
undermining the sector's propensity to invest.
There were a number of purely domestic impulses to growth - among them the
continued need to rebuild eastern Germany - but these would not be enough to
offset the slowdown in exports.
Mr Issing made no comment on the future orientation of monetary policy,
which is believed to be increasingly influenced by concern about Germany's
economic outlook.
Senior Bundesbank officials met senior economists of Germany's larger banks
last week to discuss the central bank's interest rate strategy.
A report in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a leading German newspaper,
on Friday suggested the Bundesbank had given the impression at this meeting
that it was committed to further cuts in short-term interest rates, but that
they would have to take effect slowly because of the danger the German
central bank would lose credibility in the battle against inflation.
Survey, Section III

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921026

