FT924-8075

FT  13 NOV 92 / OECD attacks Swiss policy


   By IAN RODGER


   GENEVA


SWISS monetary policy has been sharply criticised by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development.
The OECD suggests in its annual examination of Switzerland that the current
policy of the Swiss National Bank (SNB) leads to confusion in financial
markets about exchange rate and monetary policy objectives and may be an
unreliable way of achieving the central bank's economic objectives.
'It would therefore seem desirable to enhance the transparency of monetary
policy in the short run, beyond the current practice of announcing quarterly
projections of the monetary base (notes in circulation and sight deposits
held at the central bank),' the OECD says.
It recalls that the monetary base became a misleading indicator in the late
1980s after Switzerland had introduced an electronic clearing system. The
SNB then abandoned annual targeting in favour of medium term targeting.
The new system has severe drawbacks, according to the OECD. 'One problem is
the absence of reliable evidence that the envisaged expansion of base money
over the medium term will be compatible with sustained growth of output
under conditions of stable prices. Moreover, it is unclear to what extent
there is scope for the SNB's intention to take exchange rate considerations
into account.'
The OECD says M1 might be a more satisfactory intermediate monetary
aggregate to use as a target. It also appears to favour the controversial
idea of pegging the Swiss franc to the Ecu or the D-Mark. It acknowledges
that this would entail the loss of monetary policy autonomy which in the
past may have allowed Swiss interest rates to be lower than those elsewhere.
'But, given the prospects of greater integration with the rest of Europe, it
is uncertain whether this interest differential can be safeguarded in the
future.'
The OECD also attacks government tolerance of widespread cartels and other
practices that restrain free competition. It suggests that these practices
are largely responsible for the excessively high prices of almost everything
in the country. 'According to purchasing power parity calculations, the
overall domestic price level in Switzerland is 40 per cent higher than the
average for the whole OECD area for private consumption,' it states.
The report acknowledges that Swiss competition policy is becoming tougher,
and that it will become tougher still if the Swiss ratify the European
Economic Area (EEA) treaty in a referendum next month. The country would
then be obliged to take on European Community competition law in most
business activities.
However, a comprehensive reform of Swiss law and policy is still needed to
enshrine the notion that collusive agreements should be banned in principle
and to insist on transparency in the execution of competition policy.
The report says that the prospects for improvement of the Swiss economy,
which has suffered recession, high inflation and deteriorating public
finances for nearly two years, are now good.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921113

