FT921-1431

FT  24 MAR 92 / Brown shoots to wound opponent in Connecticut


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor and REUTER


   WASHIGNTON


THE principal interest in today's US primary in Connecticut lies in the
extent to which Mr Jerry Brown can shoot holes below the waterline of the
front-running Democratic party candidacy of Mr Bill Clinton.
Yesterday Mr Brown, former governor of California, described Mr Clinton, the
governor of Arkansas, as the 'greatest bluffer to enter American politics in
my lifetime'. He said: 'I think it would be an alarming situation if the
spin doctors of Bill Clinton were able to adopt a Politburo-type,
one-candidate strategy for the Democrats.'
At the weekend, he said his opponent was unelectable, morally irresponsible,
insensitive on racial issues, an abuser of the public trust, and incapable
even of running a campaign without recourse to deficits. The Connecticut
contest, for 53 convention delegates, is pretty much a straight fight
between Mr Clinton and Mr Brown, though the name of Mr Paul Tsongas, who
withdrew from the race last week, remains on the ballot. It is also seen as
a preview of what could be a bitter contest in New York two weeks later.
Mr Brown has ruthlessly exploited every allegation and half-charge against
Mr Clinton. Yesterday the Los Angeles Times reported that, as governor, Mr
Clinton had lobbied his local legislature to approve a state bond contract
to a company headed by a man who later pleaded guilty to cocaine charges. Mr
Clinton then granted him a pardon after he had served time in prison.
On Sunday, the Washington Post had reported about the relationship between
the governor and the head of Tyson's Food, a big Arkansas poultry producer,
including Mr Clinton's use of a corporate aircraft on state business.
As before, Mr Clinton issued careful rebuttals. He said the pardon had
followed the unanimous recommendation of the state parole board and he had,
in any case, pursued a policy of spreading state bond business among more
companies so as to avoid favouritism. On the second question, he said
Arkansas could not afford an aircraft for gubernatorial use and he saw
nothing wrong in saving state money, especially as he had disclosed every
use of the facility.
But the mere existence of such reports is grist to the Brown mill. He has
also sought to exploit in speeches to black audiences the fact that Mr
Clinton played golf last week at a Little Rock country club which excludes
blacks from membership (Mr Clinton has apologised for doing so).
On the Republican side, President George Bush has faced no real active
campaigning in Connecticut from his challenger, Mr Pat Buchanan.
Reuter adds: An opinion poll by CNN/USA/Gallup found that Americans would
re-elect President Bush by a 52-to-43 per cent majority over Mr Clinton if
the November 3 presidential election were held now.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920324

