FT921-1414

FT  24 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Ashdown offers farmers a carrot


   By IVOR OWEN


A 'substantial programme' to ease the difficulties caused by the fall in
farmers' incomes was advocated yesterday by Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal
Democrat leader, when he toured some of his party's most fertile electoral
ground in mid Wales.
He said in Montgomery that the programme should be funded from money
currently used to raise agricultural production.
Mr Ashdown charged the Labour party with not being interested in
agriculture, and accused the Conservatives of having forgotten the farmers.
'They have turned their back on you,' he said.
He reaffirmed his party's commitment to the small family farm. They formed
the 'backbone' of the industry and should not be left to the cold winds of
the free market. But he warned: 'Farming will have to move back into balance
with the market over a period of time.' He also called for more
environmental management schemes which would pay farmers for preserving the
countryside.
Mr Ashdown, interviewed on BBC television's Panorama last night, said his
party was 'not prepared to give' on its pledge to increase education
spending by Pounds 2bn if it were involved in negotiations with either
Labour or Tories in a hung parliament.
Earlier he had insisted that the increase in spending - financed by 1p on
the basic rate of income tax - would be the 'number one priority' of his
party in any coalition negotiations.
Questioned by students in Brecon, Mr Ashdown said part of the extra spending
on education would be devoted to the reintroduction of student grants and
the abolition of student loans.
At the same time he stressed that the Liberal Democrats were not committed
to restoring student grants to their 1979 level.
Mr Ashdown's whirlwind election campaign tour is to include a visit to
northern France on Sunday, party officials said last night. The visit is
intended to underline the Liberal Democrats' pro-European credentials.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920324

