FT923-9547

FT  05 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Amoco signs Romanian oil and
gas exploration deal


   By VIRGINIA MARSH and KAREN FOSSLI


   BUCHAREST, OSLO


AMOCO OF the US has signed a 25-year oil and gas exploration and
production-sharing agreement with Rompetrol, Romania's state oil company, as
part of the country's first post-communist exploration deal, the companies
announced in Bucharest yesterday.
The agreement gives Amoco Romania Petroleum, a subsidiary of Amoco
Production Company, rights to a 750 sq km (290 sq miles) area in the
Carpathian Mountains about 60 km (37 miles) north-east of Bucharest, which
Amoco won after an international tender in September 1990.
A Canadian Occidental/Enterprise Oil combine, which won two offshore sites
in the Black Sea and, Shell, which successfully bid for an area in
Transylvania, are due to sign similar contracts within the next 10 days. The
western companies are expected to invest about Dollars 90m in the next three
years as part of an initial five-year exploration period.
However, Rompetrol said developing the sites in the event of commercial
finds could could cost more than Dollars 2.4bn.
Rompetrol retains the right to acquire up to 20 per cent in any development,
with the western companies, which have received substantial tax concessions
from the Romanian government, free to export their share of production.
Mr David Work, vice-president of Amoco Production, said the agreement was
consistent with the company's strategy of investing in areas with known
hydrocarbon potential.
The deal, which was held up for several months until the Romanian parliament
passed enabling legislation, is Amoco's first exploration agreement in
central Europe.
Existing wells in Romania, historically one of central Europe's major
oil-producing areas, were heavily exploited under the Ceausescu regime.
However, the dictator's obsession with paying off the national debt kept the
Romanian oil industry short of funds for further exploration, contributing
to a drop in domestic crude oil production from more than 12m tonnes in 1979
to 6.8m tonnes last year.
SAGA PETROLEUM, Norway's biggest independent oil producer, said yesterday
its Snorre oil and gas field had come on stream six weeks earlier than
planned and NKr1.5bn (Pounds 135m) below budget at a cost of NKr16.6bn,
writes Karen Fossli in Oslo. Recoverable oil reserves are put at 770m
barrels. Production will be gradually built up beyond 100,000 barrels a day
by the end of the year, by which time production from a seabed installation
will have come on stream, allowing production capacity of 190,000 b/d to be
reached early next year.
Snorre is providing Saga's first production from a field that it operates.
It has been developed with the Norwegian North Sea's first tension leg
platform, the biggest of its kind in the world. Oil and gas is processed at
the nearby Statfjord field, with oil tanker loaded and gas exported further
via the Statpipe line to the European continent.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920805

