FT922-7438

FT  19 MAY 92 / Australian cabinet minister resigns


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


AUSTRALIA'S Labor government suffered a serious blow yesterday when Senator
Graham Richardson, a senior cabinet minister, resigned over his relationship
with a businessman facing fraud charges in the Marshall Islands.
Senator Kerry Sibraa, a second minister embroiled in the affair, appeared to
have survived as president of the Senate after Mr Paul Keating, prime
minister, accepted a report explaining his involvement.
However, the affair appeared likely to spread after Mr John Hewson, the
conservative opposition leader, demanded an investigation into the role of
Senator Gareth Evans, the foreign minister.
Mr Richardson, who was transport and communications minister, is credited
with helping Labor to win the last federal election in 1990 by persuading Mr
Bob Hawke, the then prime minister, to endorse a strongly environmentalist
manifesto.
His resignation is a victory for the opposition, which has pursued the
Marshall Islands allegations since they emerged in the Victorian state
parliament earlier this month.
Mr Richardson, who denies any wrongdoing, said he had decided to resign to
avoid damaging Labor's prospects in the next federal election, which must be
held by mid-1993.
His resignation follows a spate of revelations about his relationship with
Mr Greg Symons, a relative by marriage, who is on trial for forgery in the
Marshall Islands, a former US protectorate in the Pacific.
Mr Richardson admits meeting Mr Symons in his Senate office, writing a
reference for him, and telephoning Mr Amata Kabua, president of the Marshall
Islands, after Mr Symons was arrested.
He initially denied any knowledge of Mr Symons' business affairs, but later
admitted knowing he was involved in a business emigration scheme aimed at
attracting Asian investors to the Marshall Islands, which has a passport
union with the US.
His resignation appeared to come as a surprise to Mr Keating, who said he
would consider a cabinet reshuffle later in the week.
Mr Keating said Mr Richardson's relationship with Mr Symons had been
unfortunate, but not improper.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920519

