FT924-963

FT  21 DEC 92 / The dinosaurs arise again: IBM is no longer a symbol of US
industry, which is becoming more competitive


   By MARTIN DICKSON and LOUISE KEHOE


There could not be a more startling contrast between two US high-technology
companies: on Tuesday, International Business Machines, the world's largest
computer company, announced plans for sharp cuts in jobs, manufacturing
capacity and development spending because of dreadful fourth quarter sales.
IBM shares plunged.
Just 24 hours later, Intel, the largest US computer chip manufacturer, sent
its stock soaring when it said its fourth-quarter results would be well
above Wall Street expectations.
IBM is such a large company, and was a bell-wether of the US stock market
for so many years, that it is easy to see the crisis wracking the business
as a symbol of America's supposed industrial decline.
Easy, but wrong. For IBM's core problem - and it is one which is about to
hit the large Japanese computer manufacturers which for years have emulated
Big Blue - stems from its failure to adapt fast enough to the revolution
which has moved computing power from large mainframes to the desktop. Yet
the companies which dominate the expanding personal computer market are also
American, not Japanese. And an important reason for Intel's success is that
these US PC manufacturers are the prime customers for its chips.
So, while IBM is struggling, the US high-technology sector in general is
quietly prospering, and in some sectors winning back market share from
international rivals.
For example, the US semiconductor industry, which a few years ago seemed
about to be bludgeoned to extinction by Japanese competition, has revived so
strongly that 1992 sales figures are expected to show America regaining
world market leadership by a narrow margin, thanks to the success of the US
PC companies, technical innovation and the opening up of the Japanese
market. Mr Craig Barrett, senior vice-president of Intel, calls it the
'revenge of the dinosaurs'.
There are also signs, albeit much more tentative, of greater American
competitiveness in other areas, from consumer durables such as automobiles
to basic industries such as steel.
In short, the fashionable pessimism which for years has tarred the US with
'the British disease', condemned to irreversible industrial decline, is
beginning to look grossly exaggerated.
It is giving ground to a cautious optimism that, while the US will never
again dominate world industry as it did in the three decades after the
second world war, it may at least hold its own against Asian and European
rivals in many sectors and excel in some of the most important.
This shift in perception is still in its early stages - pessimism was well
represented at President-elect Bill Clinton's economic summit last week -
but is being reinforced by two developments: America is gradually recovering
from the 1991 recession; and Japanese industry is facing structural problems
as it battles with domestic economic downturn, severe asset value deflation,
and a shift of emphasis from market-share growth to profits growth.
Yet the US cannot afford to be complacent. For one thing, past economic
shocks - such as the sharp rise in energy prices in the 1970s - have shown
Japan to be remarkably resilient and creative in bouncing back from
adversity.
Second, a smattering of market share gains cannot disguise the fact that
many US companies remain uncompetitive. Look no further than the world's
largest manufacturing business, General Motors, which faces a formidable
struggle to return its loss-making North American operations to profit after
years of arrogant, complacent drifting.
That said, GM's Detroit rivals, Ford and Chrysler, have greatly narrowed the
quality and productivity gap with Japanese rivals, which control about 30
per cent of the US car market but for now seem to have stopped increasing
their market share.
Third, the US still faces some severe, long-term structural problems which
threaten industrial competitiveness, including rising healthcare costs (with
business picking up most of the insurance costs), lagging investment in
plant and equipment and one of the western world's least impressive school
and vocational training systems.
Action in all these areas ranks high among Mr Clinton's priorities, although
none can be solved simply by the wave of a federal government wand.
Many factors are contributing to increasing US competitiveness, but four
ingredients stand out: an improving financial backdrop; wholesale
restructuring of manufacturing industries over the past decade, coupled with
investment in information systems which quicken decision-making; the
adoption by many large companies of new quality control techniques, largely
learnt from Japan; and selective government assistance.
In the financial field, exporting industries have been greatly aided by the
sharp decline from 1985 in the value of the dollar, which most economists
argue remains undervalued relative to other currencies.
Corporate America has also benefited over the past two years from a
restructuring of its balance sheet. Many companies - ranging from food and
tobacco group RJR Nabisco to paper company Georgia Pacific - were loaded
down with debt in the 1980s, either because this was fashionable, or to help
or hinder takeover bids, or to allow managers to acquire the business in a
leveraged buy-out.
A reasonably high level of debt relative to equity does not inevitably
impede competitiveness. Indeed, for much of the past 20 years German and
Japanese companies have shown their heels to American and British rivals,
despite being more highly leveraged. Academic research suggests that the
cost of equity to a company - which is far from easy to measure - is
substantially higher than the cost of debt.
However, there is no doubt that, in the prolonged economic expansion of the
1980s, many US companies leveraged themselves far beyond the point of
commercial prudence, so that cash flow was inadequate to service their debts
when the 1991 recession struck.
Over the past two years, though, corporate America has been redressing the
balance with a wave of new share issues, ending a seven-year drought, and
the ratio of debt to balance sheet equity has dropped sharply (see chart).
At the same time, a drop in long-term interest rates to 8 3/8 per cent, the
lowest level for 15 years, has allowed companies to call in relatively
high-priced debt and take on fresh borrowings at lower costs.
This, coupled with a gradual improvement in corporate profits, is improving
business's ability to service its debt. Corporate interest payments as a
percentage of income have dropped to about 21 per cent, compared with a peak
of almost 25 per cent at the end of 1989.
However, this remains high by historic standards and analysts at Salomon
Bros, the New York investment bank, warn that 'much more restructuring and
income growth will be required to restore debt-to-income ratios in the
non-financial sector to levels that typically have accompanied sustained
economic expansions'.
US companies are also benefiting from a narrowing over the past two years of
their cost of funds (both equity and debt) relative to Japanese and German
rivals.
The beneficial effects of these financial trends have been reinforced by a
widespread restructuring of American industry, which has been going on for
roughly a decade, prompted both by global competition and, during the bid
boom of the 1980s, by the threat of being taken over.
The restructuring - which began in capital-intensive manufacturing companies
most exposed to international trade, but is now spreading through service
sectors such as banking and retailing - includes job and plant cuts, mergers
and the adoption of new production and quality-control methods.
Many large US companies have begun adopting the Total Quality Management
methods pioneered by Japanese industry, which involve a minute attention to
quality and just-in-time manufacturing throughout the production process, a
devolution of responsibility to workers, and an overriding concern for the
needs of customers.
While such techniques can have a profound impact on performance - Xerox, the
copier company, and Motorola, the chip and electronics business, are
outstanding examples - they have yet to be be adopted by most American
companies and are no guarantee of success. IBM is one of the foremost
advocates of TQM.
The US government has thrown its weight behind the quality movement with
sponsorship of annual awards, and in a few cases has intervened more
actively to help industry: Intel's Mr Barrett says the semiconductor trade
pacts of 1986 and 1991, which forced the Japanese to open their market to US
products, have allowed chip manufacturers to boost sales to Japan by Dollars
1bn a year. Federal government sponsorship also helped set up Sematech, a
research consortium which has helped US manufacturers pool information on
chip production techniques.
The net effect of these initiatives is better labour productivity, which
grew at a healthy 2.5 per cent in the 12 months to mid-1992. Says Mr Stephen
Roach, senior economist at Morgan Stanley: 'Once the global economy begins
to move ahead, US companies will be the beneficiaries of a tremendous amount
of corporate restructuring. The only glitch could be a dollar surge.'
However, Mr Kent Hughes, president of the Council on Competitiveness, a
study group backed by big business and labour, warns that 'while we did a
lot of fat-shedding in the 1980s, it's not clear we added as much muscle as
we should have', investing in new plant and equipment.
The US has one of the lowest ratios of business investment to GDP among
countries belonging to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development. Non-military spending on research and development has also
lagged behind some of its rivals.
Such findings have generated an intense argument as to whether the US system
of capital allocation is inferior to that of Japan and Germany, with stock
market pressures forcing American companies to concentrate on excessively
short-term goals.
But the current high-technology fight-back suggests US self-criticism may be
overdone. Mr Barrett, for example, reckons that capital spending by the US
semiconductor industry will rise 12.5 per cent next year, compared with a
12.7 per cent drop in Japan. Intel plans to boost spending 33 per cent to
Dollars 1.6bn.
The only dinosaur-like element of that is its sheer size.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921221

