FT923-10824

FT  28 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Richmond Oil's underwriting queried -
Accountants' report sparked Serious Fraud Office inquiry into share dealings


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


   JERSEY, CHANNEL ISLANDS


A PRICE Waterhouse report, which has sparked a Serious Fraud Office inquiry
into share dealings in Richmond Oil & Gas, raises serious questions about
arrangements for the underwriting of the company's flotation, which flopped
badly in July 1989.
Price Waterhouse is concerned about the involvement of a number of companies
which, as sub-underwriters, agreed to take a proportion of the unsubscribed
shares. The report believes there are grounds for investigating whether a
financing scheme involving some of the sub-underwriters misled investors in
Richmond shares in the weeks after the flotation.
Richmond, a US-based exploration and development company keen to profit from
the popularity in the UK of oil and gas plays, offered 20m shares at 105p in
July 1989. The offer valued the whole company at Pounds 68m.
Only 12.2 per cent of the shares were taken up, however, and they closed at
62p on the first day of trading. Two weeks later, the shares began a steady
climb to 173p on June 28 1990. They then began a virtually unbroken fall to
close last night at 6p.
Richmond's flotation was underwritten by its broker, the now-defunct
Corporate Broking Services. A small part was sub-underwritten by several
major stockbroking or investment fund groups, such as BZW. However, a
further 12 companies were responsible for 72 per cent of the
sub-underwriting commitment, and are the focus of Price Waterhouse's
concern.
Some of the 12 were managed or controlled by Mr Kelvin Myles, a former
manager of Bryant & Co, a Jersey accountant raided by local police in April.
The report was compiled at the request of Jersey authorities investigating
the disappearance of about Pounds 150,000 lodged with Bryant & Co. Police
commissioned Price Waterhouse to analyse documents found at Bryant. The
authorities subsequently passed the report to the SFO last month.
The report says the preliminary evidence indicates that Mr Myles acted as a
'nominee (holding and using powers of attorney and executing necessary
payments) in a scheme to mislead investors'.
Mr Myles, who is now living in the Republic of Ireland, said he had no
comment on the subject.
In the course of its investigation, Price Waterhouse discovered what appears
to be evidence of a 'circle of funds', which it suggests was used to give
the impression that Richmond's underwritten offer was fully financed.
With one exception, accounting records for the 12 underwriting companies
have not been seen by Price Waterhouse. The firm 'consequently cannot
conclude whether they had resources capable of funding their underwriting
commitment'.
The circle appears to have been 'kick-started' with funds from Bryant & Co
client accounts.
According to Price Waterhouse, various amounts of money were pumped
repeatedly around the circle via three bank accounts in the 10 days after
the July 10 closing date for the flotation. The transactions totalled Pounds
16m.
Documents show that money flowed from Bryant's account at Royal Trust in
Jersey to Richmond's underwriting account at Barclays in London. Richmond
then lent a similar sum to Jersey-based Oakwood Management Enterprises,
which transferred funds back to Bryant.
Richmond lent a total of Pounds 15.8m to Oakwood. The report alleges that
Oakwood partly paid the company back by bank loans raised through some of Mr
Myles' sub-underwriters and secured against the stock.
Thus Sabre Trust, which Mr Myles administered, raised Pounds 1m, later
increased to Pounds 2m, from Bankers Trust in Jersey. Bankers Trust was
forced to sell some of the shares to secure repayment of the loan.
The Price Waterhouse report is based entirely on information gathered from
Bryant & Co's premises. In a discussion paper, it set out its recommended
further investigations and stressed that its inquiry was a preliminary one.
As a director of Oakwood, Mr Myles signed documents including the agreement
to borrow money from Richmond. When asked if he knew Oakwood, Mr Myles said
he had 'heard of it'. When asked why he appeared as a signatory for the
company, Mr Myles refused to comment.
Mr David Wilkinson, Richmond's then-chairman, said he was unaware of any
cash circle. He said the flotation receipts from the sub-underwriters had
been put on deposit with Oakwood at the suggestion of Corporate Broking
Services. Mr Wilkinson was a director of CBS at the time.
'They recommended that they could gain a better rate of interest from a
source and the company agreed to do that,' he said.
Mr Wilkinson, who is currently Richmond's joint managing director, said he
had been unaware that Mr Myles had been a director of Oakwood, although he
knew that Mr Myles had dealt with underwriting matters. He could not recall
the letter sent to him by Mr Myles on March 14 1990, terminating the
relationship with Richmond.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920728

