FT924-11925

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (27):  A vehicle for
expatriates, rather than stay-at-homes - Offshore Funds, A resident,
domiciled Briton is liable for tax on his worldwide income wherever it
arises. The Inland Revenue does not care whether the fund is based in London
or Luxembourg / Survey of Unit Trusts


   By PHILIP COGGAN


OFFSHORE FUNDS have a rather mixed image in the UK. There is a general
perception of (ill-defined) tax benefits for investors; but also an
impression of risk, probably created by the Barlow Clowes affair.
In theory, however, offshore funds are the product of the future. In 1989,
the European Community introduced legislation relating to Ucits
(Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities) - with
the aim of ensuring that the same fund can be sold across Europe, from
Fishguard to Frankfurt. Fund management companies dream of creating
billion-dollar funds by tapping the wealth of the rich of Europe.
To date, progress has been relatively modest. The main reason is that there
is no real salesforce available to market offshore funds, so that investors
have tended to stick with the domestic institutions they know. In Europe,
most investors tend to buy investment products from their domestic banks;
and even in the more open market of the UK, 'there are a limited number of
financial advisers who are registered to sell offshore funds', according to
Martin Harrison, of GT Management.
There is one ready market for offshore funds - expatriates. People working
abroad - a growing trend within the EC - can enjoy tax benefits from keeping
their savings outside their home country.
For resident British investors, however, the tax advantages of investing
offshore are rather limited. A resident and domiciled Briton is liable for
tax on his worldwide income, wherever it arises. The Revenue does not care
whether the fund is based in London or Luxembourg.
Offshore funds, unlike their onshore counterparts, can pay gross income to
their investors, but this apparent advantage can be somewhat illusory. The
funds themselves may have to pay withholding tax (a tax deducted at source)
on their income. In the case of a fund holding UK equities, a UK-based
investor might actually find himself at a tax disdvantage if he invested
offshore.
There may be a cashflow advantage for British investors from receiving gross
income from an offshore bond fund. Such funds frequently invest in Eurobonds
and the like, which are not subject to witholding tax.
Just mentioning the words 'offshore' and 'bonds' in the same breath fund
inevitably conjures up the image of Barlow Clowes. The good news is that
there has been some tightening in investor protection since the mid-1980s.
Some countries - Bermuda, Guernsey, Isle of Man and Jersey - have investor
compensation schemes; others (Canada, Ireland, Luxembourg and Switzerland)
have 'SIB recognised' local regulation.
The offshore market does have some non-tax appeal to investors. The first is
that many funds use single pricing, which is a lot easier for the investor
to understand than the complicated mix of bid, offer and cancellation prices
that afflicts the unit trust market.
The second is the umbrella-fund structure which many management groups have
established. Initially these structures had capital gains tax advantages
(which have now been removed), but they still allow for relatively easy
switching between funds.
Fidelity International launched an umbrella range of Ucits in 1990 in the
teeth of the Gulf crisis. Barry Bateman, managing director of Fidelity, says
the range has consistently grown, gaining about Dollars 150m of funds since
launch. The company has concentrated on Germany and Austria and has recently
started advertising direct to the retail investor.
Lewis McNaught, of Gartmore, says that his group's umbrella fund has so far
been sold to investors in 79 different countries although 60 per cent of the
money derives from UK holders.
When all is said and done, most investors will only be attracted to the
sector if they believe that investment performance is superior. However,
comparisons are difficult. In many cases, the sectors do not exactly
correspond. For example, Finstat has one UK equity sector for offshore
funds, which is the rough equivalent of four onshore sectors (growth,
general, smaller companies and equity income).
A further problem is that offshore fund performance figures are quoted on an
offer-to-offer basis. This makes sense because of the use of single pricing,
but does not allow for the initial charge, which the investor pays
separately. Onshore funds are quoted on an offer-to-bid basis, which allows
for the effect of the initial charge. The result is to give a 6 per cent or
so advantage to the performance figures of offshore funds.
Nevertheless, in those sectors where comparison is possible, offshore funds
come off quite well. Over the five years to September 1, the average
offshore gilt fund rose by 54.2 per cent, compared with 33 per cent for
onshore funds. North American offshore funds (up an avearge 5.8 per cent
over five years) also performed better than their onshore equivalents (down
3.1 per cent).
The day of the pan-European fund may yet come. But as the events of the
autumn have shown, the path to European integration is not smooth, and
cultural differences may delay the development of the offshore market.

The Financial Times


London Page XXV

921023

