FT921-1439

FT  24 MAR 92 / Hyundai founder's shadow looms over poll: Chung's party has
tapped fears for S Korea's economic miracle


   By JOHN BURTON


MR Chung Ju Yung, the founder and former chairman of Hyundai, the South
Korean conglomerate, is casting an imposing shadow over the country's
parliamentary elections, which take place today.
When Mr Chung formed his Unification National Party (UNP) in January,
government officials dismissed it as a quixotic attempt to challenge the
ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) of President Roh Tae Woo.
But Mr Chung may now be able to help prevent the DLP getting a parliamentary
majority, with the UNP possibly holding the balance of power in the 299-seat
National Assembly.
The outcome of today's polling is uncertain, with 40 per cent of the voters
undecided on the eve of the election. The turnout is expected to be
relatively heavy at 77 per cent, which is expected to benefit the opposition
parties.
The DLP claims it is leading in 45 per cent of the constituencies, while the
main opposition Democratic Party says it will capture a third of the seats,
mainly in the south-eastern region of Cholla.
Mr Chung's UNP claims it will win at least 13 per cent of the electoral
districts. It has tapped middle-class fears that South Korea's economic
miracle may be waning as a result of the present government's policies. The
DLP now has two-thirds of the assembly seats, while the Democrats have 63.
Although the country achieved a growth rate of 8.6 per cent last year, it is
plagued by an inflation rate of 10 per cent and a soaring trade deficit of
Dollars 8.8bn (Pounds 5.08bn).
The implicit argument of the UNP is that South Korea will achieve its
economic salvation as long as the government does not interfere with the
chaebol, the powerful industrial conglomerates that include Mr Chung's
Hyundai.
The government has tried to streamline the chaebol's activities in an
attempt to increase competition in the domestic market. Measures so far
include a directive requiring the chaebol to restrict their control to three
core areas and to reduce or sell non-core operations.
Mr Chung is taking a gamble in challenging the government. The Chung family
has already been the subject of a tax evasion investigation and was forced
to pay Dollars 181m in back taxes and penalties last autumn.
They charge that the investigation was politically motivated. Hyundai
subsidiaries have since alleged that the government is trying to restrict
credit to them as a result of Mr Chung's political activities.
Mr Chung and the Hyundai group could face further retribution from the
government if the UNP fails to secure a firm parliamentary position. But
that threat appears to be receding as the UNP's campaign attracts voters.
The biggest casualty of the elections could be the presidential hopes of Mr
Kim Young Sam, the former opposition leader who merged his party with
President Roh in 1990 to give the government a parliamentary majority.
Mr Kim had been expected to be anointed as the DLP's candidate for the
presidential election in December. But a poor election showing by the DLP
could give his rivals in the party the chance to deny Mr Kim the nomination.
Mr Kim is heading the parliamentary campaign as the DLP's executive
chairman.
If the nomination goes to a rival - possibly Kim Jong Pil, another
opposition leader who joined the DLP in 1990, or Park Tae Joon, the leader
of President Roh's faction in the DLP - Mr Kim might pull out of the DLP.
This would leave the government with a minority of seats in the National
Assembly, even if it achieves a majority in today's voting.
Mr Kim's departure would also probably end the government's hopes of
creating a dominant political party that would guarantee stable one-party
rule like that of Japan's Liberal Democratic Party.
The spoiling tactics of Mr Chung may cause the government greater chaos than
even he would have dared believe.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920324

