FT921-459

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: War of Jennifer's ear ends in a draw


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


THE SOUND and fury over the fate of Miss Jennifer Bennett at the hands of
the National Health Service looked set to end with a whimper last night as
both main political parties exhausted their supplies of righteous
indignation.
As early as yesterday morning both Mr Neil Kinnock and Mr John Major
appeared to be sending lightly coded messages through their news conferences
to each other that it might be best to call a draw.
Barring fresh revelations, the melodrama, complete with comic scenes of
journalists interviewing journalists before the television cameras and
behind-the-scenes spin-doctors taking walk-on roles, had become too
incestuous a soap opera to merit endless repeats.
Two big questions remain unanswered. Perhaps it will never be known how The
Independent and the Daily Express obtained the name of Jennifer, whose
delayed ear operation was presented by Labour as a symbol of the
inadequacies of the NHS.
Yet the more self-critical analysts were yesterday asking: who really cares?
The central justification for the lashings of moral outrage that the case
engendered was, after all, entirely false. This was that Jennifer's life had
been ruined by the press attention that was, it was alleged, gratuitously
triggered by a leak from a political party as yet unidentified.
This argument was weakened by the cheerful face of the child before the
cameras and her parents' relaxed, even amused appearance on Channel 4's
Midnight Special programme.
But what of the political impact of it all? Sunday's opinion polls may give
answers, but some assumptions can be made.
The mud-slinging, for example, must have confirmed the prejudices of
anti-politician sentiment - a response that must augur well for the Liberal
Democrats.
The protests of Mr Patten and Mr Major that the film was inaccurate must
equally have found a resonance with the party faithful, just as Mr Kinnock's
occasional intemperate attacks on the government and the Tory tabloids will
have fuelled the prejudices of those who dislike him.
Add to this the sloppy provision by Walworth Road of other examples of NHS
delays or slip-ups, later proved inaccurate, and the 'You Can't Trust
Labour' slogan was given added weight.
The official Conservative Central Office theory that the row successfully
obscured Labour's promise of an extra Pounds 1bn for the NHS must also carry
some credence, though how much it is hard to gauge.
On the other hand, the Tories suffered from losing time to push their own
agenda.
The media clamour blew once and for all the government's chance to tell its
side of the NHS story.
Mr Waldegrave's chorus line of distinguished doctors, gathered to promote
the Tory reforms, were also rendered redundant.
Many neutral observers agree with Labour that the mere mention of health in
an election, whatever the circumstances, is a bonus for their campaign. And
that the 'two-tier' NHS charge is now common currency.
For the Conservative party, whose prime electoral pitch is competence and
the integrity of its leader, it was a poorly managed affair.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920328

