FT922-4164

FT  06 JUN 92 / Lloyds gives upbattle to acquire Midland Bank: Hongkong Bank
left with a clear run for its Pounds 3.9bn improved offer


   By ROBERT PESTON


LLOYDS BANK yesterday aban-doned its controversial plan to buy its UK rival
Midland.
Lloyds' withdrawal makes it almost certain that Midland will be acquired by
Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, which earlier this week improved
the terms of its recommended offer for the UK bank to Pounds 3.9bn.
Yesterday's news stunned the stock market and Midland's share price fell 21p
to 446p, compared with the 469p value of Hongkong Bank's shares and cash
offer.
Lloyds' decision to withdraw its proposed offer, which had been referred to
the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, was made at a board meeting yesterday
morning.
Mr Brian Pitman, Lloyds' chief executive and the architect of the takeover
plan, admitted that he was disappointed at the outcome. He said he had
recommended to the board that Lloyds should withdraw. Only four days
earlier, after Hongkong Bank raised its offer, Mr Pitman still believed his
bank had a chance of buying Midland.
He changed his mind after his financial advisers - the stockbroker Hoare
Govett and two merchant banks, Baring Brothers and Lloyds Merchant Bank -
told him Lloyds would have to offer more than 520p for each Midland share to
have any chance of acquiring the bank.
Mr Pitman said he believed such a price was too high. The advisers did not
give him this information in preliminary form until Thursday morning.
Sir Jeremy Morse, Lloyds' chairman, said he and Mr Pitman did not take a
definitive view on this question of how much their bank could pay until just
before the board meeting, which began at 9.45am yesterday.
Sir Jeremy said there was no question of Mr Pitman or any other board member
stepping down as a result of the collapse of the takeover attempt. 'It does
not compromise him (Mr Pitman) or us,' Sir Jeremy said.
Mr Pitman said he did not believe Lloyds' reputation would be damaged
severely by the failure of the takeover attempt. He would press on with a
strategy of cutting costs - staff numbers are currently being reduced by 250
a month - and attempting to increase income by selling more financial
services through its network of 2,000 branches.
Sir Jeremy questioned whether Midland would be equipped to meet the big
challenges ahead under its likely new owner, Hongkong Bank. He said Midland
faced 'quite a struggle'.
Lloyds made banking history on April 28, when it became the first UK
clearing bank to make a hostile proposal to buy another bank at the heart of
the UK financial system.
Sir Jeremy has always said his bank's intentions towards Midland were not
hostile but he admitted that if Midland saw Lloyds intervention as hostile -
as Midland did - then it was probably fair to describe it in such a way. The
Bank of England was also unhappy that there should be such an aggressive
contest between two banks, Lloyds and Hongkong Bank, for control of Midland.
The Bank has been convinced throughout the contest that Lloyds would be
blocked by the MMC and therefore could not understand its motives in making
the proposed offer.
However, Sir Jeremy said the Bank went out of its way not to influence the
course of events.
Lloyds' attempt to buy Midland has caused a storm at Westminster because it
planned to close 1,000 bank branches and cut staff by 20,000 if it succeeded
in acquiring Midland.
Two weeks ago, Mr Michael Heseltine, president of the board of trade,
referred the proposed takeover for scrutiny by the MMC, the UK competition
authority. The MMC has since been bombarded with submissions from different
groups of banking customers - including lobbies representing small
businesses, farmers, retailers and consumers  - who were concerned that a
Lloyds acquisition of Midland would have an adverse effect on competition.
Lloyds had been working on plans to buy Midland since the beginning of 1991.
However, not until late November did Sir Jeremy ask Midland's chairman, Sir
Peter Walters, if he would enter into secret negotiations on a takeover.
However, Hongkong Bank already had a 14.9 per cent stake in Midland, which
it had bought at the end of 1987. When it bought the stake, it had hoped to
buy Midland three years later, but that plan was subsequently put on ice.
Hongkong Bank's interest in Midland revived when it learned of Lloyds'
approach. Midland then carried out secret talks with both and on March 13 it
opted for Hongkong Bank, because it was convinced that a bid by Lloyds would
be blocked by the competition authorities.
However, Lloyds was so convinced of the commercial logic of buying Midland,
that it broke its silence on its intentions and said it wanted to buy
Midland. But it said it would back out if its bid was referred to the MMC
and Hongkong Bank's was not. In the event, however, it did not back away
after the MMC reference of its proposal - even though Hongkong Bank faced no
such scrutiny. Sir Jeremy said yesterday that Lloyds had initially decided
to press on because Hongkong Bank's initial offer for Midland was
'inadequate'.
Further reports, reaction and analysis Page 10
Stock exchange Page 17
Lex Page 26
Markets Weekend, Page II

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920606

