FT924-6473

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment (7): Writs fly after dirty work
at the crossbars - Sport on Television


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


SPORT on television, particularly football, is increasingly a highly
competitive and sometimes dirty game.
There were many cries of foul and allegations of skulduggery earlier this
year when British Sky Broadcasting teamed up with the BBC to pay Pounds 304m
for five-year exclusive broadcasting rights to the new Premier League.
Writs started to fly. Mr Greg Dyke, chairman of the ITV Association which
had lifted the rugby world cup from what would have been in the past its
natural home - the BBC - accused the Corporation of being little more than
Rupert Murdoch's poodle over the soccer deal.
At the same time Mr Michael Grade, chief executive of Channel 4, urged the
Office of Fair Trading to intervene.
For the viewer there is more choice of sport - but at a price. After feature
films, the other main category of programmes attractive enough to persuade
people to pay a regular subscription is exclusive sports events.
The unprecedented bid by BSkyB - a consortium in which Pearson, owners of
the Financial Times has a significant stake - and a subsequent Pounds 75m
deal with the Football Association for FA Cup and England's home
internationals, has led rival broadcasters to look for competing deals.
ITV has acquired rights to broadcast the Football League apart from the
breakaway Premier division and live European cup games involving British
clubs. Channel 4, in the meantime, has signed up for live Italian football.
ITV has still managed to retain large audiences with football, despite being
outbid for the Premier League.
In the week starting September 28, for example, ITV won an audience of 6.6m
with live European football, compared with 5.3m for the BBC's Match of the
Day - edited highlights of Saturday's Premier League games.
Channel 4 attracted 2.1m viewers for Italian football and ITV in London had
an audience of 700,000 for a live First Division game. BSkyB had an audience
of 500,000 for live Premier League.
The apparently small BSkyB audience is, however, misleading. The Sports
Channel is now scrambled so that only those who pay Pounds 5.99 a month,
apart from discounts, can watch. With more than 1m subscribers, nearly 50
per cent of the possible audience was viewing.
The development for sport on television is pay-per-view: charging for
individual events rather than whole channels.
BSkyB is planning to introduce a pay-per-view system in time for the 1994-95
football season and once such systems are in place it will be possible to
charge for events such as world title boxing matches.
Cable television is also starting to change the way sport is viewed. During
the Barcelona Olympics Videotron, the Canadian-owned company, with cable
franchises in south and west London, offered its customers unprecedented
choice. The company devoted four entire channels to the Olympics. One was a
results service, the other three showed both live and delayed transmissions
so that viewers could chose the sports they were most interested in.
Starting with ice hockey, Videotron now plans to introduce sports coverage
from different perspectives. Viewers will be able to watch through the lens
of a camera behind their team.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921120

