FT922-652

FT  26 JUN 92 / International Bonds: EIB deal has parity with French state
issues


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE European Investment Bank yesterday became the first borrower to raise
funds in the Euro-French franc bond market at the same level as the French
government. The bank's FFr2bn five-year deal was priced to offer the same
yield as the 8 1/2 per cent French government OAT due 1997.
Dealers said the bank could have sold bonds at a yield below French
government bonds. The FFr2bn issue launched by Credit Commercial de France
sold out rapidly, helped by strong demand in both France and Italy. By the
end of the day, the spread had tightened to 8 basis points below the OAT
issue.
Demand for EIB paper is typically stronger than for other names because the
agency's bonds are tax-exempt in both Italy and Austria. Italian investors
in particular are enthusiastic buyers of the name and took about a quarter
of this deal.
But the pricing of the deal reflects extremely tight spreads of French Franc
Eurobonds generally. For an issue of 9 1/2 per cent bonds due 1997 by
Societe Nationale des Chemins de Fer Francais, the French railway, is
currently trading at a yield of 10 basis points below the comparable OAT.
Dealers said buying of the new EIB deal was fuelled by expectations of
further tightening. A FFr3bn issue of 8 1/2 per cent bonds due 2002, launced
by the EIB in January at 22 basis points above the 10-year OAT, has
tightened to 22 basis points below the OAT.
At first sight, it appears illogical that investors are prepared to pay more
for EIB or French agency paper than for bonds issued by the French
government, the best credit in the French market.
Dealers say the anomaly is due in part to expectations of heavy supply in
the French Treasury market, fuelled by last week's announcement of an
exchange programme of old bonds for new OATs.
In addition, some investors prefer to hold Eurobonds, which are in bearer
form, rather than book-entry government bonds.
In the dollar market, the Halifax Building Society launched the largest deal
by a UK building society outside the sterling sector. The Dollars 300m
three-year deal via UBS Phillips & Drew was considered rather aggressively
priced, but met buying interest from both retail and institutional
investors.
The deal benefited from renewed interest in the dollar sector among European
investors, based partly on growing expectations that the dollar is set to
firm.
In the Canadian dollar market, a CDollars 200m deal for an arm of Deutsche
Bank also met firm demand. The deal closed at 99.45, slightly above its
reoffer price of 99.40.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920626

