FT924-6020

FT  24 NOV 92 / Candidates play dirty in Georgia fight for Senate


   By BARBARA HARRISON


   ATLANTA


VOTERS in the state of Georgia today cast ballots in a bitterly fought
run-off election for a US Senate seat.
The result is expected to be close. The incumbent Democratic Senator Wyche
Fowler, a liberal with backing from a coalition of blacks, women and labour,
is being challenged by Mr Paul Coverdell, a conservative Republican, who has
the support of the religious right.
The outcome of the race is important enough to have drawn President-elect
Bill Clinton and Vice President-elect Al Gore to campaign for Mr Fowler. Mr
Clinton appeared yesterday in Macon and Albany, and Mr Gore has been in
Georgia twice in the past week.
Mr Gore, underscoring what is at stake in the contest, said: 'In Congress,
the margin of one vote can make a tremendous difference.' A victory for Mr
Fowler would give the Democrats 57 Senate seats, the same number as before
the election.
Another by-election next week in North Dakota, where the Democrats are
strongly favoured, would add another seat, but their total would still be
short of the 60 needed to cut off Republican filibusters.
The run-off is being held because Georgia law requires a candidate to
receive a majority of the vote; in the November 3 election, Mr Fowler won
just 49 per cent of the ballots, while Mr Coverdell won 48 per cent.
The result of today's voting is expected to hinge on turn-out. Because
run-offs do not galvanise voter attention, turn-out is estimated to be just
25-33 per cent of the registered voters. This compares with 73 per cent on
November 3.
Consequently, both candidates have campaigned frantically during the past
three weeks. Mr Fowler has appealed particularly to black churches for help
in mobilising voters and Mr Coverdell has done the same at fundamentalist
Christian churches.
Ironically, little Christian spirit has been shown in what has been called
one of the dirtiest and nastiest campaigns in local memory.
The mud-slinging match, conducted largely through television advertisements,
has dismayed many voters and is likely to spur few other than the party
stalwarts and the ideologically-motivated to vote today.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921124

