FT922-13428

FT  11 APR 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Cottage industry communicates fax
of life - New technology and a new idea beneath a thatched roof deep in the
Devon countryside


   By CLIVE FEWINS


TELECOTTAGES are a simple idea. Fill a room in a country dwelling with a
mass of telecommunications equipment and advanced business machines, then
watch small businessmen and local community members fall over your stable
door in the rush to use the kit beneath the thatch.
In practice the idea has failed to spread: most of the 20 or so functioning
telecottages spread over the UK occupy odd corners in schools, colleges and
public libraries.
Only one, according to Mick and Maggi Waltho, is actually a cottage - with
roses round the door. 'All we lack is a thatched roof,' joke the Walthos,
whose mid-Devon telecottage, in a deep lane in the hamlet of Penstone, five
winding miles from Crediton, celebrates its first year in business last
month.
It all started three years ago when, as a result of their marriage, Mick and
Maggie found themselves with two cottages, one in Penstone and one in nearby
Colebrook. The alternatives, when they combined their families, were to
continue letting the 'spare' cottage as a holiday property, or selling it,
or using it for some other purpose.
Mick, who is 42, had worked for Post Office Telephones and then British
Telecom; he was already earning his living from his front room doing systems
work and computer consultancy, bringing in about Pounds 10,000 a year; he
was just able to service the remaining Pounds 42,500 mortgage and support
the two of them and their three children, aged eight, six and one. Maggi had
a background in marketing.
With an additional loan of Pounds 15,000 to renovate and convert the
telecottage, the Walthos calculated that they could just afford to spend a
year living off their savings while starting up the project. Forty pounds a
week for 12 months came from the Enterprise Allowance Scheme. Mick was able
to do some more consultancy work while they were setting up. Maggie worked
as part-time barmaid at a local pub, and took some secretarial work: this
brought in about another Pounds 2,000. There was also some rental income
from the last few months of letting the 'spare' cottage to holiday visitors.
The Walthos, who put all their Pounds 18,500 liquid assets into the scheme,
had an early stroke of luck when Canon UK and Bonsai Computers agreed to
support the venture in kind. Both offered concession prices on the purchase
of computers and photocopiers, while BT provided practical support in
setting up the project. By March 1991, with overheads totalling no more than
Pounds 13,000, they were ready to go.
The scheme attracted the attention of a computer consultancy in Okehampton,
a dealership in Tiverton, a CAD specialist in Bovey Tracey and the East
Devon College Information Technology Centre.
'We saw such a network as an umbrella under which telecottages and
organisations with some overlapping interests could pool resources, share
skills and workloads and use as a means of marketing their services,' said
Mick.
Another advantage he saw in a Devon teleworking network was that it might
provide a series of 'work centres,' where visiting businessmen could call
and pick up faxes, electronic mail or other data. The plan is that,
ultimately, the network should act as a sort of clearing house for business
information and equipment, the cost shared by interested parties.
The official launch of the telecottage last October introduced Devon
Teleworking to representatives of local businesses, councils, industrial
development bodies and the local media. Transferring most of their equipment
to a nearby hotel, the Walthos demonstrated access to the European Community
database, Prestel, advanced audio conferencing by satellite and desktop
publishing, to an assembly of local farmers, BT boffins and college
lecturers.
They were also able to link up with some of the other members of the
proposed Devon Teleworking network, and beyond. 'Since then it has been all
go,' said Mick. 'We expect to turn over between Pounds 90,000 and Pounds
100,000 in our first financial year."
The Walthos have been offered a trial contact with Reuters, the news agency,
which has an historical text scanning and indexing operation in nearby
Tiverton. And this month Maggie hopes to become the new Colebrook and
Penstone post mistress - a position that has been vacant since the previous
post office closed in 1990.
'We have also been asked by Post Office Counters Limited to be the community
post office for the villages round here, and this should provide a valuable
source of regular base income for the telecottage,' said Mick, who plans to
be his wife's assistant behind the counter. 'The first proper job I had when
I left school was behind the counter at Southall post office. So, in a
sense, it be back to square one.'

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920411

