FT921-3850

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Bonds: US bank in yen issue as appetite for
currency fades


   By RICHARD WATERS and TRACY CORRIGAN


THE Inter-American Development Bank yesterday came in on the tail-end of
recent demand for yen bonds as appetite for the currency among international
investors appeared to be fading fast.
The Y50bn offering of three-year bonds was generally welcomed as a
well-priced deal from a borrower with a good name in the market, although
there were grumbles in some quarters that the deal was too aggressive and
was not selling well.
Also, concern about the yen-dollar exchange rate and a weakening in the
Japanese government bond market led to some resistance. One banker said:
'The pricing is correct. The timing is not so good.' There were concerns
that issues in the days ahead could cause indigestion in the market.
The IADB's issue, with a yield of 5.25 per cent, was priced to fall between
the bid/offer spread on the nearest comparable deal, a three-year issue from
the European Investment Bank which was yielding 5.28 per cent on the bid
side and 5.18 per cent on the offered side. The tighter pricing was aimed in
part to pick up on a move to shorter-dated yen paper, bankers said.
An Ecu150m seven-year deal for BP America, aimed at retail investors, met
rather subdued demand, according to most participants, due to the lacklustre
performance of European markets. Dealers said the positive reception of
Deutsche Bank's recent seven-year deal was due to the particular popularity
of that name with retail investors; interest in the sector has since
dwindled.
Although the BP deal offered a yield pick-up of 26 basis points over the
Deutsche Bank deal, retail demand remained sluggish.
The deal was not helped by the fact that BP's debt rating of double-A3 is
under review by Moody's.
However, dealers added that there was sporadic demand for seven to 10-year
paper, rather than the short end of the market. Lead manager, UBS, reported
firm demand from Swiss retail investors. The deal was still held in
syndicate at the end of trading.
Eurofima, which finances European rolling stock, launched a L200bn offer
said to have been tightly-priced, though strong demand was reported in some
quarters. The L200bn, seven-year deal, was said to have encountered demand
among retail funds in continental Europe, though it later traded within fees
and ended the day at break-even point for the banks involved.
In a rare move, Daito Trust Construction, a Japanese construction company,
offered Dollars 300m of convertible bonds, marking a step away from the
warrant market and into convertibles.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920312

