FT921-1170

FT  25 MAR 92 / FT Law Report: Writ can be served in Pennsylvania


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


ISC TECHNOLOGIES LTD AND ANOTHER v GUERIN AND OTHERS
Chancery Division: Mr Justice Hoffmann:
March 17 1992
THE TIME for examining the appropriateness of an English forum on an
application to set aside leave for service of a writ abroad, is when leave
was granted, and not when the application to set aside is heard, unless
further evidence or subsequent events throw light on what should have been
relevant considerations at the time. And accordingly, irrespective of
whether judgment has been entered against most of the original defendants
and those remaining may not be worth pursuing, leave will be upheld if it
was properly granted in that at the time England was the appropriate forum
for trial of the action and the other requirements for service abroad were
satisfied.
Mr Justice Hoffmann so held when refusing an application by Mr Stuart
Pindell, the 10th defendant to an action by ISC Technologies Ltd and ISC
London Ltd against Mr James Howard Guerin and others, to set aside an order
by Master Barratt giving leave to serve proceedings on him in Pennsylvania.
HIS LORDSHIP said that the plaintiffs were English companies whose principal
business was selling arms to foreign countries. They were subsidiaries of
International Signal and Control Group plc (ISC) which in 1987 merged with
Ferranti plc. Mr Guerin was founder and executive chairman of ISC.
The plaintiffs claimed that between 1983 and 1989, Mr Guerin and other
persons in the ISC group conspired to commit a complex fraud. They created
fictitious contracts for the sale of arms to foreign countries, and
fictitious contacts for the purchase of stocks and services to enable them
to perform the sale contracts.
They represented to the companies' accountants, auditors, solicitors and
bankers that the contracts were genuine and thereby falsely inflated the
profits which ISC appeared to be earning.
That enabled Mr Guerin to deceive Ferranti into agreeing to a merger upon
advantageous terms.
They also made payments out of the companies' funds to Panamanian
corporations controlled by Mr Guerin on the pretext that they were payments
to suppliers. More than Dollars 180m of the companies' funds was diverted to
the use of Mr Guerin and his associates.
The action was originally commenced against nine defendants: Mr Guerin,
three of his associates and five Panamanian companies which Mr Guerin was
alleged to have controlled. By the end of June 1990, final judgment had been
entered against all except two.
On July 25 1990, Master Barratt gave leave under RSC Order 11 for service of
proceedings on Mr Pindell out of the jurisdiction. Mr Pindell now applied
under RSC Order 12 rule 8 to set the order aside.
Mr Pindell was an ISC director until 1986. He was responsible for securing
and negotiating major contracts for international arms sales.
The principal allegation against him was that he knowingly participated in a
fraudulent representation that a contract dated May 12 1984 had been
concluded for the sale of missiles to the United Arab Emirates (UAE), when
there had been no such contract.
He was also alleged to have participated in the pretence that goods and
services were being ordered to enable the plaintiffs to perform the
contract, and to have given the auditors a false version of a genuine
contract between ISC and the UAE in 1986.
The relief sought against Mr Pindell was account and restitution, damages
and account of profits.
The requirements for leave under RSC Order 11 were that the plaintiff had a
'good arguable case'; the claim came within the 'letter and spirit' of the
sub-paragraph relied upon; and England was 'the forum in which the case can
most suitably be tried in the interests of all the parties and for the ends
of justice'.
As to whether the claims fell within the paragraphs of Order 11 rule 1(1),
the claim for damages for fraudulent misrepresentation fell within (f)
(action founded on tort within the jurisdiction); and the restitutionary
claims came within (c) (necessary or proper party to the action).
The next question was whether the plaintiffs had a sufficient case on the
merits.
Their case on the affidavits was that Mr Pindell was primarily responsible
for negotiation of contracts with the UAE. He represented that the 1984
contract had been signed when, in fact, it had not. He gave the auditors a
version of the 1986 contract appearing to contain clauses dealing with the
1984 contract and a payment which was said to have been made under it, when,
in fact, no such provisions appeared in the real contract. He also signed
amendments to two fictitious purchase contracts, and there was material to
suggest he was involved in pretended implementation of the 1984 contract.
Mr Pindell's affidavit covered in detail the whole history of his
association with the plaintiffs and the subtle intricacies of his
negotiation of the 1984 and 1986 arms contracts with the UAE. His
participation in many of the events which surrounded the production of those
now admittedly bogus documents was uncontradicted. All that remained in
issue was his degree of participation and state of knowledge.
Mr Crystal for Mr Pindell submitted that his affidavit, if believed, would
exonerate him.
That was correct. On the other hand, if he was disbelieved, he would be held
liable.
The plaintiff's case was sufficiently strong (assuming England to be the
appropriate forum) to justify subjecting Mr Pindell to proceedings within
the jurisdiction.
When the action was commenced, England was plainly the appropriate forum.
The fraud was committed here and the facts had no strong connection with any
other jurisdiction. The plaintiffs were English companies and the original
defendants resided in diverse jurisdictions, including three of the United
States.
Since then, proceedings against all but two of the original defendants had
been terminated by judgment. For the purposes of the application, when must
the appropriateness of an English forum be examined?
Mr Crystal said the court should look at the position today. He said an
application to set aside leave under RSC Order 12, rule 8 was a rehearing of
the application for leave and the exercise of a fresh discretion. It should
therefore take into account what had since happened.
That was not accepted. The present application was to discharge the master's
order. The question was therefore whether that order was rightly made when
it was made. The court could receive evidence not before the master, and
subsequent events might throw light on what should have been relevant
considerations at the time. But leave which was rightly given should be not
discharged simply because circumstances had changed.
The alleged fraud was committed in England on English companies. It had
little connection with any other jurisdiction.
In Cordoba Shipping (1984) 2 Lloyds Rep 91, 96 Lord Justice Robert Goff
said: 'If the substance of the alleged tort is committed within a certain
jurisdiction, it is not easy to imagine what other facts would displace the
conclusion that the courts of that jurisdiction are the natural forum.'
What was there in this case to displace such a conclusion?
It was said Mr Pindell resided in Pennsylvania and that it would be hard for
him to have to bear the expense of litigation in England. But that would
almost invariably be the case when leave was given and was not sufficient
answer.
If Mr Pindell came to the UK and participated in a fraud on English
companies, it could not be unfair for him to have to defend his actions
here. If the claim turned out to be ill-founded, he would be able to recover
his costs, and in that respect was better off than in his home jurisdiction.
The prima facie conclusion to which Lord Justice Robert Goff referred was
not displaced. England was the appropriate forum. The master was right to
grant leave. The summons was dismissed.
For Mr Pindell: Michael Crystal QC and Charles Hollander (Clyde & Co).
For the plaintiffs: David Oliver QC and John Nicholls (Herbert Smith).

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920325

