FT922-4178

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: June rhymes with loon - Video


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


THE Distributor of the Month award goes to Columbia Tristar Video. With a
blazing nerve that other companies should imitate, they are expanding their
catalogue of widescreen videos. June 8 sees the release of Sir David Lean's
Lawrence Of Arabia in its newly restored director's cut, Kenneth Branagh's
Henry V and Spielberg's Close Encounters Of The Third Kind - The Special
Edition.
When first issued on video, the above films were all cropped to fit a TV
format and, sadly, to suit the thousands of viewers who still complain when
widescreen films are shown compositionally intact on the small screen. These
viewers get dyspeptic about the necessary 'letter-boxing' effect that
requires black strips of empty screen to appear at the top and bottom.
Unfortunately, the only other way to fit a complete widescreen image onto a
square frame would be to squeeze the image as they used to do on film nights
at my prep school. There - how I remember - a star like Charles Laughton,
appearing in a concertina'd CinemaScope movie, would resemble a beanpole and
a star like James Stewart would vanish completely when he turned sideways.
Until widescreen television sets themselves reach the shops - they are
promised but not for some years - initiatives like Columbia Tristar's are
beyond price. They remind us that good films do not consist of an aimless
yardage of story information that can be pictorially cut and slashed to suit
the delivery system of the moment. If a good director is behind the lens,
every image tells a story and half an image tells half a story. Later
widescreen releases this year from Columbia will include The Last Emperor,
Gandhi, The Bear, Oliver] and Glory.
Elsewhere on the video scene June rhymes with loon. The season is full of
amiably insane comedies arriving from America. The Addams Family (Columbia
Tristar) is the moneyspinning film of the TV series of the Charles Addams
cartoons: Anjelica Huston and Raul Julia bestriding a script stuffed with
bats and corpses and one or two good jokes. In Bill And Ted's Bogus Journey
(20: 20 Vision) Death himself appears: a blanched-faced chess player with a
Swedish accent who challenges our airhead heroes (Keanu Reeves, Alex Winter)
to the usual sudden-mortality play-offs.
And then there is the best film of the three, What About Bob (Buena Vista).
Here Bill Murray is a New York mental patient pursuing analyst Richard
Dreyfuss all the way to RD's holiday home. Dreyfuss hopes to put his feet up
but instead has his hackles raised. Only 'death therapy', he finally
realises, may cure Murray's problems.
How obsessed all these films are with death. Perhaps it is the fin de siecle
factor. June's non-comic offerings also concern themselves with mortality,
from David Mamet's lively, fitful cop thriller Homicide (First Independent),
in which Joe Mantegna copes with anti-semitism and shoot-em-ups in
Baltimore, to the tasty cocktail of death, murder and amnesia in Wolfgang
Petersen's Shattered (Columbia TriStar). No one dies, if I remember
correctly, in Terry Gilliam's The Fisher King (20: 20 Vision). But an
appealing layer of eschatological melancholy lies over this tale of two
down-and-outs (Jeff Bridges and Robin Williams) seeking the Holy Grail in a
fantasy-filled New York.
I you want to take your mind off melancholy things altogether, why not watch
as I did Virgin's The Complete Teach Yourself Juggling Kit, presented by one
Haggis McLeod. By the end of an afternoon spent studying this tape I was
able to keep three wooden spoons airborne for 30 seconds. You may do better,
or worse, but I am sure that like me you will enjoy the learning process. At
least it will get you off the sofa for a few hours while glued to the video
screen.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

920606

