FT921-4020

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Comment): Buying votes for peanuts


   By JOE ROGALY


A clever Budget, but just possibly not clever enough. It looks prudent - or
shall we say less imprudent than anticipated - and therefore it does not
unduly frighten the horses. It will make most voters some Pounds 130-plus a
year better off, or rather less than that if increased excise duties are
taken into account. The payoff will be dribbled out in weekly allocations
over the year beginning April 5 1992, which means that the voting will
precede the backhanders. It is not absolutely clear to me that British votes
can be bought for peanuts these days.
If they can, all the election speculation is over. The Tories will be back,
and they will stay there for another 10 years, cutting taxes whenever they
can. But it is not certain that the game is over, not yet.
Let us follow the prime minister's habit and draw a line down the centre of
a sheet of paper. Take the right-hand side. Mark it 'good for the Tories'.
Tick off the items. The peanuts are intelligently targeted. Something for
the poorest pensioners. A little for the low paid. These show the
Conservatives under Mr John Major to be all heart. We must not, however,
forget the wallet. The fisc is in such an alarming state of growing
imbalance that not much could be offered, but something was found - that
very Pounds 130-plus on account. Raising thresholds would have been more
generously aimed at the poor than yesterday's surprise introduction of a new
20p rate for the first Pounds 2,000 of taxable income, but this was the
Budget of a Conservative administration in a state of desperation. An
unqualified focus on poverty was perhaps too much to expect.
There are other target areas. Small business will feast on a banquet of
small measures. Inheritance tax is to be reduced. The beneficiaries are
likely to be concentrated in the south-east, where Labour must make gains if
it is to win an overall majority. The motor industry is to be rescued; Mrs
Margaret Thatcher's 'great car economy' is not forgotten. The industry is
manned by those very skilled workers who helped to put her in power. The
Conservatives have not managed to restrict their handouts to the few hundred
thousand voters in marginal constituencies who must be bought off if they
are to win a fourth term, but they have come as close to it as our fiscal
system allows.
It might sound a little mixed up, but then so is the government. It will
fight the election on the proposition that it is prudent (tick it off),
understands business (another tick) and cares about the unfortunate in
society (half a tick). None of this would be good enough, but for the dream.
Yesterday's 20p rate gives verisimilitude to the Conservative claim that it
is the tax-cutting party. It underlines the charge that Labour is the party
of higher taxes. Dream or nightmare, this juxtaposition is intended to work
on the voters' minds.
The phantasmagoria is cheaply bought. It is based on small change, which is
all that will clink in our pockets if the Tories come back. For
large-denomination notes we must wait. If we want to pay more - nightmare -
we vote Labour. It has the merit of cunning. As I listened to Mr Lamont
drone on with bloodless implacability in the Commons yesterday I had a dream
of my own. The cadence-free voice was that of the chancellor, but, looking
at Mr Major sitting behind him you could not help being reminded of Joel
Gray, the emcee in the musical Cabaret.
He had that secret look on his face. You must remember the verse: money
money money money . . . money makes the world go round, ending with a
raspberry . . . sqppps . . . on being poor. Mr Major has excluded the
raspberry. He would. He is not stony-hearted. He has demonstrated that. Yet
the essence of his budget is a mark, a yen, a buck or a pound . . . that
clinking, clanking sound.
End of dream. Move to the other side of the line drawn down the centre of
the pad. Head it 'good for Labour'. We cannot fill this in quite yet, except
with guesses. The clinking, clanking sound will be tested on a date expected
to be announced by the prime minister today or tomorrow. The Labour party
has given itself a week in which to come up with an alternative. Yesterday
Mr Lamont must have taken some pleasure from the obvious discomfort of the
opposition when he produced his surprise 20p band. This destroyed the best
part of the speech prepared by Mr Neil Kinnock denouncing the Tories for
knocking a penny or two off the standard rate. No knock-off; no possibility
of denunciation. We must give our much-criticised chancellor credit when it
is due.
We cannot yet put the opposition's obvious discomfiture safely in the Tory
column, or tick it off. For the Labour response will be reshaped. Mr Kinnock
is as desperate for victory as any Tory. His entire political future depends
upon it. Before yesterday's Budget the plan was to accept whatever figure Mr
Lamont gave for the public sector borrowing requirement. Labour's putative
chancellor, Mr John Smith, would then redo the sums to come up with the same
figure. That gives Mr Smith Pounds 28bn to play with. He will have to match
Mr Lamont's ingenuity if he is to devise a more attractive-looking deal.
Mr Kinnock told us just before Christmas that Tory tax cuts would be
restored. Some of his colleagues were yesterday wishing that he had not said
that, but Mr Smith seemed determined to proceed with the original plan. If
his determination survives what is likely to be a week of earnest internal
debate, he will have to allow that the 20p band will not be introduced by
Labour this year. Mr Smith's rationale is that it constitutes a generalised
tax reduction for all people, not just the lower paid. On the assumption
that the rate stays at 25p under Labour, that gives the shadow chancellor
Pounds 1.8bn - the cost of the 20p band next year - to spend on meeting the
opposition's various promises. Tick Labour.
This is not all. Mr Lamont has more than matched Labour's offering to
pensioners, but restricted his largesse to the worst off. He is right to do
so. Labour would have to cost the enlargement to a universal benefit, minus
the extra tax income received from wealthier pensioners in receipt of the
party's proposed increase. The Conservatives said nothing new about child
benefit, which they are indexing. Labour is pledged to increase it yet
further. Mr Smith has also indicated that Labour will increase higher rate
taxes to 59 per cent, and tax investment income by 9 per cent. He may choose
to phase some or all of that in. During the coming week there will be an
assiduous use of calculators to see how much can be promised to meet
Labour's proposals to spend yet more on health and education, without giving
the appearance of profligacy.
For if Mr Major is appealing principally to the wallet, while remembering
the heart, Mr Kinnock will seek to re-awaken visions of the providing state.
Every restoration of tax, every tax increase, every reshuffle in the Smith
shadow Budget next week will convey the message that greater expenditure by
government is good for us.
Britain will then go to the polls to choose between two Budgets, each
entailing the same amount of total borrowing, but the one emphasising tax
reduction, the other public spending. The two Budgets will be very similar
when viewed by accountants and economists. They may adopt an identical
fiscal stance. But the philosophies will be widely divergent. There will be
a clear choice. This may be the first time such a public verdict on a Budget
has been so explicitly sought.
The political race is now so very close that the smallest spurt of speed by
one party or the other could make all the difference to the outcome.
Yesterday the Conservatives undoubtedly put on speed. For all I know they
may yet risk an interest rate cut to give themselves a further edge. This
will be followed by a hard-fought campaign. Absent the Smith and Kinnock
responses, nobody can safely put their money on the Tories this morning.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920311

