FT923-9697

FT  04 AUG 92 / Arts: Phoenix - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


THE EXCITEMENT of this new play at the Bush Theatre by Roy Macgregor is the
way its characters are caught up in the waves of recent history. The date is
1989; the Berlin Wall is falling. Renata, a former terrorist who caused the
death of a West German bigwig and his daughter, knows that East Germany will
no longer be a refuge for her. Bruno, her former partner in crime, wants her
to keep his involvement secret, now that he is a prominent West German
journalist with a wife, family and distinguished in-laws. He buys her
promise of silence by arranging her reunion in Berlin with the father she
has not seen for years.
The play's beauty lies in all the detail that surrounds this. You see
Renata's father Frankie, initially in his poor New York abode. He was a jazz
musician; his Phoenix jazz club was burnt after his daughter had caused
those deaths. You see Renata's East German husband, Paul, who even knows her
by another name; and you see him and a friend, Rudi, following her on a
train to Berlin. They have never been West; and Rudi, determinedly hip,
insists 'It's gonna be a gas-gas-gas.' You see Bruno's wife, Gabi, and
father-in-law, Otto - who would himself have been assassinated by terrorists
but for an assiduous chauffeur.
The plot that links these people is worthy of Le Carre at his best. Renata
is drawn from her East German marriage, like a vixen from her lair, by her
need to see her beloved father again. For her and for the more duplicitous
Bruno, the past keeps becoming far more alive than the present. Even their
marriages become unimportant. And, for Renata the refugee from Western
justice, there is now no future anywhere. I will not reveal what happens;
you follow the narrative like a thriller.
Dominic Dromgoole has directed with marvellous concentration. Simple
encounters and confrontations acquire immense eloquence. Body language,
nuances of accent, details of behaviour all speak volumes without ever
spoiling the naturalistic tone of the play. Thanks to deft designs by Mark
Viner, the play moves briskly from one locale to another. (Only the use of
projections during the scene-changes misfired - too huge to be effectively
visible.)
The cast does the play proud. As Renata, Nicola Redmond is always calm and
inscrutable; whatever fires are left in her smoulder deep down. By contrast,
Niamh Cusack as Gabi is eager, trusting and transparent. Both acquire great
pathos as the play develops. Nick Dunning's burnt-out, inelegant Bruno is -
as the plot requires - the most mysterious character of all: which in turn
is repeatedly contrasted with the vivid, funny, tired old jazz-player
Frankie, as played by Trevor Ray. Patrick Godfrey as Otto, Ewan Stewart as
Paul and young James Hooton as Rudi all ensure that each scene feels like a
large and brimming chapter.
Continues at the Bush Theatre, London W12, until August 22.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920804

