FT924-11548

FT  24 OCT 92 / Food: The fight for America's stomach - Nicholas Lander
considers different US food lobbies


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


WHAT does the future hold for food in the US? Like the presidential election
this is a three-cornered contest. Weighing in as the heavyweight, in terms
of resources, clout and geographical spread, is the fast food movement. Its
advance is remorseless reaching even the youngest generation; pre-packaged
meals which your child can cook in the microwave and eat in front of the
television.
The newcomer to the contest is represented by those who advocate dieting as
a way of life. This group has become prominent in the fight against obesity.
But it also has support from the neo-prohibitionist movement. The group
manages to portray food and drink, especially alcohol, as the enemy. Backed
by wealthy individuals and institutions, the group has bought considerable
time on radio and television to proclaim its views.
Finally, somewhat battered but still fighting, is a group which has
prospered significantly since the early 1960s when the US woke up to the
potential pleasures of good food and wine. It consists of food producers,
chefs and restaurant owners, wine makers and critics, food writers, farmers
and the interested consumer.
Its figurehead, Julia Child, now aged 80, was recently in London. Child is
as imposing now as she must have been in 1961 when she became America's
first television cook. Shehas a ready smile and a sense of fun that belies
her age and the gravity of her message. Today, Child believes, there are so
many conflicting and confusing reports of what is good, or bad, to eat that
Americans are in danger of associating nutrition with guilt and developing a
genuine fear of food.
In the forthcoming contest it would be foolish to underestimate the mettle
of Child and her younger disciples. It is far too simplistic to see her as
just a successful cookery writer - her books have sold in millions all over
the world - Child is also one of the co-founders of the American Institute
of Wine and Food which, via demonstrations by professional chefs, seminars
and a quarterly magazine, has established considerable support across the
US.
Recession and increased state taxes on the California wine producers, the
institute's biggest financial supporters, had weakened the institute but it
has emerged rejuvenated after an organisational overhaul. Child seems
confident about its future.
In an outline of the group's strategy she said it was important to
acknowledge the dangers of excess, be it in alcohol or cream, and preach
moderation. Secondly, she felt it was the institute's duty to bring the fun
back into cooking and eating and, most importantly, Child hopes to see off
the opposition by continuing to place a strong emphasis on educating people
about food.
The masters degree in gastronomy which she has helped to establish at Boston
University will, she hopes, be the first of many.
The American Institute of Wine and Food, Suite 700, 1550 Bryant Street, San
Francisco, California, CA 94103, tel 415-255-3000, and now with a British
chapter at 114, Marylebone Lane, London W1M 6HH, tel: 071-935 3503.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921024

