FT921-4019

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Comment): Pessimistic funding forecast offers
only gilts traders joy - Barry Riley on Budget implications for a stagnant
market


   By BARRY RILEY


It was not, in the event, quite the generous Budget that the whispers had
indicated. Tax concessions amounted in aggregate to about Pounds 1.5bn
against anything up to Pounds 4bn which had been mooted in the City
scribblers' circulars.
But this brought no relief to the gilt-edged market last night because the
Chancellor's starting point appears to have been worse than all but the most
pessimistic had been anticipating. It was not so much a giveaway as a
spendaway Budget.
A big funding job now beckons for the Bank of England. The PSBR of Pounds
28bn for 1992-93, with a possibly optimistically calculated Pounds 32bn or
so slated for the following year, caused gilt prices to fall back in late
trading.
A press notice from the Bank of England set the scene with an indication
that about six gilt-edged auctions are likely over the next year, each
raising Pounds 2-3bn or even more if conditions are favourable. Those should
account for between Pounds 15bn and Pounds 20bn. Last year's auctions were
for more modest sums.
Net gilt-edged borrowing may be some Pounds 25bn next year, allowing for
redemptions. But gross issuance of gilts should be about Pounds 33bn,
although the exact total will depend on the success of the revived sales
drive at National Savings, and also on the flows of revenues from
privatisation sales which are estimated at Pounds 8bn. If you exclude
privatisation receipts, which to varying degrees you may have to if any
government other than a majority Tory administration is returned at the
election, the PSBR would be Pounds 36bn next year. In any case,
privatisation revenues are expected to tail off sharply after next year.
The gilts market does not really know whether to laugh or cry at all this.
On the one hand, the market makers are delighted at the prospective
expansion of business. Their territory has already stopped shrinking, and
will soon be growing at a spanking pace. But will the supply of paper be so
great as to demoralise purchasers? Not if you believe the traditionally
self-correcting projections in the medium term financial strategy, which
shows the PSBR dwindling back to a modest  3/4 per cent of GDP in 1996-97
(Pounds 6bn or so).
This depends, however, on economic growth hitting 3 1/2 per cent for years
at a stretch in the mid-1990s. If the depression were to persist the numbers
would look awful, however. After all, in the financial year starting next
month government receipts in money terms are projected to rise by only 3 1/2
per cent while expenditure jumps by 9 1/2 per cent.
Taking the official view at face value, however, the financing problem is
not enormous, although efforts may need to be made to jolt some of the
domestic investment institutions into changing their investment strategy.
Recently much of the running has been made by foreigners. The important
point to bear in mind here is that the gilt-edged market no longer stands
proudly, or sometimes forlornly, alone as it did in the 1970s. Since the UK
became a full member of the European Monetary System in October 1990 the
gilt-edged market has become a rather unimportant corner of the broader
European government bond market.
Because there are doubts about whether the UK will really be able to sustain
a central exchange rate of DM2.95, and because there is in any case the
extra currency risk of a 6 per cent fluctuation band for the time being,
British government debt pays a premium over that of other leading EC member
states. Ten-year gilts pay about 150 basis points (1.5 per centage points)
over German bunds, while the French government gets away with a
corresponding premium of say 90 basis points.
Still, at these kinds of rates there is potentially a very large
international demand. This already came into play in 1991, when foreigners
had the same net uptake, Pounds 5.3bn, as domestic non-bank investors. Many
overseas investment institutions, after all, are keen and regular bond
buyers. The problem is that many British institutions have lost the habit.
Now the Bank of England must stimulate it again.
During the first three quarters of 1991 the long-term institutions - mainly
life insurance companies and pension funds - actually continued to be net
sellers of gilts to the tune of almost Pounds 2bn, although by the end of
that period they had begun to buy.
During the 1980s the institutions turned away from gilts, especially the
pension funds. At the beginning of that decade pension funds had around 25
per cent of their portfolios in gilts (and life funds a lot more). But the
latest figures for end-1991 show that the typical pension fund had 3 per
cent or less in fixed interest gilts, although possibly 1 to 2 per cent in
index-linked gilts as well. Exposure to overseas bonds is about 5 per cent,
as large as the whole investment in British government securities.
Viewed positively there is a big opportunity here for the authorities to
engineer a portfolio shift. The investment institutions have an annual cash
flow of some Pounds 40bn, so if a substantial proportion of this could be
directed into gilts the problem would be solved. As recently as the early
1980s about a third of pension fund cash flow was going into gilts of one
sort or another (though since 1986 the funds have been consistent net
sellers).
The task may be more difficult than it looks, however. Fund managers will
need to be convinced that the outlook for equities - to which pension funds
have an 80 per cent exposure - has become poor. Moreover they will want a
secure real return on gilts. This can no doubt be made credible by the UK's
ever-closer attachment to the EMS, with entry to the narrow fluctuation
bands promised 'in due course' by Norman Lamont in his speech yesterday.
However, the market has tended to hope that the EMS would be the basis for
long-term financial prudence, not a borrower's charter.
Meanwhile, taxpayers may worry that the borrowing could become very
expensive for the government. Public borrowing is deferred taxation, so long
as you stick to sound money.
It was not quite like this in the past. The last wave of massive UK
government borrowing was in the 1970s. But the burden was eroded by
inflation which totalled 270 per cent in the ten years starting 1973. That
was 14 per cent a year on average, so the 12-15 per cent interest paid out
was a complete illusion. Since 1982 inflation has averaged only 5.7 per cent
a year. Now there is the prospect that it might fall to the 2 to 3 per cent
range. So a government going on a protracted borrowing binge at 9.5 per cent
could soon find itself in the plight of a yuppie house buyer of 1988
vintage.
Ahead of a closely-fought general election, however, a Chancellor of the
Exchequer has little option. Ironically the gilt-edged traders might have
responded better if Norman Lamont had produced a few more bribes. At least
that would have made a Tory election victory seem more likely.
As it is, Mr Lamont has turned on the taps which his successors may be happy
to keep gushing at full capacity. Within three years the government's
financial position has turned around from substantial surplus to heavy
deficit. The recession has something to do with it, but there is more
besides. If the Conservatives behave like this, what can the gilt-edged
market expect under John Smith?
Last night the investors were just a shade nervous. The gilt-edged market
makers, however, can expect to be busy and prosperous for a long time to
come.
 ---------------------------------------------------
GILT SALES
 ---------------------------------------------------
Net sales of British government securities
 ---------------------------------------------------
Financial       Pounds bn
years
 ---------------------------------------------------
1983-84           11.7
1984-85           10.2
1985-86            5.7
1986-87            6.1
1987-88            7.1
1988-89          -13.3
1989-90          -15.8
1990-91           -3.0
1991-92           10.0 est
1992-93           25.0 est
1993-94           30.0 est
 ---------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920311

