FT921-15488

FT  09 JAN 92 / Factory canteens keep Russia's workers well fed


   By GILLIAN TETT


   YEKATERINBURG


MRS Tamara Katsishevskaya, a pensioner in the Russian town of Yekaterinburg,
scraped the remains of a meal off her plate into a jar, and slid it into her
shopping bag.
'I can't eat it all now, but I'll eat it later at home. It's the only chance
I get to eat a proper meal,' she confessed as she sat in a dingy cafeteria,
recently converted into a soup kitchen for Yekaterinburg's pensioners and
invalids.
The soup kitchen represents an increasingly desperate attempt by the
authorities in this huge town in the Urals, typical of many across Russia,
to soften the blow of spiralling food prices.
Nobody in Yekaterinburg believes they will starve this winter. But with
state shop shelves still mostly bare, the issue is now not simply the price
of the food, but also its distribution.
One reason is that in Yekaterinburg, as in many industrial towns across
Russia, a considerable proportion of the food that passes through the town
is distributed, not through shops and markets, but through the factories.
Yekaterinburg, like most towns in the Urals and Siberia was built up as an
industrial town with practically no local agriculture to sustain it. It is
dominated by huge industrial complexes, the largest of which, the machinery
and metal works complex 'Uralmash', employs 50,000 people.
Under the old Soviet system, these factories have provided their workers not
only with housing, kindergartens, saunas and sanatoriums, but also most
crucially, with subsidised restaurants and food shops.
'Uralmash' for example, spent over Rbs70m last year on the 'social welfare'
of its workers  - an expenditure that Mr Sergei Lipatnikov, Uralmash's chief
economist, cites as one reason for its Rbs127m loss last year. 'If we are to
make the factory profitable, and do business in market conditions, then we
probably will not be able to sustain this type of social programme for
long,' he admits.
For the moment, though, factories across the Soviet Union are using their
newly-won independence to barter industrial goods and metals for food
produce, either from other republics, or from abroad. In a typical deal
Uralmash is now bartering its metal with a Czech company, Dialog Agro, in
exchange for Czech meat, oil and sugar, all of which are in desperately
short supply in the town.
This food is directly distributed to employees or sold through subsidised
shops in the factory or Uralmash's cafeterias, which are far better stocked
than anything on the streets of Yekaterinburg.
'Before it wasn't fasionable to eat in the factory cafeterias, but now
everyone eats in them,' says Mr Vladimir Gorokvy, a welder at the factory,
who estimates that he and his wife now get 'about half' of their food at the
factory.
But although this system allows employees access to rare goods like sugar,
it does little for the rest of town's citizens.
Those employed in the new 'private' businesses  - where wages are usually
two or three times higher than in the factories  - can afford to shop in the
state shops and free markets, where meat has been available at Rbs45 a kilo.
Mrs Katsishevskaya, whose pension has been only Rbs186 a month, plainly
cannot.
In spite of the efforts of the town authorities to persuade factories to
give up some of their food for wider distribution, the factories  - faced
with an increasingly restive workforce  - are so far refusing to do this. As
economic conditions deteriorate, every level of the administrative hierarchy
in Russia is becoming increasingly determined not to give up any of its
assets to the level above it.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

920109

