FT922-4412

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (8): Fresh
challenges - The machine tools industry


   By CEDRIC ASHLEY


IN relationship to the vehicle industry, machine tools should not in any way
be thought of in isolation, but instead as part of a system. Indeed, it is a
complex system going back to the moment of conception of the motor vehicle.
The present 'buzz word' is 'simultaneous engineering' in which design,
development, tooling, manufacture, assembly and quality are all considered
together at the same time.
It both reduces the key lead time between between initiation of a project
and selling on the market place, and it ensures that the optimum blend of
technologies is brought to bear on the complex process of creating a motor
car.
In this process, the technology of manufacture is decided, at least in some
detail, at the same time as the first part is drawn. The most complex
element is the body and it is now possible to go directly from a computer
model to the press tool to manufacture the part.
Normally, there is an intermediate stage in which a styling model is created
in foam or a special form of very high density wood material. This model may
be tweaked by the stylist, either at the computer or through traditional
methods of reshaping using modelling clay.
The next stage is production of tools for prototype manufacture and finally
the production tools. In all these cases, use is made of a three- or
five-axis profiling machine. Indeed, the whole process can be handled on the
computer to cover the design of the body tools, the jigs, the fixtures, even
the production line.
It is even possible to use a computer simulator of the whole process, so
that it can be optimised at an early stage.
Quality to a manufacturing engineer is the capability of the production
process to produce a part to specification. We now look for a zero defect
production process in which every part is produced right every time.
Quality is not a measure of the skill of the individual operator, and indeed
the production process is generally organised in such a way that accurate
manufacture to specification does not depend on operator skill.
This means that any computer-controlled production machine must not only
receive computer-generated information about what it has to do, but also
computer read information on acceptable limits and sensors to check and
verify that those limits have been met. Much of the technology advance has
been in sensor development.
There is also considerable interest in the arrangement of machine tools
within the factory. In the late sixties, group technology was initiated
where groups of machines were put together to manufacture specific parts to
minimise transfer time between machines and stock holding. To some extent
the machining centres have superceded the six- to 10-machine group of
dedicated machines, but the concept is now being developed further in terms
of the product cell.
In this concept, an operational unit is formed to produce a specific small
family of units such as electric motors, water pumps, etc. This allows
minimum stockholding within the unit.
In such a unit, a time lag as short as 12 hours may exist between initiation
of demand for a product variation and such a variation being produced at the
end of the line.
A further key element in the selection of the production process is
flexibility. The speed of product development is such that extensive changes
in the product can occur in three- to four-year time spans and these must be
accommodated.
At one time, transfer lines had such rigid constraints that design and
development was inhibited. We now expect full flexibility from the transfer
line to accept both extensive design change and product variation within a
short time spell.
There has long been a financial investment and return hierarchy in machine
tools starting off at the basic building block, the CNC machine such as a
lathe, drilling machine or miller.
The next stage is the machining centre capable of a variety of operations
through multiple tool changes and modes of operation. The Flexible
Manufacturing System (FMS) effectively links together machining centres and
finally we have the dedicated transfer line.
The trick is to know the volume break point at which to invest in the next
level of machine. These boundaries are continuously moving upwards.
Some recent developments illustrate these points. Vauxhall has just
commissioned a new large transfer press at Ellesmere Port which is notable
for its rapid changeover of tools.
Tools for the next run are placed on sliding bolsters and are automatically
changed at the time, using photo-sensors to ensure correct location with
automatic clamping. The computer controls the usual press operation setting
up variations and within 13 minutes a completely different pressed part can
be produced. In the last decade, more than 24 hours would be necessary for a
tool change of such complexity.
Adwest has just commissioned a novel machine for producing variable-ratio
steering racks using a CNC lathe. By combining movement of six elements, two
cams, two angular axes and two linear axes, the complex form was turned
rather than ground. Tooling costs were reduced by a factor of 10 and the
cycle-time reduced from five minutes to only two minutes.
Ford in the US is to build a transfer line in conjunction with several
unit-type machines to produce Zeta crankshafts. A novel feature of two of
the unit machines will be to use rotary broaching to machine the crank pins,
as opposed to turning.
Emissions requirements have led Cummins to an improvement in cylinder block
machining. The bores are now being honed with the block clamped in such a
way as to simulate the distortions caused when the cylinder head is bolted
into place. This gives improved bore roundness in service and reduces oil
consumption and hence particulate emissions.
These examples show some of the challenges which have been met. Computing
power for machine tools is falling in cost, but the consumer is demanding
even higher standards of the end product of his vehicle than before.
Machines are faster, smarter and more flexible; we expect many more
developments in the near future in the world of automation and machine
tools. It is recognised by the CBI and many others that this is one of the
key areas for new investment if the UK is to retain a viable manufacturing
base.
The author is a past chairman of the Automobile Division of the Institution
of Mechanical Engineers

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920605

