FT922-7291

FT  19 MAY 92 / Arts: Landscapes wild, rural and grand - Fine art


   By WILLIAM PACKER


Contrary to the impression given by the evident fatuity of so much that is
called modern art, there really is a great deal of serious and creditable
painting still be done and shown, not in the Tate, perhaps, but in other
galleries.
Maurice Cockrill is now 55, a painter of long-delayed but now burgeoning
reputation, and deservedly so. He was always an expressionist and figurative
painter when to be so was to put oneself beyond the critical pale.
But a move to London from Liverpool ten years ago has brought a change of
fortune. With these new works, and with the tondo sequence of The Four
Seasons especially, he seems to have entered not a new phase of development,
so much as a period of renewed imaginative confidence and technical
assurance.
The surface is open, the paint free and active in the handling, the colour
clean and strong, the work overall dramatic, theatrical in the best sense.
The subject is landscape for the most part: the landscape of romantic
imagination and invention. My only reservation is that given such an
approach, the tendency is always to simplify and formalise the particular
element, even to decorate it arbitrarily. The closer the engagement, sur le
motif, so rich and various is the reality that such necessities of pure
invention simply fall away.
So it is with John Monks, who takes as his subject the interior as a kind of
still-life. The interior is grand rather than domestic, defined by the bare
walls and the door opening through to the space beyond. The composition is
frontal, insistent in its repetition and reinforcement of the architecture,
at once formal and descriptive. The paint is thick, laid on with a free but
disciplined confidence, the tone dark, the mood intense and sombre, again
theatrical.
The suggestion, maybe unwitting, is of the Edwardian interiors of Sargent,
of Lavery, of James Pryde most of all. And yet for all the strength and
vigour, there is a subtlety and delicacy, the atmosphere romantic and
suggestive. It is intuitively established and fraught with imaginative
possibilities.
Monks, who shares this show with Julie Major, is barely 40 years old and and
by no means as well known as he deserves to be.
Len Tabner is another landscape painter, another expressionist of 40 or so.
He, too, set his early career away from London, and although by the late
1970s his wild Turnerian paintings of the North Sea and the Durham coast
were attracting some attention in mixed shows, it is only lately that he has
been shown substantially and regularly in London. This latest exhibition
comes by courtesy of Rosehaugh Stanhope, the developers of Broadgate complex
on the fringe of the City.
The subject is still the shore, the sea and ships, and wild weather. In 1990
Tabner made a voyage to the South Atlantic, to Ascension, South Georgia and
the Falklands, and this quite remarkable series of paintings and studies is
the result. It would seem they were all done on the spot - the painter
perhaps even tied to the mast on occasion, in true Turner fashion.
These sunsets, storms at sea, cliffscapes and hulks rotting at the whaling
station, worked in an active mixture of paint, charcoal and pastel, come in
for the same expansive treatment. They are as free and expansive as we
suppose the South Atlantic to be, and quite as positive and impressive.
Mary Newcomb, who makes up a rural trio with Mary Potter and Winifred
Nicholson, might seem a world away from such strong stuff, but yet these
latest landscapes, lyrical and undemonstrative as they are, bear the
Turnerian comparison no less.
Now nearly 70, Miss Newcomb has never received her manifest due, perhaps by
that very English trait that indulges a taste for charm while discounting it
as unserious and self-indulgent.
She is, in short, a victim of her material, found in the incidents and
visual occasions of rural life, and the subtle delicacy with which she
treats them. What is overlooked is the free and radical qualities both of
her pictorial wit and invention, and the freedom and scope of her actual
painting.
In such things as the large, elegiac canvas of a bird singing in a hedge at
dawn, such qualities are inescapable.
Finally, Bruce Tippett, in his first British show in more than 30 years,
offers a small retrospective of his work in that time. Now nearly 60, he has
consistently trod the narrow line between representation and abstraction,
the landscapes always teasing the one way, the abstract works the other.
The earliest works show a clear interest in the abstract expressionism and
British neo-Romantic landscape then current, Hoffman on the one hand, Alan
Reynolds or Middleditch on the other. But all were moderated, even then, by
an overriding interest in the oriental tradition, in calligraphy in
particular, that continues to this day.
It is the nicest paradox that his most distinctive and personal work, even
though he is so clearly a western artist, should be that which is steeped
unself-consciously in that tradition.
Maurice Cockrill: Bernard Jacobson, 14a Clifford Street W1, until June 13;
John Monks: Paton Gallery, 2 Langley Court WC2, until June 6; Len Tabner:
199 Bishopsgate EC2 - view by appointment c/o Agnew's, 43 Old Bond Street;
Mary Newcomb: Crane Kalman Gallery, 178 Brompton Road SW3, until June 14;
Bruce Tippett: England & Co, 14 Needham Road W11, until May 30.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920519

