FT924-6306

FT  21 NOV 92 / Christmas Food and Drink: A personal food service in
Aladdin's cave


   By PHILIPPA DAVENPORT


MACKINTOSH of Marlborough, Wilts, does not sell Christmas hampers. It is not
that Nigel Mackintosh is against the giving of food and drink as presents.
Far from it. But he believes in the personalised rather than the
pre-packaged approach.
'Why don't you,' he suggests, 'look round our shop, choose what you know the
recipient will like, then nip next door (next door, very conveniently, is a
kitchenware shop), buy a basket and we can pack it for you.'
Alternatively you could buy a board or platter and load it with some of
Mackintosh's fine cheeses. 'Or,' adds Georgina, the catering half of the
husband and wife partnership, 'you might like to buy a lasagne, pie or pate
dish to give as a gift and I will cook something in it for you'. Thus many a
Christmas, house-warming, or birthday present is solved.
Mackintosh is a remarkably small shop, just 300 sq ft, with the same space
again in a basement kitchen area. The owners reckon the smallness of the
place is a virtue in disguise, enforcing a disciplined selection of stock.
There is no room here for run-of-the-mill products. It does not attempt to
compete with supermarkets or to stock lines carried by other shops in the
area, but concentrate instead on selling quality foods from small producers,
much of it artisan or hand-made, and its own foods cooked on the premises.
It is not a cheap place to shop but it is a miniature Aladdin's cave for the
greedy.
Nigel served his apprenticeship with Asda, spent four subsequent years with
Justin de Blank and two with Duff & Trotter.
His wife is cordon bleu trained and cooked for directors' lunch parties in
London before they married, moved to this west country market town and set
up shop six years ago.
Cheese is a major item in the shop. Up to 50 sorts may be on sale, probably
half of them British. Nigel loves the seasonality of cheeses and is
presently excited by the return of vacherin Mont d'Or after three years
unavailability, and the arrival of a torte with basil and pine nuts, 'the
latest taste sensation in the shop'.
Cheese tastings and discussions are encouraged. Labels are intelligently
detailed, often specifying the cheesemaker's name.
Here you will find not any old Caerphilly, Cheshire, Lancashire and Double
Gloucester but those by the Ducketts, the Appelbys, Mrs Kirkham of Goosnargh
and Diana Smart respectively, names as important to lovers of good cheese as
the names of chefs to serious eaters at restaurants.
Olives and olive oils are treated to the same devotion as cheese. The
charcuterie section is small but well chosen. Alderton ham cooked on the
bone (brine-cured Wiltshire style, finished with marmalade) and carved to
order is a best seller.
Other provisions come from some of the best names in the food business,
British and foreign: classy French soups in glass jars, Baxter's potted
shrimps, Cipriani pasta, Millers Damsel biscuits, Ackerman and Valrohna
chocolate, Cellier cider from Brittany, Whittard's teas, chestnut honey from
Coltibuono, English honey by Vivian, Dorothy Carter jams, panettone by Le
Tre Marie, turron Alicante and - fingers crossed - Elvas plums in time for
Christmas.
These are the sort of elitist names one would hope and expect to find in the
best delicatessens countrywide. Pleasingly, Mackintosh also offers some up
and coming'discoveries', thus allowing customers to be ahead of the game.
Chutneys and pickles by Hotshop - Tuscan Lemon and Kashmiri Apricot -
loganberry vinegar by Womersley Hall, raised pies by Tilbec, House of
Edinburgh shortbread, Orkney oatcakes and thick flaky water biscuits, all
these may become well-established names in foodie circles before long.
The shop acts as a showcase and marketplace for the produce of local farm
kitchens and cottage industries. A culinary snapshot of the region, so to
speak. They offer the shopper a rare chance to enjoy a taste of the best of
the region.
From Eastbrook Farm, near Swindon, Glos, come free-range eggs, organic bacon
and sausages; from Wroughton glorious Guernsey cream and slabs of rich
yellow farm butter. There is runny and set honey and honey in the comb from
an apiary in Oare; local wild mushroom in oil, pickled walnuts, apple and
elderberry fruit cheese and other preserves by Louisa Maskell of Chisbury;
organic apple juice from Pewsey; breads from Rushall made with organic stone
ground flour; and sponges and fruit cakes baked by two women wisely
commissioned when the local Women's Institute market closed.
Then there is the cooking done on the premises, which tends more towards
comforting country house classics than haute cuisine. It is essentially good
honest home cooking without the chore of having to do it yourself.
There is always a selection of fresh pates available, and a variety of
sandiches, mini quiches, flapjacks and brown sugar meringues for the
lunchtime trade. The freezer usually boasts a range of soups, main courses
and puddings.
Pies of the shepherd's variety, vegetarian, steak and kidney, and chicken or
game and ham are all popular. These are normally made in foil containers
though the kitchen willingly makes them - and other recipes to order - in
customer's dishes. A fish pie topped with pastry fish swimming across the
lid was carried up from the kitchen to the shop for collection during our
interview.
Georgina particularly enjoys catering for shooting lunches, when the menu
might include Lancashire hotpot, or Irish or Oxtail stew with dumplings and
all the trimmings, followed by apple pie or treacle tart, luncheon cakes and
a splendid cheeseboard.
But more than anything else the shop kitchen is kept busy cooking roulades
(mostly sweet, some savoury) and tiddlewink size Parmesan shortbreads for
nibbling with pre-prandial drinks. Marlborough's appetite for them seems
never ending.
Mackintosh of Marlborough is at 42a High Street, Marlborough, Wiltshire.
Tel: 0672-514069.
SAVOURY PUFF PINWHEELS (makes 20-24) Another popular Mackintosh party piece:
1 x 8 oz packet puff pastry; 1 x 50 g tin of anchovies, drained of oil and
sliced in half lengthways; 1 large onion, finely chopped, cooked until soft
in the anchovy oil, drained and cooled; 4 tablespoons tapenade paste; 2
teaspoons tomato puree; 4 oz grated Cheddar cheese.
Cut the pastry in half and roll out each piece to a 6 x 8 inch oblong.
Spread each piece with tapenade, scatter with onion, dot with tomato puree
and lay the anchovies on top. Sprinkle evenly with the cheese and add a
grinding of pepper.
Roll up each piece of pastry as tightly as possible, rolling from one short
end to the other. Wrap in foil and freeze if preparing ahead. Or cut into
1/4 inch slices straight away.
To cook, lay the pinwheels on non-stick baking trays, spacing them a little
apart, and bake at 400'F (200'C) gas mark 6 for 10-15 minutes until golden
and crisp.
Cool on a rack and eat while still warm or within 24 hours or the pastry
will spoil.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

921121

