FT921-11828

FT  30 JAN 92 / Ukraine rejects joint line on debt: Kiev says it will pay
its share of Soviet foreign dues independently


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND


   KIEV


UKRAINE said yesterday it will pay its foreign debt independently and
appealed to the international financial community to help make the
appropriate arrangements.
The statement is likely to increase western unease about the division of the
former Soviet debt. Last week, German officials threatened that republics
which refused to accept 'joint and several' responsibility for the debt
should be excluded from international financial organisations such as the
IMF.
But yesterday the prime minister, Mr Vitold Fokin, insisted that Ukraine
would pay its 16.37 per cent share of the Soviet debt independently.
He accused Russia of violating inter-republican agreements on the division
of Soviet foreign debt. Mr Fokin also insisted that the Ukrainian National
Bank and the Export-Import Bank of Ukraine, which was established to replace
Vnesheconombank in Ukraine this month, be allowed to participate directly in
international financial institutions and serve as Ukraine's sole
international financial representatives.
Mr Fokin appealed to the west for assistance in securing 16.37 per cent of
the assets of the former Soviet Union, both at home and abroad. He made
particular reference to foreign property, such as embassies, which he said
the west should not recognise as belonging to Russia.
The announcement signalled a further deterioration of Ukrainian-Russian
relations on the economic front. Mr Fokin accused Russia of illegally taking
control of Vnesheconombank, gold reserves and other assets of the former
Soviet Union.
Mr Jacques Attali, head of the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, met yesterday with Mr Fokin, the chairman of the Ukrainian
National Bank and other Ukrainian leaders and expressed confidence in their
economic reform programme and supported their efforts to join international
financial organisations, such as the IMF.
To insulate itself from feared Russian economic retaliation, Ukraine
yesterday signed a contract with Iran and Azerbaijan to purchase oil.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920130

