FT922-13321

FT  13 APR 92 / Court gives go-ahead to EC-Efta accord


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   BRUSSELS


A TREATY creating a 19-country European Economic Area is likely to be signed
next month after the European Court of Justice cleared it at the weekend.
The EEA accord, negotiated between the European Community and the European
Free Trade Association, was thrown into doubt by an objection from the Court
of Justice two months after its conclusion in October. The court said a
proposed joint EEA panel of judges would undermine its own autonomy as the
Community's supreme court.
EC-Efta negotiators agreed to resolve disputes over the judicial
interpretation of EEA laws through a joint political committee, rather than
a fully-fledged court.
On Saturday the Community Court said it had no objection to this, but said
the committee's decisions 'must not be contrary' to its own rulings. This
may have to be added to the treaty as a protocol, Efta diplomats said
yesterday.
The EEA agreement means the EC is, in effect, extending single market
freedoms to 40m Scandinavians, Austrians and Swiss. It will increase trade
between the two groups, which are already each other's largest commercial
partners, leading eventually to a free flow of goods, capital, services and
labour between the groups.
The Efta countries will be able to shape, but not take, EC decisions. They
will be consulted at an early stage by the European Commission on
forthcoming legislation but they will not have a vote in the Council of
Ministers.
However, the agreement has stirred institutional jealousy precisely because
it gives Efta countries a kind of half-membership of the Community. After
the EC judges, the next group that needs placating are MEPs, who have passed
a resolution saying they 'will not approve an agreement which would weaken
community institutions, and notably the European Parliament, in their
legislative functions'.
The agreement is due to come into effect on January 1 1993, although its
practical effect may be shortlived as three of the six Efta countries -
Austria, Sweden and Finland - have already applied for full EC membership.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920413

