FT924-916

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (5): New discipline
imposed - Foreign investment


   By ROBERT THOMSON


The wave of Japanese direct investment that swept over the US and Europe
during the late 1980s is receding. The collapse of the country's financial
markets and the international recession have imposed new discipline on
companies which appeared to have bottomless budgets and borderless
ambitions.
Japanese companies are still investing in foreign manufacturing operations,
but they are more selective.
They are also reviewing foreign investments made during the 'bubble era' of
the late 1980s and concluding that these projects cannot survive in the
harsher environment of the 1990s.
From fiscal 1987 to 1989, Japanese foreign direct investment doubled to
Dollars 67.5bn, including an increase from Dollars 6.6bn to Dollars 14.8bn
in Europe, and from Dollars 15.3bn to Dollars 33.9bn in the US.
Since then the figure has been in decline and direct investment in the
fiscal first half was 12 per cent lower than a year earlier.
Behind the fall is a shift in investment priorities that will produce a
better-targeted flow of money out of Japan.
Car parts manufacturers will still establish US factories and European
machinery makers will be acquired, but the emphasis will be on profits, not
politics or public relations.
And there will be increased investment in China, Vietnam and other centres
offering lower-priced production facilities for manufacturers whose core
profitability has declined for more than a decade.
Mr Yuji Hosoya, a deputy director of the industrial policy bureau at the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti), said that investment in
China had increased against the trend because it was 'survival investment'
for labour-intensive Japanese industries.
'Japan's main target must be Asia,' Mr Hosoya said. The financial reasons
for this focus are obvious to those Japanese companies burdened by purchases
of ailing US steel makers or investments in unprofitable US components
plants.
Miti has found that the Japanese manufacturing investment in the US is
showing a negative profit to sales ratio of 0.9 per cent, while European
investments are yielding 3.2 per cent and those in Asia 5 per cent.
But even within Asia, Japanese companies have become more selective having
learned from experience over the past decade.
One trading house representative said his company had invested heavily in
Thailand, particularly in textile and other processing ventures, but the
productivity of some of those ventures had not met expectations.
A decision by the Japanese government in November to restore official
development assistance (ODA) to Vietnam has encouraged the leading trading
houses, all of whom have representative offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh
City.
However, the short-term viability of Vietnamese projects is still limited by
inadequate infrastructure and concerns on the rule of corporate law.
Japanese companies are also convinced that China's time has finally come, as
the country is now an important base for components out-sourcing and an
increasingly lively market.
Over the past decade, Japanese companies have tentatively invested in China,
believing that the quality of product was not high enough for the
international marketplace and that the domestic market was limited by
consumers' modest means and by strict government regulation.
All three of those limits have changed over the past three years, while the
stability of economic and foreign investment policy during the political
upheaval of June 1989, when the pro-democracy movement was crushed, have
convinced Japanese executives that reform will endure long beyond the
lifetime of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount Chinese leader.
The result is that Japanese investment in China, which rose from Dollars
349m in 1990 to Dollars 579m last year, is likely to double this year.
Each day the Japanese press carries news of new ventures and, apart from the
'Gold Coast' of southern China, there has been a rush of money to the
northern port of Dalian, familiar to many Japanese because of its past role
as a manufacturing base in occupied China during the 1930s.
In the textile industry, about 30 projects have been established around
Shanghai by a Japanese sewing companies' association, although the results
of this investment are reducing these makers' domestic operations.
Mr Mitsunobu Nonaka, president of KM Clothing, based in the southern island
of Kyushu, said the quality of Chinese garments had improved rapidly over
the past three years, and Japanese garment makers were unable to match the
Chinese prices.
Mr Kaizo Hashimoto, director of investment promotion at the Japan External
Trade Organisation, said Japanese companies remain interested in European
investment, even though the flow of funds had slowed over the past two
years.
The UK retained an advantage, he explained, because many Japanese executives
could speak some English, while relatively few spoke French or German.
'In continental Europe, Germany is the number one spot for Japanese
investors. There is a lot of interest in the former East Germany because
there are not so many competitors in that area, compared to other parts of
Europe, and companies can see the potential for development,' Mr Hashimoto
said.
East European markets may offer Japanese companies long-term profits, but
executives are more concerned about their companies' present lack of
profitability.
One cause of the profits problem is the increased cost of capital for
Japanese companies, which could raise funds at virtually zero cost during
the financial frenzy of the late 1980s, but which must now pay between 4 and
5 per cent for their money.
The prospect of long years of unprofitability for a new manufacturing plant
in eastern Europe has become particularly unpalatable for manufacturers.
Japanese companies, like the country's consumers, have become more modest in
their spending habits and more determined to get value for money.
 ------------------------------------------------------
    JAPANESE FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (DOLLARS BN)
 ------------------------------------------------------
Year     Total     N America     Europe      Asia
 ------------------------------------------------------
1985      12.2        5.5         1.9        1.4
1986      22.3       10.4         3.5        2.3
1987      33.4       15.4         6.6        4.9
1988      47.0       22.3         9.1        5.6
1989      67.5       33.9        14.8        8.2
1990      56.9       27.2        14.3        7.0
1991      41.6       18.8         9.4        5.9
 ------------------------------------------------------
Source: Ministry of Finance
 ------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921221

