FT921-14320

FT  16 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Maxwells tobe quizzed in writing


MR Kevin Maxwell and his brother Ian are to be given a second opportunity to
answer MPs' questions about missing pension funds from their late father's
companies.
The Commons social security committee met in private yesterday and decided
to put questions to the Maxwells in writing. The brothers will be asked to
reappear before the committee to give their answers in public.
On Monday, Mr George Carman QC, counsel for Mr Kevin Maxwell, said he was
prepared to answer some questions in writing, provided the answers were not
passed on to the Serious Fraud Office.
Progress in hunt, Page 23
*****
EC FUNDS: The political impartiality of Mr Bruce Millan, the EC Commissioner
for regional policy, was questioned by Mr Edward Leigh, junior trade and
industry minister, in the Commons yesterday.
He accused Mr Millan, a former Labour cabinet minister, of holding back
Pounds 109m in EC funds intended to benefit coalfield communities in
Britain.
The minister claimed Mr Millan chose to withhold only grants due to Britain
because of arrangements to ensure that the level of public expenditure was
determined at Westminster and not in Brussels.
*****
COAL INDUSTRY: The coal industry bill completed its Commons passage
yesterday as Labour renewed charges that safety standards in Britain's mines
were being jeopardised to facilitate privatisation.
Mr Frank Dobson, shadow energy secretary, urged ministers to encourage
overseas mining industries to bring standards up to British levels.
*****
GREEN PARTY: Ms Jean Lambert and Dr Richard Lawson have been elected as the
Green party's two principal speakers.
Their election follows a decision taken at last September's conference to
replace the 25-member party council with an 11-member executive. Both
principal speakers will sit on the executive as non-voting members.
*****
AGRICULTURE: Spending to encourage farmers to use more environmentally
friendly methods of cultivation to preserve the best of the English
countryside is to be increased by Pounds 52m a year, Mr John Gummer,
agriculture minister, told the Commons yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920116

