FT922-13403

FT  11 APR 92 / Books: Dreams under her feet


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


THE GONNE-YEATS LETTERS 1893-1938 edited by Anna MacBride White and A Norman
Jeffare Hutchinson, Pounds 25, 544 pages
ON January 30 1889 a young nationalist, tall, imposing and said to be the
most beautiful woman in Ireland, descended from a hansom cab to visit the
home of the painter John Butler Yeats. His son, the aspiring poet Willie,
opened the door, and what he called the troubling of his life began: Yeats
fell instantly in love.
For 14 years, he pursued Maud Gonne; he proposed to her, worked with her,
wrote obsessively to and about her. She was a radical inspired to
nationalism after seeing Dublin tenants evicted by absentee landlords. He
was a dreamy aesthete. Their meeting ground was Celtic mysticism and Irish
literature, and Maud agreed to a 'mystical marriage.'
Yeats pressed for a material one, kept aloof from other women, believed she
would marry no one. Then, about to give a lecture in 1903, he received a
letter, addressed in the familiar hand, telling him that she had married an
Irish militant, Major John MacBride, in Paris. 'The ears being deafened, the
sight of the eyes blind/With lightning', he staggered through the lecture
and set about reconstructing his life.
The letters about her marriage are among nearly 400 from Maud to Yeats
collected in this compelling volume; only a handful of his to her survived
the ransacking of her Dublin home by Free Staters. Yeats once said his
meeting with Maud Gonne reverberated through his life like a Burmese gong in
the middle of a tent. Here, for the first time, is extensive evidence of
Maud's side of the relationship which has beguiled scholars for half a
century; her life told in her own voice.
Was she a frigid goddess, a manipulative politician, or simply a woman who
could not make up her mind? This correspondence unravels rather the story of
two absolutists set for head-on collision. 'For the honour of our country,
the world must recognise you one of the Great Poets of the century', she
writes. But fanaticism came to colour her reactions - Dreyfus is 'an
uninteresting Jew', later, Hitler was her hope of revenge on England - while
Yeats turned from the struggle to criticise her 'joyous and self-forgetting
condition of political hate'.
What these highly-charged letters make clear is that Gonne lost herself in
politics as she never could in love, and that Yeats' refusal to grasp this
led to the anguished hope and near breakdown that ruined his youth. Maud,
her firebrand letters full of an unswerving interest in the event of the
moment, whether upsetting Queen Victoria's visit to Ireland or extricating
herself from Holloway Prison, never understood her effect on Yeats.
When his patron Lady Gregory asked her intentions, she snapped that she and
Yeats had more important things to think about than marriage. Later, she
claimed her liaison with MacBride was engineered to disguise as a Spanish
honeymoon his attempt to assassinate Edward VII in Gibraltar. But MacBride
got too drunk to carry it out, and after a year of inebriated marriage she
sued her unruly rebel-husband for divorce: 'Of a hero I had made, nothing
remains, and the disillusion has been cruel.'
Yeats met her honesty with generosity, support, advice over solicitors. Hope
surged: in 1916, when MacBride was executed in the Easter Rising, Yeats is
still proposing marriage. Did they ever sleep together? Maud, according to
Yeats and others, had 'a dread of physical love,' and tried to limit sex to
procreation (after her first child died, she descended with her lover, a
French revolutionary, to his tomb to conceive another baby in whom the first
would be reincarnated).
Yeats said he and Maud were briefly lovers in 1908; in her letters then she
dreams of him as a serpent but is most passionate in asceticism: 'My loved
one I belong to you more in this renunciation than if I came to you in sin.
Did you not say yourself that our love must be holy?'
Every one of her letters confirms a temperament uncompromised, too strong in
its beliefs to change. For decades Yeats met her romanticism with his own,
but finally he snatched happiness for himself and married a younger woman.
They rented Maud's house while she was in prison; on her return, Yeats,
fearful for his pregnant bride, turned her away at the door - he knew his
loyalties. But they stayed friends, and she appears in his last poems,
written when both were in their 70s. In
In our century, only another Irish muse, James Joyce's wife Nora, was as
significant in literary history. It is inconceivable that Yeats would have
written the same poetry had he not met Maud Gonne; if she had wanted him, he
even wrote, 'I might have thrown poor words away/And been content to live'.
A classic story: the introspective poet rejected by a beautiful heroine for
a man of action. It makes a book thrilling in itself and invaluable as a
commentary on so autobiographical a poet.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920411

