FT924-12109

FT  22 OCT 92 / Marching miners met by medley of rhetoric: 40,000 in biggest
London rally since poll tax riots


   By DAVID GOODHART and JIMMY BURNS


YESTERDAY WAS Trafalgar Day, but there was little sense of victory as more
than 40,000 miners and other trade unionists took to London's streets to
protest against the government's coal policy in the biggest rally in the
capital since the poll tax riots in March 1990.
After a subdued journey through Hyde Park and Kensington Gardens, the
marchers listened to the great and good of the labour movement telling them
that the government had not conceded enough and that their march was the
beginning of a great campaign and not the end.
Many of the marchers were less certain. Mrs Peggy Tomlinson, secretary of
the colliery band which led the march, said she was disappointed the turnout
had not been bigger. Behind her, a Yorkshire miner, 52-year-old Mr Alan
Bailey, said he and his colleagues feared for their redundancy packages.
Contradicting their own platform rhetoric, some senior union officials
worried, privately, that the government's partial U-turn would be enough to
damp the surge of feeling that has unexpectedly placed them at the helm of
mass protest.
'With the government conceding some ground, we are going to need good
judgment and organisation to keep up the momentum for a really fundamental
change in policy,' said one.
Reflecting the new emphasis that the National Union of Mineworkers is
putting on winning the hearts and minds of the wider British public, the
march remained disciplined. As it moved through Kensington, isolated groups
of shoppers and shopkeepers clapped while tourists looked on bemused.
A more strident show of solidarity was displayed by speeches in a half-empty
Westminster Central Hall, designed to keep miners amused before and after
lobbying their MPs. Labour MP Mr Dennis Skinner called Mr John Major 'an
incompetent wimp' and attacked the two non-Labour MPs on the platform, Mr
Simon Hughes, the Liberal Democrat, and Mr Michael Clarke, the Conservative
and former chairman of the Energy Select Committee.
Mr Clarke admitted he had little in common with his mainly leftwing audience
but was listened to respectfully as he put the case for coal. 'I do not
represent a northern Labour constituency, I represent a southern Tory one,
but I will be voting against the government because my constituents want me
to,' he said.
Mr Arthur Scargill, the NUM leader, arrived late, to the loudest cheers of
the afternoon, and said the British labour movement had crossed the Rubicon:
'For the first time in years, working men and women have expressed their
outrage and indignation at a government devoid of compassion and
understanding.'
But Mr Scargill did not call for strikes and emphasised the need for a
broadly-based campaign.
Mr John Smith, the Labour leader, found it difficult to arouse much passion
but received a polite hearing when he said that the coal crisis would return
to haunt the government.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921022

