FT921-14380

FT  16 JAN 92 / Labour may scale back National Insurance plans


THE LABOUR leadership may scale back its plan for sharp increases in
National Insurance contributions for those earning more than Pounds 20,000 a
year because of the potentially crippling impact on its electoral support in
southern England.
Senior party figures are suggesting that the proposed abolition of the
Pounds 20,280 earnings ceiling on such contributions could be phased in over
a number of years rather than coming into effect immediately after the
general election.
The change of heart, which follows a Conservative onslaught on Labour's tax
and spending plans, reflects growing concern in the shadow cabinet about the
unpopularity of the plan among voters in key southern marginals.
The party insisted last night it had emphasised consistently that its
planned tax and National Insurance changes would be introduced gradually.
But the general presumption among MPs of all parties at Westminster has been
that the NIC changes would be introduced in the first budget of a Labour
government to pay for its planned increases in spending on child benefit and
pensions.
Labour needs to win a swathe of seats around London and in the rest of
southern chance of defeating the Conservatives in the general election due
by July.
Its concern about the impact of the NIC change will be reinforced by the
publication later this month of a detailed study on its effect on voters in
different parts of the country.
Overall, about 3.4m or about 14 per cent of taxpayers would be hit by the
abolition of the ceiling, but because of the wide disparities in income, the
losers would be heavily concentrated in the south.
It is understood that a report under preparation by the independent
Institute for Fiscal Studies will show that in parts of the south-east more
than a third of those in employment would suffer.
If it were introduced immediately, it would cost employees Pounds 90 extra a
year on every Pounds 1,000 of income over the Pounds 20,280 threshold. For a
middle-manager on Pounds 30,000 per year that would mean an additional
annual bill of nearly Pounds 900.
There are two possible ways to phase in the change. Shadow cabinet members
have floated the option that initially employees earning more than Pounds
20,280 would pay contributions on anything above that point at a lower rate
than the 9 per cent level levied on the rest of their income.
Another possibility, suggested by the IFS, would be a gradual increase in
the ceiling over a number of years until it was eventually aligned with the
top-rate tax threshold, and then abolished.
Either would bring Tory charges of a U-turn in policy. The Conservatives,
buoyed by the latest opinion poll giving them a one-point lead and by a
cheerier mood in the City, plan a new attack on Labour's spending plans
ahead of a Commons debate on the economy next week.
They will raise further their estimate that Labour's spending commitments
add up to more than Pounds 35bn.
But if Mr Neil Kinnock confirms the plans for a phased change, he will
insist it is entirely consistent with long-stated pledges to avoid large
disruptions in family budgets.
Labour party figures last night were referring to a phrase in the party's
latest policy document, Opportunity Britain, which states: 'Fundamental tax
reforms of the kind we propose must be introduced gradually so that family
and business budgets are not disrupted.'
Labour can also argue that the two specific areas of spending which it has
pledged to increase immediately on taking office - child benefit and
pensions - can be financed comfortably without a 'one-off' abolition of the
NIC ceiling.
This total package is estimated to cost Pounds 3.5bn, but a substantial
proportion of that could be raised by the planned increase in the top rate
of tax and by other planned income tax changes, allowing room for a phased
increase in NIC.
Parliament, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920116

