FT924-6365

FT  21 NOV 92 / International Company News: Hoechst profits down 19% as
dollar fall cuts turnover


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


PRE-TAX profits at Hoechst, the German chemicals group, fell 19 per cent in
the first nine months of this year to DM1.54bn (Dollars 960m), compared with
DM1.9bn in 1991 and DM2.5bn in the previous year.
A 'summer recession' set in at the start of the third quarter, continued
into the autumn and there is still no end in sight, Mr Wolfgang Hilger,
chairman, said yesterday.
The results, following news of a 45 per cent profits fall at BASF, further
highlighted the impact of international and now domestic economic weakness
on Germany's leading companies.
Hoechst shares gained on the news, which was not as bad as expected, and
closed in Frankfurt DM1.40 higher at DM241.90.
The company's fortunes were saved from a more dramatic plunge by its strong
pharmaceuticals business, which accounts for about half its earnings and is
less prone to violent cyclical swings. With 75 per cent of sales overseas,
the group was also less affected than BASF by the sudden downturn in the
domestic market in the third quarter.
Even so, Hoechst could not escape the effects of exchange rate changes. The
effective devaluation of the US dollar against the D-Mark was responsible
for the lion's share of the DM770m turnover fall in the third quarter, Mr
Hilger said.
Group sales, down 7 per cent in the three months to end-September, were 2
per cent lower after nine months at DM11.9bn.
Cost-cutting programmes, including plans for job losses 'in three figures'
next year, are under way. One important move, announced yesterday - the
merger of Hoechst's PVC activities with those of Wacker-Chemie - could save
DM50m a year, Mr Hilger claimed.
Hoechst, which owns 50 per cent of Wacker, has suffered badly from worldwide
depression in the PVC business. But Mr Hilger believed the deal, which would
create a company with a 10 per cent share of west European capacity, would
help improve competitiveness.
According to Mr Hilger, prospects have been dimmed by falling demand. Orders
on hand at the end of October were 15 per cent lower than a year earlier, he
said. Results for the last three months of the year would be 'virtually the
same' as in the third quarter.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921121

