FT921-402

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (14):
Insurers pick up sick planet's health bill - Chris Clarke takes a look at
pollution cover


   By CHRIS CLARKE


POLITICIANS routinely voice dismay at the insurance industry's reluctance to
offer the rest of the economy cover against pollution damage.
It would be such a simple way to safeguard the public and the taxpayer from
uncertain pollution costs, if every economic actor could be required to
carry unlimited pollution insurance.
A rapidly growing number of statutes, at European Community and national
level, is now requiring insurance or equivalent financial guarantee before
activities with high environmental risks can operate. Very little thought
seems to have been given to where such provision would come from.
Insurers, on the other hand, have spent the last decade trying to survive a
tidal wave of unforeseen asbestos and pollution claims under liability
policies written long before anyone anticipated such things.
More than Pounds 5bn has been paid out of the London market on asbestos
bodily injury claims and the annual totals are only just beginning to peak.
Behind that, there is a battle to resist what some see as potentially
hundreds of billions of dollars in asbestos property damage claims.
In addition to these concerns about asbestos, insurers are also facing the
threat of massive liabilities in relation to environmental clean-ups.
So far, the claims in this area are largely confined to the US, where
insurers are fighting in the courts to show that comprehensive general
liability policies (CGL) with 'sudden and accidental' exclusion wordings
should not have to cover clean-up costs at 'Superfund' hazardous waste
sites. (These are areas covered by American legislation of the 1980s which
primarily addresses hazardous abandoned sites.)
This is an important battle for the insurance industry. Current estimates
for total Superfund costs range between Dollars 50bn and Dollars 750bn with
further billion dollar sums awaiting under other federal and state
legislation.
In Europe, EC liability proposals and member state laws are both introducing
concepts such as strict, joint and several, and, to some extent, retroactive
liability to the environmental field. Governments have been trying to
reassure people that the retroactive element would be avoided here, but
insurers are rightly sceptical of any such promise. An imminent EC green
paper on environmental liability makes it clear in draft that vast sums of
money are going to be required from someone to pay for Europe's historic
contamination problems.
Already, European insurers know that there are thousands of old public
liability policies out there, written on an occurrence basis, that were
silent about pollution and will very likely give rise to claims in the long
run. Today, most such policies include 'sudden and accidental' exclusions,
which most insurers think will be more effective than equivalents in the US.
Meanwhile, a small number of company insurers are offering policies
specifically aimed at gradual pollution problems, known as environmental
impairment liability (EIL) insurance. These require the insured to pay for
extensive site investigation and possibly improvement before acceptance,
then restrict cover to a claims-made basis, with strict policy limits and
substantial deductibles.
A UK Chemical Industries Association EIL scheme, known as CEILIF, with a
Pounds 5m per site limit, was the first in the field, with a similar package
for non-CIA members, from brokers Bain Clarkson. These were followed by the
largest US carrier in this market, AIG, with a Dollars 20m per company limit
through its AIU subsidiary, and US rival Reliance is now launching a range
of policies through its associate ECS.
While there has been much interest in these schemes, there has been
virtually no take-up of the actual policies. Small companies seem to have
found the premiums and deductibles too high, while large companies have
apparently preferred to retain the risks. Both groups have also been getting
a good deal of cover for nothing, out of public liability policies which
still lack pollution exclusions.
In that context, the Lloyd's market has established an environment working
party, under Michael Payne, recently retired as underwriter of syndicate
386, to look at what can be sensibly provided without attracting ruinous
losses. Mr Payne reports that it will examine all the options as
constructively as possible, including insurance pools, as already exist in
various forms in France, Italy, the Netherlands and Sweden.
He looks somewhat enviously at what has happened in Germany, where he sees a
good working relationship between government, industry and insurers 'to
produce something that is insurable', rather than the vague, unrealistic
demands circulating elsewhere.
Meanwhile, a number of Lloyd's underwriters are involved in separate
initiatives to develop new environmental liability products. One group is
looking at the scope for an EIL policy with a higher limit than is currently
available, while another, chaired by Special Risk Services, the financial
risk liability specialists, is examining cover for banks and other financial
institutions.
What no one is going to offer is unlimited cover on an occurrence basis,
which provides a guarantee for all time against future pollution damage. Nor
will there be much cover for existing operating sites, where insurers are
determined to avoid picking up what John Murphy, of Bankside Syndicates, who
underwrites syndicate 1156, calls 'the sins of the past'.
The writer is liability correspondent FT World Insurance Report

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920330

