FT922-4391

FT  05 JUN 92 / Nato agrees Europe peacekeeping role


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER


   OSLO


NATO foreign ministers yesterday agreed that the alliance should take on a
new peacekeeping role in Europe, though there is no immediate prospect of it
deploying troops in areas of conflict such as Yugoslavia while a durable
ceasefire is not in place.
A statement issued by Nato foreign ministers said the 16 allies were
prepared to support peacekeeping activities 'on a case-by-case basis' on the
specific request of the 52-nation Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe.
It is the first time that Nato, which was founded in 1949, has agreed to
take action involving the defence of non-members.
Mr Manfred Worner, the secretary-general, said the peacekeeping offer
covered not only transport, other infrastructure facilities and supplies of
military equipment, but also troops, if necessary.
However, the statement was carefully worded to allow individual member
states to opt out of any peacekeeping mission - to take account of mainly
French objections. France is opposed to giving Nato an enhanced role and
argues that requests for peacekeeping help should be addressed to individual
member states rather than to the organisation - as proposed by the US,
Britain and Germany. The compromise finally reached can be interpreted as
being either an offer from Nato or the member states.
Mr Lawrence Eagleburger, the US deputy secretary of state, expressed his
country's strong support for the decision to make Nato's capabilities and
assets available for CSCE-mandated peacekeeping operations. The CSCE, he
said, had 'a unique role to play as a flexible political instrument for
managing democratic change and addressing the root causes of conflict'.
However, both Mr Eagleburger and Mr Douglas Hurd, the British foreign
secretary, stressed that the CSCE should also be able to turn to
international organisations, such as the United Nations and the nine-nation
Western European Union.
In a separate statement, the ministers called for an immediate ceasefire in
Nagorno-Karabakh, the Armenian enclave in Azerbaijan.
In a strongly-worded statement, Nato foreign ministers yesterday condemned
the use of force in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. They also
expressed their 'strongest support' for the UN resolution imposing sanctions
on Serbia and Montenegro.
Meanwhile, the opposition Serbian Renewal Party, led by Mr Vuk Draskovic,
and the Democratic Party led by Dragojlub Micunovic, demanded the immediate
resignation of Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic. In a surprise
development, the Serbian Academy of Sciences and the University of Belgrade,
long regarded as the bastion of Mr Milosevic's support, yesterday also
started a debate, and eventual vote, about the Serbian leader's future.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920605

