FT924-8052

FT  13 NOV 92 / Kenyan opposition given more time for nominations


   By JULIAN OZANNE


   NAIROBI


KENYA'S electoral timetable was thrown into confusion yesterday after the
High Court granted an opposition request for more time for nominating
parliamentary candidates and criticised the government's attempt to curtail
the process.
The main opposition party, Ford-Kenya, which made the request, immediately
seized on the court ruling as a victory for the opposition in attempts to
ensure that Kenya's first multi-party elections in 26 years, due on December
7, are not hurried or manipulated by the government.
The opposition has consistently maintained that the government of President
Daniel arap Moi is trying to sway the electoral process in its favour and
exploit a divided and ill-prepared opposition.
The High court's decision overturned the government's attempt to shorten the
legal period for nomination of candidates from 21 days to 10 days from the
date of the announcement of the polls, which was to have expired today.
Attempts by the opposition to meet the 10-day deadline have been
disorganised and marred by violence.
Justice Thomas Mbaluto said that Mr Amos Wako, the attorney-general, had
acted illegally in amending the constitutional provisions for nomination of
candidates without parliamentary approval.
Diplomats and political analysts in Nairobi said that in the light of the
ruling it was now unclear if the December 7 date for the polls could be
observed.
Mr Wako said the government would not appeal against the decision and Mr
Justice Chesoni, the chairman of the National Electoral Commission, said he
would announce a new timetable for nomination of parliamentary and
presidential candidates.
Since Mr Moi legalised multi-party politics a year ago he has continued to
keep the opposition and the country in the dark about the government's
electoral plans. Before last week's announcement of the polls he described
the revelation of the date as his 'secret weapon'.
Mr Jaramogi Oginga Odinga, presidential candidate of Ford-Kenya, said
yesterday the High Court decision had exposed the government's 'mischief'
and destroyed Mr Moi's secret weapon. Mr Odinga called on Mr Chesoni
immediately to gazette the polling stations, publish the names of all
returning officers and their deputies and consult the opposition further on
the organisation of the elections.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921113

