FT923-10766

FT  29 JUL 92 / People: Hue Williams moves to Guinness Mahon


Charles Hue Williams, who resigned from Kleinwort Benson Securities in
October 1990 after one of his 'bought' deals went terribly wrong, has
resurfaced at Guinness Mahon, the Japanese-owned merchant banking group.
He has joined the board of Guinness Mahon's agency broking business,
Henderson Crosthwaite Institutional Brokers. A former partner of jobbers
Wedd Durlacher and joint managing director of Kleinwort Benson Securities,
Hue Williams, 49, is well known in the City and used to be regarded as one
of the big players in the oil share market.
Unlike the big integrated securities houses, Hue Williams' new employer does
not make markets in shares so he will have to content himself with
concentrating on developing Henderson Crosthwaite's institutional research,
broking and corporate finance activities in the energy sector.
The hope is that with Hue Williams' connections, Henderson Crosthwaite will
be able to make the same sort of mark in the energy sector as it has in
areas such as food manufacturing where its research team is highly regarded.
Hue Williams is the second high profile appointment made by David Potter,
who took over as chief executive of the loss-making Guinness Mahon in
October 1990.
A few weeks ago he recruited Kevin Kenny, a former chief executive of
Tyndall Holdings, to be director of international private banking. Potter
believes that if small merchant banks are to succeed in this climate they
need a dozen or so good people, like Hue Williams, at the top.
Hue Williams has been absent from the City since Kleinwort Benson lost
Pounds 35m on a 29.7 per cent stake in Premier Consolidated Oilfields. Hue
Williams' team bought the shares at 99p and had hoped to sell them on at a
premium. Unfortunately, the market started falling and after several months
the shares were placed at 78p.
They are now trading at 15p. 'Everyone makes mistakes,' says Potter who
admires Hue Williams' decision to accept the blame and resign from
Kleinwort. Hue Williams, he says, is a 'man of absolute integrity'.
However, he has no fears that Guinness Mahon might be hurt by a repeat of
the Premier debacle. 'We are not a market-maker, we have set our face
against it.'
*****
Ken Young, deputy chairman of the Post Office, was yesterday named
non-executive chairman of the Student Loans Company, which administers the
government's student loan programme. He replaces Malcolm Hurlston who
resigned unexpectedly last month, after less than a year in the position.
Young has been on the Post Office Board since 1972, during which time he
served variously as chairman of Girobank, of Post Office Counters and of
Post Office Subscription Services. He is currently chairman of the
Roehampton Institute. Before joining the Post Office he had been group
personnel manager at General Electric. Education secretary John Patten said
yesterday 'we are confident that under his guidance the company will go from
strength to strength'.
Hurlston, who resigned 'because of the pressure of his other business
commitments', is an independent corporate consultant specialising in
consumer credit and public affairs.
*****
Total quality management may not be a phrase which Network SouthEast
commuters readily associate with British Rail, but it is something that has
been going on within the corporation for four years now; and from September,
it is to have a new director in Iain Livingston, 42.
Livingston, presently managing director of the US-owned Butler Service Group
international division, a company providing contract technical services, was
previously with Rank Xerox (UK), a pioneer in total quality management.
He takes charge of BR's TQM programme as its second phase gets under way. A
quality process programme is in place, with pilot projects throughout the
railway aiming to improve performance. Each of the rail businesses has a TQM
directorate responsible for quality audits, the creation of quality systems,
and training. The ultimate aim is to improve the service to customers, both
passenger and freight.
Livingston replaces Brian Burdsall, who moved to become director of the East
Coast Main Line in an earlier round of changes.
*****
The change of emphasis at McKechnie, away from metal components and towards
plastics, has led to John Kembery resigning from the board with effect from
July 31. He is replaced by Derry Hanratty, who is being promoted internally.
McKechnie saw through the disposal of the metals business some 18 months
ago. But Kembery, a metallurgist by training whose experience with the
company has largely been on that side, stayed on to help smooth the
transition, according to chief executive Michael Ost. Kembery has been at
McKechnie since 1981.
Hanratty, who counts 20 years with the company, had been managing director
of Harrison Drape, the window furnishings operation within the group, before
heading the consumer products division. With his forthcoming promotion he
takes on the specialist engineering business.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920729

