FT921-3917

FT  12 MAR 92 / Technology: Revolution at eastern banks


   By EUGENE DAINOV


Western countries took 300 years to move through agricultural and industrial
revolutions to the information age of the 20th century. The east European
economies are having to do it in the space of a few years.
Nowhere does this apply more than to the banks. The potential for huge
turnover has not escaped the notice of the two credit and debit card
companies, Visa and Eurocard.
Electronic payments through point of sale (Pos) swipe card machines should
encourage foreign and local consumer spending through ease of payment, while
simplifying shops' accounting and reducing bank costs. Automated teller
machines (ATMs) will enable private banks to compete with the traditional
savings banks' large but inefficient branch networks.
The dilemma is how to automate, and there are two possibilities. Bankers can
invest now in systems designed to handle the expected explosion of growth in
card usage. This is the route favoured by Eurocard and the main large
software supplier, Base 24. Or they can start more modestly and invest in
smaller but possibly more flexible systems, as endorsed by Visa and the new
lower-cost technology suppliers, such as IFS International.
So far the banks have been divided on which route to take. In
Czechoslovakia, Muzo, the joint clearing and settlement company, has based
its ATM and Pos network on a Tandem computer and Base 24 software. Muzo's
first ATMs began operating last month and accept Eurocard/Mastercard and
local cards. It also plans to take Visa cards. The company says 500 ATMs
should be working by 1996.
Ceska Sporitelna AS (CSAS), the Czech savings bank, will be using a
Unix-based IFS system. The bank will have 10 ATMs linked through Unix to
Visanet, Visa's authorisation, clearing and settlement system.
Toby Mitchell, Visa's area manager for eastern Europe, thinks Eurocard and
its followers are over-optimistic about the short-term market for cards.
Among the issues are:
Low incomes, which will limit fee scales on cards.
Inadequate telecommunications - CSAS is having difficulty obtaining just 20
lines to run 10 ATMs.
Retailer resistance to Pos machines.
Starting costs are also a concern. Mitchell asserts that the combination of
Base 24 and a Tandem computer brings the price of hardware and software to
Dollars 1m (Pounds 500,000), compared with a Unix-based package starting at
Dollars 130,000.
John Bycroft, European area manager of Base 24, disputes this, saying that
the price for running five ATMs starts at around Dollars 200,000 and
expansion to 100 ATMs means spending just Dollars 40,000 more.
But cost is not the only factor. Charles Caserta, founder of IFS, says
Tandem's closed architecture ties banks to the original hardware and
software vendor. 'If Base 24 has 1m lines of code, mine has 30,000,' he
says. 'This is immeasurably easier to understand, modify and enhance'.
Base 24 argues that Unix users face exactly the same problem, because of the
variety of systems available.
Fault-tolerance capabilities - which provide an automatic back-up to every
part of the system, including telecommunications - form another contentious
topic, one which concerns the Giro Card Company, Hungary's equivalent to
Czechoslovakia's Muzo. It is considering Tandem equipment because it
believes the system's fault-tolerance capabilities are suitable for
international payment networks.
But Giro Card Company's projections of 200 ATMs in operation this year have
been delayed and there are difficulties in persuading retailers to accept
Pos. Moreover, a Tandem/Base 24 system can typically process around 20
transactions per second, but peak hour ATM transactions are expected to
reach only 0.36 per second in 1994, making its power largely redundant.
The Giro Card Company may have to invest in a cheaper package, says Edward
Collier, of management consultants Ernst & Young. 'If you want to automate,
you need money,' he explains.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920312

