FT923-9663

FT  04 AUG 92 / International Company News: Marzotto begins to flex its
muscles at Boss - Haig Simonian on the Italian men's clothing group's
prospects after its German deal


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


SIX months after taking control of Hugo Boss, Germany's best-known mens'
clothing group, Marzotto, the big Italian textiles and clothing concern, is
starting to flex its muscles.
Italian representatives have joined Boss's supervisory board and Mr Peter
Littmann has been hired as chief executive, replacing from next March the
brothers Uwe and Jochen Holy who brought the company - founded by their
grandfather - from obscurity to international fame.
After spending Dollars 165m last December on a 63.7 per cent stake in Boss
and an option to buy 13.8 per cent more, Marzotto, chaired by Mr Pietro
Marzotto, had been waiting patiently to reinforce its position.
However, Mr Marzotto asserts there is no question of Boss losing its
identity or merging with his company, which had sales of L1,280bn (Dollars
1.12bn) last year. 'At least not for the time being,' he says. 'These first
six months have been spent seeing how to use the existing synergies. Talk of
merger is premature.'
Boss, which made net profits of DM35.4m (Dollars 23.2m) on sales of DM997m
in 1991, will only be consolidated from this year. But the companies have
been examining how to co-operate to improve efficiency and save money, short
of amalgamating.
Savings have already been identified by collaborating in 'outsourcing' -
subcontracting work to low-cost countries - acquiring accessories like
linings and buttons and data processing, Mr Marzotto explains. Working
groups of managers from both sides are being formed, and detailed proposals
should be ready by year-end. 'There is already a marked exchange of
management and ideas,' he states.
Part of the improvement will come through resolving difficulties at Joseph &
Feiss, the US men's clothing group Boss purchased in 1989. Hailed as a
breakthrough into the lucrative US market, the concept turned sour as a
result of collapsing US demand and the need for expensive modernisation at
the company's Cleveland plant.
The problems with Joseph & Feiss 'were a bit of everything', Marzotto
managers explain. Losses arose owing to problems in retailing and
distribution, while earnings were depressed by the recession.
Boss had already begun modernising Joseph & Feiss, where over half the
output is up to its standards, says Mr Marzotto. That should rise to 100 per
cent by next March, when all the production lines will have been brought up
to date. He remains as convinced as the Holy brothers of the validity of the
acquisition. Under their strategy, Joseph & Feiss would continue making its
well-established brands to traditional US tastes, while introducing softer,
more European-styled Boss apparel. Around 80 per cent of the Hugo Boss
formal wear, like suits, sold in the US is already produced in Cleveland.
The priority is to relaunch Joseph & Feiss's own brands, says Mr Marzotto.
The new equipment should raise quality while cutting overheads. Although a
loss is still forecast this year, the company should break even in 1993.
Reviving a troubled apparel operation is familiar ground for Marzotto. Like
many Italian manufacturers, it has been caught in the vice of producing the
bulk of its output in a high-cost country with relatively high inflation,
heavy social security costs and a fairly strong currency.
'The situation in Italy today penalises all manufacturers requiring
substantial amounts of labour,' he notes.
Marzotto's profits have fallen for three years running. Group net earnings
last year were just L39.8bn, 12.3 per cent down on 1990 and two-thirds of
their 1988 peak, triggering a 20 per cent dividend cut.
Mr Marzotto grows testy when probed about current financial performance.
Enquiries about prospects for the dividend are dismissed as 'arrogant',
while predictions on net earnings, especially at group level, are based on
factors 'which are not interesting for readers', he replies.
In spite of falling demand in most big markets and increasing competition,
parent company operating profits, adjusted for acquisitions, should rise
this year, he says. The increase will come through higher productivity and
lower costs, while a better product mix, weighted more towards higher value
items, should also contribute.
Taking free cash-flow as his measure, Mr Marzotto says this year's figures
will 'certainly be better' than in 1991. Earnings at group level are tougher
to predict, as much hangs on how Marzotto treats the difference between the
acquisition and book price for Boss. And Boss's final-quarter sales,
traditionally very important, will also play a part.
Raising earnings will partly depend on pushing through the strategy of
internationalisation which dictated the Boss acquisition. Prior to the
purchase, 70 per cent of Marzotto's sales came from Italy, where over 90 per
cent of its goods were produced. This year's consolidated figures, which
will see turnover rising to around L2,100bn, will show domestic sales
falling to around 55 per cent of the total, while the domestic share of
production will have fallen to around 60 per cent, forecasts Mr Marzotto.
Longer term, his aim is to reduce the Italian share of apparel production
down to 'a very significant minority'. For textiles, manufacturing at home
'will always be preponderant', he says.
Bringing that about will entail some further adjustments to the group, which
has tripled sales in the past six years, largely through takeovers.
Acquisition-led growth is set to continue, probably in eastern Europe at the
outset. And there will be disposals of non-core businesses.
The recent sale of its work clothes subsidiary and its 50 per cent stake in
another small offshoot have brought the group's target closer. The disposals
should also generate 'a certain capital gain' for the first-half results.
However, there is still a little more to do, says Mr Marzotto.
International demand and the Italian economy permitting, the group should
remain on course with its financial strategy of maintaining its ability to
generate cash, without turning to shareholders for funds, and keeping up the
dividend.
For Mr Marzotto, this year's dividend cut was an isolated event triggered by
the Boss acquisition. But with the market still difficult and Italian
manufacturers increasingly penalised by domestic economic conditions,
investors will have to wait until early next year to see whether he is
proved right.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920804

