FT922-4523

FT  05 JUN 92 / Arts: Aztecs and injuns - Exhibition


   By SUSAN MOORE


Perhaps no account of the fate of the Amerindians since Columbus could be
dispassionate. Home of the Brave, its title ironically provided by The Star
Spangled Banner, takes a highly charged subject and does all it can to
elicit an emotional and political response from its audience as it is
propelled from 15th century Castile to the White House. In more ways than
one, this 'amazing new museum experience' is a provocative as well as
spectacular European contribution to the Columbus quincentennial.
It is indeed an experience, a touring, Pounds 2m, multi-media tour-de-force
organised by Glasgow Museums and the Fondation Mecenat Science et Art of
Strasbourg. Visitors make their way through a sequence of dimly lit
stage-set galleries which chart the discoveries of the Americas and the
relentless quest for Eldorado. We travel with Columbus to the Bahamas and
the Caribbean islands, with Cortes to Mexico, Pizarro to Peru, and Jacques
Cartier to Canada. En route we encounter a recreated pueblo village and an
Iroquois longhouse.
As we progress, our cordless headsets pick up the music specially composed
by Phillipe Eidel, background sounds of dripping rain forest and crackling
fire, plus the narrative from the short films playing on the wide TV screens
clustered at seven different sites. There are things to touch: an Olmec
stone jaguar head from 1500BC Veracruz; a buckskin; a snowy feather
headdress and a recently carved 4m high totem. The borrowed tepee even
offers the lingering fragrance of the camp fire. Effects and videos are
exceptionally well done, and the headsets ensure peaceful viewing even if
surrounded by schoolchildren. The pitch is popular, but the quality of the
exhibits is sufficient to captivate the enthusiast for hours.
Glasgow has chosen to focus its show on peoples already familiar to its
audience, and British museum collections unsurprisingly boast rich holdings
of North American Indian artefacts. A far greater treat, however, is the
astounding and generous loans from Mexico. Here are dozens of sculptures,
bas reliefs, frescoes, ceramics and other ritual artefacts that have
survived from the pre-Columbian civilisations of South America. What is
maddening is that one wants to know more about the objects than the bald
captions supply, and the book - rather than catalogue - accompanying the
show does not oblige.
An elaborately carved chalk head from 500-700AD Chiapas, its intertwining
symbols forming a pictorial text, introduces us to a group of Mayan
rarities. A second gallery concentrates on the remarkable clay figurines and
vessels produced 1150-100BC, largely by the Olmecs or under their influence.
One naturalistically relaxed Guerrero figure from 1150-100BC is of a
well-coiffed woman sitting cross-legged in a fringed skirt, her left arm
supporting her weight. The garment draped across her shoulders might almost
be a cardigan. Zapotec funeral urns depicting various divinities are another
highlight.
No doubt much interest is generated by the basalt figure of one of the 400
Aztec gods of intoxication, and by the objects associated with the last
years of Aztec human sacrifice. Flint knives, some decorated with eyes and
teeth, were used to cut out human hearts which were then offered to the sun
to refresh the cosmic energy. Such rituals were to horrify the Spanish
Conquistadores, but was their own Auto da Fe any less morally reprehensible?
Inevitably, the exhibition book is able to explore more fully the
circumstances that compelled the confrontation of the Old and the New
Worlds, the subsequent devastation and, at times, the vital merging of the
two. (Americas Lost, edited by Daniel Levine, published by Bordas, Pounds
19.)
One of the strangest aspects of the chance discovery of the new continent is
how, again and again, the native Americans offered so little resistance to
relatively few Spanish troops and accepted their subjugation. Most of them,
it seems, anticipated the return of white and bearded divinities. That helps
us to understand why the Amerindians were literally demoralised when the
whites revealed themselves not as gods but as slaughterers and oppressors.
Their whole concept of the world was destroyed.
Certainly the record of the European presence in the Americas is shameful.
It is estimated that some 80 per cent of the native population disappeared
during and immediately following the Spanish Conquest. Smallpox and measles
brought death to thousands. The Old World gave its diseases, but took land,
slaves, and the plundered the continent's mineral resources. The great
monuments of the Aztec and Inca empires which had so amazed the
conquistadores were razed to the ground, and Catholic churches erected in
their place.
Unlike the Spanish, the British and French in the North showed little
inclination to intermarry and preferred to colonise Indian land. By the late
1770s, the colonial population outnumbered the Indians. By the end of the
19th century, the Indians had all but shared the fate of the buffalo. It is
with the history of the North American Indian that the exhibition, unlike
the book, loses its balance and objectivity.
We find a muslin tunic taken at the Battle of Wounded Knee in 1890 -
complete with bullet hole - among the pieces placed in old-fashioned museum
display cases. This presumably signifies the end of the living culture of
the Redskin and the beginning of the villainous White Man's ethnography. In
the same room, called 'The Old Museum', the TVs run the old cowboy and injun
movies that celebrate the pioneer's version of American history.
'Pacified America' offers an emotive climax. Its walls are lined with
colourful hand-blocked panoramic wallpaper first produced by Zuber in 1834,
and which hangs in the White House. Entitled 'Scenic America', its portrays
the North American Indian reduced to the indignity of curiosity as he dances
for the amusement of the white man. In the centre of the room, exhibited
behind a wire fence, are a dozen of the 40,000 sepia photographs taken by
Edward S. Curtis at the turn of the century to record the fading glory of
the redskin. They make a mockery of the words of the Star Spangled Banner
resounding in our ears.
In their simplistic portrayal of Indian life, the organisers of this
otherwise excellent exhibition are in danger of romanticising the North
American Indian and simply replacing the myth of the western with another of
late 20th century making, ecologically sound and politically correct.
The exhibition continues at the McLellan Galleries, Glasgow, until September
20, then on to Paris, Strasbourg, Munich, Lyon and Bordeaux

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920605

