FT924-8329

FT  11 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Middle Eastern sellers push
gold to 7-year low


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


THE WEALTHY Middle East syndicates that have battered the gold bullion
market several times in the past three years seemed to have scored another
financial success yesterday by pushing the metal's price down to its lowest
level in nearly seven years.
Silver and platinum prices were dragged down by gold's collapse in which
commodity funds, following the lead of the oil-rich Middle Eastern
speculators, played an important role.
Dealers said the market received no help from previous big buyers of gold
who decided yesterday to hold back to see how far the price eventually would
fall.
Producers in Australia and South Africa also contributed to the downward
pressure. They were selling forward because the strength of the US dollar
gave them good prices in their local currencies. Australian gold producers
could collect nearly ADollars 500 a troy ounce, about the best price for
them since the Gulf war.
Mr George Milling-Stanley, first vice president, bullion sales, at Lehman
Brothers in New York, pointed out that, not for the first time, the gold
price was ignoring the supply-demand fundamentals. Demand for the yellow
metal was likely to reach another record this year because sales to India
'are going like a train' while 350 to 400 tonnes of gold had been imported
to China through 'unofficial' channels. Meanwhile, supply from gold mines
was levelling off.
Mr Milling-Stanley said chartists believed that when the price of gold for
delivery in December dropped below Dollars 340 an ounce it was heading for
Dollars 320. He added, however: 'I'm not sure where the bottom is'.
Last night in London gold for immediate delivery closed at Dollars 329.80,
down Dollars 4.65 from Monday's close.
However, Mr Milling-Stanley also insisted that the Middle East speculators
and the commodity funds were 'very heavily short and there is a lot of short
covering to be done at some stage. So the price could bounce back very
quickly'.
The funds and the Arabs started to go short when December gold reached
Dollars 353 an ounce two months ago, he said. So they already had a Dollars
30-an-ounce profit on the first ounces they bought.
North American gold producers were not selling below Dollars 340 an ounce.
Mr Ian Bayer, president of Hemlo Gold Mines, the Canadian producer, on a
promotional tour speaking to analysts in Europe, said he believed that the
long-term price range for gold was Dollars 350 to Dollars 400 an ounce. 'But
I can't see much upside in the near term.'
Mr Bayer said he believed central banks, big holders of gold stocks, had
been net sellers this year, and dealers also suggested central banks had
been selling the metal in 50,000-ounce tranches for the past two months.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921111

