FT924-6211

FT  23 NOV 92 / Cook seeks 'straight' answers: Pressure over Iraq arms
affair


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


THE LABOUR party yesterday demanded 'straight' answers to the evidence of
government complicity in the build-up of Saddam Hussein's military machine
as MPs prepared for today's full-scale Commons debate on the Iraq arms
affair.
Mr Robin Cook, shadow trade and industry secretary, said that over the past
two weeks his party had demonstrated that the government had consistently
misled parliament over the controls applied on defence-related sales to
Iraq.
He added that it was now up to ministers to provide straight answers as to
why equipment used in the Iraqi arms build-up was sold to Baghdad in breach
of the government's own guidelines - and why those guidelines were changed
without parliamentary notification.
Mr Cook said that Mr John Major, the prime minister, had told parliament
that the embargo on defence sales to Iraq imposed in 1985 had remained in
force until the invasion of Kuwait in 1990. But he added: 'We know that in
1988 they first relaxed the guidelines and then watered them down.'
Mr Cook, who again questioned whether Mr Major could have been unaware of
the controversy during his spells in the late 1980s as foreign secretary and
chancellor, said that British taxpayers were now footing the bill for
breaches of stated policy.
He said that the Export Credits Guarantee Department had provided insurance
for defence-related sales worth up to Pounds 200m on which the Baghdad
government had subsequently defaulted.
The Labour motion for today's debate says that the conduct of ministers in
the affair has been 'inconsistent with the security of British troops, with
open government, and with the just administration of the legal process'.
But a government amendment says that the issue of whether any rules were
breached must be left to the inquiry headed by Lord Justice Scott and
accuses Labour of 'sensationalism'.
Ministers said yesterday that it was clear that Mr Cook, who has been
harrying the government on the issue for two weeks, had run out of
'ammunition' to substantiate his charges.
The ministers said the papers to be made available to the Scott inquiry
would fully support the government's case that there had been no conspiracy
to arm Iraq.
Samuel Brittan, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921123

