FT921-15320

FT  10 JAN 92 / Row likely over enterprise zone plan: Government and
Brussels head for clash on scheme for Ravenscraig area


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY and IVOR OWEN


THE GOVERNMENT and the European Commission last night appeared to be on a
collision course over ministers' plans to set up an enterprise zone in north
Lanarkshire to cushion the closure of the Ravenscraig steelworks later this
year.
In an apparent attempt to pour cold water on the proposal, Sir Leon Brittan,
the commissioner for competition policy, yesterday expressed concern that
'comments at a very high level' - in this case the prime minister - had
created the impression that setting up the zone was a matter for government
decision.
He said any application would be given 'careful consideration'. The
Commission, which must approve the creation of enterprise zones, is
sceptical about them because it believes the 100 per cent capital allowances
available to developers distort competition and encourage tax avoidance.
Companies in the zones benefit from freedom from planning controls and
business rates. Notable developments in such zones include the Isle of Dogs
in east London, the Metrocentre at Gateshead, Newcastle Business Park and
the regeneration of Manchester docklands as Salford Quays.
Any application would represent a U-turn in British policy. The government
declared that Britain's 27th enterprise zone - set up in Sunderland after
months of wrangling between the government and the European Commission - was
'the last' when it was designated in April 1989. The government backed it
reluctantly and is understood to have been embarrassed by having to fight
Brussels to get it approved. It was allowed only because Sunderland had lost
its entire shipbuilding industry.
At the time, the government spread word among developers that it had turned
against enterprise zones because of their negative effect on taxation and
public spending.
In the House of Lords yesterday, Lord Strathclyde, Scottish Office junior
minister, admitted to being 'unsure' about how long it would take to secure
the Commission's approval. 'It will certainly be a considerable period of
some months,' he said.
After making a government statement on the closure, Lord Strathclyde was
criticised from both sides of the House for failing to take earlier action
to encourage new industrial development in Lanarkshire in anticipation of
the closure. He said Mr Ian Lang, the Scottish secretary, had been told on
December 20 by Sir Robert Scholey, chairman of British Steel, of the
decision to close Ravenscraig.
There had been no formal consultation in the sense that the government had a
direct role to play. The minister insisted that job losses arising from the
closure were likely to be about 2,500, not 15,000 as suggested. He stressed
that in response to recommendations made by the Lanarkshire working group,
substantial help had already been provided, and a wealth of planning and
activity was geared towards growth.
Ravenscraig closure will cost Clyde Pounds 4.4m, Page 7

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920110

