FT921-14316

FT  16 JAN 92 / Leading Article: The future of Lloyd's


LLOYD'S, the insurance market, is an organisation built on business
structures that pre-date the industrial revolution. Yesterday, a task force
set up to investigate Lloyd's workings and prospects - the fourth such
report in two decades - offered an escape into the modern world. It may be
too late.
Consider the story the task force's report tells, with admirable clarity and
force. Lloyd's has been losing market share for years. Its geared capital
structure heightens its members' vulnerability to periods of loss, which
have become more deadly as the insurance industry's cycle oscillates ever
wider. Its managing agents pay themselves too much, without enough exposure
to market forces. Its costs exploded in the 1980s, at the same time as it
sucked in large amounts of excess capital. Too much of that capital came
from new members who did not possess enough personal wealth to cope with the
risks.
Lloyd's cannot predict its liability to US damage claims, which may continue
rising uncontrollably. Half its members are locked into 'open years', past
trading periods that carry an open-ended exposure to unpredictably rising
losses. Angry members are suing each other and Lloyd's itself. Its principal
asset, a sterling international reputation, is threatened by those lawsuits
and by growing concern over its future capital stability.
In short, Lloyd's is in crisis. In response, the task force offers a curious
mixture of short-term conservatism and long-term radicalism. This may be the
right prescription for the market as a whole but it offers little
consolation to Names seeking a way out of the errors of the past. Indeed, by
recommending that Names' bank guarantees always be called in, regardless of
the underlying security, it has increased the likelihood that the worst-hit
Names will lose their homes.
Afflicted
The task force has firmly rejected any retrospective sharing-out of the
losses of the past few years, despite the evidence that they have fallen
disproportionately on a relatively small number of Names. Yesterday Mr David
Coleridge, Lloyd's chairman, offered afflicted Names his sympathy, but
little else.
In the short-term, the task force proposes a sensible scheme for capping
future losses, at a level still high enough to inflict pain, but probably
low enough to protect against devastation. Its other short-term
recommendations are similarly level-headed, although one of them - the
strengthening of Names' rights - is no more than a basic code of fair
dealing. After three centuries, Lloyd's should not need a task force to
teach it such elementary principles.
Radical vision
In the longer term, the report offers a much more radical vision. Although
it preserves the principle of unlimited liability - above all, for tax
reasons - most individual Names would end up as participants in what amounts
to little more than a tax-advantaged, mildly risky unit trust. A smaller
number of truly wealthy individuals, 'Super-Names', would continue business
as before, but a growing proportion of the market's capacity would be
provided by insurance company subsidiaries. Syndicate places would be bought
and sold, like securities. Costs would shrink by 30 per cent; many jobs
would go.
This vision has much to recommend it. Unlike many blueprints for reform, the
report offers a way to get from here to there with minimal disruption. Yet
events may conspire against its successful achievement. Much hangs on the
trading year in progress. If this year is healthily profitable for the first
time in half a decade, Names who are thinking of leaving will grit their
teeth and carry on. Lloyd's capital will stabilise, and its prospects of
achieving the profitable growth on which the task force pins its hopes will
greatly strengthen.
If this year goes badly, the flight of Names will accelerate, and Lloyd's
prospects of maintaining its place in the world insurance industry will
vanish. The task force report is timely and welcome; but the underwriting
experience of 1992 may prove more important.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920116

