FT922-7170

FT  20 MAY 92 / Slimming to fit a shrinking business: While many US defence
groups branch into commercial areas, General Dynamics is holding an auction


   By MARTIN DICKSON


You are the chairman of a company in an industry doomed to decline. What is
your best strategy?
'Consolidate the sector and diversify into new businesses,' is the answer
given by many businessmen. Tobacco companies, for example, anticipating a
shrinking US market, have branched out into areas such as food, drink,
retailing and financial services.
Now the US defence industry is taking a similar route. Faced with
contracting Pentagon equipment spending, companies have been pushing into
commercial businesses, ranging from environmental services to airport
management.
Except for General Dynamics. The second largest US defence contractor is
auctioning off its commercial operations. It recently clinched a deal to
sell its missiles division to Hughes Aircraft for at least Dollars 450m
(Pounds 244.4m).
What is under way is a 'quasi liquidation' of General Dynamics, in the words
of Mr Cai von Rumohr, securities analyst with Cowen & Co. Mr William Anders,
former air force pilot and astronaut who took over as chairman at the start
of last year, calls it a 'plan of contraction'.
The commercial businesses on the block, which account for about Dollars 1bn
of the company's Dollars 8.7bn of annual revenues, include a subsidiary
making civil aircraft fuselages, a manufacturer of avionics test equipment,
and a construction materials division. And this comes on top of the sale
earlier this year of Cessna, its profitable business jet subsidiary, to
Textron for Dollars 600m.
This is the outcome of an examination of General Dynamics's strategy by Mr
Anders. After toying with the idea of diversification, he has plumped for
the opposite policy: slimming the company down to four core defence
businesses.
These are tactical military aircraft, where it makes the popular F-16 and is
co-developer of the US's F-22 advanced tactical fighter; nuclear submarines;
armoured vehicles, with the M1 Abrams battle tank; and a space launch
business.
The thinking behind this has two elements. The first is Mr Anders's
recognition that the contracting Pentagon budget has left the US defence
industry with 'massive overcapacity' which needs to be rationalised.
General Dynamics is concentrating on the four core businesses and buying
assets to reinforce their 'critical mass' or selling peripheral defence
operations to bolster the strengths of rival companies.
The missiles agreement with Hughes fits into the latter category. General
Dynamics is getting out of a commodity product where it faced tough
competition from other suppliers.
The second element in his thinking - that diversification simply does not
work - is more controversial. Mr Anders says two independent studies have
found that the diversification failure rate among defence companies is
'unacceptably high'. Diversification would therefore be too risky,
especially when General Dynamics is trying to sort out the challenges facing
its defence operations. Far better, he says, to sell off its existing
commercial businesses and return much of this money to shareholders.
Investors should 'have the opportunity to make their own individual
decisions regarding commercial diversification'.
The shock treatment involves shaking up the four core businesses. General
Dynamics over the past 18 months has seen a sharp reversal of its declining
profit margins as Mr Anders has improved productivity, slashed the workforce
and sought to eliminate bureaucratic complacency.
Some analysts fear Mr Anders's pruning may be too severe, while he prompted
almost universal condemnation last year - including the ire of the Pentagon
 -with a compensation package which awarded top managers huge cash bonuses
for very short term increases in the share price.
The aim, he claimed, was to align 'employee interests' more closely with
those of shareholders. But critics saw it as an incentive for a handful of
executives to grow rich by shrinking the business and firing colleagues. So
great was the opposition that the plan was watered down to a more
conventional share option scheme - but not before Mr Anders and 24 senior
colleagues benefited to the tune of more than Dollars 20m from the company's
contraction.
Still, investors have also profited from Mr Anders's strategy. The company's
share price has rocketed from Dollars 25 1/4 at the start of 1991 to around
Dollars 63 now, thanks to the tighter management controls, disposal
programme and promise of a large payout to shareholders. The quarterly
dividend has also been boosted from 25 cents a share to 40 cents - the first
change since 1984.
General Dynamics is now sitting on Dollars 1.2bn in cash and marketable
securities and this will grow as the missiles division and other assets are
sold off.
The company will need some of this to lower its debt, for research and
development and to cover any potential liability from a dispute with the
Pentagon over last year's cancellation of the A-12 aircraft programme.
Mr von Rumohr says the company's free cash by the end of next year could
amount to Dollars 53 to Dollars 64 a share, while the company's remaining
'core' operations could bring the total value to between Dollars 79 and
Dollars 97. Much depends on the prices the company gets from its disposals.
Already the missiles sale looks like raising more than some analysts
expected.
So while Mr Anders's basic strategy is as clear as a flight path while many
rivals still seem to be groping for a map, it is also likely to produce
interesting acrobatics along the way.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920520

