FT923-6618

FT  22 AUG 92 / Gardening: Sorbus sets the pace but beware of blight -
Celebrating the glories of small trees


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


LAST weekend, I stood in the far corner of the marvellous garden at
Kiftsgate Court and found myself, in mid-August, surrounded already by trees
in berry. The chill of autumn might be creeping into the late evenings but
surely it should have kept its nose out of our trees' behaviour.
The fruits on Apricot Lady were looking moderately apricot; around her, two
Chinese dignitaries were about to reach their peak. The grey-green leaves of
the wild sorbus from Hupeh were already set with white berries; beyond it, a
sorbus from Yunnan was covered in fruits with a greyish-pink flush.
Like so much else, these sorbus trees have been in a hurry, but they have
also revelled in this warm and wet summer. The most hurried variety is
actually not so far ahead of itself. In front gardens and on the islands in
motorways, you will find trees of the mountain rowan bent heavily with red
berries. Even the birds cannot strip them so soon: sorbus aucuparia is
having a field day, the first tree to show berries among the usual range of
English garden planting.
In normal years the berries appear by late August, an early intimation of
autumn like the sudden sharp scent on phloxes or the sight of a dahlia
sodden with dew. I am extremely fond of this tree but there are better
cousins further east, as I continue to discover.
This year, my personal best is sorbus hupehensis, a wonderfully easy tree
which has taken a shine to my horribly stony soil. In the dry weather of
1991 its neatly-cut, grey-flushed leaves drooped and looked miserable. In
1992 it flowered stupendously early in June, proving that it has a scent
which books ignore, perhaps because it is decidedly masculine.
Already, it has grown madly two years after planting, and I would recommend
it to anyone who wants leaves, berries and a robust elegance to a height of
20 ft. My trees are set for exceptional berrying, but they have received no
attention from me except for the usual coulis of pig manure when they first
went into position. Sorbus hupehensis is a winner.
So are its other Far Eastern cousins, vilmorinii and the mildly-obstinate
cashmiriana. The latter, I think, dislikes dry gardens but it is a dream in
others when contented, a tree which can be contained at 10 ft or so and
admired for a lovely leaf and its large white berries.
Vilmorinii is much easier, and, if anything, its fern-shaped leaves are
prettier. In a small garden, it has every quality: good leaf, suitable
habit, pink-white fruit and a vibrant autumn colour. Although it is not a
tree to block out neighbours, it is worth anybody's space.
Most of my sorbuses have come from Landford Trees at Landford Lodge,
Landford, Salisbury, Wiltshire. It even lists the most brilliant autuman
sorbus of all, the large-leaved sargentiana, which has lovely buds in
spring, like a horse chestnut, and the most wonderful orange flare in
mid-November. It grows slowly but is an outstanding variety for anyone with
patience and a stable life.
At a much lower height - a mere 5 ft if you clip it - sorbus koehneana is a
newish variety from the same supplier. Its small leaves are cut thinly and
are slightly on the grey side of green, while the berries are white. The
effect of this small tree is well-suited as an emphatic point for a border
or, in my garden, the centre of a bed of old-fashioned roses.
If you want to see young sorbuses competing with turf in fairly hostile
conditions, the place to go is the arboretum at Jodrell Bank, Cheshire.
Early in the 1980s, a collection of the best forms was planted there and, if
you are serious about the sorbus, a visit is highly advisable. It will teach
you to avoid the dull thuringiaca and to think twice about the curious pink
trunk of beissneri. I am also very taken with the prettily-cut green leaves
on the recent Chinese Lace, another Landford offering.
During the next two months, sorbuses are presenting themselves in full
beauty, and the many of you who want smallish trees with as many seasons as
possible could not do better than to size them up.
Until the mid-1980s, I rated Joseph Rock as one of the best of the bunch. It
seemed ideal for smallish sites, but a terror has stolen up on it, moving
east from Somerset up the line of the M5 motorway.
Joseph Rock is prone to the disease of fire blight, which enters through
damaged bark in winter. It is a total killer and can even transfer to prunus
or rose bushes.
I intend to brazen it out and take the greatest care not to prune my Joseph
Rock before winter, nor to leave any broken wood on the tree after the main
season. Experts insist that we should not choose it as our main garden
variety but I cannot bring myself to remove it. You must be warned, though,
that the best of the easier small sorbuses is now potentially blighted.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920822

