FT921-15520

FT  09 JAN 92 / UK jobless rate third worst in EC, says Labour


   By ALISON SMITH and DAVID GOODHART


THE LABOUR party yesterday underlined its intention to place unemployment at
the heart of the election campaign by releasing a leaked Department of
Employment briefing paper which shows that Britain now has the third highest
rate of unemployment in the European Community.
When calculated on the same basis as other countries, Britain's jobless rate
is behind only Spain's and Ireland's.
As Labour launched its package of measures to strengthen the economy in the
longer term, Mr Tony Blair, shadow employment secretary, said the paper
showed that the rise in job vacancies, which Mr John Major had implied in
the House of Commons was a positive economic sign, seemed to be 'associated
with a reduction in recruitment activity'.
It acknowledged that the number of new vacancies notified to Jobcentres fell
for the first time since August, while the number of people placed into jobs
by the employment service also dropped - the largest fall in placings since
June.
Mr Blair said the paper also showed that the rate of increase in
unemployment in Britain in the past year was higher than any country in the
western world except Finland, and was continuing with 'an underlying upward
trend of about 30,000 a month'.
The document, intended as a briefing for the departmental press office,
showed that places on the employment training (ET) programme had fallen from
190,000 in November 1990 to 139,000 in November 1991. While the figures for
youth training (YT) places were less precise, there seemed to have been a
fall from 350,000 to about 295,000.
Mr Michael Howard, employment secretary, said there was nothing surprising
or depressing about the reduction in ET. It was part of a deliberate policy
announced at the end of 1990 after it had been discovered that many
unemployed people were already quite highly skilled and needed other forms
of help which have subsequently been provided in other programmes.
The reduction in YT was attributed to more people staying on at school, the
lack of information for Scotland and the introduction of training credits.
The Department of Employment said the leaked document had wrongly been
marked confidential, and that almost all the material in it was available
when the monthly unemployment figures were released.
Nevertheless, with jobless levels set to continue rising in the coming
months, the issue will remain a sensitive one for the Conservatives, even
when other economic indicators are more encouraging.
To counter this, there will be renewed warnings from Mr Howard about the
effect of Labour's policies on jobs.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920109

