FT922-4211

FT  06 JUN 92 / Sport: Injury cloud over Europe's big party - Soccer


   By PETER BERLIN


THE WORLD Cup is the highlight of the soccer calendar but, for professional
players, an invitation to the European championship is harder to come by.
While 14 European squads of 22 players went to the 1990 World Cup finals,
only eight, of just 20 each, are going to the European tournament which
starts next Wednesday in Sweden when the hosts play France in Stockholm.
Even so, some of Europe's most sought-after celebrities have not been able
to take up their invitations. Britain's two most entertaining midfield
players, Paul Gascoigne of England and Gordon Strachan of Scotland, are
absent injured. So, too, is Lothar Matthaus, captain of West Germany's 1990
World Cup-winning team. England's most talented attacker, the injury-prone
John Barnes, is also out after rupturing his achilles tendon on Wednesday.
The high attrition rate of modern soccer has taken its toll of the lesser
names as well; England have lost a complete back four to injuries. This is
hardly a surprise for a high proportion of Europe's top players are hurt at
any one time, victims of over-crowded fixture lists.
There is little point in complaining, though. The wealthy clubs - which can
make their cash advantage tell by turning every competition into an
endurance race - persuaded UEFA (European soccer's governing body) to double
the number of games in the quarter-finals and semi-finals of the European
Cup last season.
For the stars of this year's European championship, the ultimate prize could
be a lucrative contract from Silvio Berlusconi to turn out for the reserve
team at AC Milan. The club is allowed to field only three non-Italians at a
time in the first team but has six on the books already: the Dutchmen Ruud
Gullit, Frank Rijkaard and Marco van Basten; a Croat, Zvonimir Boban; Dejan
Savicevic, the captain of Yugoslavia; and Giovane Elber, of Brazil.
Berlusconi plans to add France's leading goal-scorer, Jean-Pierre Papin, to
this list.
Neither Boban nor Savicevic will play in Sweden as the political unravelling
of Yugoslavia has also meant the destruction of a promising soccer team. The
Croats, many of the Slovenians and Bosnians and, most recently, the
Macedonian Darko Pancev, had quit already, leaving a squad made up mostly of
Serbs and Montenegrins.
They were thrown out of the championship by UEFA last week and replaced by
Denmark - victims, in a way, of South Africa's referendum on apartheid in
March which proved, beyond any doubt, that sporting boycotts work. Hence the
alacrity with which the United Nations called for one and the immediate
unprotesting compliance from UEFA which, 24 hours before the UN vote, was
pretending it had never heard of Sarajevo.
One man who has overcome injury and will be in Sweden is Gullit, the
greatest European player of the past decade. In his prime, Gullit was like a
sixth-former playing against under-11s: more skilful, bigger, quicker,
stronger. He is proportioned so perfectly that he does not look 6 ft 2 in
until he stands next to a lesser footballer. But, even as he touched the
peaks, his body was beginning to betray him.
In 1988, he was part of the Dutch team that won the European championship,
the Netherlands' first international soccer triumph. In 1989, playing in
pain, he scored twice as Milan dismissed Steuea Bucharest in the European
Cup final.
In 1990, both his teams felt the effects of his injury. He was present, but
less forceful, as Milan retained the European Cup and as the Dutch failed to
repeat their European championship form in the World Cup. Since then, he has
had the cartilages in both knees removed and missed several matches this
spring as the problem flared again. At 30, he is fighting to delay an early
and painful retirement. This could be his last opportuntity for more glory.
While Gullit's powers have waned, those of the two other Milan Dutchmen have
waxed. As the club galloped undefeated to the Italian championship, van
Basten scored a record-breaking 25 goals along the way. Rijkaard was just as
impressive. He has spent much of his career as a defender and brings many of
those qualities to his present role in midfield. He is a reliable rather
than flamboyant passer. His goals - and he scores his share - come from low,
sneaky shots and not with the flourish of van Basten or the power of Gullit.
His speciality is the midfield ambush, pouncing on opponents as they move
the ball out of defence; he thinks and moves faster, while his tackling is
strong and crisp. He exploits this strength and speed on his mazy runs.
Often, he does not trick defenders or blaze past them, he simply powers
through them. If the ball bobbles loose, he reacts more quickly to recover
it.
The Dutch squad offers this trio a supporting cast almost the equal of
Milan's. The pace and goal-scoring ability of Brian Roy will stretch
defences, and the shooting power of Ronald Koeman from free kicks will deter
opponents from resorting to fouls.
But the Dutch also know how to defend with the dullest, as Feyernoord showed
again in this season's Cup Winners' Cup. It is possible that Rinus Michels,
the Dutch coach, will want to compensate for Koeman's slug-like pace by
moving Rijkaard back to mark the speedier opposing strikers, which is the
role he was filling - querulously - when he got into a spitting match with
Germany's Rudy Voller in the World Cup and was sent off.
Rijkaard very much prefers midfield, and the greatest threat to the Dutch
defending their title could be another of their periodic player revolts.
Last December, following a dispute with Michels, Gullit walked out of the
dressing room, and the team, just before the start of their qualifying game
against Greece.
There has been a strange whiff of player-power hanging over the England
team's run to the championship. When Graham Taylor, the manager, reverted
suddenly to a five-man defence after insisting for a long time that English
players were more comfortable with the familiar system of four defenders, he
indicated that the players wanted this change. After Wednesday's confused
display against Finland, Taylor has an excuse for going back quietly to the
familiar, dropping a centre back and playing an extra midfielder.
The problem is that England do not have four midfielders of international
quality - and Taylor showed that he recognised this when discussing possible
replacements for Barnes. He indicated that Keith Curle (yet another centre
half) rather than midfielder, Andy Sinton, would be his first choice. But
UEFA entered into the festive spirit and both received late invitations to
soccer's most exclusive party.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920606

