FT922-7355

FT  19 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Topsoil threat to world food
supply


   By DAVID DODWELL, World Trade Editor


RAPID loss of topsoil is threatening the world's long-term food supply and
raising the prospect of widespread starvation and hunger, according to Mr
Dwayne Andreas, chairman of Archer Daniels Midland, the US farm products
group, who has been long-time adviser to US presidents on farm policy.
He attacked fiercely the protectionism in international farm trade,
describing the agricultural sector as 'the biggest victim of the chaos in
today's world trading system'. He said world markets had been ruined by
predatory government policies that subsidise production and then dump goods
on the world's markets.
Referring to US threats to block Dollars 1bn of EC food exports in
retaliation for EC practices harming US oilseed exports, he warned that the
EC 'can expect more of that unless (they) can negotiate fair practices in
agricultural trade'.
Soil erosion has cost the world 480bn tons of topsoil since 1970, Mr Andreas
told executives attending the annual meeting in Oxford of the International
Agribusiness Management Association. That is more than the total of all US
cropland, he noted.
'Farmland in America's midwest breadbasket loses some 20m tons of topsoil
per acre every year,' he said: 'In Illinois, we're losing 1.5 bushels of
topsoil for every bushel of corn we produce.' Describing topsoil as 'our
basic raw material - to us, what iron ore is to the steel industry', he
warned that failure to act could turn the world into 'a famine-ridden dust
bowl of warring and hungry billions'.
Soil preservation policies were the foremost of five challenges facing the
global agribusiness companies, Mr Andreas said. The other main challenges
were to help the nations of eastern and central Europe to rebuild, to find
new uses for agricultural products, to ensure a fair multilateral trading
system, and to feed the world's hungry.
'Just to feed the world at today's nutritional standards means we will need
to build a new flour mill every eight days; a new crushing plant and
vegetable oil refinery every 30 days; and a new corn mill every 15 days,' Mr
Andreas said: 'World hunger is a ticking bomb waiting to go off.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920519

