FT924-6030

FT  24 NOV 92 / Bosnia no-fly zone 'violated over 100 times'


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


THE United Nations said yesterday there had been more than 100 violations of
an international ban on flights over Bosnia-Hercegovina since it came into
force last month.
Mr Cedric Thornberry, deputy head of the UN Protection Force (Unprofor),
said flights involved helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. 'There has been a
good deal of flying over Bosnia, despite the Security Council resolution.
Well over 100 flights were registered in the past month.'
World attention has been focused on numerous Serb violations of the flight
ban, but Mr Thornberry said Croat and Moslem forces have also violated the
no-fly zone.
'It is too early to say for certain whether or not some were combat flights,
but it cannot be ruled out since it has been clear that helicopter flights
are being made with the deliberate intention of avoiding radar,' he said.
Diplomats said that military equipment was probably being smuggled in by
Croats and Moslems in defiance of an arms embargo imposed on the former
Yugoslav republics by the UN on May 31.
The UN Security Council, frustrated by repeated violations of the embargo,
last week agreed to tighten sanctions against the rump Yugoslavia and
western navies launched a naval blockade. Yesterday, three ships flying the
flags of Syria, Ecuador, and Liberia were halted for inspection but later
let go after nothing suspect was found.
The western navies have been patrolling the Adriatic since July, but until
last week they only had the right to ask merchant ships to identify their
cargo and destination. Under new rules of engagement the warships are
allowed, if necessary, to fire across the bows of suspected
sanctions-busting vessels, forcing them to stop to be searched by boarding
parties.
However, the ban on flights over Bosnia, adopted by the Security Council on
October 9, did not authorise the use of force against violators. Mr
Thornberry said: 'It is not for us to decide what to do about these flights.
That is for the Security Council.'
On the issue of Croatia, a European diplomat said yesterday: 'Western
governments have not taken any action against Croatia, although 'they know
the exact sizes and elements of the Croatian army involvement'. The Croatian
government has denied any military presence in Bosnia. But Mr Thornberry
said the Croatian Defence Council, which controls Bosnia's Croat forces, had
told UN peacekeepers that the Croatian army controls large stretches of
territory around Mostar.
Fighting yesterday continued in Sarajevo. Mr Thornberry said 192 shells were
counted by UN observers - all but two of them fell on Bosnian government
positions.
Despite the failure of ceasefire agreements to take hold, the international
airlift has continued. Since July, 1,568 aid flights have reached Sarajevo.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921124

