FT924-6556

FT  20 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: RTZ's investment boosts
credibility of diamond site


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


RTZ CORPORATION, the world's biggest mining group, has already spent
USDollars 6m to join the hectic hunt for diamonds in the Lac de Gras area of
Canada where the biggest land rush in North American history is taking
place. If the UK group takes up all its land options it would cost Dollars
30m, said Mr Bob Wilson, chief executive, yesterday.
Diamonds were discovered in this area of the North West Territories in
November last year by a small Canadian mining company, Dia Met Minerals,
which now has the financial backing of Broken Hill Proprietary (BHP),
Australia's biggest company. BHP's presence and that of RTZ, which says it
is interested only in high-quality, low-cost mineral deposits, lends extra
credibility to claims that Lac de Gras could become one of the world's major
diamond mining areas.
However, Mr Wilson was cautious yesterday when talking to the Association of
Mining Analysts in London. He suggested it was unlikely that RTZ would take
up all its options. These entitle it to interests in about 4m acres -
interests of 40 or 60 per cent, depending on the deal reached with the
original claim holders.
Also, while six out of seven holes drilled on land in which RTZ was
interested were bearing kimberlitic material, history showed that only 2 per
cent of kimberlite pipes actually contained diamonds and only 30 per cent of
those that contained diamonds had eventually proved worth mining.
Base metals and gold prices were unlikely to go much lower but would remain
'soggy' until well into 1993, suggested Mr Phillip Crowson, RTZ's chief
economist. He said more aluminium, nickel, lead and zinc production cuts
were needed before prices could rise substantially. However, the copper
price would have to slip to 75 to 80 cents a lb before output cuts were
necessary. Mr Crowson did not expect copper, which yesterday closed at a 98
cents a lb, to fall to this level.
He pointed out that output cuts were being delayed because many producers
had sold forward when prices 'spiked' and warned that 'special factors'
might drive up London Metal Exchange prices in spite of the fundamentally
poor outlook - factors such as heavy Chinese buying, investment funds
returning to the metal markets if the US economy showed a
stronger-than-expected recovery, or simple price manipulation.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921120

