FT924-12214

FT  22 OCT 92 / Sweden sees falling output until 1994


   By DAVID MARSH, European Editor


SWEDEN HAS postponed hopes of economic growth until 1994 as a result of the
deterioration in the European economy and the costs of recent measures to
support the krona, according to Ms Anne Wibble, the finance minister
(pictured left).
Speaking in London yesterday after a presentation to bankers, Ms Wibble said
the Swedish economy was likely to decline by slightly more than 1 per cent
both this year and next.
Growth would resume in 1994, with an estimated 1 per cent expansion in
output, she said. However, if Sweden had abandoned its fight to avoid
devaluing the krona last month, the economic results would have been 'even
worse', she said.
'We are aware of the costs of going through a (currency) defence process.
But we look at this in terms of building up confidence for the future.' Ms
Wibble was in London to spell out to foreign lenders the effects of fiscal
and monetary action during the past six weeks to shore up the country's
financial position. She also had talks yesterday with Mr Norman Lamont, the
UK chancellor.
Despite action to reduce the budget deficit by annual amounts of up to
SKr42bn (Pounds 4.4bn) during the next few years, Ms Wibble said the deficit
would grow further in 1992-93 because of the effect of the recession on
revenues and spending.
The 1992-93 deficit would be 'substantially above SKr100bn', she said.
The government would also spend significant amounts to shore up the banking
system during the next few years through loan guarantees and possible
injections of equity capital.
Sweden has already taken specific action to aid Nordbanken, Forsta Banken
and Gota Bank, but is now trying to take more general steps to support the
troubled banking sector.
Although Ms Wibble admitted the negative effects of high Swedish interest
rates on the domestic economy, she said interest rates would now fall as
confidence returned.
She also shrugged off the effect on Swedish export competitiveness of the
recent devaluations of the currencies of Britain and Finland - two of the
country's leading trading partners. There were already signs of a recovery
of Swedish exports, she said.
The Riksbank (central bank) cut its marginal lending rate to 13.5 per cent
from 14.5 per cent yesterday, after earlier increasing it as high as 500 per
cent during the speculative assault on the krona last month.
Sweden has embarked upon a large-scale foreign borrowing programme to
bolster reserves depleted by last month's turbulence. This has resulted in
the Riksbank's reserves rising to around SKr150bn, Ms Wibble said. Sweden is
borrowing a total of SKr230bn under a plan announced on September 9.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921022

