FT923-15455

FT  02 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Jones & Shipman shares dive 14 1/2 p as
losses reach Pounds 7.4m


   By ANDREW BAXTER


SHARES IN Jones & Shipman, one of the UK's three remaining publicly-quoted
machine tool companies, fell by nearly a third yesterday after the
Leicester-based company announced a Pounds 7.35m pre-tax loss and omitted
its final dividend for the second year running.
The loss for the year to March 31 compared with a deficit of Pounds 960,000
last time. It was accompanied by the announcement of a new business strategy
which will progressively halve the workforce of 500, take the group out of
the machining of parts, see the disposal of non-core small tools and honing
machines businesses, and allow the group to concentrate on precision
grinding machines.
The shares dropped from 45p to 27p after the announcement, before recovering
to 30 1/2 p. Losses per share were 56.1p, compared with 8.2p, while turnover
dropped from Pounds 22.4m to Pounds 15.9m. A nil dividend for the year
compares with a 1p interim last time.
The restructuring will end nearly 100 years of parts machining at J&S, which
will gradually move to subcontracting.
The Pounds 7.35m loss, which Mr John Wareing, managing director, admitted
was 'horrendous,' underlines the continuing severity of the machine tool
recession and the lack of confidence - especially among manufacturing
customers in the UK - to invest in capital equipment.
The group said market indicators suggested little improvement in trading
conditions before the end of 1992. Mr Wareing said inquiries from customers
were continuing at a high level, but the conversion rate into orders was not
as good as had been hoped.
The length and depth of the recession had prompted the group to announce a
fundamental change in its strategy - which has been under consideration for
the past 12 months - rather than adopt half-measures, Mr Wareing indicated.
A three-part strategy will produce 130 redundancies initially. This will be
followed by sales of the non-core businesses - Mr Wareing said J&S was
already talking to a number of interested parties - and a progressive move
to subcontracting the machining.
Mr Wareing said the aim was to remove the heavy fixed cost of the machine
shop, which was large by the standards of European competitors. Eventually
this would enable the company to increase its returns when market conditions
improved.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920702

