FT921-11786

FT  30 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Berisford picks new chief for rebuilding


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


BERISFORD, the commodities and property group which narrowly escaped
liquidation through an 18-month-long sale of assets, yesterday moved one
step closer to rebuilding its business with the appointment of Mr Alan
Bowkett as chief executive.
Mr Bowkett replaces Mr Murray Stewart, who directed the company's disposal
programme and cut debt from Pounds 1.2bn to the current net cash position of
Pounds 18m. The biggest sale was British Sugar in 1990 for Pounds 800m.
Berisford is now little more than a shell, with a UK property portfolio
worth Pounds 57m, some small agribusinesses in California and a 45 per cent
stake in Rayner Coffee International, the loss-making coffee trading group.
Mr Bowkett said his first task would be to sort out RCI. 'In the next six
months I want to resolve that problem (and) turn (it) into a profitable
situation for shareholders.' That could mean either retaining or reducing
the stake.
Once RCI was dealt with, Mr Bowkett said he would begin building a core
business, funded by further asset sales or perhaps rights issues. None of
the existing operations would be suitable.
'We are looking for a fragmented market where we can put units together,' Mr
Bowkett said. He added he would be looking in the services and manufacturing
sectors.
The property division was not part of Berisford's long-term plans, said Mr
Bowkett. 'Over the next few years we will either liquidate at a profit or
look at some form of joint venture.'
Mr Bowkett, who will invest Pounds 1.1m in Berisford in return for a 1.2 per
cent stake, was former chief executive of United Precision Industries, sold
to NSK of Japan for Pounds 210m in 1990, and managing director of Boulton &
Paul, where profits doubled in two years.
Berisford shares moved up 3p to 20p on yesterday's announcement.
See Observer

The Financial Times


London Page 22 Photograph Alan Bowkett, will invest Pounds 1.1m in the
company (Omitted).

920130

