FT923-10764

FT  29 JUL 92 / Arts: Thoroughbreds and old nags - Television


   By PATRICIA MORISON


SOPPY though it may seem, the week's most enjoyable viewing for me was The
Peruvian Paso Horse (Saturday, C4). A paso is native to Peru, a chunky
little horse which throws its front legs out like a swimmer doing butterfly.
Unfortunately, this beautifully filmed documentary was shown at tea-time,
which was nice for younger members of the Pony Club but meant that most
adult horse-lovers - not a small constituency - missed a treat.
Prime-time animal programmes tend to be grittier and altogether worthier.
They harrow us over the imminent extinction of a species, or confront us
with shots of humans doing beastly things to animals - poachers sawing off
elephants' feet, abattoirs, vivisection, etc. Alternatively, wild-life films
show animals doing ghastly things to each other, to maintain what an older
generation of film-maker used to call the 'balance of nature'.
In contrast, the hymn to the paso appeared distinctly effete; an hour-long
rhapsody about a thriving and wholly artificial breed designed to give the
Peruvian land-owning class an even smoother ride through life. The paso
descends from bloodstock brought to Peru by Pizarro in 1531, and thence from
the famed Spanish jennets of the middle ages. Centuries of breeding have
produced a sweet-tempered horse like an equine mattress and easily capable
of 40 miles a day around the hacienda. So smooth is a paso that a
poncho-clad chap was shown riding at speed with a full champagne glass in
his hand. Very useful at a Boxing Day meet . . .
Horses give the best performances in The Riders of the Dawn (Thursday on
C4), the terrible yet mildly addictive Spanish drama series set in a health
spa in Civil War Spain. Black thoroughbreds pound across the set in slow
motion every time terminal wilt threatens the story-line. They symbolise raw
nature plus the untamed recesses of the Spanish soul.
Every human member of the cast belongs to the jamon school of acting
although to be charitable, the poor dears are hindered by a farcical plot, a
Spanish version of Cold Comfort Farm crossed with Gone With the Wind. It is
served with liberal dollops of sex, for one and two players. Subtitles make
the staccato script quite ludicrous. An old gentleman puffs into the Spa.
'It's getting hot out there', he opines. The weather? query the inmates 'No,
the political situation.'
I have stuck with this amusing tosh, curious to find out what happens to the
web-fingered daughter they chained up in the cellar. But interest has
flagged since the Republicans shot her hermit dad in the balls. He was
wonderful, a prophesying nutcase who answered the prayers of barren ladies
without recourse to the supernatural.
Franco, Behind the Myth (Thursday, BBC1) was disappointing, almost
inevitably given that producer Anthony Geffen compressed Franco's entire
life into one hour. Surely Franco's importance merits the fuller treatment
recently, and memorably, accorded to Stalin? Jonathan Dimbleby suavely
presented an interesting portrait of El Caudillo thanks to archive film and
interviewees who included Franco's daughter, his niece, and Eisenhower's
interpreter, who recalled how entranced the President was in Madrid in 1959
by well-staged mass expressions of love for their leader.
But by the standards of the best television histories, Franco failed. Its
premise was that in contemporary Spain, Franco's memory has been wiped out
by an act of collective amnesia. Several times, Dimbleby made this striking
assertion - but the evidence to back it up was missing. It is one thing to
detect a 'web of myth' around a historical figure but it is quite another -
and indeed something of a contradiction - to assert that he has been
forgotten or expunged. If this is the case with Franco within Spain, who
then is responsible for unearthing the new material which gave this
documentary its particular interest?
Take the film of Franco's speech of loyalty to the Axis in late 1940. Found
'very recently', it argues powerfully against the Francoist view that the
General strove to keep Germany at arm's length. Who found the film, and is
its significance really ignored in Spain? A second hour and some academic
talking heads would have given this ambitious film vastly more 'bottom'.
The excellent documentary series, Invisible Enemies (Sunday, C4) provided
the most alarming information of the week. Do not eat oysters in Alabama, or
you could catch cholera. Do not sleep on the ground in California, or you
may catch bubonic plague. Far from dying out, the Black Death is on the
loose in the US and the more our lifestyles change, even for the better, the
greater the risk from disease.
Few tropes are more enraging than the journalist on a voyage of
self-discovery. Searching for a Killer got the latest run of Video Diaries
(BBC2, Saturday) off to a teeth-grinding start. Innocent Geoffrey Smith
clearly has trouble with the concept of military dictatorship. In 1987, he
was unlucky enough to get shot in the leg during a horrendous massacre at a
polling-station in Haiti. The experience gave Mr Smith bad dreams, so he
decided to go back to confront his would-be killer.
How strange, no one in Port-au-Prince was anxious to help with nice Mr
Smith's enquiries. But did he really think Haiti is like Clacton-on-Sea?
Presumably he was working as a newsman in 1987, or how else did he come to
be surveying the freshly killed bodies with the international press corps
and then cop it in the leg when the gunman returned?
The film dwelt at quite unnecessary length on CBS footage of the corpses in
the school. A brave dissident provided Smith with film of bodies executed by
the police and dumped on waste-ground, which sent the intrepid Mr Smith off
looking for the corpses. Damn it, someone had moved them.
Cheap thrills and a grotesque level of disingenuity made this one of the
most nauseating programmes I have seen. Smith played out his emotions for
the camera, being frightened for his own skin as gunfire echoed through the
night, being ever so sorry for two burglars executed for robbing his
apartment.
As he complained to his friend, the wise voodoo priest, he never got his
Walkman back. But at least he got those precious videotapes home - film
which presumably will earn him as much as the average Haitian earns in
years. So it was all worth it. Mr Smith's bad dreams have stopped and he can
rebuild his new life. Meanwhile, how are his unfortunate friends and
contacts doing, back in Port-au-Prince?

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920729

