FT923-9827

FT  03 AUG 92 / Banks win battle over WPP rescue


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


DISSIDENT shareholders in WPP, the worldwide media services group, dropped
their opposition to a proposed restructuring plan after accepting that the
banks were likely to put the company into receivership, costing them their
investment, a leading shareholder said.
Fidelity Investments, the US-based investment company which holds a stake of
about 10 per cent in WPP, announced on Saturday it would support the
restructuring plan, an abrupt reversal of its earlier position.
Fidelity has led an unusually public campaign to persuade WPP's preference
shareholders that terms of the reconstruction give too much to the company's
lenders.
Fidelity and other shareholders had said they believed the banks were
bluffing and did not intend to act on their threat to place WPP in
receivership if the restructuring was rejected.
Mr Anthony Bolton, senior investment director at Fidelity, said that
although most of the group still believe the restructuring plan unduly
favoured the banks, shareholders realised the banks could protect their own
stake by a controlled receivership known privately among the lenders as
'Plan C'.
The banks were said to have spent more than Pounds 700,000 in legal and
other fees over the past few weeks devising Plan C.
Mr Bolton said that following a conference call with a group of preference
shareholders - who between them hold 30 to 40 per cent of all preference
shares - investors agreed to back down.
He said that rather than be the sole dissenter, Fidelity approached the
lenders and offered to drop its opposition. In exchange the preference
shareholders' gain the right to recommend a candidate for a new
non-executive director on the WPP board.
'We went through in some detail the plans for administrative receivership.
Although it is very complex, it appears perfectly legal,' he said.
The plan called for the banks to put the WPP holding company into
receivership and transfer all its operating subsidiaries - many of which are
profitable - into a new company. This would have left shareholders owning
the worthless holding company while the banks held the profitable
subsidiaries.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920803

