FT922-3936

FT  09 JUN 92 / Technology: Spirits lifted at Otis


   By ANDREW BAXTER


The last thing most people want when they get trapped in a lift is to be
talked to by a computer - but they do want to talk to someone.
At Otis's new nationwide service and training centre in west London, a
computer screen flashes red when it receives an electronic message from
sensors attached to lifts. This prompts the human touch to come into play,
with a telephone call to the unfortunate passenger. An Otis engineer,
meanwhile, is automatically notified.
Innovations like the Remote Elevator Monitoring service are important for
Otis. Technology is being used to strengthen lift-makers' service business,
which is at the centre of a power battle in an industry that has seen new
equipment sales floored by the recession. Even in good times for new sales,
service business accounts for the lion's share of the industry's profits.
But the relationship between service and technology works both ways, says
Bill Hogg, general manager at the centre.
Improved quality of service to existing customers, for example, can lead
indirectly to increased business for Otis modernising old-technology lifts.
Microprocessors have been used in lifts for at least 20 years, but 70 per
cent of the 150,000 lifts in the UK still use relay technology.
The recession in the UK construction market has made Otis's Pounds 5m
investment in its new centre, opened in December, particularly timely. New
lift sales fell 50 per cent in 1990, and a further 50 per cent fall last
year, says Hogg.
The investment has enabled the company to bring together functions such as
its Otisline data and information management system, its modernisation
business and its service centre and related engineering and training
functions.
Otisline, introduced two years ago in the UK, is a classic illustration of
the symbiosis between after-sales service business and technology. For the
customer, it offers 24-hour access to the company's engineers in case of
faults.
For Otis, the system performs as a database that gives early warning of any
recurrent faults - information used in new product design.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920609

