FT922-4179

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: Artistic strategies - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


WHILE THE future of the earth is debated in Rio, the future of the arts is
debated in five programmes on Radio 3. Sir Richard Luce, former Minister for
the Arts, set up a National Arts and Media Strategy; and after consultation
with the Arts Council, the Regional Arts Boards and such bodies as the BFI,
the Crafts Council and others, a draft paper was published. Each radio
debate covers a particular aspect of the paper, and each has a different
panel. All are chaired by Robert Hewison.
On Monday, the fundamental question: why a strategy at all? It was a
holistic project, and the point, after all the consideration, was what was
to come next. This must not include official preferences, especially as the
paper is not to be re-submitted to the originating Richard Luce but to the
new minister, David Mellor.
Tuesday's debate considered what was in fact to be accepted as 'art'. A long
list progressed from such obvious items as music, dance, drama, and so on,
by way of folk-arts, to television and video. Experimental and innovative
work had to be included, and the standing of work aimed at specific targets
like blacks, gays and the disabled. Such matters as directing the arts
'industry', providing funds and setting standards did not seem quite
relevant to the debate's theme.
They came up on Wednesday, where the theme was the relationship between
artist and institution, and the feeling more practical. The topic was
largely money, its inadequacy generally realised; but other interesting
points were raised. The 'right to fail' was played down in favour of the
duty to create; and the paper's distinction between primary and
interpretative artists was dismissed. There are two more debates next week.
On Sunday, Radio 3 repeated the 1988 production of John Guare's play Women
and Water, set mostly on the battlefield of Cold Harbour, Virginia, in 1864,
but switching from place to place and from time to time in the author's own
adaptation. At the heart of it is Lydie Breeze (Natasha Richardson), a nurse
in the Union Army. As she goes in a riverboat to buy medical supplies from
the depot, we move to a tale about about Lydie's father, captain of a
Nantucket whaler. All the black crew are lost, and later the ship itself,
complete with the captain's log.
We soon return to the fighting, then back to Nantucket; it would take half a
page to detail the sundry intertwined stories. It was all pretty exciting,
but whether it is good drama is another thing. My feeling is that if
Treasure Island is a good novel, then this is a good play, though I believe
it would have been even better for radio as a serial. It was enjoyably
played, in serviceable American voices, under Stuart Owen's direction.
Radio 4's own 'Classic Serial' on Saturday made a disappointing start. Colin
Haydn Evans's Castle of the Star is a two-part tale about TE Lawrence, which
promises us new light on his character and motivation in the Arabian
campaign. I observed no new light in the first half, only new inventions of
conversations with General Allenby and Henley of the FO; but this half ended
just as Lawrence was captured at Deraa, where Rattigan, for example, gave
him some unusual experiences. We may know more this evening about the
association of Lawrence (Simon Chandler) with his Arab bodyguard, Salim
Ahmed. Nigel Bryant directed.
Usually it is Radio 1 to blend social problems with popular music but this
week was Radio 2's turn. People need people, a national strategy for the
requirement, and the opportunities, for volunteers was introduced on Monday
by Ken Bruce, and continued through the week by him and others with helpful
information.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

920606

