FT921-1458

FT  24 MAR 92 / Survey of Employee Ownership (6): Owners work harder / A
look at the attitudes of institutional investors


   By NORMA COHEN


'IF EMPLOYEES own a stake in a company, we generally think that's a good
thing,' says Mr David Rough, investment manager at Legal and General, one of
the UK's largest life insurers. 'The question for us is what kind of
employee share option scheme it is.'
Institutional shareholders see workers who are owners as having a stake in
the company's success - raising the odds that they will work hard to earn
profits for their employer. They point to NFC, formerly the nationalised
National Freight Company. It was saved by the intervention of its staff and
management who bought it and turned it into a highly profitable venture.
Rarely is there any concern that employee shareholdings limit the ability of
senior management to make changes to company structure, such as those
involving redundancies. Indeed, most institutional shareholders say they
have given little thought to the matter. Only when employee share ownership
is used to accomplish a corporate goal do institutional shareholders sit up
and take notice.
In particular, US-style employee stock option plans, often funded by the
employer itself, raise the hackles of institutional shareholders. Last
August, the Association of British Insurers issued 'best practice'
guidelines for companies. There is no compulsion for companies to follow ABI
guidelines on Esops, but they risk the ire of big institutional shareholders
in ignoring them.
'The additional interest which is now developing in Esops and Esots (trusts)
is welcomed in the context that they can genuinely result in wider share
ownership. Such schemes however are increasingly being advocated as
providing a means of building up 'an anti-takeover stake',' the ABI wrote in
its paper.
According to the ABI, any anti-takeover mechanism which prevents existing
shareholders from recognising the full value of their investments is a bad
thing. Its guidelines say that no more than 10 per cent of a company's
shares should be held by employees and management as a group, with each
limited to 5 per cent. 'Where an Esop or Esot would be capable of building
up a holding of more than 5 per cent of a company's issued ordinary share
capital, the arrangements should be first submitted to shareholders for
their prior approval,' the ABI said.
Mr Tom Crombie, investment chief at Scottish Equitable, says that the ABI
guidelines appear to have had the desired effect. 'Most of those wishing to
increase their shareholdings discuss it with the ABI's investment committee
first and are turned down.'
According to Mr Robin Garrow, investment manager at Scottish Widows: 'As
long as employee shareholdings are relatively insignificant, we think they
are a good thing.'
Legal and General's Mr Rough says that he is concerned about how Esops are
financed. US-style Esops are typically arranged with bank borrowings secured
on the shares themselves. Thus, if the value of the shares fall, the lender
will demand additional collateral, possibly in the form of more shares.
Concern about financing Esops has led to some innovations to prevent
precisely that scenario. In June 1990, Exxon Corporation, the US-based oil
concern, raised Dollars 174m by selling notes of a special vehicle set up to
hold a Dollars 220m pool of its own shares for an Esop.
However, the investment community is divided over stock option plans for
senior management, in particular directors. The odds are greater that these
shareholdings will act as an anti-takeover mechanism, says an ABI official.
But even if directors' holdings remain within the 5 per cent ceiling, how
the shares should be awarded to them is still an issue. The ABI view,
consistent with Inland Revenue rules on the taxation of stock options, says
that options may be offered to directors at a discount of up to 15 per cent
on the offer date - with the caveat that they should not be exercisable for
at least five years. The restriction is intended to prevent managers from
taking a quick profit and moving to another company.
However, the Institutional Fund Managers Association says that system is too
generous to ineffective managers and affords too little incentive to see
that the shares perform well. 'If the shares do nothing for five years, the
directors have made a profit,' says one IFMA member. Instead, the trade
association says directors should simply be offered the right to buy shares
five years hence at a price equal to the current one. Only if the share
price rises more than inflation will they have made a profit.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920324

