FT924-11904

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (15): Volatile forex
climate upsets the rules - Bonds / Long gilts have been hit by inflationary
fears, but index-linked may benefit


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE KEY to bond market performance over the past three months has been in
picking the right currency.
The gradual collapse of confidence, in the wake of Denmark's rejection of
the Maastricht treaty in June, has eroded the theory of 'convergence' - that
progress towards European monetary union would drive down European interest
rates. Then, the appearance of untenable strains within the exchange rate
mechanism (ERM) created turmoil in the foreign exchange market, which has
dominated bond trading.
Volatile foreign exchange conditions have reversed traditional criteria for
bond investments. Instead of looking for economic slowdown to push bond
yields, weak economic conditions have become signals of potential or actual
currency weakness. Since investors are focusing on currency considerations,
a strong economy, normally negative for bonds, has become a positive sign
that the currency will prove a safe haven from the turmoil in the foreign
exchange market.
For sterling investors, the Deutsche Mark bloc - German Bunds, Dutch and
Belgian bonds - has provided an attractive harbour in the storm. For the
year to date, Bunds have provided returns of 22 per cent for sterling based
investors, compared with 8.3 per cent in local currency terms, according to
JP Morgan's benchmark government bond index.
As well as offering currency gains, the strength of the D-Mark means that
the Bundesbank still has plenty of room to cut interest rates, unlike most
other European central banks.
Defensive positioning against further currency turmoil is expected to remain
a priority for investors. The Yes vote in the French referendum on
Maastricht, in September, failed to glue Europe's exchange rate system back
together, and pressures within the system show little sign of abating.
'Fixed-income investors should overweight funds in the core European bond
markets,' according to Mr Adrian James, international bond strategist at
NatWest Capital Markets. 'Investment in other European markets carries a
much higher degree of currency risk, and is probably best limited to
short-term instruments.'
Under these conditions, the high-yielding bond markets are still likely to
be shunned. Italian and Spanish bond markets attracted a massive inflow of
foreign investment in recent years, as yields tumbled on expectations of
convergence. But doubts about the future of European monetary union have
severely undermined both bond and currency markets. The return on benchmark
Italian government bonds in the third quarter was -2 per cent for sterling
based investors, compared with -1.1 per cent for Spanish government bonds,
according to the JP Morgan index. At the start of the fourth quarter, prices
were still in freefall.
'There may be a gross undervaluation of the lira at these levels, but the
fact is that no one can say where the floor is,' said Mr Michael Burke,
international bond strategist at Yamaichi International.
The other markets to have benefited from a flight to safety from European
bonds are the US and Japanese bond markets, despite the low interest rates
on offer.
Despite rather jittery market conditions ahead of the US presidential
elections, there are expectations of further interest rate cuts, and the
dollar is being viewed as a relatively safe haven.
In Japan, signs that the economy is weakening rapidly are boosting
expectations of further declines in interest rates, and the bond market has
also benefited from weak stock prices. However, some analysts are concerned
that the negative economic data could result in a bout of currency weakness.
Switzerland has also enjoyed a revival of its traditional role as a safe
haven for investors.
Despite the dangers of navigating foreign exchange risk, the returns offered
by international bond markets are likely to tempt investors away from the UK
gilts market, which is currently offering rather poor prospects.
Although short-dated gilts have received some support from expectations of a
further interest rate cut, the longer end of the market has been severely
hit by inflationary fears, exacerbated by the economic policy vacuum left in
the wake of sterling's withdrawal from ERM. One area which could stand to
benefit is the index-linked sector, which has held up well in recent
turmoil.
Unit trusts investing in international bonds have dramatically outperformed
comparable gilt funds. According to data from Finstat, international bond
funds have provided an average return in the last three months of 8.5 per
cent, compared with 0.4 per cent for gilt funds. (Going back nine months,
the disparity is smaller, with 9.8 per cent for international bond funds and
7.4 per cent for gilt funds.)
In the past three months, Legal and General's international bond fund leads
the 26 international fixed-interest unit trusts tracked by Finstat, with
returns of 13.3 per cent. Guinness Flight's unfortunately-named Emu Trust
recorded a 0.5 decline in September, perhaps not surprisingly.
However, given the volatility of currency markets, bonds may not be the best
investments, particularly for retail investors. There are distinct
advantages to putting cash on deposit, because of the lower risk.
'Retail investors probably won't miss out on very much if they keep their
money in cash deposits. At this point in the economic cycle, cash is king,'
said Mr Burke.
Bond unit trusts: as charges fall, it could be worth paying for management
expertise - page 22

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921023

