FT924-12270

FT  21 OCT 92 / Arts: Kiss of the Spider Woman - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


Some people may like Kiss of the Spider Woman. Since I did not, and so much
work has obviously gone into it, I shall try to make my remarks as objective
as possible in order not to undermine other people's pleasure.
It may be advisable not to sit too close to the front of the stalls. Spider
Woman is a very big musical, at least in its pretensions. The Shaftesbury
Theatre also has a large stage. The set is almost uniformly a prison with
metal bars, literally hundreds of them.
Yet the trouble with turning the stage into a prison is that you tend to
keep the audience out rather than invite them in. This is not a show full of
warmth.
There is a second motif in the spider's web. It has a similar effect to the
prison bars. This spider does not entice people in; it drives them away. It
is true that there is a smaller cell inside the larger prison. Here is where
the intimacy is supposed to take place.
The central relationship is between two prisoners, one a poor homosexual who
has been entrapped by a minor, the other a Marxist revolutionary familiar to
Latin American politics.
Gradually they become mutually dependent, eventually to like each other and
finally to embrace. The essential point of the relationship is that it is
micro and develops in a small space. It is anything but micro in Harold
Prince's production. Thus the main thrust of Manuel Puig's novel is lost.
Is anything valuable put in its place? The answer is no. There is a lot of
loud music by John Kander with lyrics (none of them memorable) by Fred Ebb.
Chita Rivera as the Spider Woman flits about much like the phantom in the
Opera.
At one stage there is a trip to what looks like the Brazilian jungle. The
Latin American police are shown to be crude in their methods. One of their
punishments consists of placing a metal bucket over a prisoner's head and
banging on it with metal rods.
There is also a touch of sentimentality. Molina, the homosexual prisoner, is
allowed to telephone his mother and does so with a song called 'Mama, It's
Me'.
The question I kept finding myself asking was why. What does the musical
treatment add to the story? The answer is worse than nothing; it detracts.
Spider Woman is a pastiche of the work of Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber and
Stephen Sondheim. It does not come off because it lacks a reason for
existence.
I also thought longingly of a couple of plays. If you want to see
homosexuality movingly portrayed on stage, remember Tony Kushner's Angels in
America at the National Theatre.
And if you want to explore brutality in Latin America, recall the treatment
in Ariel Dorfman's Death and the Maiden. Throughout Spider Woman the latter
scarcely left my mind. Dorfman's piece is a low budget play which speaks
volumes. Spider Woman must have cost millions to ruin a story.
The one redeeming feature is Brent Carver as Molina. He acts, shows genuine
pain and genuine pleasure. He would be perfectly at home in Angels in
America. Here he is locked into a production unworthy of his talent.
The prison and the rest of the sets are designed by Jerome Sirlin.
Shaftesbury Theatre. (071) 379 5399

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921021

