FT923-9569

FT  04 AUG 92 / Blue Arrow judge urges computer support


   By JOHN MASON and ROBERT RICE


JUDGES should make greater use of computer technology to help to keep
complex fraud trials manageable, Mr Justice Brooke, the second Blue Arrow
trial judge, said yesterday.
Mr Justice Brooke - who replaced Mr Justice McKinnon after the first Blue
Arrow trial - was speaking after formally acquitting the remaining four
defendants charged with fraud over the affair.
Not-guilty verdicts were returned against Mr Paul Smallwood and Mr Tim
Brown, both former equities directors with UBS Phillips & Drew; Mr Charles
Villiers, the former chairman of County NatWest; and Ms Elizabeth Brimelow,
County's former compliance director. Their costs, thought to approach Pounds
1m, were awarded from public funds.
Contributing to the debate on reforming the handling of large fraud trials,
Mr Justice Brooke said the public and business community were 'justifiably
looking with impatience' to the courts to find ways to manage such trials.
Judges in such cases faced an enormous intellectual and physical burden, he
said. Computer support was crucial.
Experience in the US had shown that the use of laptop computers by judges
could save much time and cost. Edited evidence could be recorded on computer
within 20 seconds of its being given. With the judge freed from making
handwritten notes, up to 10 per cent more evidence could be heard in a day.
'It is, I believe, incumbent on English judges to be willing to learn new
techniques if they may make such a substantial difference to the length of a
trial or the overall cost of proceedings,' said Mr Justice Brooke.
To reduce court time further, he called for firmer timetabling of legal
arguments heard when juries are out.
The Law Society the solicitors' governing body, is to re-examine US-style
'no win, no pay' contingency fee arrangements as an alternative to legal
aid, Robert Rice writes. The move is part of an overall review of methods of
funding court cases.
Solicitors are concerned that restrictions on legal aid have put the cost of
going to court beyond the reach of people on average incomes. The review
will examine whether contingency fee arrangements, where lawyers are paid
only if they win the case, could cut the cost of legal aid, which is
expected to exceed Pounds 1bn in 1992-93.
Government attempts to control the rising cost of legal aid by imposing
standard fees for criminal legal-aid work in magistrates' courts have been
opposed by solicitors, who have threatened to withdraw from legal-aid work.
The society believes that a more radical solution to the drawbacks of the
legal aid system must be considered. The review will examine whether
contingency fees would increase access to justice or simply encourage
hopeless litigation. It will also ask whether legal aid should continue to
be available in cases that could be funded on contingency fees and whether
insurance could be devised against the risk of paying the other side's
costs.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920804

