FT921-3995

FT  11 MAR 92 / A model of UK's industrial pattern


The good news is that Glynwed International has withstood the worst of the
recession. The bad news is that it cannot tell exactly when better times
will come.
To monitor Glynwed is to monitor the movement of the British economy, so
diverse are its interests. To watch Glynwed is to see in microcosm a
shifting in the pattern of national manufacturing industry: the move towards
more exports and the move away from cyclical markets to those perceived to
offer prospects for growth.
In 1987, 16.7 per cent of Glynwed's turnover was generated overseas. This
climbed to 32.7 per cent in the record year of 1990 and slipped last year to
31.8 per cent - still worth around Pounds 300m.
Glynwed was the archetypal metal basher. Even now it is part of the metals
and metal-forming sector of the stock exchange. But it sees its brightest
prospects in the growth of an international plastics business. The only
problem is that the funds for new investment have to come from selling off
traditional businesses and it is difficult to fatten up companies for
disposal in a recession.
The attraction of plastics is clear. The sector was the last into the
recession. Healthy demand from the water industry and steady buying from the
gas industry, as infrastructure projects went ahead, meant that the plastics
share of Glynwed's 1991 pre-tax profits - Pounds 20.5m against Pounds 24.5m
in 1990 - held up better than any division except property.
In fact, Glynwed has been feeling the effects of recession, first in a mild
form and then more acutely, since August 1988 when the demand for consumer
products, especially domestic cookers - Glynwed makes the Flavel, Aga and
Rayburn brands - began to turn down. Then, in May 1989, it was the turn of
building materials, such as copper tubing.
By spring 1990, the steel business was beginning to feel the strain. By the
end of the year, iron products used in the commercial, non-housing,
construction industry were caught in the recessionary trap. Steel tube
demand fell off at the same time.
Throughout 1990, Glynwed saw the slide in demand for products used in
capital equipment. Then last year, plastics became a cause for concern while
there was also a reduction in the demand for steel used in the motor
industry, the full implications of which are not yet clear.
But as these sectors moved down the economic cycle, others began to move up.
In the second half of last year, there were signs of improvement in the
consumer products section of Glynwed's business. The return on capital
employed for 1991 was 22 per cent compared with 35 per cent for plastics and
a meagre 12.4 per cent for the group as a whole.
It was tempting to think that the first sectors into recession would be the
first out, and that there would be as even a movement back to prosperity as
there had been out of it. But the reality will probably be more complex.
Overall, the market is not improving, Mr Gareth Davies, chairman, made clear
yesterday.
But Glynwed's health probably will be improving. Like other UK engineering
companies struggling for a position in increasingly harsh international
markets, it has been cutting costs. It has also been seeking to enhance its
competitive position. It has been making provisions in its 1991 accounts for
losses it expects to occur in 1992. It has been bringing in new capacity and
rationalising its copper tube operations. It has been selling off businesses
where it cannot hope to be market leader - metals distribution in Canada,
for example. It has been cutting wages and salaries bills.
The immediate effect was that last year Glynwed had a net cash inflow of
Pounds 9.7m compared with a net outflow in 1990 of Pounds 8.3m. That in turn
led to a reduction in the group's debt burden to Pounds 82.6m from Pounds
92.3m at the end of 1990. The amount of debt, as a proportion of the group's
equity, is expected to be stable in 1992 at just under 40 per cent.
The hope is that the combined effect of Glynwed's financial and industrial
measures will provoke a much faster response, in terms of profits, to any
upturn on the market.
'I do believe that when it (the upturn) starts to happen, it will not need
much movement, especially on the consumer products side, to see profits come
through,' said Mr Davies.

The Financial Times


London Page 41

920311

