FT921-3676

FT  13 MAR 92 / Technology: Roll in the log cabins - Low-cost housing built
for the third world is finding its way back west, writes Stephen Fidler


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


Alejandro Stein, a Venezuelan academic-turned-businessman, reckons the
construction system that he has helped to develop could cut 40 per cent off
the cost of building a house in Nicaragua. In western Europe, where people
expect more in a new home, he says building a house his way would be 15-20
per cent cheaper than using traditional methods.
Stein, a 44-year-old professor in the faculty of architecture and urban
design at the Central University of Venezuela in Caracas, set out with
colleagues about a decade ago to find ways to reduce the costs of housing
the poor in the third world.
For the Venezuelan academics, the problem was close to home: flimsy shanties
rise vertiginously on the hills surrounding their city. The idea they
developed for the third world has already been used in the first: for
example, in a housing development in Orlando, Florida. Stein and others
believe it also has potential to improve housing standards in eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union, for example in housing the homecoming Red Army.
Stein, now the chairman of the company which is licensing the product,
called his system 'Tronco', Spanish for log, since the structures resemble
metallic log cabins.
Housing projects in the third world usually involve the manufacture at a
remote plant of prefabricated concrete sections which are then transported
to the housing site. This requires a substantial investment in plant and
transportation costs which rise with the site's distance from the plant.
Skilled labour is needed at every stage of the construction process and it
is scarce. Often the buildings do not look traditional, and do not reflect
local preferences, such as that of central Americans for solid walls.
The Tronco system attempts to avoid these problems by creating, on site,
hollow 'logs' of aluminium or galvanised steel which are slotted together.
The logs form the walls, upper floors and roofs of the building, although
they can be hidden by attaching cladding to the structure to give the house
its character.
The system requires neither skilled labour nor big transportation costs.
There is no large investment in production because the 'plant' - a machine
that produces the tubes - can be moved from site to site.
The raw material is a metallic strip which arrives on the building site in
coils and is fed into the machine, which uses a similar process to that used
for making central heating or air-conditioning ducts. The machine forms the
hollow helicoidal tube or log by wrapping the metal strip rather like a
bandage around an imaginary arm. It folds the overlapping parts of the strip
mechanically to prevent the log from unravelling. The length and diameter of
the logs can be altered, giving the system more flexibility than traditional
prefabrication, while connectors at one or both ends keep them in place.
These logs are light enough to be carried into position by one person. Each
machine requires eight people for maximum efficiency, including a
semi-skilled machine operator and a supervisor. Because the majority of the
workforce is unskilled, building costs are reduced and the houses can be put
up where traditional building skills are not available.
Buildings can be put up very rapidly: each machine and team of eight can
construct an estimated 300 square metres of built area a day - up to three
times as quick as conventional methods and helping to keep costs down. This
speed, Stein suggests, could be useful in the former Soviet Union, where the
severe winter restricts the housebuilding season and which is also
plentifully supplied with unskilled labour and the metallic raw material.
Although the logs, being hollow, have insulating qualities, this can be
supplemented in cold climates with additional insulation between the logs
and the cladding. In warm climates, the logs are more efficient at keeping
out the heat than concrete, which after sitting in the sun will begin to
radiate heat inside a dwelling.
Stein has laid a strong emphasis on obtaining building certification in the
US. Now obtained, it means the buildings are acceptable in earthquake-prone
California and hurricane-swept Florida. He claims this as a strong
advertisement for the buildings' stability.
However, there are limits to its application. It is not practical for
buildings with more than three storeys, because the extra strength and
weight needed to make such a construction sound would negate the savings in
construction.
Furthermore, in rich countries, resistance to the concept can be expected
from private buyers who usually prefer more traditional brick or wood-frame
houses. A well-established building trade is likely to favour traditional
construction methods.
Stein now spends much of his time travelling to potential licensees in many
parts of the world. He has secured agreement with Japan's Sumitomo Group,
and is in discussions in France, Turkey, Italy, Mexico and other countries.
In Britain, he is talking with the construction company John Laing.
This is not expected to lead to a proliferation of metallic log cabins in
the English countryside; the British company is apparently more interested
in using the method to put up buildings in the Middle East, Far East and
eastern Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920313

