FT922-7305

FT  19 MAY 92 / Parliament and Politics: Plan to expand rail freight level


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


MOVES to expand the amount of freight carried by rail were signalled by Mr
John MacGregor, the transport secretary, in the Commons last night.
He is expected to make an early statement on whether the Channel tunnel link
will carry freight as well as passengers.
But Mr MacGregor said that whatever the the expansion in freight traffic
carried by rail the bulk will continue to be transported by road.
The minister, moving the second reading of the British Coal and British Rail
(Transfer Proposals) Bill, said 81 per cent of all freight traffic was
currently moved by road.
The bill was given a second reading by 69 votes (325 - 256).
He faced demands from both sides of the House to ensure that the
introduction of rail services by private-sector operators is not limited to
British Rail's most profitable routes.
Mr John Prescott, Labour's shadow transport secretary, led the calls for
restrictions to prevent 'cherrypicking' by Mr Richard Branson's Virgin Group
and other interests keen to secure access to BR's tracks.
Railway enthusiast Mr Robert Adley (C Christchurch), who has warned that the
privatisation of BR might become a 'potential poll tax on wheels', also
insisted that in order to protect BR's position, private-sector operators
should not be allowed just to 'pick the bit they like'.
Mr MacGregor confirmed that the principal measure dealing with BR would be
introduced in the autumn.
It would be preceded by a white paper outlining proposals for the
franchising of passenger services, the sale of BR's freight and parcels
businesses, and preparing the way for the sale of stations.
The minister said decisions on the timing of the privatisation of the coal
industry had yet to be made. Mr Prescott argued that the bill reflected the
government's 'ideological obsession' with privatisation.
Editorial Comment, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920519

