FT921-1436

FT  24 MAR 92 / An angry church confronts a troubled state in Kenya: Recent
violence is feared to be related to official warnings of the danger of
multi-party politics


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


BURSTS of applause punctuating a passionate speech and ice-cream vendors
hovering on the edge of the crowd created the atmosphere of a political
rally.
In fact, angry church was confronting troubled state at Nairobi's Holy
Family Minor Basilica, where Sunday's huge congregation had spilled over
into the forecourt. Reading from a pastoral letter, the Roman Catholic
Archbishop of Nairobi, Cardinal Maurice Otunga challenged President Daniel
arap Moi's commitment to multi-party politics, and accused the government of
instigating the violence in western Kenya that has cost more than 60 lives
over the past three weeks.
The near-euphoria that greeted the repeal last December of the ban on
opposition parties has gone. In its place are growing doubts about Kenya's
capacity to manage the transition to democracy. Recent riots in Nairobi,
tribal clashes in the west, an economy in difficulties, and continuing aid
donor dissatisfaction with government policies are putting the 68-year-old
president and the ruling Kanu party under severe test.
Last year's expectations of an early general election have proved wishful
thinking. 'When he ended one-party rule,' says one critic, 'we weren't sure
whether he was being a Kaunda or a Mobutu' - distinguishing between the
former Zambian president's acceptance of defeat in a general election last
October, and President Sese Seko Mobutu's determination to cling to power in
Zaire.
'We are starting to think that he is a Mobutu,' he said.
President Moi's warnings that multi-party politics would lead only to
inter-tribal violence have started to look like a self-fulfilling prophecy,
designed to delay - perhaps indefinitely - an election Kanu seems
increasingly likely to lose.
The ban last week on political meetings - intended, says the government, to
stop the violence, not curb debate - fuelled suspicions. They are apparently
shared by the country's Roman Catholic bishops.
'Well-trained bandits,' the pastoral letter claimed, were responsible for
the killings in western Kenya, where members of the president's minority
Kalenjin clan have clashed with Luo and Luhya tribes.
The killings were 'part of a wider political strategy', claimed the bishops:
'The whole issue is officially presented to the public as a clear sign of
the failure of the multi-party system in this country.'
Yet even if the government could in this way stifle the opposition, economic
and political imperatives have caught President Moi in a squeeze.
The first set of pressures is external. Western assistance to Kenya is
vital, with the proportion of grants to gross domestic product rising from 1
per cent in 1986 to 3 per cent in 1990.
During the 1980s Kenya covered its USDollars 3bn accumulated budget deficit
with disbursements from the World Bank and bilateral donors. The same donors
turned this assistance into leverage last November, insisting at a meeting
in Paris that new aid would be conditional on faster implementation of
economic and political reforms.
The bind Mr Moi now finds himself in is that the economic measures expected
of him - such as trimming the overstaffed state bureaucracy and charging for
social services - will free held-up aid, but will count heavily against him
at the ballot box.
Meanwhile other internal economic pressures, coming on top of high
unemployment and weak prices for tea and coffee, the two leading exports,
are mounting. Poor rains have made it likely that Kenya must import 500,000
tonnes of maize this year. But strained relations with donors will make
concessional supplies difficult to obtain.
And the tourist trade, the largest foreign exchange earner, may be hit by
the international publicity given to recent attacks on tourists (albeit a
handful out of the 750,000 visitors each year).
The only way out, most western diplomats believe, is for Mr Moi to bite the
bullet and call an election: 'Only the president,' said one ambassador, 'can
set the positive tone for which the country cries out.'
 ------------------------------------------
   BALANCE OF PAYMENTS (SDRS M)
 ------------------------------------------
                     1990   1991   1992
 ------------------------------------------
Exports               740    755    860
Imports             1,702  1,618  1,745
Trade deficit         962    863    885
Net services          341    324    380
Net transfers         275    235    230
Current account      -346   -304   -275
Net capital           238    208    230
Overall balance      -108    -96    -45
 ------------------------------------------
1SDR=Dollars 1.36
Source: Kenya government
 ------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920324

