FT923-6538

FT  24 AUG 92 / Bacteria to cleanse water


   By TIM BURT


BACTERIA ARE being encouraged to breed in UK water supplies in an attempt to
remove iron particles and comply with European Community directives on water
quality, Tim Burt writes.
The scheme, the first move away from the chemical cleansing of water
supplies in Britain, has been launched in southern England by Three Valleys,
a subsidiary of Generale des Eaux of France.
The company is breeding bacteria to absorb the iron and manganese that is
common in underground water sources in southern England and East Anglia.
In many areas the iron content exceeds EC limits.
Officials at Three Valleys say the bacteria are 78 per cent more efficient
than chlorine in removing iron. They expect cost savings of more than 10 per
cent at the first plant to use the system, at Roydon in Essex.
Other water companies are understood to be considering the scheme following
warnings from industry executives last week that the cost of complying with
EC directives on water quality could exceed Pounds 60bn.
Independent scientists have also welcomed the scheme. Dr Brent Knox-Holmes,
a research scientist at Sheffield University, said: 'The process of using
naturally occurring organisms to absorb harmful materials has multiple
applications.'
Other water companies have experimented with using bacteria but the Three
Valleys scheme is the first on stream, according to officials at Biomechanic
Environmental, the Midlands company which specialises in biological water
processes.
Three Valleys introduced the bacterial process - pioneered in France - as
part of a Pounds 3.5m investment at Roydon. It has been encouraged by the
bacteria's appetite for iron.
Untreated water in the area has an iron content of about 2 milligrams per
litre. This is reduced to 0.02mg by filtering out the heterotroph and
autotroph bacteria before the water is fed into the domestic supply system.
The EC limit on iron content is 0.2mg per litre.
The company has abandoned water chlorination at Roydon in favour of
bacteria, which it says are more environmentally friendly.
Mr Mike Gerrard of General Water Processes, which installed the system,
admitted the scheme was 'outside what is normal for the UK water industry'
but said there had been inquiries from other companies. 'We will be
tendering for other plants. Anglia Water has similar problems as do other
companies in the south-east,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920824

