FT921-1153

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Formal pacts are scorned by Unionists


   By TIM COONE and RALPH ATKINS


   BELFAST, LONDON


MR JAMES Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP), yesterday
ruled out a formal post-election pact with any of the main UK parties in the
event of a hung parliament.
Speaking in Belfast at the launch of his party's manifesto, he welcomed Mr
John Major's recent statement that there would be no coalition government.
However, his comments did not rule out an informal arrangement between the
UUP and the Tories.
If there was a hung parliament, Mr Molyneaux said, the UUP would take into
account what was said in the Queen's Speech by the new government on policy
issues regarding Northern Ireland, the economy and the Maastricht Treaty.
Mr Molyneaux attacked the Liberal Democrats' ambition of participating in a
coalition government. 'It is unacceptable that a rump of a party could be
dictating the future of the UK,' he said, adding that his party was not
'making any demands.' But he warned that 'whoever forms the government knows
where we stand and will have to take care not to alienate us'.
Mr Paddy Ashdown, Liberal Democrat leader, yesterday ruled out taking part
in any coalition government which relied on the support of Ulster Unionists.
He said it would jeopardise progress the government had made towards peace
in the province.
Mr Jim Nicholson, UUP chairman, said his party wanted devolution for Ulster
and 'would not countenance a devolved structure in Scotland only'. He added:
'We would be happy to be the guinea-pigs for new regional devolution
arrangements - we, after all, have the most experience in this'. He said
that the UUP - which had nine MPs in the last parliament - would support a
Labour administration if its policies were acceptable.
Mr Ken Maginnis, UUP security spokesman, said he may 'make public' a recent
letter he had received from Mr Major. He said it showed a 'much more
positive response' to Unionist demands for security in Ulster to be stepped
up.
The UUP manifesto calls for:
Restoration of the rule of law through the destruction of higher echelons
within terrorist organisations.
A clearly defined union, with the Queen in parliament remaining supreme.
Removal of the Irish Republic's claim to Northern Ireland and an end to the
Anglo-Irish agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920325

