FT923-9700

FT  04 AUG 92 / Technology: Mind over matter - Technically Speaking


   By PAUL TAYLOR


I admit that I felt more than a little sceptical when I met the people who
claim to have developed a 'mind-controlled' computer - even if the research
had been done in the Medical Electronics and Physics department at London's
St Bartholomew's Hospital.
The idea is to operate the computer by relaxing or tensing up at the
appropriate time. Today's keyboard is recognised to be an awkward interface
between man and machine, but this seemed to be taking things a bit too far.
The front door of an average-looking house in Muswell Hill in north London
did nothing to reassure me. Could this really be the right address for
Menorah Software? It was, said Daniel Rogoff, Menorah's director, as he sat
me down on a suitably relaxing sofa, about six feet in front of an ordinary
looking PC clone - minus the keyboard.
I was soon wired up - with two small sensor pads strapped to the fingers of
my right hand. The wires led to a remote-controlled box about the size of a
cigarette-packet which resembled a cordless computer mouse.
The electrodes on my fingers picked up biofeedback signals, in the form of
skin resistance which, I was told, 'has been widely used over the last 80
years as a 'marker' which reflects the state of physical, emotional and
mental arousal of humans and animals.'
Skin resistance is a well-established parameter for measuring psychological
reactivity and was used by, among others, Karl Gustav Jung, the Swiss
psychologist, and has been popularised by its use in 'lie-detector' tests.
The signal, which varies according to how relaxed or stressed the person
feels, is sent back via an infra-red link to a receiver in the PC which
decodes the information and passes it along to the standard serial port of
the computer.
Now for the clever part. Software in the computer processes the incoming
data, displays it on the screen and communicates interactively with the user
through text, symbols, games and animation designed by some of the people
who worked on the film 'Who Framed Rodger Rabbit'.
Press the start button on the sensor control and the fun begins. The 'game'
I played, called Evolve, involved trying to move an animated fish. Relax,
and the fish moves from left to right, turns into a mermaid who climbs out
of the water, metamorphosing once again into a girl who walks up the beach,
sprouts wings, and flies off into space, finally turning into a twinkling
star. At least that's the idea. If, however, you tense up - as I did when
Daniel asked me about deadlines - the whole process goes into reverse.
Other software modules included with the basic Pounds 189 (plus VAT)
RelaxPlus package include 'Mind-controlled Car', a driving game which
requires the user to tense up as well as to relax, and two computerised
interactive tutorials, Biofeedback and Muscular Relaxation. More games,
including 'mind-powered adventure games for children, home healthcare
programs and a range of executive products for the office' are promised.
The least impressive thing about the system is probably the skimpy brochure
which, in the tradition of pure hyperbole, claims that RelaxPlus will 'help
you attain your full potential by teaching your conscious and sub-conscious
mind to communicate'.
Is RelaxPlus more than another wacky computer game? Its developers think so.
The system was devised by two healthcare innovation companies, Ultramind and
Medeci Developments, and is based on research by a medical team at St
Bartholomew's led by Ernesto Korenman in co-operation with Professor Bernard
Watson, professor of medical electronics.
They believe that it may find uses in hospitals, doctors' surgeries, at
home, and even in the office, where it might be used to help stressed
executives 'chill out'.
RelaxPlus is distributed by Menorah Software: 081 803 4269.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920804

