FT922-7275

FT  19 MAY 92 / Bank of England warns against dangers of excessive
regulation


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


THE public's growing expecta-tion that it should be protected against all
loss caused by the failure of a financial institution could hurt the
long-term health of the financial system, Mr Eddie George, deputy governor
of the Bank of England, warned yesterday.
In a speech to the Royal Institute for International Affairs, Mr George said
politicians and investors must understand the trade-off between the benefits
of free, competitive financial markets and the social benefits of
regulation.
Cautioning against the constraint on competition of excessive regulation, he
said minimum standards should not be so demanding that financial
institutions - such as banks, building societies, securities houses and
insurance companies - could never conceivably fail. Nor should people expect
to be fully compensated by the government.
'I have a sense that society is coming to expect an awful lot, including all
the benefits of free markets on the one hand, and increasingly high
standards of protection against a widening range of financial risks on the
other,' he said.
Regulation was not a 'free good' available without limit, but a cost which
the consumer ultimately had to bear. Regulators could not reasonably be
asked to guarantee 100 per cent success in consumer protection.
A situation where depositors and investors felt they were relieved of all
responsibility for counterparty risk would place an intolerable burden on
regulation.
On fraud, Mr George said it was no more possible for regulation to prevent
all abuse of the financial system than it was for the police to eradicate
all crime.
The Bank of England has been criticised for failing to intervene earlier in
the activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Mr George did not say where the line between conflicting objectives should
be drawn. 'There has to be a balance, but that balance is difficult to pin
down,' he said.
Pressure on Bank, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920519

