FT924-11959

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (2): The bull market
was the anomaly, not the crash - Black Monday revisited, A salutary
anniversary / Five years on, the lesson of 1987 is that shares are a
commodity, just like anything else


   By PHILIP COGGAN


THE STOCK market crash of October 19, 1987, was perhaps the day when the
1980s free-market dream turned sour. Thatcherism and Reagonomics had
liberalised the financial sector, and it seemed, for a while, that markets
and economies were destined to head ever upwards.
But then the Dow Jones Index fell 508 points in a day, spreading panic to
the rest of the world's stock markets. It took weeks for markets to settle
down and resume some semblance of 'normal' trading. The optimism of the
mid-1980s has yet to return.
Reaction to the crash went through several phases. At first, memories went
back to the Wall Street crash of 1929, which ushered in the great depression
of the 1930s. World governments lowered interest rates, in an attempt to
prevent a repeat of the slump.
Then, as markets stabilised and economies continued to grow, the crash
seemed merely to prove to many that the financial markets were divorced from
the real economy. The only people who had suffered, it appeared, were the
Porsche-driving Yuppies, and few shed any tears for them.
Now that the world economy has gone through its recent traumas, the crash
can be reassessed. It seems to have been an early sign that the deregulation
of the financial system, and a consequent explosion of bank lending, had
resulted in an unsustainable explosion in asset prices. Share markets,
usually a leading indicator, were among the first to discover the worst;
property markets have since been forced to absorb the same lesson.
When banks lend money, they often use assets as security. When asset prices
are rising substantially, it is good business for both banks and borrowers;
and the speculative bubble is inflated further. When the bubble bursts, and
asset prices fall, the banks' 'security' proves illusory; both banks and
borrowers lose heavily.
The 1987 crash proved the undoing of many over-ambitious entrepreneurs who
had borrowed heavily, using shares in their companies as security; their
business empires depended on market values which the crash destroyed.
In retrospect, it seems obvious that it was the bull market of the early
part of 1987, and not the crash of October, which was the remarkable
occurrence. If, at the start of 1987, you had told an equity investor that
the FT-SE 100 Index would rise by 40 per cent over the next five-and-a-half
years, he would probably have been moderately satisfied with the prospect.
In fact, all that rise was achieved in the first six months of 1987; for the
last five years, share prices have struggled to regain, and pass, their
pre-crash levels.
Sadly, most private investors will not have kept up with the market. Many
will have piled their savings into shares and unit trusts in 1987 (July and
September 1987 were the peak months for unit trust sales). They will have
sold out for a loss, disillusioned, before now. Indeed, the average UK unit
growth unit trust fell 16 per cent (even with income reinvested) in the five
years between August 1987 and August 1992.
The private investor always seems to lose out in a bull market. Indeed, it
is almost the definition of a speculative boom when the average man starts
to get excited about investing. The injection of a sudden extra tranche of
demand pushes prices up to unsustainable levels.
The commodity does not seem to matter: there was once a speculative mania in
tulips. But when the next-door neighbour boasts about the profits he has
made in the equity market, it is time to sell.
Of course, the same principle applies to bear markets. The bottom of the
market occurs just when many private investors have finally sold all their
shares in disgust.
It would be wonderful if FT readers could learn the lessons and become
successful contrarians, selling at the top and buying at the bottom.
However, successful contrarians are, by definition, a minority.
Many investors will have given up on equities for good. Indeed, there is a
significant school of thought which argues that bonds, not shares, will be
the top-performing asset category of the current decade. Bond investors have
traditionally been battered by inflation, but the 1990s could be the era of
low inflation (good for bonds) and low economic growth (bad for equities).
Equity enthusiasts would argue that shares will still beat bonds in a low
inflation environment, and indeed there is some historical evidence to that
effect. But retired investors may well decide that the security of gilts,
and the high real interest rates, currently on offer, are too attractive to
miss.
Those who do not depend on their savings for income need to think twice,
however. The tax system still favours equities over gilts, since the former
provide a significant part of their return in capital gains. Most people do
not come even close to using their annual CGT allowance (Pounds 5,800 in
1992-93), so much of their return on equities will be tax-free.
If you are still brave enough to invest in equities, what lessons can you
learn from the Crash?
Equities are only for the long term.
Those who suffered most from the crash were investors who bought at the
height of the bull market and sold out a few months later, when share prices
had tumbled. To long-term equity investors, the crash was merely a blip in
the progress of their fortunes.
According to the BZW equity-gilt study, Pounds 100 invested in equities in
1945 would have grown, with gross income reinvested, to Pounds 28,513 by end
1991. The same sum invested in gilts would have grown to just Pounds 1,209.
Progress for the equity investor has not always been smooth. The original
Pounds 100 rose in value fairly steadily to reach Pounds 1,284 in 1968,
before falling back to Pounds 1,113, rising again to Pounds 1,968 in 1972
and then plummeting calamitously to just Pounds 677 at end 1974.
So those who bought shares in 1972 would thus have seen their wealth eroded
by two-thirds in two years (and the picture is even worse after inflation
and tax). But the BZW figures show that by end 1977, they would have been
back in profit and by end 1980, their wealth would have more than doubled.
Fundamentals cannot be ignored.
Those buying shares in the summer of 1987 were ignoring the evidence of some
of the most fundamental stock market ratios.
When the market reached its peak in July 1987, the yield on the FT-A
All-Share index fell to 2.85 per cent. That level had only been reached
before in 1972, just before the start of the 1973-74 bear market - which
should have been a warning sign. Since yields have an inverse relationship
to share prices, when yields are historically low, the obvious corollary is
that shares are historically expensive. The average yield on the All-Share
since 1965 has been around 5 per cent.
Another fundamental factor is the relationship between returns on gilts and
those on shares. In the summer of 1987, this ratio was 3.2 - in other words,
you could get three times the income return on gilts that was available on
shares. For much of the late 1970s and 1980s, the ratio had varied between 2
and 2.5.
So, in 1987, gilts looked much more attractive relative to shares than they
had previously; either gilts were cheap or shares were expensive (or a
combination of the two). But investors were carried away with the
exhilaration of the bull market.
Stock market movements are often handy indicators of future economic
problems.
The 1987 Crash does seem to have been a warning of the unsustainability of
the 1980s boom and the debt-related problems we have suffered in the 1990s.
Note also how, in 1990, politicians and most economists were telling us
there would be no recession. But the stock market fell over the year - for
the first time since 1976. Not that the markets are infallible. The stock
market rise in 1991 anticipated an illusory recovery in 1992. So perhaps
markets are better predictors on the downside than on the upside.
Shares are a commodity like anything else.
Why did investors rush into equities in 1987? Because they had risen in
price. Normally, a buying spree by consumers only occurs when prices are
'cheap', such as a January sale. It was strange logic that saw investors buy
shares because they were expensive. Evidently they felt that the normal
rules did not apply to shares. The crash proved otherwise.
In time, the cycle will come round again. Investors will gradually forget
the excesses of the 1987 bull market; soon the crash will have dropped out
of unit and investment trust five-year performance figures. In the 21st
century some time, some new economic consensus will determine that the world
is headed for self-sustaining growth; and thus traders will argue that the
old stock market ratios no longer apply. Yields will fall to new lows and a
new crash will come due.
The Review's regular sequence of pages covering the equity markets,
including Building a Portfolio, begins on page 10

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921023

