FT924-8085

FT  13 NOV 92 / Lamont unveils growth plan: Interest rates cut - Housing
boost / Car sales tax scrapped / Aid for industry


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


MR NORMAN LAMONT, the chancellor, yesterday unveiled plans to pull the
economy out of recession with a 1 percentage point cut in interest rates,
measures to boost housing, investment and construction, and the surprise
abolition of the tax on new car sales.
At the centre of a 'strategy for growth' was a package of time-limited
measures to boost business confidence and activity that should inject an
estimated Pounds 1bn into the economy over the rest of this financial year.
Mr Lamont's keenly awaited measures raised the spirits of a government
demoralised by a series of setbacks and received the qualified approval of
industry and the City. However, the Treasury is forecasting only a very
modest recovery next year.
Delivering an Autumn Statement that brought rousing cheers from Tory
backbenchers in the House of Commons, Mr Lamont fulfilled the government's
promise of keeping public spending within the preset planning total of
Pounds 244.5bn for 1993-94, largely through limiting pay settlements in the
public sector to a maximum of 1.5 per cent.
To aid hard-hit sectors, the government will:
Spend Pounds 750m mainly to buy 20,000 empty houses by the end of this
financial year to reduce the overhang of unsold properties on the housing
market and house families in need.
Allow local authorities to use all capital receipts from council house sales
between today and the end of next year on capital programmes, triggering an
estimated Pounds 1.75bn of capital spending in the next 3 1/2 years.
Provide an extra Pounds 700m of export credit cover for exporters.
Raise for 12 months only the allowances for investment in plant and
machinery, excluding cars, to 40 per cent from 25 per cent. The government
will also introduce a 20 per cent allowance for spending on industrial and
agricultural buildings ordered before October 31 1993.
Abolish the car tax from today, cutting the cost of an average family car by
about Pounds 400. The measure, which will cost about Pounds 100m this year
and Pounds 750m in 1993-94, will be financed by higher motoring taxes next
year.
Due to the recession, government borrowing is now expected to total Pounds
37bn in 1992-93, against Pounds 28bn estimated at the time of the March
Budget. Treasury figures suggest the public sector borrowing requirement
could rise to about Pounds 44bn in 1993-94.
With the Treasury forecasting a 1 per cent contraction in gross domestic
product this year, Mr Lamont announced that the Bank of England would set a
minimum lending rate of 7 per cent today, cutting base rates by 1 point from
8 per cent and lopping 'a further Pounds 1bn off industry's costs'.
The public pay freeze will allow the government to shift an estimated Pounds
1.5bn from current to capital spending projects next year. Mr Lamont
announced that London Underground's Jubilee Line extension would go ahead,
subject to completion of negotiations with the administrators of the Canary
Wharf development, its bankers and London Transport.
The chancellor also announced a relaxation of Treasury rules that could
allow private finance to play a bigger part in infrastructure projects such
as London's east-west Cross Rail project and the Channel tunnel rail link.
The government would 'actively encourage' joint ventures with the private
sector and allow greater use of leasing where it offered good value for
money, the chancellor said. British Rail, for example, will be allowed to
lease Pounds 150m of new rolling stock in the next three years in a move
that will develop the leasing market for rolling stock and so aid plans for
privatisation.
The government's spending plans were held within the targeted total only
after weeks of difficult negotiations between senior cabinet ministers,
headed by Mr Lamont and Mr Michael Portillo, the chief secretary, and the
spending departments.
From 1993-94 onwards, most public spending will be expressed in terms of a
new 'control total' that excludes cyclical expenditures such as unemployment
benefit and income support. Under the new definition, departmental
expenditure will total Pounds 243.8bn in the next financial year, rising to
Pounds 253.6bn in 1994-95 and Pounds 263.3bn in 1995-96. These increases
will represent annual average growth of 1.4 per cent in real terms, compared
with 3.2 per cent a year in the three years to 1992-93.
Mr Lamont said that the government had met in full its commitment to index
pensions and other benefits. Contrary to some expectations, he announced no
increase in National Insurance contributions beyond the usual indexation of
the various bands for employers and employees. However, he said MPs' pay
increases would be brought into line with the rest of the public sector
while ministers will receive no pay rise in the year ahead.
Recession-linked social security costs of nearly Pounds 4bn have left their
mark on departmental spending plans. Defence spending will be Pounds 570m
less in 1993-94 than budgeted a year ago and is set to fall steadily in real
terms in each of the coming financial years. Local government will receive
Pounds 520m less next year. The government's finances in 1993-94 will be
helped by an expected drop of Pounds 1.16bn in payments to the European
Community budget.
Transport Department spending will be cut by Pounds 270m against original
plans. But this largely reflects the switch to leasing finance for rail. The
road programme will be maintained.
In spite of the measures to boost confidence and stimulate economic growth,
the Treasury is taking a cautious view. Its latest forecast, also released
yesterday, projects 1 per cent real growth for the economy next year,
compared with the 1.25 per cent consensus of independent forecasters. The
government expects to have only limited success reversing the decline of
fixed investment in recent years: a sluggish upturn in consumer spending
will be the main spur to growth.
It is expected that inflation, as measured by the retail prices index less
mortgage interest payments, will just hold within the government's 1 to 4
per cent target this year and next. The Treasury forecast expects this
so-called underlying inflation rate will be 3.75 per cent in 12 months to
the end of 1993.
THE MAIN POINTS
Measures to boost growth:
Interest rates cut to 7%
Car sales tax abolished
Councils freed to spend capital receipts
Pounds 700m to buy empty houses for the homeless
Industry investment allowances raised
Extra Pounds 700m for export credit guarantees
Joint private-public sector ventures
Go-ahead for Jubilee Line
Forecasts and spending:
Public sector pay rises limited to 1.5%
PSBR to rise to Pounds 37bn this financial year
Spending target of Pounds 244.5bn met
NI contributions: no increase in rates
1% growth next year; 1% decline in 1992
Autumn Statement: 12-page special, Pages 17-28
Unemployment rises, Page 6
Lex, Page 16
Editorial Comment, Page 19
Samuel Brittan and Joe Rogaly, Page 19
Currencies, Page 37
London stocks, Page 46

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921113

