FT924-11499

FT  26 OCT 92 / Jordan hardens line on Baghdad


   By HUGH CARNEGY and MARK NICHOLSON


   AMMAN


JORDAN appears to be preparing to distance itself in unprecedented terms
from the Iraqi regime of President Saddam Hussein.
Palace and government officials in Amman are expressing alarm over the
deterioration of conditions within Iraq and fear the prospect of the
country's disintegration.
King Hussein is expected later this week to make his first speech since
returning home in late September to a triumphant welcome after cancer
surgery in the US. Diplomats say he may use the occasion to dissociate
himself publicly from the regime in Baghdad, while continuing to express
Jordan's support for the Iraqi people.
The palace and the government fear that Iraq is heading towards
fragmentation. 'We are afraid of the consequences of an Iraqi breakup. It
would be a black hole, sucking all the powers around it into a fracas,' said
Mr Kemal Abu Jabbar, the foreign minister.
Jordan is frustrated that Mr Saddam has ignored its appeals for policies
which could ease Iraq's international isolation, allow increased aid for its
beleaguered population and safeguard its territorial integrity.
Jordan's strong popular support for Baghdad during the Gulf crisis and
official opposition to the war which ousted Iraq from Kuwait were the most
vehement of any Arab country, leading to its own isolation from the US and
its Arab neighbours.
Nevertheless King Hussein, whose domestic popularity has soared since his
illness, may feel he has never been in a stronger political position to
distance himself from Mr Saddam. He has already had meetings in London last
month with Iraqi opposition figures.
A marked public shift away from the Saddam regime would help Jordan's
rehabilitation with the US and in particular Saudi Arabia. On Tuesday, King
Hassan of Morocco is due to visit Jordan after talks in Jeddah. Diplomats
say King Hassan, who is also visiting other countries in the region, is on a
mission to heal Arab rifts caused by the Gulf crisis.
King Hussein has already had a public reconciliation with President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt when he visited Cairo after this month's earthquake. He has
also made it known he wishes to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Places in
Saudi Arabia to give thanks for his recovery during which he would hope to
see King Fahd.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921026

