FT922-13411

FT  11 APR 92 / Gardening: Bring on the cream buns - A growth area that has
little to do with plants: Catering to the millions who visit National Trust
gardens and houses has its problems - and rewards


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


ACROSS the country 126 restaurants and tea shops have just opened for
business. Before November 30, when most close for the winter, they will
serve 4.5m cups of tea and coffee, take Pounds 11m and contribute more than
Pounds 1m towards the upkeep of some of the country's finest buildings.
These restaurants and tea shops make up the increasingly important, and
increasingly professional, catering arm of the National Trust.
Although the 2m members and 10m visitors each year to National Trust
properties tend to associate a visit to a stately home with a stately tea
afterwards, this is a recent association. The trust is unusually vague about
when its catering operation began, but more precise about its very humble
origins.
It all started with the gardener at Hidcote Manor, Gloucestershire, selling
scones from his front parlour in the early 1960s - although the eclairs
offered on the weekly Connoisseurs' Day by the administrator's wife at
Saltram, Devon may have appeared a little earlier.
During the 1970s and 1980s the restaurants developed under David Mellor, a
former tea planter, and their annual turnover reached Pounds 3m by 1985.
Their financial importance to the future well-being of the National Trust
was only fully recognised by Ian Bollom, appointed finance director of the
NT in 1985 and by Anne Roberts, a former buyer with Next, the retail clothes
chain, now managing director of National Trust Enterprises Ltd.
Bollom saw the restaurants as under-appreciated sources of revenue which
would compensate for falling government grants (and falling farm revenues)
and set the restaurants demanding (but commercial) annual growth rates.
Roberts supplied the central organisation and the marketing vision. For the
NT today, catering is such an important financial concern that when its
finance committee meets to consider acquisitions, the potential number of
cups of tea a 'new' house could supply enters the equation.
To put its catering in the hands of a professional, the National Trust has
just appointed Sue Sewell, formerly operations director with contract
caterers Gardner Merchant, as national catering manager. At the age of 29,
Sewell takes charge of 16 regional managers, a seasonal staff of 2,500,
restaurants ranging in location from Souter Lighthouse, Northumbria, to
Mount St Michael off the Cornish coast.
Her job has unique problems and challenges. Unlike most other restaurateurs
she sees no sign of diminishing demand. There are, however, constraints on
where and for how many her restaurants can cater. The NT's sine qua non is
the preservation of its properties for future generations.
The preservation department frowns on the concentration of large numbers of
vistors who can only too easily damage buildings and contents and insists
that the houses have 'days-off' to recover. Private functions, a potential
source of extra revenue, are also discouraged; there is a worry that these
could cause irreparable damage.
The most practical solution to accommodate numbers and preserve the fabric
of the houses has been the conversion of many spare stable blocks and
out-houses into restaurants and tea-rooms. Converting these, however, into
pleasant dining areas and professional kitchens that meet the demands of the
new Food Safety Act requires capital and expertise. In 1992 the NT will
spend Pounds 1.2m on its catering infrastructure.
There are particular personnel problems, too. At certain NT properties, the
gardeners were used to walking into the kitchen for their tea. Under the new
laws they must first put on white hats and shoes.
Visitors to the properties often want to be served lunch and a potted
history of the property from their waitress at the same time. The British
weather can mean tremendous fluctuations in attendance, too; a sudden
downpour sends hundreds scurrying for shelter, tea and refreshments when
they are supposed to be in the grounds.
The challenge and potential for growth is enormous. One of the most
significant factors in the growth of NT catering is that popular tastes are
beginning to follow the trust's policy of home-baked, wholesome food with a
regional bias.
Many visitors, who even five years ago would have settled for a cooked
lunch, now appreciate the healthy virtues of lunch with local cheeses and
salad and the fact that 80 per cent of all the bread, cakes and scones the
trust sells are baked on the premises.
At Souter Lighthouse you can try pan haggerty or singin' hinny, two local
Northumbrian dishes, and there is a huge variety of local cheeses on offer,
from Pant-ys-Gawn goats' cheese at Powys Castle, Wales, to a farmhouse
Wensleydale in Yorkshire. On the Isle of Purbeck in Dorset a Trust tenant
farmer supplies the milk to the local dairy which makes Purbeck Dairy ice
cream for sale at the nearby Corfe Castle.
Sewell hopes to accentuate these regional differences because they so
clearly distinguish the Trust's restaurants. The National Trust, 36 Queen
Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AS. Tel: 071-222-9251.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920411

