FT924-6299

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: Nordic design rooted in British idealism


   By SUSAN MOORE


FEW British household have escaped the influence of Scandinavian design. Why
has it been so consistently popular? One reason is that Nordic design has
its roots in British idealism.
The reform of Swedish design at the beginning of this century was directly
inspired by the romantic socialism of Ruskin and William Morris
(incidentally, a devotee of all things Icelandic) and the example of the
British Arts and Crafts movement. Then the avant-garde Scandinavian
industrial designers of the 1920s and 1930s succeeded in making Modernism
palatable to the British. They tempered the uncompromising functionalism of
Gropius and Le Corbusier with an emphasis on natural materials and a
humanity that placed the needs of the user above aesthetics.
Ironically, their machine-made, mass-produced and therefore relatively
inexpensive artefacts came closer than Morris and his less mechanised
craftsmen to realising the dream of introducing good design to the modest
home.
The extent of this achievement can be seen in a series of seven small
exhibitions which are part of the Tender is the North arts festival in
London. The most thoughtful, at the Design Museum, is called 'Allies in the
same Battle': Scandinavian Design in Britain 1930-1970 (until February 28).
It shows how Victorian fussiness and Edwardian opulence was replaced by a
clean, elegant line, restraint and lightness. Armchairs by the great Finnish
designer Alvar Aalto exploit the flexibility and strength of plywood but
their flowing line and form are agreeably organic. The Swede Bruno
Mathsson's bent laminated wood 'Eva' chair seems almost sculpted to human
shape.
It is hardly surprising that we are still slumping in contemporary versions
of the Dane Kaare Klint's 1933 folding beech and canvas safari or director's
chair, or that various chairs, lightfittings and glassware featured here
have recently been reissued.
During the 1930s contemporary Scandinavian furnishings and applied arts were
available in Britain at such up-market emporia as Heal's. (Alvar Aalto, for
instance, found his largest export market in Britain.) By the 1950s,
Scandinavian Modernism had filtered down to the High Street, largely thanks
to a series of promotional international exhibitions. British industry
responded with its own contemporary designs, produced by 'G' Plan furniture,
Dartington glass and Midwinter pottery (a designer for the last was Terence
Conran).
Those nostalgic for '1950s Contemporary' will relish Marianne Westman's
'Picknick' tableware of 1956, with its cheerful, stylizied vegetables and
herbs, the linear patterns of Heal's textiles and the Ercol two-seater
'Windsor' beech sofa with its faux medieval upholstery. A decade on, the
Swedish furniture industry's development of colourful, inexpensive and
well-made furniture for a younger market, which could be bought flat-packed
to be assembled at home, provided the idea for Habitat.
During the 1960s the traditional relationship between the craft tradition
and Scandinavian industry weakened. Revealingly, Caroline Schlytar's elegant
calligraphic 'h' chair is one of relatively few wooden pieces in New
Directions in Scandinavian Design, also at the Design Museum. Instead, a
heightening of the social conscience of Scandinavian design has resulted in
an emphasis on, for example, CityCom's environmentally friendly and high-tec
PCV - a personal commuter vehicle to you and me.
Just as industry became less interested in the craft ethic, the
artist-craftsmen has become increasingly independent of industry.
Scandinavia, particularly Sweden, boasts a long and distinguished tradition
of studio glass, departments of which have been standard features of
manufacturers such as Orrefors since the early years of the century. Imagine
the shock to the industry when artists began setting up their own studios in
the late 1960s in the wake of Asa Brandt, a graduate of the Royal College of
Art in London responsible for introducing the new spirit of contemporary
glass to Sweden.
Ulla Forsell is one maker who followed Brandt's lead, and her exuberant,
fantastical and humorous confections make for a striking antidote to the
Barbican's drab interiors (until December 13). Here are glasses for serious
drinkers - oversize goblets of brilliant colour, their decoration like paint
squeezed out of a tube, and small, translucent houses that glow like stained
glass windows on a sunny day.
Other displays at the Barbican focus on contemporary jewellery, ceramics and
textiles (much of which, like Forsell's glass, is for sale). Here the
feeling for nature - which has long characterised Scandinavian craft and
design - has become even more pronounced, and related to the brooding
Northern landscape and coastline. Danish jeweller and gemmologist Agnete
Dineson, for example, exploits the natural beauty of pebbles in necklaces.
Jane Reumert hand-builds exquisite, wafer-thin porcelain vessels that take
their inspiration from shells and bird's eggs. Beate Anderson's vessels
share strong, primitive shapes and simple incised geometric decoration.
Natural earth colours are built up using a sequence of dry glazes.
A comparable rough, chalky surface characterises the ceramic ships crafted
by Gunhild Aaberg. These objects bring to mind the harsh, bleak life and
landscape portrayed in Babette's Feast. In similar vein, 'Abandonned Stage',
the large and impressive textile installation by the Finn Kirsti Rantanen,
would make an ideal set for The Flying Dutchman - despite its vibrant blues
and hot reds. She creates monumental hoops, spirals, waves, coils and
boulders of barely restrained, twisted and richly textured yarn, resonant of
the harbour's mounds of rope and rock and heaving shore.
The Scandinavian Design Festival is sponsored by Saab Great Britain and the
'Exclusively Finland' campaign. The Barbican displays are sponsored by
President Office Furniture, Intercraft Designs, Lamco Paper Sales and Varma
Services

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921121

