FT924-6287

FT  21 NOV 92 / Gardening: The comprehensive guide to Jekyll and her genius
 -Arthur Hellyer praises a new book on the designer who made history


   By ARTHUR HELLYER


ONE hundred years ago, Gertrude Jekyll was just emerging on the garden scene
as an impressive new voice on design and, in particular, on the use of
plants in gardens. Today, her influence seems as great as ever. Her books
are available again and new works on her life and her place in garden
history are being produced.
The latest of these, The Gardens of Gertrude Jekyll (Frances Lincoln, Pounds
20), is by Richard Bisgrove, a lecturer at Reading University, near London,
and an expert in garden design. It is the most comprehensive study I have
seen of the garden-making ideas of this astonishingly prolific lady.
Something like 2,000 of her plans are stored in the library of the
University of California at Berkeley, near San Francisco - all, I think,
drawn in black and white. Bisgrove examined the lot and made a selection. He
then re-drew them in colour, partly for clarity but also to imbue himself
with the logic and feeling for form and colour that combine to make the
essential Jekyll style.
There are not, I think, any Jekyll gardens that have survived the years
unaltered by their owners, but a number have been restored and there are
also Jekyll's own photographs to show what some of them looked like.
Because she was associated closely with William Robinson, a gardening writer
and editor for whom she worked extensively, it has been assumed that the two
of them had similar ideas about garden-making, but this is not really so.
Her vision was wider than his and she never ruled out formality or the use
of temporary bedding-out plants to maintain colour in the garden.
Some of her best planting schemes are for the gardens which the architect
Sir Edwin Lutyens was accustomed to design for the many fine houses he
planned, most especially during the early years of the century. Most of
these gardens were essentially formal in design.
In this book, for the sake of clarity, the gardens have been divided into
fairly arbitrary groups, which have been given chapter headings. There is
one on garden-making as a whole; this looks especially at Jekyll's painterly
vision, for she was also an accomplished artist. Weak eyesight was one
reason she gave this up.
A second chapter, which includes several gardens in America, is used to
reveal the great diversity of her styles. There is no such thing as a single
simple Jekyll garden but always a feeling for the special needs of the site
in question.
A third chapter includes the recently restored garden of the Manor House,
Upton Grey, Hampshire, and four other gardens to highlight Jekyll's use of
plant associations. I saw the Manor House this past summer and found it
deeply interesting for its division into two sections that are entirely
different in manner.
On one side of the house, there is a garden of flowing lines and a
Robinsonian type of natural garden-making. On the other is a much more
regular design, with high terrace retaining walls planted freely and with
careful colour contrasts. There is also a long pergola as a central feature.
This garden is open to the public occasionally for charity and so can be
used as a living guide to two of Miss Jekyll's methods of garden-making, for
here she was on her own without guidance from Lutyens or anyone else.
There is a chapter on formal gardens which includes Hestercombe, a very fine
Lutyens garden. It has been restored faithfully by the Somersetshire fire
brigade, which uses the place as its headquarters. The massive
stone-pillared pergola here is very typical of the Lutyens-Jekyll
partnership. The garden is full of delightful detail including an entirely
formal parterre of beds in the centre, planted with bergenias and other
Jekyll favourite perennials.
Other chapters deal with Shrubs, Wild Gardens, Steps and Walls, Sun and
Shade and with Jekyll's favourite plants. In all of these, Bisgrove proves
himself a perceptive guide.
This is a book that can be read cover to cover - but one to which people
will refer time and again over the years.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921121

