FT921-11726

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (6): Curbs on funding emerge -
Defence procurement


   By DAVID WHITE


BY the time of the war against Iraq a year ago, Saudi Arabia had become the
world's biggest importer of arms.
The crisis over Kuwait could only reinforce its arms-buying ambitions. To
Saudi Arabia and the other countries of the Gulf Co-operation Council the
war brought home a hard reality: that however much they had already spent on
defence, they still could not match the threat.
However, the conflict has not given way to the spectacular weapons buying
spree that some had expected. Several changes have taken place affecting the
country's arms supply relationships.
One is the emergence of funding constraints. A report on the arms trade by
the US Congress's Office of Technology Assessment last year spoke of the
Saudi Arabia's' 'virtually unlimited amounts of cash'. But, after payment of
its own and the allies' war bills and its excursion into government
borrowing, funds are not as unlimited as they were.
Secondly, the Saudi authorities have clearly given priority to the expansion
and improvement of base installations including hardened shelters to receive
aircraft in the event of a renewed crisis. The availability of large modern
harbour and airfield facilities was crucial to the ability of the US and
other allies to assemble forces after Kuwait was invaded.
At same time, western defence companies, having enjoyed only a short-lived
boost from the war itself, are facing sharp cutbacks in their domestic
markets after the end of the Cold War in Europe. Suppliers are competing
desperately against each other for export business. The Saudi market is all
the more important to them now that Iraq is completely excluded as a
customer. Saudi Arabia is also increasingly seen by suppliers as an
essential first foothold for supplies elsewhere in the region.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI),
Saudi Arabia was second only to India and Japan as a customer for big
conventional weapons in the period from 1986 to 1990. In the last year of
that period it overtook both those countries to become the biggest single
customer, with imports, calculated at constant 1985 prices, of Dollars
2.55bn. Over the five years its total purchases of Dollars 10.8bn (still at
1985 prices) were bigger than Iraq's and more than a tenth of arms purchases
by the developing world.
The modernisation of Saudi defences began in earnest during the post-1973
oil boom and created a field for all-out competition between the US, Britain
and France.
France secured its place in the early 1980s with a naval deal including four
frigates and with sales of the Shahine, a version of the Crotale
anti-aircraft missile mounted on tanks. The French have since kept a foot in
the door with sales including coastal defence helicopters and, shortly
before the war, a further FFr3bn (Dollars 550m) worth of air-defence
missiles.
In the mid-1980s, Saudi Arabia was poised to purchase French Mirage 2000
interceptor fighters to complement additional supplies of F-15 combat jets
it was seeking from the US. But US unwillingness to allow it to have the
long-range strike version of the F-15 prompted it to switch to the
Anglo-German-Italian Tornado instead, to fulfil both interceptor and
ground-attack roles. Around that choice was built the wider Anglo-Saudi Al
Yamamah agreement, paid for through the revenue from a dedicated share of
Saudi Arabia's crude oil output.
The initial deal, which also included trainer aircraft and support, was
bolstered by another framework agreement in 1988, the fruits of which - in
terms of equipment supplies - are still awaited. The deal has a potential
value of some Dollars 40bn, but the funding system has proved to be an
obstacle, making it difficult to accumulate a lump sum sufficient to cover
new contract for supplies on the Saudi 'wish list'. This list has included
some 48 more Tornado strike aircraft, about 60 more Hawk jet trainers, six
minehunters and 88 armed helicopters to be made under US licence, as well as
a big new air base at Al Sulayyil, 300 miles south of Riyadh, and other
infrastructure projects.
So far, however, the only military equipment items ordered under the second
phase of the deal have been three of the minehunters, of which one has
already been delivered. How much of the remainder the Saudis will buy, and
when, has been uncertain. Confidence in the Tornado sale, which had been
called into question before the war, was bolstered by the aircraft's
performance and British Aerospace's support during the campaign against
Iraq. But Tornado production in the UK is being run down and re-starting it
threatens to be costly.
The Saudi authorities are expected to keep seeking a diversity of sources
because of continuing restraints on their access to some US weapons. A
request for 72 more F-15 jets, including the two-seat F-15E strike version
denied to them in 1985, is being held up. McDonnell Douglas, the
manufacturer, needs the order to keep its F-15 production line at St Louis
open beyond 1994. Saudi Arabia is the only Middle East country other than
Israel fo possess the F-15. Pressure from the pro-Israeli lobby in Congress
led to a limit of 60 aircraft, but this was lifted after the invasion of
Kuwait in 1990 when 24 were supplied from the US Air Force inventory.
Deliveries of another 12 new aircraft already on order are progressing.
US contracts in the 1980s also included Awacs early-warning aircraft and
refuelling tankers, and a sophisticated command and control system under the
Peace Shield programme.
After complaining of delays in this project, which involves setting up six
underground command centres, the Saudis cancelled the bulk of Boeing's
Dollars 1bn contract just before the outbreak of hostilities against Iraq,
and subsequently brought in Hughes, its rival, instead.
A series of package deals were agreed with the US in 1990, including, before
the invasion of Kuwait, 315 of the latest M1A2 Abrams tanks and, after the
invasion, emergency supplies from US stocks and more than Dollars 7bn of new
equipment including more Abrams tanks, thousands of wheeled vehicles,
Patriot air-defence missile batteries, multiple-launch rockets, Apache
helicopters, transport and tanker aircraft. But a second stage to this deal,
which would have brought the total value to more than Dollars 20bn, was
suspended by Washington.
General Dynamics is hoping to sell a further 235 M1A2 Abrams to the Saudis,
bringing its total sales there to 700. Production of the tank was to have
been halted next April as a result of US defence budget cuts. Saudi orders
so far are enough to keep it going for another three years. The additional
order, the company says, depends on 'evolving national policy towards the
Middle East.'
Vickers of the UK is competing to meet the same Saudi requirement with its
new Challenger 2, being promoted outside the framework of the Al Yamamah
agreement. Saudi officials attended UK trials of the tank in the autumn and
hot-weather trials are planned in Saudi Arabia this summer. If Vickers'
hopes materialise, the company would be producing significantly more of its
new tanks for the Saudis than for the British army.

The Financial Times


London Page IV Photograph Saudi troops head for Kuwait during the Gulf war.
Saudi Arabia was second only to India and Japan as a customer for big
conventional weapons in the period 1986-90 (Omitted).

920130

