FT921-398

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (20): The
great, the good and the not so lucky - Tom Lynch takes a roll call of top
Names


   By TOM LYNCH


THE SIGHT of public figures losing their shirts adds spice to the
intermittent stories about losses at Lloyd's.
The man in the Clapham bus cares little that people he has never heard of
are in a spot of bother because of long-tail liability losses arising from
asbestosis claims. But when one of them turns out to be a former prime
minister - Mr Edward Heath - the complex and abstruse affairs of Lloyd's can
become the subject of lounge bar speculation.
It is usually when losses mount that the identity of Names is revealed, as
they join pressure groups seeking redress or taking legal action. Lloyd's
itself does not name Names, arguing that their identity is a private matter,
and should not be disclosed without their owners' knowledge.
So when it becomes known that a syndicate has struck losses, attention is
focused on the famous.
Their names used to add a touch of sparkle to Lloyd's. When it was known as
an aloof, remote, solid, stuffy institution, reeking of leather armchairs,
port and four-hour lunches, the occasional enrolment of a show business
personality, especially one from a humble background, was a sign that anyone
could make it into one of the world's most exclusive and moneyed clubs.
In those days, the fact that the super-rich and aristocracy were part of
Lloyd's was used in a low-key way to persuade sceptical Americans that
Lloyd's membership had its advantages. 'Solid as a rock, old boy. Good
fellows, salt of the earth. Not supposed to say, but titled chaps, Duke of
Norfolk, that sort of thing, you know. Can't go wrong.'
For many of the rich and famous, as for those who were merely rich, the
annual cheque kept dropping through the door.
But, also like other Names, they were not immune to heavy underwriting
losses, as the market was hit in the late 1980s by catastrophe and long-tail
liability losses.
Even the blue-blooded were not immune - the Duke of Norfolk appears on the
1989 list of Names on the Wellington 406 and 448 syndicates, which were hit
in the 1988 underwriting year by long-tail liabilities; the 1989 position is
not yet clear.
In the case of Outhwaite, the famous were represented among about 1,000
members of Outhwaite syndicate 317/661 in the 1982 year who reached a Pounds
116m out-of court settlement in February of their legal action to recover
Pounds 200m losses. Mr Heath was an Outhwaite Name, along with the actress
Susan Hampshire, Rocco Forte, Tony Jacklin and, before anyone suspected the
scale of his misdemeanours, the late Robert Maxwell.
Cynics say Lloyd's is ideally suited to sportsmen and women, to showbusiness
stars, to politicians and to entrepreneurs. They say that people who build
up their wealth through taking risks understand that there are risks
involved in being a Name at Lloyd's.
It is not clear how a distinguished career on the stage, the golf course or
the green leather benches of the Commons enhances an individual's perception
of financial risk.
The old boy network sometimes became the new boy network in the 1980s, as
Lloyd's sought to expand capacity and brought in some of the newly
prominent. Critics say this was storing up trouble, since some of the newly
prominent were only moderately well off, and lacked the wealth to cushion
them against a really bad couple of years.
One such case related to Lime Street Underwriting Agencies, the Lloyd's
members' agency which is now in liquidation.
Some of the 450 or so Names recruited to Lime Street were placed in some of
the syndicates with the worst losses in recent years - many were enrolled on
catastrophe reinsurance syndicates managed by agencies such as Feltrim,
Gooda Walker, Rose Thomson Young and Devonshire. Famous or not, Lloyd's has
refused to inform the Names whether it is conducting an investigation. It
says such matters are confidential.
Mr Robin Kingsley, who founded Lime Street, was, like his father, a tennis
player and a member of the All England Lawn Tennis Club at Wimbledon. He
persuaded tennis players to join, including Mark Cox and Buster Mottram.
But it was not just the new showbusiness and sport stars who were among the
big losers at Lloyd's in recent years. The 1989 list of Names on the
Wellington syndicates has a good flavour of Who's Who and Burke's Peerage
about it - perhaps the most prominent being Prince Michael of Kent.
There are at least two Dukes - Norfolk and Atholl, the latter a dangerous
man to upset, being the only individual in Britain allowed to keep a private
army.
The roll call goes on through a dozen or so earls, 20 or so assorted
viscounts, viscountesses, countesses, marquesses and marchionesses and
upwards of 30 Lords. The roll call of lawyers includes a number of judges.
The peers include members or former members of the government, like Lord
Denham, who, as Chief Whip in the Lords in 1988, was responsible for turning
out backwoods Conservative Lords from boardrooms and country houses to
squash a backbench revolt and ensure a 134-vote government majority on the
poll tax.
From the other end of the palace of Westminster, the Wellington list
includes a dozen or so MPs, including Sir Nicholas Lyell, the solicitor
general. and a government Whip, Mr Nick Baker. All are Conservatives.
From the diplomatic world there is Sir Ewen Fergusson, Ambassador to Paris,
and from sport there is John Francombe, the jockey.
The Wellington syndicates are among a number which have come to grief in
recent years, and blue blood and stardom have proved no protection.
Like Wellington, the Poland 105 and 108 syndicates suffered from long-tail
liabilities. On the 1989 list of members of 108 was Dame Shirley Porter, the
steely leader of Westminster Council, while John Julius (Viscount) Norwich
and Sir Freddie Laker are listed in the same year on Gooda Walker 290, hit
by catastrophe losses. On another Gooda Walker loss-maker, 299, is listed Mr
Edward de Bono, the lateral thinker.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920330

