FT923-6530

FT  24 AUG 92 / Management: Grandmother's footsteps in Europe - Christopher
Lorenz urges slow cross-border integration


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


Two years ago IBM, with its eye very much on the need for cross-border
integration ahead of 1993, unveiled a far-reaching European reorganisation.
The strategy of the computer giant's move was eminently sensible: in
essence, it consisted of a decentralisation around Europe of most of the
regional responsibilities long exercised by IBM Europe's headquarters in
Paris. But, from the very start, the precise pattern of the restructuring
looked too neat and textbookish to be true.
In a set of patent political compromises, the HQ's regional responsibilities
were parcelled out to the general managers of the four largest country
organisations. With a new European title to his name, each took charge of
strategy for one or two types of product or system, and one or two customer
sectors. The chairman of IBM Germany gained mainframe computers plus
manufacturing industry; his French counterpart got telecommunications,
'professional and technical services' (including maintenance and systems
integration), software and IBM's internal computing systems; Italy took over
mid-range machines, scientific computers and government and the public
sector; while the boss of IBM UK took charge of personal computers and
'Unix' open systems products, as well as the banking and financial services
sector.
Sure enough, within a year two aspects of the neat reorganisation had to be
reversed in rather embarrassing circumstances because they had proved
inappropriate. First, responsibility for PCs was transferred back from the
UK to IBM Europe; then the latter also reassumed professional and technical
services from the French organisation. The principle of some businesses
being run centrally was thereby reasserted.
To most IBM insiders, this episode pales into insignificance compared with
last summer's much more dramatic reorganisation of IBM worldwide into a
number of arm's length product/systems businesses and marketing/service
units. But to the outside world it typifies the dangers of trying to create
every aspect of a pan-European organisation too rapidly and too neatly.
The risks of doing so are underlined by four McKinsey consultants - though
without any reference to IBM - in an article called 'Creating European
organisations that work', published in the latest issue of the McKinsey
Quarterly*.
Experience shows, say the consultants, that the best way to Europeanise is
to shift power gradually (a tactic which IBM had been following until 1990).
Most successful efforts focus initially on only a few 'lead functions',
where the need is most apparent and urgent and where good early results can
cause a ripple effect which gradually overcomes nationalistic attitudes and
practices.
Procter & Gamble, the American consumer goods group, did this by introducing
a 'Eurobrand' concept to bring national product managers together in a task
force to thrash out common brand requirements. In another food company, the
key lever was a manufacturing task force, and a freight company set up a
pricing task force.
But only when such groups get down to nuts-and-bolts practicalities does
commitment to a common European vision - and actual co-ordination  - really
start to develop, say the consultants. In addition to its main objective,
the pricing task force also uncovered a need for better cross-functional
co-ordination on such issues as sales management, product labelling and
packaging, and distribution.
When it actually comes to realigning the power structure 'short cuts do not
work', warns the McKinsey team. Simply imposing a functional 'head of
Europe' frequently proves ineffective because such people do not have power
over - and respect from - the various national operations.
When a German company appointed a European operations manager, it left
control of production in the hands of its product managers in Germany. So
sales and marketing companies elsewhere in Europe found they were better off
ignoring the new Euro-manager and continuing to deal direct with Germany.
One obvious approach, as at IBM, is to give the managers most threatened by
prospective changes part of the responsibility for planning and executing
them.
* 1992 No 2. By Norman Blackwell, Jean-Pierre Bizet, Peter Child, and David
Hensley.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920824

