FT921-413

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (2): The task
force proposals


   THE Rowland task force recommendations


all of which have been accepted by the Lloyd's Council - include both short
term and long-term measures. A number of working groups are now examining
how a number of changes can be implemented. Among the most important:
The establishment of a compulsory stop loss scheme, financed by a levy on
Names, which would cap all losses over a four year period at a level
equivalent to their premium limits. A Name underwriting Pounds 500,000, for
example, would have all losses above Pounds 500,000 - incurred over a four
year period - paid from the fund. Liability could return to the individual
if the fund is exhausted, although the task force saw this as happening only
if the market as a whole were collapsing.
The setting-up of members' agents pooling arrangements, or Mapas, to allow
agents to pool all the syndicate participations of the Names whose affairs
they handle, to spread risks and rewards more evenly. The agent would pool
all portfolios and allocate units in the pool to Names, constructing a kind
of unit trust, as distinct from a separate portfolio of participations on
separate syndicates for each Name.
New measures to deal with open years - which syndicate managers are unable
to close because of uncertainty over the size of future claims usually
arising from liability business, in which claism can arise many years aftert
the inception of policies. CentreWrite, the company created by Lloyd's in
July last year, to reinsure open years should shift its focus from
syndicates to individual Names.
Syndicates should be allowed to increase the business they write by making
more use of reinsurance from outside the market and should also be
encouraged to co-insure risks with companies via consortium arrangements.
Names should be given rights akin to those enjoyed by shareholders,
including the rights to: continue participation in a syndicate, replace
their managing agents, approve major syndicate transactions, access
syndicate information and hold regular meetings of their syndicates.
In the longer term three important proposals would require legislative
changes: the introduction of limited-liability capital, the creation of a
secondary market for syndicate participation and the abolition of the rule
obliging Lloyd's brokers to sell any majority interests in managing agents.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920330

