FT924-6290

FT  21 NOV 92 / Travel: Mobbed by many monks - Snapshot / Tibet


   By SARAH ANDERSON


WHEN I flew into Lhasa's airport the Chinese at the passport check barked at
me to take off my sun-glasses. Knowing that you have done nothing wrong is
no solace when confronted by Chinese officialdom. With a shaking hand I
removed my glasses and was subjected to some harsh stares before being
allowed to pass.
Since the Chinese invaded Tibet in 1959 they have tried to wipe out Tibetan
culture. They call Tibet the 'Treasure House,' and have denuded its forests
and strip-mined its land. It is hard to know who the Chinese think they are
fooling with their attempts to whitewash their horrific deeds. There is now
a massive programme of reconstruction in Lhasa: temples are being rebuilt
and young Tibetans are being encouraged to become monks.
But this is only for the tourists. The Chinese need foreign currency and
they have realised that foreigners will only go to Tibet if monasteries and
monks are on the itinerary.
Arriving by aircraft prepares you for Tibet's bleak but beautiful landscape
of arid brown mountains and burning azure lakes, but not for the razor-thin
air.
I gasped my way on to the bus, but was soon transfixed by everything we
passed. Yaks are the only mammals, apart from man, which can live at high
altitudes for extended periods, and as we drove the 90 kilometres into
Lhasa, I saw yak dung used for houses, yak skin for boats, and yaks sporting
red ribbons working in the barley fields.
Chinese government policy ensures that there are now more Chinese in Lhasa
than there are Tibetans, which perhaps explains why the military presence,
although obvious, was low key; unfortunately, it takes little for the army
to start shooting innocent civilians.
Why should the peace-loving Buddhist Tibetans be subjected to continual
Chinese bombardment? This was the question which nagged me during my short
stay.
This was nowhere more perplexing than in the grubby face of a child, who,
bundled up on its mother's back, had come on a pilgrimage from the far
reaches of Tibet and was being taken round the Drepung Monastery to worship
and light butter lamps at each of the many different shrines. What kind of
future could this child expect?
Packs of wild dogs guard the entrance to Drepung. It is said that the dogs
are reincarnations of monks, something which our Tibetan guide dismissed as
myth, but certainly each monastery has many fewer monks than in the past.
Drepung now has 400 monks against the original 10,000.
The lined faces of the elderly monks have experienced so much hardship, yet
they remain proud and eager to show off their monastery. I was mobbed by
about 30 of the younger monks. Inside pilgrims leave white scarves and money
and prostrate themselves before the shrines.
Of the 1,000 rooms in the Potala, I was allowed to visit only six. The
Potala was used as the winter palace by the Dalai Lamas, and - contrary to
what I had been told - there were many photographs of the present Dalai Lama
both here and throughout Lhasa.
The Jokhang Temple, in the heart of town, was almost destroyed in the
Cultural Revolution. It is being thoroughly restored, but if the Chinese
think they are restoring it only as a museum to attract foreigners, they are
mistaken. I was moved by the religious feelings of the pilgrims, who often
spend months travelling to Lhasa and who fill the courtyard with their
prostrate bodies. Prayer is a quietly powerful act of resistance; how it
must madden the Chinese to have it around them all the time.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

921121

