FT924-1053

FT  19 DEC 92 / How to Spend It: New games win as old favourites go by the
board - Peter Berlin tests this season's new and repackaged ideas and judges
how the die is cast for them


   By PETER BERLIN


The Reverend Green is dead. His place among the murder suspects in the
Cluedo set is to be taken by a businessman. Green's fans jammed the
switchboard of the game's UK licensee when the news leaked out this week.
But when you unwrap the family Christmas game this year, you will find that
he is not the only victim of changing fashion.
This year's seasonal releases include new versions of those old favourites,
Monopoly and Trivial Pursuit. They are joined by, among others, a growing
number which hark back to the British tradition of parlour games.
The tried and trusted Christmas games are both repackaged this Christmas.
There is a Trivial Pursuit - The Annual Edition, to celebrate the game's
tenth birthday, containing questions culled from events of the last year.
There is no board. Instead, there is the usual pie and a die with coloured
dots for categories. This keeps the price down but removes the last vestiges
of tactics.
Since it is rarely possible to deduce the answers to Pursuit questions, this
is essentially a game of luck. Furthermore, like all trivia games, it
favours adults who have had more time to accumulate the debris of modern
society more than children and, in this version, adults who are obsessed
with Madonna most of all. There are also three different versions of the
full set with board (Pounds 43), a travel version, additional specialist
boxes of question cards and sets of CD and cassette questions (Pounds 15).
In Euromonopoly (Pounds 29.95), the EC version for 1993, the dark blue
properties (the most expensive) are, unsurprisingly, German: Berlin's
Kurfurstendam and the Konigsallee. Strangely, the two cheap brown ones are
Danish. The currency is Ecus, the playing pieces are the Eiffel Tower, the
Tower of Pisa, and so on. But the game is played exactly the same way. It is
a pretty tackily made version of the old favourite, but you can always buy
Standard Monopoly (Pounds 15), Deluxe Monopoly (Pounds 25) or Pocket
Monopoly (Pounds 9) instead.
The latest Trivial Pursuit may have dropped the board but imitations crop up
everywhere. Both Pictionary (Pounds 32.95) and Articulate (Pounds 24.95)
come with boxes of question cards and boards divided into coloured segments.
Both also owe a large debt to charades.
At least with Outburst (Pounds 33.95), the board is black and white. All
three games contain little plastic egg-timers which break easily. Articulate
is the least-well made and accordingly the least expensive.
All three are really rather fun. They fit into the booming category of rowdy
team games. In Pictionary, players must communicate words to team-mates with
drawings, in Articulate they must explain as many words as quickly as
possible and in Outburst, teams must name as many words in a category as
quickly as possible.
Pictionary is not for those sensitive about their art. Drawings are subject
to ridicule, but even bad drawings can be communicative. It is amazing what
stick men can do.
Articulate is, for the most part, a test of quick wits and word-power but a
team can run aground on questions of general knowledge - if you do not know
what the Maldives are, you cannot explain them to team mates.
There are other, inferior, variations on this theme. Pazzazz, which is not a
team game, comes with what looks like a set of clockwork dentures instead of
an eggtimer. This flops over at the end of a player's timed turn of naming
words in a category. If you do not want a set of jumping teeth, you
certainly will not want the whirring, plastic clapperboard which comes with
Guesstures (Pounds 33.95), a reworking of charades. Save your money and play
the original.
One cheeky repackaging of an old parlour game that is worth the money is Ex
Libris (Pounds 10.95). It contains a well-disguised set of rules and a pack
of cards. These offer plot synopses of novels. Players, if they do not know
the real first or last lines, write down versions of their own devising and
then try to guess the right one.
Once you have used the entire pack, you can start working your way through
paperbacks on your shelves. It is immense fun. Even the best-read will be
surprised at how little they remember, while the least bookish can show a
surprising literary flair.
Apart from the many repackagings of Monopoly and Cluedo (Pounds 14.95)
old-fashioned board games are rare. The biggest British games manufacturers
are obsessed with jumping teeth and do not believe old-fashioned games will
sell to the Nintendo generation.
The worthwhile exceptions include Fair Means or Foul (Pounds 17) from
Germany, where such games still sell well. It takes antique collecting as
its metaphor, so it is full of rather pretty playing cards showing antiques
and modern works of art. Players collect sets of art by outbidding opponents
or stealing from them. But if you spend too much time building a collection
rather than moving your piece, you might be too far behind at the end.
This is a nicely designed, testing and infuriating game which can occupy a
couple of nerve-wracking hours in comparative quiet and allow children a
good chance of beating their parents. The same goes for Hare and Tortoise
(Pounds 17), a British game, in which a gift for mental arithmetic is
helpful but not essential as you try to calculate how many carrots your
rabbit needs to hop round the course.
One way games companies are trying to compete with the video and computer
games is by putting games on video tape. The most heavily advertised is
Atmosfear (Pounds 32.95), a board game which has the advantage of taking
exactly the 60 minutes the tape lasts. Players race around a graveyard
collecting six keys by luck rather than skill. Every so often, an
over-the-top actor playing 'the gatekeeper' snarls instructions from the
screen. As the game goes on, he grows more over-the-top, his make-up
thickens and his growls become louder and more frequent. Good fun for
teenage children and their friends following the Christmas Eve visit to the
pub after which it will probably be forgotten.
Another video game is 221b Baker Street. The video offers badly-acted but
entertainingly scripted little snippets of plot but is little more than a
decoration of the board game of the same name (Pounds 15) - a sophisticated
variation on Cluedo. Fans of the great detective might also enjoy the rather
quirky card game Sherlock Holmes (Pounds 8.95) which contains elements of
the old card game Hearts. It is most entertaining if players announce plot
developments in a Dr Watson voice as they play each card.
The obsession with detectives has carried over into the ultimate
dinner-party game: the murder evening. Players take the parts of suspects in
a murder and play out their roles over a meal. The leaders in this field are
the How to Host a Murder (Pounds 23) series. The box includes a cast list,
so you can invite the most suitable of your friends for each role.,
You begin the evening with a tape in which you are told by a policeman that
you are suspects in a murder and may not leave. The players spend the meal
wheedling secrets out of each other. Each has a booklet of information their
character knows, after each course they turn the page to find out more,
after dessert they turn to the solution.
It can make for an entertaining evening if everyone enters into the spirit,
but it can be trying for the host, running in and out with food and missing
clues. One strange aspect of some of the games is that the murderer does not
know he or she has done it until the last turn (or course).
The How To games run through the usual gamut of Agatha Christie country
houses and train journeys.
For those with a large wardrobe of Lycra tunics and nylon slacks, there is a
Star Trek mystery, but you can only play each mystery once. It is also
impossible to make real conversation while you are playing a game - perhaps
that makes it more attractive for a family Christmas.
Retail prices of games vary greatly. Those quoted are from Harrods, for
games it stocks, or specialist shops Just Games and Esdevium Games. Both of
these offer mail order; Esdevium Games, 6 Wellington St, Aldershot, Hants,
GU11 1DZ, tel: 0252- 311443; Just Games, 71 Brewer St, London W1R, 3FB, tel:
071-734-6124.

The Financial Times


London Page XIX

921219

