FT923-6568

FT  24 AUG 92 / The European Market: Szczecin holds key to cross-border
regional renaissance - Germans and Poles look to the port to power
development


   By ANDREW FISHER


IN Poland they call it Szczecin, one of the country's largest ports and a
gateway to the Baltic, Scandinavia and the rest of northern Europe.
But to the Germans it is still Stettin, once sold by Sweden to Prussia and
then taken from Germany after the second world war. The city of 411,000
people lies at the mouth of the River Oder, which forms part of the border
separating the two countries.
Szczecin, with its grand 19th century avenues and parks, suffered severe
damage during the war, much now repaired. Today it is at the centre of
tentative moves towards economic and political co-operation that hold out
the hope of renewed prosperity for the region of Pomerania spanning both
countries.
At present that hope is a long way from realisation. But the will is there
on both sides since the fall of the Berlin Wall opened up a new era for the
region's 1.5m inhabitants.
On the east German side there is an eagerness to reach across the Oder and
develop Pomerania as an economically viable cross-border region, with
Szczecin as its natural centre. 'We've got to start rebuilding links with
Poland now,' says Mr Rainer Haedrich, head of the local council in Pasewalk,
a small German town at the far eastern edge of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, the
agricultural state next to Poland. 'We must take that step.'
The Poles are keen, since the prospect of Szczecin being able to benefit
again from its former hinterland is attractive. There is also the prospect
of EC funds under a programme for border regions. Arthur D. Little, the US
consultancy advising the German side, suggests comparisons with the
maquiladora system of labour division in the border free-trade zone between
the US and Mexico. Since 1960 about 2,000 US companies have created half a
million jobs on the Mexican side.
But before anything like this can happen, considerable work and money will
be required on both sides. The main prospects for increased co-operation are
in tourism - the largely enclosed bay area north of Szczecin is especially
attractive for yacht owners - as well as construction, transport, food
processing and furniture. German companies already buy cheap Polish timber,
upholstery and building materials.
But while eyeing the possibilities of broader co-operation, both sides have
more immediate problems. As in the rest of east Germany, the regions of
Pasewalk and neighbouring Ueckermunde are struggling to adjust to the free
market. The area was over-farmed and over-fertilised in the interests of
East German self-sufficiency. Most of the agricultural jobs are now
disappearing.
The big railway depot near Pasewalk is also reducing its operations. The
extensive maintenance activities that supported agriculture are being run
down and some of Ueckermunde's industry has been privatised. Unemployment is
high.
Against this background it is hardly surprising that many Germans in the
region are hopeful of renaissance in Szczecin and its nearby sister port of
Swinoujscie (Swinemunde), which handles bigger ships. The Poles, too, are
keen to develop business, seeing their port complex as a natural link with
Berlin.
'We are more favourably placed than Rostock (the east German port city
further east) to serve the Berlin area,' says Mr Jan Grenke, Szczecin port's
chief technologist. 'Historically, Szczecin was the main port for Berlin.'
It was also part of the pre-war route between Scandinavia and Prague.
There is potential for growth. Some German companies are interested in using
Szczecin and Swinoujscie to ship timber, chemicals, building materials, and
other goods in and out of Germany. Szczecin also wants to set up a
customs-free zone.
In recent years the two ports, employing nearly 5,000 people, have operated
at well below capacity, mainly because of the drop in Polish coal mining and
the loss of some markets. To develop new business, the port wants to build a
multi-purpose terminal in Szczecin for container and roll-on/roll-off
vessels.
Swinoujscie also needs new handling and storage facilities. Since the ports
do not have the money, they are looking for German, Scandinavian, and other
partners. 'We have the land, but because of our economic situation we have
no funds,' Mr Grenke laments.
Language is one difficulty, since the Poles - at least, the younger ones -
prefer to speak English, which was hardly taught in the old East Germany.
But Polish is now starting to be taught on the east German side.
The east Germans also plan business parks to attract investment in light
industry and services. In Ueckermunde a DM60m (Pounds 21.2m) marine harbour
is being developed to attract prosperous Berliners who want to sail in the
attractive Oder bay straddling the border. Pasewalk has hopes it can attract
investment to build a DM1bn cement complex on the site of a limestone
deposit.
For the east Germans the possibility of a revived Pomeranian region with its
heart in Szczecin makes the present economic uncertainties easier to bear.
Says Mr Peter Heise, head of Pasewalk's economic development department,
hopefully: 'We want to give this region, which is away from the main centres
of economic development, a better image in the outside world.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920824

