FT924-6426

FT  21 NOV 92 / Nato to enforce Yugoslav embargo: Ships suspected of
violating UN trade ban may be stopped and searched


   By LAURA SILBER


NATO agreed yesterday to enforce the United Nations Yugoslav trade embargo,
giving its ships in the Adriatic Sea power to stop and search ships
suspected of violating the ban, Nato sources said yesterday.
The decision by Nato coincided with a similar one by the Western European
Union (WEU) defence grouping, which announced in Rome that it had ordered a
full naval blockade in the Adriatic to tighten the economic noose around the
rump remainder of Yugoslavia.
The decisions came as Mr Cyrus Vance, the international mediator, accused
local Serb authorities of violating the UN peace plan in eastern Croatia.
Mr Vance and Lord Owen, co-presidents of the Geneva Conference on the former
Yugoslavia, made a two-day visit to UN peacekeeping zones in Serb-held
territory in Croatia in an attempt to break the deadlock over
demilitarisation.
The Vance plan, agreed on January 3 by the presidents of Serbia and Croatia,
calls for the disarming and disbanding of paramilitary units and the return
of refugees to the four UN zones.
Mrs Blandina Negga, UN civil affairs officer, yesterday said: 'We have
become deadlocked with the local authorities. The militia has refused to
give up its arms.
'They are not in favour of any refugees returning. Until the militias are
disarmed no civilian will be safe. No refugees can return.'
One UN official said: 'The whole situation is sliding.'
In Rome Mr Salvo Ando, the Italian defence minister, said he expected the
Nato and WEU blockade would begin on Tuesday at midday. But details of the
operation would be settled on Monday when WEU and Nato officials met to
settle procedures. There are five vessels in the Adriatic under the aegis of
the WEU and seven attached to Nato.
Nato ambassadors meeting at the North Atlantic Council approved the plan in
line with Monday's United Nations Security Council resolution calling for
enforcement of the ban.
The WEU said it committed its members to order their aircraft and warships
to ensure 'strict implementation of the (UN) embargo at sea' against Serbia
and Montenegro, the two republics making up what is left of the old Yugoslav
state.
Nato sources said the rules of engagement agreed for the alliance ships
would allow them to stop and search suspect vessels to prevent illicit cargo
from reaching the former Yugoslavia.
Nato and the WEU have shared patrolling duties in the Adriatic Sea since
July to monitor ships suspected of breaching the trade embargo, but they
have not had power until now to halt vessels or order them to turn back from
their intended destinations.
Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic will stand in early elections on
December 20, the ruling Socialist Party announced yesterday.
Mr Milosevic is seen by the international community as the main instigator
in the violent break-up of Yugoslavia in recent years.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921121

