FT922-7459

FT  19 MAY 92 / Italian unions angry over this month's missing pay rise


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


   ROME


THE Italian union movement has protested vigorously over the refusal of the
government and industry to pay an inflation-indexed wage increase this
month.
The CGIL, the largest of the three union confederations, has taken the
matter to the courts, and the metalworkers' union has threatened a protest
strike on May 29.
Yesterday, in an attempt to head off a wave of protest, Mr Franco Marini,
the outgoing minister of labour, held talks with the three main
confederations and will hold a similar meeting today with Confindustria, the
industrialists' association.
Italy's scala mobile system of indexed-linked wages went into abeyance at
the beginning of the year following agreement between the government, unions
and employers that broad negotiations on labour costs and wages would resume
this June.
At the time Confindustria, which has long sought to abolish the scala
mobile, said it regarded the system as dead. With average wages projected to
increase to 5.6 per cent this year, Confindustria calculated topping up
wages would have resulted in an effective increase for employers of 7.5 per
cent. However, the unions warned that they expected a final payment.
The CGIL claimed that many wage deals last year had been negotiated with
this May's scala mobile payment included.
The increase sought by the CGIL would amount to only an extra L28,000
(Pounds 12.67) a month in take-home pay. But the protest is less about money
than principle. The unions are also aware they need to flex their muscles in
advance of next month's tough talks with Confindustria on wage costs.
These negotiations will be a crucial test on whether the two sides can agree
on measures to ease the European Community's most rigid labour market and
create a more competitive wage structure for industry. The unions recognise
the climate of industrial relations is changing and that formal wage
indexation is unrealistic. Nevertheless, they are anxious to safeguard their
members in an economy which has consistently showed unpredictable and high
levels of inflation.
After an abortive ninth joint session of parliament yesterday, the country's
politicians were still no closer to finding a candidate capable of winning
sufficient cross-party support to be elected president.
Socialist efforts to present a candidate backed by potential allies in the
International Socialist movement - the former communist Party of the
Democratic Left (PDS) and the Social Democrats - collapsed early yesterday.
Too much mistrust appeared to exist between the opposition PDS and the
Socialists, who are partners in the outgoing Christian Democrat-led
four-party coalition.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920519

