FT924-5979

FT  24 NOV 92 / People: Thomson foundation grows in Wales


It is 30 years since Roy Thomson (later Lord Thomson of Fleet) set up the
Thomson Foundation with the aim of furthering the training of print and
broadcast journalists in underdeveloped countries. 'The general belief was
that in 20 years we would be out of business,' says current director Norman
Cattanach; 'Instead, the mandate keeps growing.' As a reflection of its
expanded activities, the foundation has just appointed another three
trustees, in addition to the current six.
The organisation, which for the past three and a half years has been based
in Cardiff, has secured the services of Lord Howe, who, as well as having
been foreign secretary between 1983 and 1989, was born in Port Talbot.
Scots-born Cattanach is particularly keen on the, initially controversial,
Welsh connections of the enterprise; he points out how 'it is very handy to
have people who do not believe that one language, English, is the be-all and
end-all. We are also more attuned to the aspirations of small countries
here.'
John Tusa, who steps down after six years as managing director of the BBC
World Service, also becomes a trustee, as does Lady Luce, who is deputy
chairman of the English-Speaking Union and is married to former arts
minister Sir Richard Luce. Of the latter, Cattanach explains: 'She is not an
expert in the media; it will be a very good thing to have someone who can
look on dispassionately.' They join a group of trustees drawn from the
diplomatic service and the media, including Lord Campbell of Croy and Lord
Thomson of Monifieth.
Recent projects of the foundation, which draws its income partly from Roy
Thomson's original grant, and partly from the British Council, the Foreign
Office and others, range from bringing television to Tanzania, to training
30 (out of 3,000) producers of China Central TV. Vietnam features high on
next year's agenda, with plans among other things to help develop the
two-year-old English newspaper Vietnam News.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921124

