FT921-646

FT  27 MAR 92 / International Company News: Salomon blunder fuels trading
row


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


SALOMON Brothers, the embattled Wall Street securities house, was yesterday
clearing up the mess left by an embarrassing clerical error which swamped
the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) late on Wednesday with hundreds of
millions of dollars in computerised sell orders.
The mistake, which could prove costly, created chaos on the exchange floor
and knocked 12 points off the Dow Jones Industrial Average in the final two
minutes of trading.
The NYSE said it was 'reviewing' the trades with the full co-operation of
Salomon. The Securities and Exchange Commission, the industry watchdog, said
it would also look into the matter.
Although it was not clear whether any disciplinary action would be taken
against the firm, the fuss surrounding Salomon's blunder is likely to
intensify the debate over the influence of computer trading on US stock
markets.
The error, which traders said was unprecedented in recent memory, was
committed when two Salomon clerks mistook a customer's order to sell Dollars
11m of stock as an order to sell 11m shares of stock. Even in these days of
big computerised trades, the latter represented a huge sale.
At 3.58pm on Wednesday, two minutes before the close, the incorrect order
was sent by Salomon to the stock market via computer, which began selling
11m shares of some of the market's biggest stocks.
The sudden wave of sell orders pushed prices lower as traders on the floor
rushed to find matching buyers. The Dow, which at 3.58pm had been up nearly
13 points, finished down 1.57 points. Experts say the entire loss was
attributable to the Salomon trades.
The value of the bungled order was estimated to have been somewhere between
Dollars 300m and Dollars 500m, although Salomon says it spotted the mistake
and 'halted the order mid-trade'.
The error could not have come at a worse time for Salomon, which is still
struggling to overcome last year's scandal over its illegal activities in
the Treasury bond markets.
The managerial, staffing and procedural changes in the wake of the scandal
have created morale problems within the company, most notably in Salomon's
equity department, which has seen its role cut back and several senior
executives depart for other firms.
One Wall Street insider who knows Salomon well said the computer blunder
revealed a worrying lack of supervision at the firm. He was surprised that
clerks apparently did not check with a senior supervisor before executing
the huge block sale of 11m shares.
If the embarrassment over the bungle were not enough, Salomon faced the task
yesterday of sorting out the mess without losing money.
Observers said that whether the trading error ultimately proved costly
depended on which direction the stock market moved. Late last night a
spokesman for Salomon said: 'The position we were left with on Wednesday
night was neutralised before the market opened this morning via a complex
set of hedging procedures.'
Salomon's blunder is also likely to provide ammunition to critics of
computerised block trading, a practice regularly used by big securities
firms to execute large stock orders in a hurry.
In the past, computer trading has been blamed for exacerbating price
volatility, most notably during the October 1987 crash. Critics have also
argued that it undermines investor confidence in the stock market.
They say the ability of dealers to trade large amounts of shares at great
speed by computer gives them an unfair advantage over individual investors,
who have to trade via specialist market-makers on the exchange floor.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920327

