FT922-4027

FT  08 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Full implication of closer ties
eludes provinces - Sarzana, Italy


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


SARZANA'S European credentials are there for all to see. At the entrance to
this small provincial town on the borders of Liguria and Tuscany is the
large European Community symbol, with its blue background and yellow stars
of the 12 members.
Does Franco, the petrol pump attendant at the nearby garage, worry now that
there may be only 11 real members in the Community? 'Never bothered to count
the stars myself,' he says, slightly embarrassed.
Has he heard of Denmark's decision in a referendum to reject the terms of
closer EC integration? 'Wasn't that the night of the Italian under-21s
against Sweden?' Like most of his fellow countrymen, football is his term of
reference.
Franco is not afraid of Europe and has never questioned whether he or Italy
might not be part of it. Europe and the EC are just there. A fact of life.
Sarzana lies astride the ancient Highway No I (the Aurelia) close to the
mouth of the river Magra. Here the mountainous rocky coastline of Liguria
gives way to a fertile narrow plain that gradually broadens out towards
Viarregio and Pisa to the south. Historically, the town controlled access to
the inhospitable hinterland of the central Appennine chain and the rich farm
land of Parma.
This strategic position has long made Sarzana (population 25,000) a trading
centre. The town has also benefited from being close to the marble mines of
Carrara.
But the big change has come in the past 20 years with the construction of
two autostradas, one linking Genoa and Pisa and the other from Parma.
Sarzana has become a wealthy distribution centre - hypermarkets have grown
up on ring roads while the centre of town has acquired boutiques and antique
shops.
It is the kind of place marketing men like to test their new products.
But for the town's citizens, Europe is an awkward product. In the Chamber of
Commerce, at the local trade union office, the rules of the European game
are clear. But for the 'man in the street' notions are vague.
Aldo runs a fruit stall with his mother and two sisters. Is he aware that
Brussels is making regulations which might affect his business? 'I don't
know about the common market; but the big difference in our lives was when
they started building supermarkets on the outskirts of town. We have to
watch our prices. . . We don't have to worry about cheap foreign imports: we
Italians don't like buying foreign produce - we are still used to buying
things in season.'
One of Aldo's customers interjects: 'The common market's been good to us -
why should we think of a referendum? They've given too much money to the
south; but round here people in agriculture have been pretty good at
fiddling money (from Brussels).'
In a newspaper shop a lively discussion begins about the EC even though no
one apparently has paid much attention to the Danish referendum. 'The EC is
good for us - helps our exports,' says a young man with a motorcycle helmet
under his arm. 'They told us about our budget deficit. We can't spend so
much,' says a waiter who has popped in from a neighbouring bar.
The owner of the shop looks on bemused. 'I read the headlines. Selling
newspapers you don't have time to read them. . . mind you, the Danish
referendum wasn't given much prominence. It's political scandals every day
in Italy. Most of my clients prefer Corriere dello Sport and right now its
the Tour of Italy cycling,' she says.
Ana is a 19-year-old medical student from Pisa spending the weekend with her
parents. 'We should have a referendum on Europe, although I doubt there
would be enough signatures.'
Of more than a dozen people 'in the street', Ana is alone in being critical:
'Italy has blindly accepted everything about European integration. People
are fundamentally in favour of belonging to the EC but no one has asked why
and the politicians have not initiated a debate. But how can you have a
meaningful debate when the country has no faith in the politicians?' she
says.
'Thank God for Brussels,' says an antique dealer. 'Our politicians are
useless and the EC has given us our only project - no wonder Italians are in
favour of the Community. No one worries about sovereignty here. Modern Italy
has always been in hock to someone - if it wasn't the Vatican, then it was
the Americans. Why not Brussels?'
Nevertheless, in a prosperous town like Sarzana few realise the practical
implications of closer EC integration. For instance, Franco is working at a
petrol station owned by the state concern, Agip, which is about to be
privatised. He has not heard of competition policy and does not know the
intricate defence mechanisms adopted until now by Agip to keep foreign
competition out of the Italian market.
He realises, however, that self-service pumps, resisted by his union, are in
use in northern Europe and his job could be at risk.
'But Italy gives good pensions,' he says (thanks to a public-sector deficit
which Brussels tells Rome ever more bluntly it cannot afford).
Perhaps if European integration were explained in terms of a game of
football, where the fans no longer had the chance of intimidating the
referee, more Italians would question the benign view of Brussels.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920608

