FT922-4186

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: Friel's 'Philadelphia' revisited - David Murray finds
no weak link in this excellent production


   By DAVID MURRAY


THE TRIUMPH of Brian Friel's Dancing at Lughnasa, gently resounding far and
wide, has already prompted a happy Royal Court revival of his earlier play
The Faith Healer. Now the King's Head has brought back his first
international success, the 1964 Philadelphia, Here I Come] Given the loving
commitment of Dan Crawford's production and his cast, the size of London's
Irish community and the minuscule scale of this pub-theatre, it could play
to full houses far beyond its promised six weeks - except that it employs 14
excellent actors, more than any fringe theatre can afford for long.
The young Gareth of Philadelphia . . . ] hasn't got there yet. He is
spending the last night of his youth in tiny Ballybeg, Co. Donegal, before
he absconds to the City of Brotherly Love, where his Americanised aunt Lizzy
and a new job await him. Seeing everything now - home, friends and life in
Ballybeg - for what may be the last time, he sees it all as if for the
first.
'Gar' (Jonathan Arun, honestly sensitive and gauche) lives with his widowed
father and their elderly housekeeper Madge. In the course of this final
night at home, he bids many farewells: to his former schoolmaster, to old
Canon O'Byrne (who always turns up, as Madge remarks, after the Rosary has
been recited but before the tea-kettle is put on), to a trio of
schoolfriends, to young Kate who married somebody else. Deft flashbacks show
us more of them.
As we expect, these encounters are variously poignant, funny and
frustrating. Since the basic situation is a familiar archetype, there are
attendant risks of stereotyping and all too heartfelt autobiography; but
Friel evades them with an inspired device. On stage the 'public' Gar has a
wry alter ego (Brendan Coyle) as constant companion, invisible to others.
Though the cast-list calls him the 'private' Gar, he does more than
articulate Gar's unspoken reactions on the spot; he also reviews the scene
from a standpoint of beady-eyed maturity.
Thus Friel contrives brilliantly to have his cake and eat it. 'Public' Gar
can play out his serial partings at full sentimental value, touchingly
strangulated, whilst 'private' Gar sets them in ironic, disillusioned focus.
Many a dramatic hero or heroine before Philadelphia . . .] has been assigned
an alter ego, metaphorical or literal, but I recall none who serves just
this function to such astringent effect.
Meanwhile all the other people, unaware of how they really fit into Gar's
scheme of things, can be played at juicy face-value, and they are. There is
no weak link in this expert cast, too numerous to praise adequately - but I
have to mention the radiantly gormless, self-deluding local lads (Ruairi
Conaghan, George Heslin and Aidan Dooley), and Frank Dunne's Canon, a bland
old crocodile. Pauline Delany's Madge and Eamon Kelly's Dad (his role in the
original staging]) convey unshakeable character behind their tight-lipped
words. Valerie Hermanni makes a fine, flamboyant Aunt Lizzy on her flashback
visit home, with David Duffy sweetly embarrassed as her American husband.
There have been many plays in this tenderly distanced autobiographical vein,
like everybody's first novel. What distinguishes Friel's is not only its
eventful concision and pace (thoroughly 'professional' work in the best
sense), nor the extra depths it reaches through 'private' Gar, but a kind of
livid, affectionate fury. Fury over the Ballybeg brain-death he escapes so
narrowly; but also furious about his own stubborn incapacity to make peace
with his decent, blinkered folk. For once the anxious hero isn't a budding
Artist (ie the author) whose vocation demands transplanting to a larger pot,
but just an averagely shrewd Irishman who sees no way out but out, and finds
that painful beyond expectation.
King's Head Theatre, Upper Street N1

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

920606

