FT923-9843

FT  03 AUG 92 / Observer: Don't let it all hang out


Would readers care to help in stopping what, in Observer's experience at
least, is a growing nuisance besides a pernicious one. The root cause is the
numerous traders who have joined publishers of free newspapers in
distributing unsolicited bumf from house to house.
It is not so bad when the stuff is pushed right through the letter boxes
because, then, it is easily binned along with other junk mail. The trouble
is that the bumf-bringers often stop short at sticking it only half through.
Hence when the householders are away, the other half remains outside the
door as a signal to any casing criminal that the place is unoccupied.
So if that leads to burglary, how do the victims stand? Not at all well,
thinks Observer's legal colleague.
The odd thing, he says, is that if the inviting signal was the householders'
fault - for going away without cancelling the newspapers they pay for -
their insurers might well refuse to pay up. But when the householders have
been set up by the fault of someone else, however clearly identified, it is
unlikely that the culprit could be successfully sued.
At the very least the householders would need to have written beforehand to
the producer of the particular piece of offending paper, requesting that
such deliveries should cease. If the tell-tale bumf came from anybody who
hadn't been so forewarned, hard luck.
It is a position which, given the encouragement to crime, seems antisocial
as well as unjust. It also seems easily rectifiable. All it needs is a bit
of legislation putting the onus on the bumf's originators to ensure that it
doesn't remain on view from the outside - although it might be time to ask
by what right people go around invading others' property with objects they
have not said they want.
If any readers feel the same way, perhaps they'd like to write in. Then,
given enough support, we'll see what can be done to change things.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920803

