FT924-11547

FT  24 OCT 92 / Arts: A premium put on the depraved - The Truth of the
Matter


   By NIGEL SPIVEY


IT IS much thought of, at all levels. It is much talked of, at all levels;
and it is much written of, at all levels. Why then do we continue to pretend
that sex is the part of our lives that we most repress?
A century ago, when some stewards of morality were reputed to have been
offended even by bare table-legs, one could understand how books might be
scandals, politicians disgraced and royalty demeaned, on account of sex. The
Victorians, at least, were consistent: they properly sought the repression
of discourse about sex.
Our own age is less so. We want sex to be a matter for open minds, to be
able to chat, write, read and see all about it: yet we want it to be, at the
same time, tinctured with the illicit: something about which we can confess.
For the confessional habit bred into us by medieval Christianity has not
faded as Christian belief has faded: it has simply been absorbed into the
application of Freudian analysis. The confessional box has become the
psychiatrist's couch.
This, broadly, is what the French theorist Michel Foucault maintains in his
History of Sexuality (published by Penguin). A secret habitue of the gay
barrack-rooms of San Francisco, Foucault died of AIDS in 1984, before he
finished his project. In fact, he got scarcely any further than the ancient
Greeks. But his work remains useful. The Greeks, as he demonstrated, never
built into sex the notion of inherent sin. Sex was only a focus of moral
concern insofar as it involved self-respect and personal volition. There was
no hierarchy of sexual behaviour determined by religious or social codes.
That a group of married men might meet up one evening and go through the
entire gamut of homosexual modes of gratification was not unseemly according
to any law. But - as anyone with the slightest acquaintance with the texts
of Plato will know - this does not exclude the possibility of 'upright' or
'decent' behaviour. Greek doctors recommended moderation because they
believed a man's sperm to be a limited supply and essential for his
longevity. Socrates recommended moderation because he believed that
self-control was germane to good citizenship and a means of training the
soul for higher things in the life to come.
Pornography - literally, 'the depiction of prostitutes' - existed in
Classical Greece. There is no evidence to suggest that it was an underground
phenomenon. Even if the philosophers despised it (as I suspect they did),
they were perceptive enough to see that any law which defined pornography as
depravity would put a premium on the depraved. Diogenes the Cynic went so
far as to masturbate in public: if he could eat in public, he argued, why
should he not accommodate his sexual appetite likewise - at no inconvenience
to anyone else?
Two events of this week concentrate the mind on this exemplary system of
morals. First, the issue of Madonna's scrapbook-cum-epistolary novel, Sex.
Second, the launch of a renewed campaign to ban tobacco advertising
throughout Europe. On Sex, little needs to be added to the verbiage it has
already attracted. One's uppermost impression throughout is that Madonna is
an ugly and inarticulate lady who cannot hold a candle to the delicate
eroticism of Marilyn Monroe.
But juxtapose her book with the move to prohibit the promotion of smoking,
and there emerges a structure of values with some cogency to it.
You cannot ban a book because it is boring and garbage-laden. Nor can you
ban this particular book on the grounds of indecency alone, because many
newsagents in Britain now stock magazines which are equal to, and often more
explicit than anything Madonna parades. But Sex is directed at young people
in a way that pornographic magazines are not. And it glamourises behaviour
likely to do young people just as much harm as smoking cigarettes.
Games with knives held against genitals. Studs, whips and thongs. The
involvement of dogs. The sheer multiplicity of partners. All these can
reasonably be defined as injurious to good health. The straight motive of
preserving the species would ultimately justify action to forbid the
behaviour encouraged by Madonna.
She tells us, in the course of Sex, that she finds fat people repugnant.
They fail to work out, to look after their bodies. If she thinks thus, then
she should understand why her book is offensive. The logic invoked by the
Greeks, the logic whereby tobacco advertisements are banned, the logic which
makes obesity a form of corruption - it is the same as the logic which holds
sado-masochism, promiscuity, bestiality and sexual excess as threats to
society. If we are consistent, we shall draw up guidelines for moral action
based on this logic of human health and happiness, suitable for a
pluralistic and largely secular society. Failing that, I hope for Sex II:
the sequel of loveless, bloodied and moribund bodies.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

921024

