FT921-4008

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): Personal allowances to
rise in line with statutory indexation - Income Tax


THE CHANCELLOR proposes in his Budget to:
reduce the rate of income tax to 20 per cent on the first Pounds 2,000 of
taxable income;
increase the personal allowances for all age groups in line with the
statutory indexation provisions;
increase the age-related married couple's allowances in line with the
statutory indexation provisions;
keep the married couple's allowances for those aged under 65, the additional
personal allowance and the widow's bereavement allowance at their 1991-92
level of Pounds 1,720;
make no change to the basic rate limit;
make no change in the basic and higher rates of income tax.
New lower rate band. New tax tables incorporating the lower rate band will
be used by employers on the first pay day after May 17.
Changes in income tax allowances and car scale benefits. Tax offices will be
sending employers instructions to increase codes ending in L, H, P or V.
Revised coding notices are not sent to employees when codes are increased
automatically in this way.
The codes of the following employees will be reviewed individually by tax
offices who will notify both the employee and the employer of the revised
code where a change is due: employees whose codes begin with F or end in T;
employees whose codes include adjustments for car benefits.
Taxpayers aged 65 and over. It is proposed to raise the income limit for
age-related allowances for those aged 65 and over from Pounds 13,500 to
Pounds 14,200.
If a taxpayer's total income is below this limit the age-related allowances
are due in full; if it is above this limit they are reduced (by Pounds 1 for
every Pounds 2 of income above the limit) to the level of the basic personal
and married couple's allowance.
Tax offices will amend codes that at present include a reduced amount of
age-related allowances to take account of the increase in the income limit.
Where the size of a taxpayer's income means that only the basic allowance
was given for 1991-92 but an age-related allowance is now due, the tax
office will revise the code where necessary in examining 1992-93 tax returns
from April onwards.
Any taxpayer aged 65 and over whose 1992-93 code does not include an
age-related allowance at present but who expects to be entitled to an
age-related allowance following the proposed increase in the income limit
and has not been asked by the end of April to complete a 1992-93 tax return
should write to his or her tax office giving National Insurance number, date
of birth and details of income.
Maintenance payments. The limit on maintenance payments qualifying for tax
relief is equal to the married couple's allowance. The limit for 1992-93
will be Pounds 1,720, the same as for 1991-92.
New 20 per cent rate of income tax. The chancellor proposes to reduce the
rate of income tax to 20 per cent on the first Pounds 2,000 of taxable
income (after allowances and reliefs).
The new rate will apply for the tax year 1992-93, starting on 6 April. This
release explains what it will mean for relief at source schemes and tax
deduction schemes. There is generally no change for people making payments,
but some people receiving income taxed at source will be able to claim a
repayment. The new rate will also apply for the purposes of capital gains
tax for those whose marginal income tax rate is 20 per cent.
Interest, annuities and annual payments. Tax should continue to be deducted
at the basic rate of 25 per cent by banks and building societies from
deposit interest not eligible for payment without deduction of tax and other
payers of interest, annuities and other annual payments who are entitled or
obliged to deduct tax.
People who suffered deduction of tax at 25 per cent, but are liable to tax
only at the lower rate of 20 per cent, will be able to claim a repayment of
the difference.
Advance Corporation Tax and Tax Credit on Dividends. The rate of advance
corporation tax remains at 25/75ths. Tax credit will continue to be given at
the same rate, and will satisfy shareholders' basic rate liability.
People who receive dividends and tax credits but who are liable to tax only
at the lower rate, will be able to claim payment of part of the tax credit
from the Inland Revenue.
Relief at Source Schemes. The relief given at source on mortgage interest
under the Miras scheme remains at 25 per cent. This will apply even where
the borrower is only liable to tax at 20 per cent.
The same applies to the other relief at source schemes: personal pension
contributions and free-standing additional voluntary contributions made by
employees; private medical insurance premiums covering people aged 60 and
over; and expenditure on vocational training (the new scheme starts on April
6 1992).
Deeds of Covenant and Gift Aid. People should continue to deduct tax at 25
per cent from payments to charities made under deed of covenant. The amount
to be paid to the charity by the covenantor will not be affected by the
introduction of the lower rate of tax. Payments under the Gift Aid Scheme
will continue to be treated as gifts made net of basic-rate tax.
As now, charities will be able to reclaim basic-rate tax from the Inland
Revenue on payments which they receive under covenant or the Gift Aid
scheme. There will be no effect on the amount charities can reclaim.
Capital Gains Tax. Where appropriate, the new lower rate will apply to
capital gains. Net gains are treated as the top slice of income, and charged
to capital gains tax at income tax rates. If someone whose taxable income is
less than Pounds 2,000 has chargeable gains above the threshold (Pounds
5,800 in 1992-93), then the first taxable slice of their gain will be taxed
at the lower rate.
Trusts. The new lower rate does not apply to trusts. Trusts will continue to
be taxed at the basic rate of 25 per cent plus, where appropriate, the
additional rate of 10 per cent.
Construction Industry Tax Deduction Scheme. The rate of deduction from
payments to uncertified subcontractors remains at 25 per cent. This is
credited in full against the subcontractor's eventual liability. If it
exceeds that liability, the subcontractor will be entitled to a repayment.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

920311

