FT922-7327

FT  19 MAY 92 / Fujimori offers compromise on democracy


   By SALLY BOWEN


   LIMA


PRESIDENT Alberto Fujimori of Peru has offered a compromise plan for a swift
return to democracy, in an attempt to avert the threat of sanctions.
In an address yesterday afternoon to foreign ministers of the Organisation
of American States (OAS), meeting in the Bahamas, he proposed a return to
democracy through election of a 'democratic constituent congress' to reform
Peru's constitution.
The proposal represents a volte-face by the president, who two weeks ago was
refusing to consider such a mechanism. But the prospect of international
isolation and the severing of crucial funding to support Peru's IMF-approved
economic adjustment programme seem to have wrought a change of heart.
Architect of the compromise is Mr Hernando de Soto, a former presidential
adviser. Mr Fujimori's proposals contain all the elements of Mr de Soto's
draft law on the 'democratisation of government decision-making,' which the
president has already embraced once and discarded. This time, having
committed himself before the OAS to setting up mechanisms for
pre-publication of laws, freedom of information and gathering of citizen
feed-back, Mr Fujimori may have to stick to his promises.
Mr Fujimori placed responsibility for his April 5 overthrow of democracy
squarely on Peru's political parties and justice system.
'There is a complete institutional vacuum,' he said, adding that those
elected to the interim congress would be prevented from standing in the next
two full congressional elections. This would ensure that constitutional
reform did not fall prey to party interests.
The proposals, outlined in Lima prior to the president's surprise departure
on Sunday for the Bahamas, have not been well received by Peru's deposed
congressmen.
Mr Maximo San Roman, elected by MPs as 'constitutional president' of Peru,
called them unilateral, arbitrary and dictatorial. But opinion polls still
give Mr Fujimori about 75 per cent popular support.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920519

