FT924-6207

FT  23 NOV 92 / Fears over Pounds 2bn gas power scheme


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


DEVELOPERS behind a Pounds 2bn project for four offshore oil and gas fields
and the building of a gas-fired power station in north Wales fear the scheme
may fall victim to the government's energy review.
PowerGen, the privatised generator, plans to build a 1,360MW power station
at Connah's Quay, Clwyd, that would use gas from new fields in Liverpool
Bay. The project would create thousands of jobs.
Consent has been delayed, and the project's partners are concerned that the
backlash against gas-fired generation prompted by the decision to close 31
deep coal mines may persuade the government to 'save face' by withholding
consent.
Preliminary consent for the station was given last year but the project has
still not received a final go-ahead, partly because of delays to a public
inquiry into a proposed gas terminal at Point of Ayr on the Clwyd coast.
The inquiry was completed in June but the project's partners have been told
that the report will not be ready until January, which is also when the
energy review is due to be completed.
Cancellation of the project might jeopardise more than 4,000 new jobs and
the development of Liverpool Bay as an oil and gas province.
The three development partners - Lasmo and Monument, the UK independent oil
companies, and Hamilton, the US oil company - say they have already invested
more than Pounds 60m.
Mr Jim Riemersma, UK vice-president of Hamilton, said: 'In the middle of a
recession, we are proposing to make the largest investment that sector of
Wales has ever seen.'
Hamilton has operated in the UK since the early days of production from the
North Sea. It has warned that the loss of the Liverpool Bay and north Wales
development would 'certainly be a disincentive for future investment'.
Two bodies representing offshore oil and gas companies are preparing
submissions to the Commons trade and industry committee, which is carrying
out part of the government's energy review, warning that attempts to halt
gas projects might put at risk billions of pounds of investment in UK
waters.
The Connah's Quay project says it is a special case as there is a former
coal-fired power station on the site, with lines linking it to the national
grid.
Moreover, Liverpool Bay gas contains too much nitrogen to be accepted into
the national gas grid without expensive treatment. The gas can, however, be
burned in industrial plant, and Connah's Quay - only 20 miles from Point of
Ayr - seemed an ideal customer.
It is estimated that the project might create up to 4,000 jobs during
construction and 200 during the operational phase, as well as 750 spin-off
jobs.
The four fields in Liverpool Bay have a total of 1,000bn cu ft of gas and
200m barrels of oil.
Mr Tony Craven-Walker, Monument's chief executive, said: 'Coal and gas can
co-exist. Gas should not be penalised in view of the benefits it has
brought. There is not much point looking for gas reserves if the market is
going to be denied.'

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921123

