FT922-506

FT  27 JUN 92 / UK Company News: BM shares slump after Roger Shute steps
down


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


SHARES in BM Group, the construction equipment and engineering group, fell
sharply yesterday following the resignation of the company's founding
chairman, Mr Roger Shute, on the grounds of ill health.
The shares fell 81p to 233p, 165p below the high at which BM's shares were
trading three weeks ago.
Mr Chute's resignation, stemming from an illness that BM described as 'lung,
stress and cigarette' related, took the City by surprise.
While BM yesterday stressed that Mr Howard Sutton, managing director, has
been deeply involved in company decisions for the last 18 months, Mr Shute's
departure to the position of president will hit the company hard. 'The City
when it thinks of BM thinks of Roger Shute,' said Mr Mike Costello, analyst
at Kleinwort Benson.
Mr Shute effectively started to build the company in 1979 when Beazer, the
housebuilding group, split off its engineering companies. Five years later,
with Mr Shute at the helm, Beazer reversed these engineering companies into
the quoted Braham Millar and kept a controlling stake until 1986. Beazer,
now part of Hanson, sold its remaining 28 per cent stake in 1989.
Mr Shute was the force behind a period of rapid growth through a series of
acquisitions. These included Blackwood Hodge, the construction equipment
distributor, and most recently the purchase of Thomas Robinson, the
engineering group.
Mr Shute will now play a roving role as president in Asia where he has
developed strong distribution links with Japanese companies like Hitachi.
The executive chairman position will not immediately be filled. Mr Matthew
Thorne, presently non-executive deputy chairman, will become non-executive
chairman and Mr Cliff Walker, who joined BM at the time of the Thomas
Robinson acquisition, will also join the board.
Mr Thorne said yesterday the group would achieve almost all its targets in
its financial year ending on Tuesday. Gearing would also be reduced from
about 75 per cent to 30 per cent.
'Roger Shute has generated very substantial growth,' Mr Thorne said. 'His
daily operational role has been reducing and the same management team that
has generated that growth is in place.'
Market traders said yesterday that there had been signs of a bear raid on
BM's shares in the past weeks. Questions have been posed about BM's
accounting of acquisitions and how, despite the recession in construction,
the company has managed to report such rapid profits and earnings growth.
Pre-tax profits are forecast at Pounds 45m this year, up from Pounds 34.1m
last year and Pounds 5.1m in 1987.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920627

