FT921-630

FT  28 MAR 92 / Books: Hopkins' lonely road to classic status


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


HOPKINS: A LITERARY BIOGRAPHY by Norman White Oxford Pounds 35, 531 pages
'WHAT FUN if you were a classic,' the undergraduate Gerard Hopkins once
remarked. 'What a waste,' the painter, Jack Yeats said when he met him 20
years later, 'that Gerard Hopkins, with all his gifts for art and
literature, should have become a priest.' Hopkins' retort - 'you wouldn't
give only the dull ones to Almighty God' - highlights his arrogance and his
own sense of loss as well as his commitment.
Why did the most original poet of the 19th century choose a vocation which
prevented him from publishing a single stanza, and was his art enhanced or
diminished by the sacrifice?
The first triumph of Norman White's splendid biography is to show how deeply
Hopkins' difficult, intense poetry comes out of his difficult, extreme life:
the Jesuit priest at once despairing and devout; the Victorian prig who
subsumed homosexual lust into holiness; the scholar who enjoyed blowing
cayenne pepper through a keyhole to disrupt his colleagues' seminar.
The second is to set the poet-priest's maverick, conflicted temperament in
the context of fevered, Victorian religiosity and idealism, and thus to
broaden out a life story into an intellectual and social portrait of an age
which should fascinate anyone interested in English history.
Hopkins was born in 1844, the eldest son of an upwardly mobile insurance
broker whose sons' education reflected his rising status: Gerard attended
local school in Hampstead, but three younger brothers went respectively to
Lancing, Winchester and Charterhouse. For Gerard, life opened out at Oxford,
which began in adolescent rapture ('Altogether Paradisaical. A canoe in the
Cherwell must be the summit of human happiness') and ended in the queue of
conversion-hungry undergraduates which, by the 1860s, lined the route from
Balliol to Newman's door in Birmingham.
'I believe the Balliol set is truly wise,' said the young poet Clough at
this time. White is comically inspired on 1860s teenage posturing, which
ranged from midnight tutorials with Jowett to secular pursuits like shooting
water-rats from a bridge on the Cherwell.
Romance, mostly between men, was of course everywhere, and Hopkins fell for
Digby Dolben, an aesthete expelled from Eton for Papist inclinations (he
wore a monk's habit and dated his letters by Roman feast days). He flirted
with Hopkins and, says White, his 'flamboyant leanings incarnated Hopkins'
suppressed spiritual inclinations'.
Incipient homosexuality is as obvious in Hopkins' poetry - witness the boy
in The Bugler's First Communion 'breathing bloom of a chastity in mansex
fire', or the hedonists plunging around naked in the pools in Epithalamion -
as it is in Kipling's; both poets are famously popular with adolescent boys.
White links the homo-erotic impulses, which Hopkins experienced as an
overwhelming sense of sin - he records admiring the bare arms of working
navvies and looking up 'dreadful words' in the dictionary - and youthful
rebellion against his family as factors which drove him to Rome. He was, WB
Yeats later observed, the typical 'sensitive querulous scholar' of 19th
century 'English Aesthetic Catholicism'.
When Hopkins converted, mid-Victorian England was rife with Papist-phobia;
on a train journey once, Pugin 'crossed himself while engaged in private
prayers. . . to the horror of a lady, alone with him in the compartment, who
cried out: 'You are a Catholic, sir - Guard, Guard, let me out''. But
Hopkins got only enlightened tolerance from Balliol and his parents, and so
his masochism pushed him further into the strict arms of the Jesuits. He
used to meditate on being shut-up in a cloister and on pain's 'great and
real sense of freedom'.
'I did say yes/O at lightning and lashed rod,' he records on joining the
Jesuits. He made a bonfire of all his poems but first sent corrected copies
to his friend, Robert Bridges.
Before he became a priest, Hopkins used to compile lists of similar sounds,
of 'consonant-chiming' words, of words to which he was specially attached,
and try them out in prose; a long wrestling which lay behind the muscled
strength of celebratory poems like The Windhover. As a Jesuit, this was put
aside and not until the shipwreck of some nuns was he pushed to break a
lengthy silence. The Wreck of the Deutschland is in part a classic Victorian
sea-disaster poem; it is also the first Victorian work to break away from
poetic convention into a dramatically truthful art.
It was frighteningly original for the Jesuits, who refused to publish it in
their magazine. Since publication elsewhere was forbidden, there followed a
lifetime of artistic isolation.
'I should do you no kindness in sending you a man so eccentric', wrote one
priest to another about Father Gerard. As a Jesuit, Hopkins fitted in
nowhere, and was moved year after year - 'to seem the stranger lies my lot'
 -from London to Wales to Glasgow to Dublin, as a worker in slum-dwellings
and as a teacher.
Too aloof to get on with his working-class parishioners, he was also too
naive to teach - he was once mocked for weeks after solemnly telling his
class that 'he regretted that he had never seen a naked woman'. Meanwhile,
his own artistic instincts and his interest in music and sounds - in Wales
he learnt Welsh, in Dublin he collected Irish accents - were discouraged.
The result was acute, piercing loneliness, an absolute lack of understanding
which made him ill and exhausted and inspired the sequence of despairing
sonnets - Carrion Comfort; No worst there is none - which are among the most
passionate and intimate in all English poetry.
His last poems were scribbled on the back of exam books while he was
invigilating at University College, Dublin. Then, worn out, he died aged 44
from typhoid fever, possibly carried by two rats discovered in the Jesuits'
stewpot.
The unsung hero of this story is Robert Bridges, who collected the poems as
Hopkins sent him them, corresponded with and encouraged him, and finally, in
1918, judged the time right to publish them. Regarded as odd and cold and
impossibly obscure by most who had seen them in Hopkins' lifetime, they
suddenly found their place: an early wave in the great tide of modernism.
Leavis' approval in the 1930s sealed Hopkins' longed-for status as a
classic.
Norman White's scholarly, humane and witty account will surely send many
readers back to the poems and enhance that reputation still further.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

920328

