FT924-819

FT  22 DEC 92 / Technology: Creating dreams on computers / A look at the new
generation of films that use digitalisation techniques


   By VICTORIA GRIFFITH


A magic carpet teases its companions and hides from them; a woman steps out
of a pool with water pouring from a hole in her stomach; cows sing; and a
thousand fans are cloned to fill a baseball stadium.
Even in the fantasy world of films, these scenes would have been impossible
just a few years ago. The reason they are on screen today is that a new
generation of film artists is exploiting a fresh and exciting technique
known as computer digitalisation. The widespread acceptance of
computer-generated images in films has surprised even the pioneers of such
techniques.
'When we started experimenting with computers in films in the early 1980s, a
lot of people didn't want to have anything to do with it,' says John
Lasseter, a film director at Pixar, which has won Academy Awards for its
innovations in computer-animated films. 'Now, it's hard to imagine an
animated film without it. And pretty soon, it may be hard to imagine a
feature film without it.'
Computers work on both a two-dimensional and three-dimensional level with
film. On a two-dimensional level, the computer can be used to fill in
colours and background.
Walt Disney routinely uses a computer colouring system to add in subtle
shadings throughout an animated piece. Disney and Pixar, which helped
develop the system, won a special technical Oscar this year for the
technique's contribution to Beauty and the Beast. The technique digitally
'inks and paints' the animator's drawings before compositing them with
hand-drawn backgrounds and effects.
Industrial Light & Magic, considered the leader in special effects for
feature films, used a two-dimensional digitalisation technique to create the
hole in Goldie Hawn's stomach in Death Becomes Her. 'First we filmed the
scene without Goldie in it, exactly duplicating the camera moves,' says
Thomas Williams, in charge of digital technology at the company. 'Then, we
filmed the scene with her in it. The computer took the two films in its
memory and used them to create the hole, with the background scenery exactly
where it was supposed to be.'
The three-dimensional applications of the technique are even more exciting.
In the same way that a science researcher uses digitalisation to create a
three-dimensional computer model of a molecule - capable of being spun
around and viewed from different angles - film makers create fantasy images,
then work the film around them.
Walt Disney first used the technique for the clock gears in the animated
film The Great Mouse Detective. Digitalisation also created a carriage in
The Little Mermaid and a convincing three-dimensional ballroom in Beauty and
the Beast.
But the company's latest film Aladdin - which has just been released in the
US and will open next year in Britain - has taken the process one step
further. It uses the group's first computer-generated animated object, a
magic carpet, which appears in nearly a third of the film.
'The software and hardware have progressed, and so has people's acceptance,'
says Stephen Goldberg, artistic supervisor with the company's computer
generated imagery (CGI) unit, 'There is a growing sense of trust that we're
not out to take the art out of animation.'
Indeed, most of the people working at CGI have a background in traditional
animation. The magic carpet was initially hand-drawn, then digitalised into
the computer by animator Tina Price. In the computer's memory, the carpet
existed in three dimensions and was able to move around on the film with its
complex pattern - containing magic lamps, crossing swords, and tigers' heads
 -in place.
'It would have been impossible to move the pattern convincingly from frame
to frame using traditional animation methods,' says Goldberg.
Walt Disney also used the technique to create the film's tiger's head, which
emerges from the desert. The tiger's head is made up of many grains of sand
which would have jittered on the surface if conventional methods had been
used. Instead, the computer memory keeps the grains of sand in place.
Although Walt Disney is unparalleled in combining digitalisation techniques
with the more old-fashioned hand-drawn frames, it is Pixar which leads the
field in 100 per cent computer-animated films. Short pieces like Luxo Jr and
Tin Toy, which won an Oscar in 1988, have set the pace for the industry.
'When we started using these techniques in the early 1980s,' says Lasseter,
'there was a misconception that the computer was making the film. That is no
more true than the statement that a word processor writes a journalist's
articles. But once you have the computer tool to use in animation, you
wouldn't want to give it up any more than you would a word processor.'
The biggest challenge for animators is getting the computer to generate
images that are not perfect looking. 'We still want it to look like
animation,' Lasseter adds. 'Computers like geometric, perfect worlds, and we
have to fight against that.'
For feature films, however, the challenge is just the opposite - making
images look as real as possible. Digitalisation has been widely used in
science-fiction and fantasy films.
A three dimensional technique created Meryl Streep's twisted neck in Death
Becomes Her, and helps contribute to many of the special effects in
Terminator 2, including the scene in which a creature rises convincingly
from the surface of a tiled floor.
The film world may get computer-generated characters soon. Steven Spielberg
is said to be working on a film that would use computer-generated dinosaurs,
courtesy of Industrial Light & Magic.
But the use of computers is rapidly moving beyond the science-fiction and
fantasy realm to invade all types of films. Pacific Data Image used computer
generation to clone the extras in scenes for The Babe, a movie about Babe
Ruth, the baseball legend. 'They needed 30,000 fans in period dress,' says
Carl Rosendahl, president. 'But it's expensive to hire 30,000 people and
produce costumes for all of them. So we took 1,000 extras and filmed them in
various parts of the stadium. The computer used its memory to put them all
together and we got a stadium full of screaming fans.'
Computers are being widely used for complex stunts in action movies. 'The
stunt man can act in complete safety, with cables attached, and we later
remove the wires and scan the scenery back into the film,' says Rosendahl.
Computer digitalisation is also making its way into television commercials
and music videos. Lancia car advertisements used an effect called morphing
to make a logo in the desert melt to form a car, which then drove off. The
company also created a singing cow by computer.
Those involved in using computers in films say the new techniques are a long
way from reaching their limits. 'This industry is still in its infancy,'
says Goldberg of Walt Disney. 'At the moment, the possibilities seem
endless.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921222

