FT921-1455

FT  24 MAR 92 / Trade deficit narrows as imports and exports rise


   By EMMA TUCKER, Economics Staff


EXPORTS and imports rose sharply last month, leaving Britain's current
account deficit higher than expected, despite a fall on the month.
The value of exports rose 8.5 per cent in February over January, while the
value of imports rose 6.5 per cent, leaving the current account deficit
slightly narrower at Pounds 750m in February, against January's Pounds 858m.
The Conservatives welcomed the increases in both exports and imports as
evidence that the economy was recovering.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, said increases in UK manufactured exports
were encouraging and forecast that the deficit for the year would be in line
with prediction. Mr John Major said the rise in imports showed that the
recovery was under way.
Economists warned that the UK's inability to eliminate its current account
deficit during recession meant the balance of payments could deteriorate
once recovery began. Mr Stephen Bell, chief UK economist at Morgan Grenfell,
said: 'The plus side is that exports continue to do well despite the big
deterioration in Germany's economy, but the bad news is that in the longest
recession since the war, we still have a deficit.'
Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader described the month's figures as 'quite
dreadful', saying they showed that Britain's economy was 'at best, flat and
possibly still slipping backwards'.
Central Statistical Office figures showed that the value of exports for
February was Pounds 9bn - the highest since August - while imports rose to
just over Pounds 10bn, the highest since June 1990.
However, measured by volume, in the three months to February, imports rose
faster than exports.
The surplus on invisible earnings such as banking, insurance and tourism was
estimated at Pounds 300m, the same as in January.
On a three-monthly basis, the current account deficit worsened slightly,
rising to Pounds 1.7bn for the three months to February, from Pounds 1.1bn
for the three months to November.
Details, Page 11

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920324

