FT922-4557

FT  05 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Europe's bond markets face
upheaval


   By SIMON LONDON


THERE was broad agreement among fund managers yesterday that the performance
of European bond markets could be fundamentally changed by Denmark's
rejection of the Maastricht treaty.
In the chaos following announcement of the referendum result, most European
markets fell sharply, with a clear divide between losers and winners.
Italian and Spanish markets were worst hit, with bond prices falling by
about 1 1/2 points at the 10-year maturity on Wednesday and continuing to
slide yesterday. Bonds denominated in Ecu also fell sharply.
UK gilts suffered falls of up to a point on Wednesday but held firm
yesterday. French bonds followed a similar pattern but German bonds escaped
almost unscathed.
The underlying pattern is that high-yielding European bond markets - riding
high on in-flows of international cash as investors anticipated convergence
in the run-up to European monetary union - are most vulnerable.
Convergence theory is simple: with currencies fixed within the exchange rate
mechanism (ERM) the inflation and interest rates of European countries will
have to fall to the level of the country with the strongest currency in the
system - Germany. Since government bond yields reflect interest rates and
anticipated inflation, convergence theory states that bond yields should
also converge.
Believers bought high-yielding European bonds - such as Spanish, Italian and
UK government paper - anticipating that yields would fall towards German
levels. As bond prices rose, holders were presented with a handsome capital
gain.
At the level of pure economic logic, nothing in this argument is threatened
by the outcome of the Danish referendum. Whether the Maastricht treaty
stands or falls, bond yields should converge under a system of fixed
exchange rates.
'The ERM is going to remain intact, but problems with ratification of
Maastricht will highlight markets where the economic fundamentals are not
strong,' said Mr Keith Jones, head of fixed income fund management at Lazard
Investors.
Investment managers yesterday pointed to three main reasons for falling bond
prices:
Convergence theory was so popular that bond yields were running ahead of
economic fundamentals.
Inflows of international funds into Spain, Italy and the UK pushed bond
yields lower despite the fact that inflation and government borrowing
remained stubbornly high. In these circumstances there was always the risk
of a sharp correction.
The prospect of currency union under Maastricht was the main incentive for
European governments to bring interest rates and inflation into line with
their neighbours.
Economic convergence can be painful. If the goal of monetary union is
removed, or indefinitely postponed, there is less reason to submit to ERM
discipline, in particular the low wage settlements and high interest rates
needed to bring inflation under control.
'It was clear earlier this year that there was going to be disenchantment
with the rigours required to meet the Maastricht criteria,' said Mr Terence
Prideaux, fund manager at Kemper Investment Management in London.
Aside from the full-scale breakdown of the ERM, the biggest fear of bond
market investors is a hidden devaluation of high-yielding currencies through
realignment of the mechanism. Gains made by holding appreciating bonds would
be wiped out by exposure to a depreciating currency. With Maastricht in
place and the timetable for monetary union set, a revaluation of the ERM was
seen as unlikely. Any threat to that timetable fuels speculation that some
governments would be happy to see their currencies devalued to ease the pain
of convergence.
On Wednesday and yesterday, Italian bonds suffered from renewed fears of
devaluation, since the lire is one of the weaker currencies in the ERM. This
was also a factor behind the fall in UK gilts, although most UK fund
managers believe fears of a sterling devaluation are unjustified.
In the aftermath of the Danish vote, fund managers are again looking at the
economic factors determining government bond yields: interest rates,
inflation and anticipated supply of new bonds to finance public sector
deficits.
On this basis, markets such as France, Germany, the Netherlands and -
ironically - Denmark could continue to benefit from flows out of
high-yielding bonds. Yet Italy, Spain and Portugal could suffer. The
position of the UK gilts market is less certain, with political stability
balancing a weak currency and poor public finances.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920605

