FT921-1168

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Kinnock switches focus to industrial policy


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


MR NEIL KINNOCK switched his focus from Labour's recovery package yesterday
to a broader exposition of the party's longer-term prospectus for building
stable industrial growth.
In a speech to business people in Manchester, the Labour leader stressed
that a vibrant manufacturing sector was 'a sure foundation' for a prosperous
service sector and the 'lifeblood' of financial services.
Drawing on the experiences of the Japanese banking sector and of the City,
Mr Kinnock claimed that Britain's falling share of international lending,
from 27 per cent in 1980 to 18.4 per cent in 1990, was a direct consequence
of industrial decline. 'The manufacturing and service sectors share the same
destiny,' he said.
Mr Kinnock said the task of government was to create 'an economically secure
and socially responsible environment within which enterprise can thrive and
generate employment and wealth'. This involved two broad tasks: creating a
stable macroeconomic environment, and sustaining a 'strong and adaptable'
supply-side policy.
He argued that excessive deregulation of the financial sector had
jeopardised long-term growth by failing to establish sound credit
management. Labour's solution was to use credit controls, based on
reserve:asset ratios in the banking sector. The Labour leader also pledged:
Takeovers would require predator companies to prove their proposals are in
the public interest. Labour would use powers under the Industry Act to
ensure that short-term interests did not inhibit long-term investment
strategies.
Measures to ensure that British innovations are developed in the UK.
Strenuous efforts to build up the infrastructure and transport system,
drawing where necessary on privatesector finance.
Mr Kinnock said employers who dedicated less than 0.5 per cent of payroll to
training would be obliged to contribute to a national skills fund. Good
employers already spent more than that on training and would be unaffected
by the levy, he said. 'But the 20 per cent of employers who employ 50 per
cent of the labour force and who do no training . . . will have to pay their
fair share.'

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920325

