FT922-13286

FT  13 APR 92 / A victim of hubris falls at Canary Wharf


   By ROBERT PESTON and BERNARD SIMON


Olympia & York was a victim of hubris, 300 bankers representing 100 banks
will be told today. In 1988, it appeared to be the strongest property
company in the world. Its net assets were worth CDollars 11bn (Pounds 5.3bn)
and parent company borrowings were less than CDollars 2bn. That gave Mr Paul
Reichmann the confidence to make the biggest gamble of his career: the
creation of a financial city in London's docklands at Canary Wharf.
It started work that year on a dozen Canary Wharf buildings simultaneously.
If O&Y had followed traditional practice in the property industry, it would
have brought in partners, or arranged bank finance before construction work
started. But given its strength in North America, it chose to do neither.
It went solo, using its own resources for the initial development, planning
to bring in partners and project finance at a later stage. In the succeeding
three years, O&Y spent USDollars 3bn (Pounds 1.70bn) on the project from its
own resources. By 1990, it was ready to raise finance from banks for
individual buildings directly without recourse to its own balance sheet. But
by then, the market for property finance had dried up, thanks in part to the
unease caused by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.
O&Y was caught in a double squeeze. The value of its US and Canadian
properties was falling. Cash flow from its non-property investments, such as
the forest products group Abitibi-Price, was dwindling as well. Because of
Canary Wharf, group borrowings were rising sharply. It did raise a Pounds
500m facility from a club of 10 banks specifically for Canary Wharf in
November 1990, but even this was guaranteed by the parent. Far more money
was needed. In the second half of 1991, it was close to getting Pounds 300m,
secured against the main Canary Wharf Tower, from another club of banks. But
one bank dropped out and the deal collapsed. This was the straw that broke
O&Y's back. From the beginning of February to early March, Mr Reichmann
tried every device he knew to raise cash.
He persuaded a group of Canadian banks, led by Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce, to provide Dollars 240m for a couple of years, until the property
financing market recovered. But before the funds were actually advanced to
O&Y, the company faced a rapid depletion of its cash resources. Investors
were refusing to repurchase commercial paper, or short-term debt securities,
after a credit rating agency, Dominion Bond Rating Services, issued a gloomy
assessment of O&Y's credit-worthiness.
To add insult to injury, one of the banks in the Dollars 240m syndicate
questioned whether the money should be provided. The bank feared the funds
would be used to redeem commercial paper.
By this stage, Mr Reichmann was exploring every avenue for raising funds. To
allay the fears of the banking syndicate, he talked to investment bankers
about the possibility of selling non-property assets. Almost immediately
afterwards, there was a wave of rumours that O&Y was in serious financial
difficulties. O&Y decided to sell Interprovincial PipeLine and shares in
that oil pipeline company were suspended.
This move was widely misunderstood. The chairman of a big Far Eastern bank
rang Mr Reichmann to warn him that he had heard O&Y was bankrupt. The
rumours made it inevitable that holders of all CDollars 800m of O&Y's
commercial paper would want their money back. At the same time, three
attempts by O&Y to raise funds in London - Pounds 250m from an Enterprise
Zone unit trust, Dollars 300m from a loan on a building let to the US
investment bank Morgan Stanley and Pounds 250m from selling bonds secured
against the Canary Wharf Tower - all collapsed. By mid-March Mr Reichmann
had no doubts about the cost of his Canary Wharf gamble. For the first time
in his career, he would have to admit to the banks that O&Y could not pay
its debts on time.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920413

