FT921-14032

FT  17 JAN 92 / Reduction in youth training funds planned


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


THE DEPARTMENT of Employment is planning 'a substantial reduction' in the
weekly contributions it makes for youth training, its main scheme for 16- to
18-year-olds.
The move, announced yesterday, came as the government reported a 31,000 rise
in the jobless figures in December, with the unemployment rate rising to 9
per cent, the highest level for four years.
Training and enterprise councils (Tecs) will strongly resist the planned
reduction, which will be in excess of 10 per cent.
A confidential memorandum circulating among Tecs, which administer youth
training schemes (YT), has warned that a reduction in funds would cause
bankruptcies among training providers. It could also mean that the
government could fail to meet its guarantee of a training place to all young
people who want one.
Last week, Fullemploy, which trains ethnic minorities, went into
liquidation, while Apex Trust, which trains ex-offenders, said last night
that it would apply for a court order to appoint an administrator.
Previous cuts in weekly unit prices for YT did not directly cause their
financial difficulties, but were contributory factors. The government, in
cutting its grants for training, wants employers to pay more.
Mr Henry McLeish, Labour's spokesman on training, described the proposals as
a scandal. 'We believe the Tecs should stand firm, make their collective
voices known publicly and refuse to accept any unit price which does not
provide quality training.'
The Department of Employment, under pressure from the Treasury, wants
increased volumes of training in 1992-93 for roughly the same amount of
money as in 1991-92. It said yesterday it expected young people to stay in
YT longer partly because of the recession but mainly because many young
people were taking courses leading to national vocational qualifications
A memo from the north-west region of Tecs said: 'If a reduction in prices
were to occur, Tecs' standing in their communities would be considerably
damaged by further difficulties and bankruptcies of training providers.'
The memo said the average cash price per person for YT was Pounds 46 a week
in 1983. Eight years later, after more than 50 per cent inflation, most Tecs
still operated at between Pounds 46 and Pounds 50 a training week.
Page 9
Unemployment rises
Apex to apply for an administrator

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920117

