FT921-4005

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): Choice over allocation -
Married Couple's Allowance


THE chancellor proposes to give married couples a new option, from April 6
1993, to choose how to allocate the married couple's allowance between them.
The proposal is that: a couple will be able to choose to allocate the whole
allowance to the wife or to split it equally between them; the wife will
have the right to claim half the allowance; if the couple express no
preference, the allowance will go to the husband, as now.
The married couple's allowance is currently given to a married man, and can
be transferred to his wife only if his income is less than his total
allowances (in which case the excess allowance can be transferred to her).
They are not allowed to transfer the allowance in any other circumstances,
even if it would make them better off as a couple - for example, where the
wife is a higher-rate taxpayer and the husband a basic-rate payer.
The chancellor's proposal will allow couples to decide, before the start of
a tax year, to allocate the whole allowance to the wife or to split it
equally between them, regardless of the size of their income. Wives will be
able to claim half the allowance by right.
Whatever arrangement is chosen will apply for the following tax year and all
future tax years, until they change the allocation. Changes will normally
take effect only from the start of the following tax year.
Where the allocation of the allowance is changed, both partners' tax codes
will change and they will both be notified by their tax offices.
There are higher rates of married couple's allowance which can be given if
either partner is over the age of 65. In the case of such couples, only the
basic allowance (Pounds 1,720) will be transferable.
Couples who want the married couple's allowance to continue to be set
against the husband's income need take no action - the allowance will still
be given to the husband, unless they ask for a different allocation.
The arrangements for the widow's bereavement allowance, which goes to a
widow in the tax year of her husband's death and the following tax year, and
for the transitional allowances given to some couples following the
introduction of independent taxation of husband and wife in 1990-91, will
not be affected.
Couples who wish to opt to allocate all of the married couple's allowance to
the wife, and wives who wish to receive half the allowance, will be able to
claim by notifying their tax offices before the starting date of April 6
1993.
Child support
The chancellor proposes in his Budget that: maintenance assessed by the new
Child Support Agency will qualify for tax relief in the same way as
maintenance paid under a court order; and maintenance collected by the
agency on behalf of a divorced or separated spouse of the payer will qualify
for tax relief in the same way as if payment were made direct to the spouse.
Inheritance tax
The chancellor proposes to raise the threshold for inheritance tax from
Pounds 140,000 to Pounds 150,000. The new threshold will apply to transfers
made on or after March 10 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

920311

