FT922-3965

FT  09 JUN 92 / Bosnian defence units launch counter-attack on Serbs


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


Serb irregulars devastated Sarajevo with heavy shelling yesterday, leaving a
trail of destruction and fire in the Bosnian capital, but Moslem and Croat
defenders hit back hard for the first time in days.
In New York Mr Boutros Boutros-Ghali the UN Secretary-General, recommended
enlarging the 14,000-member United Nations peace-keeping force in Yugoslavia
by more than 1,100 troops to enable the UN to reopen the airport at Sarajevo
tin order to bring in humanitarian supplies.
Heavy explosions ripped through the heart of the capital and thick columns
of black smoke rose from burning buildings across the city, where some
300,000 residents are trapped.
More than 30 people were killed and 120 wounded over the weekend in some of
the worst fighting in a European capital since World War Two. Hospital
officials said at least eight had been killed on Monday.
Bosnian territorial defence units launched an unexpected counter-attack
against the heavily-armed Serb forces near an area where 40,000 Serb, Croat
and Moslem residents are trapped.
Sarajevo radio reported that more than 30 people were killed and 120 wounded
over the weekend. An estimated 5,300 people have died and 22,500 been
injured since the fighting broke out in the republic in April.
The territorial units include troops drawn from Sarajevo's close-knit ethnic
communities, including Moslems, Croats and lery left behind by the
Serb-dominated Yugoslav federal army units which withdrew from a central
barracks in the city last Friday. Ms Gordana Kenezevac, a journalist from
Oslobedjne, the Bosnian daily said:'Everybody is fighting to save their
city. Mathematicians and students, fathers and sons, sportsmen and office
workers.'
'Even though we have no food or medicine, we will not surrender to Karadzic
and his forces.' Ancient parts of Sarajevo were burning after yesterday's
shelling from Serb positions in hills surrounding the city. The medieval
Serb orthodox church, the Holy Trinity catholic church and the Ali Pasha
mosque, all located in the capital's old quarter, were destroyed.
In New York there was progress on plans for the United Nations to take
control of the capital's airport which Serbian militia have blockaded for
the past nine weeks.
The blockade of the airport and the main road links into Sarajevo has
prevented any food and medical supplies from reaching the 300,000 Moslem,
Serb, and Croat inhabitants of the city, which has been under siege for over
two months.
If it goes ahead, the UN plan to secure Sarajevo's airport, which was agreed
in principle at the weekend between the Bosnian government, Serb forces, and
UN officials, will allow UN troops to impose a 10km ring around the airport.
They will also secure two 20km-long corridors from the ring into parts of
Sarajevo.
Serbia suffers under sanctions Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920609

