FT923-9585

FT  04 AUG 92 / Isolated Macedonia holds on to stability and a name: Kerin
Hope finds the independent but unrecognised ex-Yugoslav republic enjoying
rare political and economic order


   By KERIN HOPE


INDEPENDENT but unrecognised, the beleaguered ex-Yugoslav republic of
Macedonia is still managing to hold on to political and economic stability.
Mr Petar Gosev, the prime minister designate, is expected to announce a new
government this week. It will be a delicately balanced coalition between his
ex-communist Social Democrat party and the ethnic Albanian party for
Democratic Prosperity.
Its survival will depend on whether the European Community decision in June
that Macedonia should not be recognised under its present name can be
reversed. Greece, its southern neighbour, insists on a change of name on the
grounds that an independent Macedonia could one day make a territorial claim
on the adjoining Greek province of the same name.
But Mr Kiro Gligorov, Macedonian president, and Mr Gosev say they have
little room for manoeuvre. Mr Gligorov says: 'Without the name, we have no
identity. It distinguishes us from other Slavs. The Greeks say, denounce the
name and then we will talk. But who can do that?'
If the new government compromises on the issue of the name, it risks
provoking an outburst of nationalism that could be exploited by the main
opposition party, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation (VMRO).
Tension is already apparent between extremist nationalists in VMRO and the
ethnic Albanian minority, which makes up more than a quarter of the
country's 2.2m population.
Macedonia has joined the UN embargo against Serbia, its main trading
partner. According to Mr Ivanco Stefanov, foreign undersecretary, the cost
of applying sanctions will amount to Dollars 1.3bn, equivalent to
Macedonia's total annual export earnings before the collapse of the Yugoslav
federation.
Efforts are under way to ensure that technical assistance from the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development can continue. But Macedonia will not
be eligible for EC financial aid or for loans from international
institutions.
Greece has been enforcing unofficial sanctions in recent months. About
two-thirds of Macedonian imports used to come by road from the northern
Greek port of Salonica, but delays and obstruction on the part of Greek
officials have forced Macedonian companies to find an alternative route
through Bulgaria.
Shops in Skopje, now mostly under private ownership, are well stocked as the
government rarely attempts to collect customs duties on consumer goods
shipped through Bulgaria, according to local businessmen. Food prices have
come down, thanks to a good harvest and lack of opportunity to export.
Still, Macedonia's economic policymakers have a difficult course to steer.
'We must be pragmatic about coping with our predicament but we can't abandon
plans for restructuring to develop a full market economy,' says a government
adviser.
One pressing problem is to find backing for a new currency, the denar, due
to be launched by the end of 1992. Yugoslav dinars were withdrawn from
circulation as part of an anti-inflation package launched in April. They
were replaced with a transitional currency, the Macedonian coupon, on a
one-for-one basis.
A public-sector wage freeze was imposed at the same time, together with
price controls on a basic shopping basket, including bread, sugar and
cooking oil. The result has been the monthly inflation rate has fallen from
80 per cent in April to 17 per cent in June.
But Macedonia's foreign exchange reserves total less than Dollars 40m,
including Dollars 5m in gold. 'We need a substantial loan if we are to make
the denar convertible, but international recognition is necessary first to
establish our creditworthiness,' says Mr Borko Stanoevski, central bank
governor.
The transitional currency is unofficially propped up by a steady inflow of
D-Marks, estimated at more than Dollars 750m last year, brought home in cash
by migrant workers in Switzerland and Germany. Coupons are used for public
sector wages and payments, while the D-Mark serves as a parallel,
convertible currency for the private sector.
Meanwhile, the government is pressing on with legislation to attract foreign
investors and broaden the privatisation programme to include more than 1,400
industrial and service sector companies. One encouraging sign is a project
by Daewoo, the South Korean electronics giant, to start producing
telecommunications equipment later this year at a state-owned plant on Lake
Ochrid, close to the Greek border.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920804

