FT921-668

FT  27 MAR 92 / Bus competition fails the road test: Increased efficiency
and innovation have come at a price


   By RICHARD TOMKINS


It is a wet morning in Merthyr Tydfil, South Wales. In most respects, the
town is as quiet as one might expect: but the bus station is a scene of
frenetic activity.
A few weeks ago National Welsh, the town's main bus operator, went into
receivership. With the 1986 deregulation of Britain's bus industry leaving
no barriers to entry, it was the signal for half a dozen other bus companies
to speed into town and fight over the spoils.
The result is close to anarchy. In this town of just 39,500 inhabitants,
buses enter or leave the bus station at the rate of one every 30 seconds.
Double-deckers, single-deckers, coaches, minibuses: they come in a bizarre
array of colours, parking two or three abreast at the bus stands and
proclaiming their destinations, if at all, with hand-scrawled notices stuck
behind their windscreens.
One man is audibly cursing as he dodges his way between the vehicles. 'It's
chaos,' he explodes. 'We're wandering around like chickens with our heads
cut off. Twenty years I've lived in this town, and I can't even find my own
bus stop.'
Merthyr's experiences of bus deregulation are not unique. Towns and cities
throughout much of Britain have experienced bus competition and its
consequences. London, with its special traffic problems, is alone in having
been excluded from the experiment; but the Conservatives have promised to
privatise and deregulate the capital's bus services, too, if they win the
general election.
The aims of deregulation were praiseworthy enough. For years, Britain's bus
system had been in decline. Part of the reason, the government argued in a
1984 white paper, was the highly restrictive licensing system which had
operated for half a century. The 1985 Transport Act swept this system away,
allowing anyone to run a bus service anywhere, except London, and paving the
way for the privatisation of the state-owned and municipal bus operators.
In theory, greater competition should have led to improved efficiency, a
proliferation of bus services, lower fares, and a rise in passenger numbers.
And indeed, deregulation has scored successes.
Efficiency has increased. Department of Transport figures show that the
average operating costs per vehicle mile have fallen by 36 per cent in real
terms since deregulation (largely through reductions in wage costs). Local
authority subsidies for bus services have more than halved from Pounds 465m
a year to Pounds 219m at 1991 prices.
Innovation, too, has come to the industry - notably through the introduction
of high-frequency minibus services in place of less frequent double-deckers.
Total annual bus mileage has risen by 19 per cent since deregulation,
reversing a long period of decline.
Arguably, however, these advances are far outweighed by the negative effects
of deregulation:
Fares have gone up, not down. Department of Transport figures show that
fares outside London have risen by an average of 12 per cent in real terms
since deregulation, largely because of the axeing of subsidies.
The pace of change in routes and services is such that many towns and cities
are no longer able to offer up-to-date information on bus times and routes.
Passengers have deserted the buses. Outside London, the annual number of
journeys has fallen by 19 per cent since deregulation. In the metropolitan
areas, they have fallen by 26 per cent.
Competition is limited mainly to the busiest routes in urban areas. The
effect is to worsen traffic congestion by spreading a declining number of
passengers among more buses. Less profitable off-peak services have been cut
because operators no longer make enough money from their busier services to
cross-subsidise them.
Wafer-thin profits have left operators unable to replace old buses. The
proportion of vehicles more than 12 years old has grown from 19 per cent
before deregulation to 34 per cent now. Britain's bus manufacturing industry
has collapsed.
Six years after its introduction, then, deregulation has failed to reverse
the decline of Britain's bus industry. Yet few would advocate a return to
the old days. The Labour party wants to restore order by giving exclusive
franchises for an entire town or region's services to a single operator. The
bus companies want to be allowed to build up dominant market positions over
substantial geographical areas.
The argument underlying both positions is that some of the best bus services
outside London today are to be found in the small number of towns and cities
where companies enjoy near-monopolies. Bus services in Bristol and
Birmingham, for example, are comprehensive and orderly, timetable
information is readily available, fares are reasonable, and the lack of
cut-throat competition has allowed operators to invest in modern vehicles.
The bus companies argue that regional monopolies are fine as long as the
threat of competition exists, because if an operator gets lazy or
exploitative, rival operators will quickly emerge. But the Department of
Trade and Industry has consistently intervened to obstruct merger activity
in an attempt to preserve head-on competition.
Whatever the outcome of the election, that could change. The trade and
Industry department is currently fighting a High Court ruling, upheld by the
Appeal Court, that local bus monopolies affect too small an area to warrant
intervention. If the House of Lords rejects the DTI's appeal case, the door
will be opened to a wave of consolidation.
Such an outcome, however, is unlikely to deter the Conservatives from
seeking to deregulate London's bus industry - an idea to which local
authorities, consumer groups, the London Tourist Board and others are
strongly opposed.
These organisations have pointed out that efficiency has already been
brought to London, where routes are still regulated but London Buses has to
compete with the private sector for the exclusive right to operate them.
Meanwhile, in spite of severe traffic congestion, London is one part of the
country where bus use has actually risen since 1986.
The government argues that bus deregulation and the privatisation of London
Buses would benefit the capital by encouraging innovation. Opponents,
though, query whether this potential gain would outweigh the risks.
Confusion over fast-changing routes and services could lead to mass
desertion of the buses in favour of cars or the hard-pressed Underground;
preserving the Travelcard system, which allows transfers between different
transport operators, would become much more complicated; withdrawal of
subsidies would push fares up; and, worst of all, traffic chaos could result
from hundreds of one-person-operated minibuses on the capital's busiest
routes.
It does not look like a vote-grabber. Far better, critics say, to keep the
routes regulated and speed up buses with bus lanes and other priority
measures. That, however, would mean clobbering car drivers.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920327

