FT922-13502

FT  11 APR 92 / Leading Article: Full term at Number 10


THE ELECTION result is an extraordinary personal achievement for Mr John
Major. He held his nerve when his campaign faltered and his low-key,
matter-of-fact approach proved in the end more impressive to voters than
Labour's glitz. Whatever they told the pollsters, people were not prepared
to trust Mr Kinnock's new model Labour party with the legacy of Thatcherism,
even in a recession.
Mr Major now has the authority and the opportunity to make a distinctive
mark at home and on the world stage. It took Mrs Thatcher a whole first term
to recover from recession and build a personal team; it was only when she
had done this that the great achievements of her second term between 1983
and 1987 became possible.
Mr Major's character-forming battles in the Gulf, at Maastricht and in the
domestic economy have been compressed into a shorter period, and have been
fought without a personal mandate from the voters. His job now is to
translate into much clearer policy terms the vision of a country more at
ease with itself, which he proclaimed for a second time yesterday on the
pavement of Downing Street.
Mr Major was chosen by his party 16 months ago because he appeared to
represent a bridge between the radical insights of Thatcherism and a
necessary, less confrontational period of reconstruction, especially in the
public services. The Tory manifesto failed to distinguish the main lines of
this vision from a cluttered landscape of random projects: it was the work
of a party which had not found time to set its post-Thatcherite priorities.
Such time for contemplation is always at a premium for a party in
government, but with a full term available to him Mr Major would be well
advised to spend this summer thinking, along with the team announced this
weekend.
Open mind
The foundation of this policy agenda must be sound public finance and an
open mind. In spite of the frolics in the financial markets yesterday, tough
circumstances lie ahead for the British economy which will require real
strength of purpose in Downing Street. The faltering recovery now under way
can be boosted by a swift, if modest, cut in interest rates, since there is
no longer a serious political difficulty in putting rates back up again
should conditions make that necessary.
But Mr Major's unbreakable commitment to low inflation and the exchange rate
mechanism, set alongside continuing pressures in the German economy, mean
high real interest rates and rising unemployment are bound to persist. The
prime minister now has enough time to demonstrate that this policy will
eventually bring rewards, although it will also mean public spending
sacrifices along the way. His chancellor, Mr Norman Lamont, has had a
difficult election campaign, but is well qualified to see the task through.
An early political challenge will be the European Community, of which
Britain assumes the presidency this summer. With a move towards the right
and a series of leadership changes ahead in Community countries, Mr Major is
in a good position to play a leading role. He will rightly resist some
attempts to increase the powers of the centre, but he must be prepared for
deft footwork on foreign policy, defence and some aspects of social policy.
In return, Britain can help build an enlarged community characterised by
strong internal competition and a commitment to global free trade.
Own interests
At home, Thursday's results must not be taken as a mandate to put aside all
need to rethink the way the country is governed, both at central and local
authority level. No one can expect the government to act against its own
interests by proposing the kind of electoral reforms which its opponents may
now see as the only way back into power. But Mr Major sensibly acknowledged
yesterday that he would need to take stock of opinion in Scotland.
Improvement in public services, whether in health, education, training or
other areas of local authority provision requires a twin-track approach:
decentralisation and contracting out, which the Conservatives have
pioneered, and appropriately accountable supervision. The proliferation of
quangos, so depressingly unchecked in the manifesto, needs to be resisted
and, where it cannot be, appointments should be made from a wide spectrum of
society.
It is not necessary to buy proportional representation or wholesale
constitutional reform to recognise that restoring the health of local
government and its relationship with Whitehall is an essential part of
running the country well. Problems like homelessness can only be resolved by
effective co-operation between central and local government. Getting this
right is at least as important as a lorry load of citizen's charters.
Mr Major is a consensus-minded politician, but if he is to achieve his
objectives for society he will need to step beyond his party's prejudices on
issues like transport, the environment, urban development and local
government. There is a need for the sort of radicalism that stirs up trouble
and requires skilful salesmanship. The prime minister should hang on to that
soapbox.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920411

