FT924-8337

FT  11 NOV 92 / International Capital Markets: Increase in retail volume
strains London markets


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


A SURGE in private client trading in UK government bonds in recent days has
paralysed one corner of the gilts market, as staff, computers and
back-office facilities have become increasingly over-stretched.
Retail brokers complained yesterday that several market-makers had stopped
taking orders, and that where prices were available, they were often
inconsistent.
The log-jam prompted the Bank of England and the London Stock Exchange to
meet gilt market-makers and private client brokers yesterday to discuss ways
of easing pressure on the retail side of the market. Average daily volume in
the gilts market has increased from 2,500 to over 6,000 trades recently, the
stock exchange estimates.
Dealers said the surge was caused in part by a wave of buying by private
clients, prompted by growing expectations of a further two per cent cut in
UK interest rates. Some investors have also been switching from short to
long-dated gilts, to gain higher yields.
Retail investors were also reported to have been rushing to sell out of a
gilt issue which the Bank of England had called for early redemption.
Only five of the gilt market's 18 market-makers - Barclays de Zoete Wedd,
County NatWest, Greenwell Montagu, UBS Phillips & Drew and Warburg
Securities - are set up to deal in small amounts with retail brokers,
increasing pressure on them as volumes rise.
Market-makers, on the other hand, said that brokers' reluctance to group
small trades into larger orders had made the problem worse.
The difficulties were exacerbated by the practice in the gilts market of
same-day settlement, dealers said.
After yesterday's meeting, the Bank said settlement deadlines would be
extended from the current 3pm to allow more time for paperwork to be
prepared by brokers. Brokers would also be encouraged to aggregate small
orders to reduce the back-office pressure. 'There's nothing to stop the
brokers dealing as principals and then parcelling shares out to their
clients,' it said.
Retail brokers are due to hold a further meeting with the stock exchange
today to consider ways of easing the log-jam.
Retail investors can obtain gilts through their brokers, or through the
National Savings stock register, which buys gilts from the Bank of England.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921111

