FT923-6435

FT  25 AUG 92 / Strongman at the economic helm: Marclio Marques Moreira is
seen as crucial for financial stability


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


MR Marclio Marques Moreira is an unlikely strongman. Diffident in manner,
quietly spoken and polite, the finance minister's demeanour has less the
flavour of a dynamic technocrat, more that of a kindly schoolmaster. But, in
the view of many Brazilians, on his shoulders hang in large measure the slim
chances of short-term stability for Brazil's giant economy.
He took office in May 1991 at the age of 59, a stark contrast with his
predecessor, the fiery Ms Zelia Cardoso de Mello. She had introduced two
shock plans and a freeze of the nation's financial assets; Mr Moreira
promised nothing more than a steady work-out of Brazil's economic problems
and an absence of shock plans. She would lose her temper and use language
that would anger her foreign counterparts; his approach, deliberate and
diplomatic, gained him the nickname The Tamer of Turtles. She offered
confrontation; he conciliation.
A former banker and diplomat  - before his appointment he was ambassador to
Washington  - he arrived in office with no backing from Brazil's powerful
political factions. But he has since built a constituency, not least among
business. A survey of executives in Sao Paulo last week suggested 80 per
cent see his continuation in office as important. The news magazine Veja,
which often reflects the views of the influential Sao Paulo business
community, ran a front page picture of the minister in May beside the
headline 'Bad with him; worse without him'.
Mr Moreira and his economic team have also won the confidence of
international bankers. Without him, many bankers believe the debt
restructuring agreement the government is now negotiating would collapse. A
detailed agreement with leading bank creditors was said last week to be
perhaps two weeks away.
The support of the International Monetary Fund will be required if this
accord is to go ahead, and the IMF will have to be convinced that government
spending is under control. Mr Moreira is said to be strongly resisting
efforts by others in the government to increase spending on projects
designed to secure President Fernando Collor the congressional support he
needs to avoid impeachment.
With the country transfixed by the corruption allegations surrounding the
president, Mr Moreira has begun a damage-limitation exercise.
Hardly able to advance his economic reform, he is now attempting to protect
progress made to date in the hope that when the political crisis is resolved
he can once again move forward to stabilise the economy  - which means
stabilising government finances.
Progress in his central aim of bringing down the Brazilian inflation rate
has been almost non-existent. Inflation is still running at 22 per cent a
month, despite his good intentions, although the corruption scandal has
undoubtedly affected inflationary expectations.
A slump in tax revenues  - the scandal has given people an excuse not to pay
taxes to government officials  - has also meant the government missed the
targets under its IMF standby programme for the second quarter in a row.
On the positive side, Brazil's foreign exchange reserves have soared to
Dollars 20bn (Pounds 10.4bn), giving the government ammunition against
speculators in the foreign exchange markets.
According to Mr Arminio Fraga, director of international affairs at the
central bank in Braslia, the government has also increased its forecasts of
this year's trade surplus, to Dollars 15bn or more against Dollars 10.6bn in
1991.
In Mr Moreira's shoes, many other ministers would have resigned by now. The
minister, who has in the past expressed shock at examples of Brazilians'
lack of morality, stays on, apparently out of a strong sense of duty. 'When
the seas are rough, people who act responsibly have to maintain their
composure,' he said last week.
He is probably now a more central figure in the government than the
president who appointed him. Even if Mr Collor survives, the president will
almost inevitably be fatally weakened. If the president goes, his
replacement  - Vice-President Itamar Franco  - has said he would like to see
Mr Moreira continuing in office.
It is not yet possible to divine what kind of government Mr Franco would
run. A politician of traditional nationalist mould, he is an unlikely
natural ally of Mr Moreira, and Mr Franco would have to build a political
coalition within Congress. Some of Mr Moreira's supporters fear that if he
were to take a job in the Franco government  - to which he would add
gravitas  - he might well be dumped once he had outlived his usefulness.
Those who know Mr Moreira say that if he faces having to abandon his
principles, in whatever government, he will quit. His continuation in office
is thus a sign economic discipline has not been completely abandoned during
the political crisis.
A resolution of the crisis is still possible within a month or two, one
senior administration official said yesterday. If this happens, it would
have set back the economic reform programme by six months  - unfortunate but
not disastrous. Mr Moreira's nightmare must be of a crisis that drags on for
years as Mr Collor struggles to retain his hold on office.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920825

