FT921-15278

FT  11 JAN 92 / Israel upset by UN Jerusalem reference


   By JUDY MALTZ and REUTER


   JERUSALEM, BEIRUT


ISRAEL has asked the US to explain why it supported a resolution which
refers to Jerusalem as part of the occupied Palestinian territories.
The resolution, which strongly condemned Israel's plans to expel 12
Palestinians from the occupied territories, was passed unanimously by the UN
Security Council this week. The term 'occupied Palestinian territories'
appears twice in the resolution.
Israel is extremely sensitive to international declarations which cast doubt
on its sovereignty over Jerusalem. Official US policy holds that the status
of the city should be determined in negotiations, but that it should not be
divided.
The status of Jerusalem is expected to be one of the big obstacles in the
Arab-Israeli peace talks. The third round is scheduled to resume in
Washington tomorrow.
According to various opinion polls in Israel, more than half the population
would be willing to make some sort of territorial concession involving the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip, but only a small minority are prepared to
relinquish sovereignty over Jerusalem.
US officials tried to play down the significance of the wording of the
resolution, saying it was merely a geographical description of the
territories located over the 'green line' - Israel's pre-1967 borders.
Israel annexed Arab East Jerusalem shortly after its capture in the 1967
War.
Israeli aircraft killed at least 12 Palestinian guerrillas and wounded 12
yesterday, in their first raid on Lebanon this year, security sources said,
Reuter reports from Beirut.
The jets bombed bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC) near Na'ameh, 9 miles south of Beirut,
Palestinians said.
The bases of the PFLP-GC, a radical group opposed to the peace policies of
the Palestine Liberation Organisation, have been frequent targets for
Israeli fighter aircraft and commandos.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920111

