FT922-7371

FT  19 MAY 92 / International Company News: K mart and Federated move ahead


   By NIKKI TAIT


   NEW YORK


TWO large US retailers - K mart, the discount store chain, and Federated
Department Stores, which operates 220 stores nationwide - yesterday reported
modestly encouraging first-quarter figures, providing further evidence of
brisker trading on Main Street.
K mart said that after-tax profits had risen 8.3 per cent to Dollars 116m in
the three months to April 29, although earnings per share slid from 27 cents
to 26 cents. Total sales increased by 8.1 per cent to Dollars 8.27bn.
On a 'same-store' basis, K mart said there had been a 2.8 per cent increase,
when November's acquisition of OfficeMax is excluded. Its speciality chains,
which range from Waldenbooks to the Pace wholesale clubs, saw sales on a
same-store basis rise by 7.9 per cent.
Mr Joseph Antonini, chairman, said the 'colder-than-normal weather' had held
back sales in the home improvements, gardening and clothing lines. However,
he was encouraged by sales of 'big ticket' items - suggesting some progress
in the economy - and by the speciality stores generally.
Meanwhile, Federated Department Stores, which clambered out of bankruptcy
earlier this year, posted an after-tax profit of Dollars 11.8m in the three
months to May 2, compared with a Dollars 64.2m loss a year earlier. This is
the first year since 1987 in which the group turned a profit in the first
quarter.
Total sales from stores such as Bloomingdale's, Abraham & Straus and Bon
Marche, were slightly lower at Dollars 1.57bn against Dollars 1.59bn, but
same-store sales rose 4.4 per cent.
Federated acknowledged that promotions had helped first-quarter sales and
warned that it expected comparable store sales to be lower, year-on-year, in
the second quarter.
However, the group also predicted a 'significant comparable store sales
improvement' for the full year.
In the speciality store sector, Toys 'R' Us, the New Jersey-based toy
retailer, saw after-tax profits improve from Dollars 22.4m to Dollars 28.3m.
Sales were up from Dollars 1.02bn to Dollars 1.17bn.
Its toy outlets in the US reported a 4.7 per cent increase in same-store
sales.
Overseas, sales growth was strong in Europe, but Canada suffered from
depressed economic conditions.
The Kids 'R' Us clothing operation was also affected by 'the difficult
apparel sales environment'.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920519

