FT923-9641

FT  04 AUG 92 / London health authority urges hospital closures


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


A PROGRAMME of hospital closures is proposed in a report from North West
Thames Regional Health Authority to the government inquiry into future
healthcare in London.
'Looking forward to 1996, it is clear that the present pattern of hospital
services in west-central and north-west London is unsustainable,' the
authority says in evidence to the inquiry.
It proposes the withdrawal of accident and emergency services from Charing
Cross Hospital, in Hammersmith, by 1994. There should be only two accident
and emergency departments in west-central London - at St Mary's Hospital,
Paddington, and the new Westminster and Chelsea Hospital - and many other
services could be accommodated at those hospitals.
Surplus sites would include Westminster Hospital; Westminster Children's;
the West London; the Western Ophthalmic; the Samaritan; and part of St
Charles Hospital.
Charing Cross is, the report says, threatened by the government's internal
market in healthcare although it might prove 'more stable than many other
London teaching hospitals'. An appraisal exercise being undertaken by the
authority will develop firmer proposals on the allocation of services to St
Mary's and Westminster and Chelsea, and 'consider the future of Charing
Cross in more detail'.
Mrs Virginia Bottomley, health secretary, is awaiting a report on London's
health provision from Sir Bernard Tomlinson, former chairman of the Northern
Regional Health Authority, in the autumn. It is likely to recommend hospital
closures with resources diverted to family doctor and community services.
The North West Thames report is the latest indication that health
authorities are planning on the assumption that the Tomlinson inquiry will
lead to a big cut in hospital beds. A report from South East Thames Regional
Health Authority last week raised the possibility of the closure of either
St Thomas' or Guy's - two of the capital's most famous teaching hospitals.
London has more hospital beds than the national average but family doctor
and community services are relatively underdeveloped, particularly in
inner-city areas. The need for rationalisation has become urgent because of
last year's health reforms. New funding arrangements are leading to health
authorities in outer areas sending fewer patients to the central London
teaching hospitals.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920804

