FT923-15359

FT  02 JUL 92 / Management: Space invaders brought back down to earth -
French media buying


   By GARY MEAD


The murky world of media-buying in France received a jolt on June 16 when
the French newspaper La Tribune leaked details of a draft report by the
Conseil de la concurrence, the government agency equivalent to the UK's
Monopolies and Mergers Commission which investigates commercial monopolistic
abuses.
The Conseil has been investigating many aspects of the French advertising
market for the past two years.
The result has now been circulated to as many as 70 advertising networks,
media-buyers and media owners, all of whom have been asked to comment within
the next two months. The Conseil then intends holding hearings with
companies concerned early in 1993.
What will follow is open to question. Many working in the advertising world
both in the UK and France believe that the Conseil will eventually rule
against a number of practices now operating in the French advertising
market, estimated to be worth Dollars 8bn (Pounds 4.3bn) annually.
The central complaint by the Conseil is the utter lack of transparency in
the French media-buying business.
It is common knowledge that companies involved in media-buying purchase
large volumes of display advertising space in print, radio and television
and in return receive considerable discounts from media owners.
The sole activity of some companies such as Carat, the biggest single
pan-European operator, is media-buying, while others who offer all
advertising services have formed themselves into 'clubs' for media-buying
activities
The discounts - which may vary between 20 per cent and 50 per cent,
depending both on the volume bought and how far in advance of publication or
broadcast date - are rarely passed on to the advertiser.
But even that is speculative, since those who know the scale of the
discounting - media-buyers and media owners - refuse to disclose it, usually
on the grounds of commercial confidence. The Conseil appears to be arguing
that far from being a necessary trade secret, non-disclosure is unfair.
The Conseil has also ruled that, until it has drawn up a final report in
1993, those involved in the media-buying market are forbidden to comment on
the matter.
However, that does not prevent everyone involved from engaging in furious
conversations whenever possible.
According to the head of one leading international advertising network with
considerable interests in France, the Conseil's draft report has already
been misunderstood as an attack on the supposed monopolistic position of
some media-buyers.
'That is untrue. There are no anti-trust problems because no single
media-buyer has anything like 25 per cent of the market. Even Carat hopes to
achieve only 12 per cent this year, he said.
'It's more an issue of malpractice, particularly the issue of double-billing
 -you get one bill from TF1 showing you have paid 80 per cent of the
advertising rate and you show your client a bill saying you have paid 100
per cent. It's disgraceful, but everyone does it because not to would mean
being less competitive. I am convinced that such practices will not be
around in three years' time.'
Simeon Galpert, finance director of The Birkdale Group, the UK marketing
services agency, believes the problem is more complex, since it is unclear
what the media-buying business actually is.
'If you go to a French magazine and buy 5,000 advertising pages for the next
year, naturally you get a big discount, since you are taking a risk that, a
year from now, you will not have sold all those pages.
'A 20 per cent discount is not big enough to be in the risk-broking
business. You could say that the advertiser should be getting some of that
discount but, after all, he is not the one taking the risk.'
Whatever the rights and wrongs, a basic question remains. Why have
advertisers not taken action to cut out the middle-man, the media-buyer? The
answer is that some may be planning to do just that.
Once Procter & Gamble, Nestle, Ford and other advertising giants latch on to
the idea that there is little to stop them negotiating directly with media
owners, the days of fat profits for some media-buyers may be numbered.
Perhaps that is one explanation why the letter of intent signed on February
15 by Maurice Levy, chairman of the French advertising network Publicis-FCB
Europe, to join Omnicom and WPP in The Media Partnership media-buying club,
and which was scheduled to be put into operation by March 31, now appears to
be in suspended animation.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920702

