FT923-15525

FT  01 JUL 92 / Foreign Exchanges: US news leaves dollar shaky


   By PETER JOHN


THE latest batch of US economic indicators did little to help an already
shaky dollar yesterday and it failed to recover significant strength against
the D-Mark or pound, writes Peter John.
The US currency had rallied in early dealings as profit-taking put pressure
on a strong D-Mark. However, it was a short-term correction, and when
consumer confidence data and US regional buying order figures were released
traders found no encouraging signs and sold the dollar down. The forthcoming
G-7 meeting in Munich was also prompting dollar nervousness.
Dealers were particularly worried that consumers' perceptions of the next
six months were less optimistic than they had been for some time. They also
focused on the purchasing managers' index for Chicago in June, the first
June figure to be released in the US and which came in below most estimates.
After the effect of the figures had faded the dollar recovered and closed up
on the day at DM1.523, against DM1.517 on Monday. But traders said it
slipped again in late dealings in spite of holding firm against the yen and
Canadian dollar. In New York the US unit finished at DM1.5227 last night.
Mr Mark Slater of Merrill Lynch said: 'There were no supportive numbers and
the market has been looking for a bounce in the dollar rather than the
reversal of a downward trend.'
Sterling, which had suffered from Mrs Thatcher's recent comments over
European unity, rallied against the D-Mark but failed to reflect any growing
confidence in the UK currency. It eased to Dollars 1.904 from Monday's
Dollars 1.907 close and struggled to hold around DM2.900 after rising from
DM2.893. It continued to flounder at the bottom of the EMS band, some 6.02
percentage points below the top-placed Portuguese escudo. However, there was
no intervention by Portugal to sell the escudo and narrow the range, as it
had done on Monday. Although the stated maximum differential is no more than
6 percentage points, in practice it is 6.18.
Moscow confirmed that the rouble would become a convertible currency from
today, although wrangles continued yesterday over whether the Russian
currency rate would be established completely by the market, or some element
of fixed rate would remain.
The rate was set at 125.26 roubles to the dollar, compared with a
prospective rate of Rbs85 last week.
In Belgrade, Yugoslavia announced an 85 per cent devaluation of the dinar
and redenominated the currency in a package of moves designed to save the
war-ravaged economy. In Warsaw, the National Bank of Poland said it would
introduce new banknotes and knock four zeros off the zloty.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

920701

