FT923-10967

FT  28 JUL 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Bank managers' eyes glaze
over - Diane Summers explains why women entrepreneurs have to try much
harder to succeed


   By DIANE SUMMERS


The best that Emma Bridgewater hopes for when she goes to see a bank manager
is that he - and so far in her career it always has been a he - has a wife
who reads glossy magazines.
Bridgewater's business is designing, making and selling classy
hand-decorated pottery that is much-featured in the pages of stylish
publications.
Her problem is that the product has a predominantly feminine appeal; she has
found bank managers, meanwhile, are invariably male.
The perception of women starting up their own businesses is that they face
more problems than men. Top of the list of complaints is that they are not
taken seriously enough by colleagues or business contacts, according to a
Barclays report published earlier this year*.
Part of this problem may be that women tend to set up very different sorts
of businesses than their male counterparts. While almost a third of
start-ups are by women, they are concentrated in the service sector,
commonly in retailing. Unsurprisingly, women's businesses may often be based
on an extension of their traditional roles and existing experience. And, as
in Bridgewater's case, the product or service itself may appeal more to
women than to men.
When faced with a proposition with which they have difficulty in
identifying, bank managers display an astonishing lack of curiosity,
according to Bridgewater. 'I've found them extremely unwilling to try and
discover anything about the business. Even to step across the road to see
what we make seems too much effort. They have only been interested in profit
and security. This seems to me desperately stupid and short-sighted,' she
says.
From the banks' point of view, Bridgewater's experience would suggest missed
opportunities. As Baroness Denton, small firms minister, points out,
somewhere out there 'the bank manager who first turned down Anita Roddick
must lie awake at night'.
Clearly, a solution would be more female bank managers, although Bridgewater
is not attracted to the US notion of banks specifically for women. One piece
of progress would be to abolish the 'big mahogany desk carry-on designed to
intimidate', as she calls the interview with the bank manager. Banks need to
evolve a different way of assessing business projects brought to them by
women, perhaps by using mixed-sex panels, she argues.
'Instead of a nasty grilling session that's more like a viva, I'd prefer to
have a discussion, preferably with a group of people. The confrontational
approach is very alien to a lot of women,' says Bridgewater.
Fortunately she had already made a start in her business before her own viva
came up. With no formal training and barely covering her costs, she started
to buy pottery, decorating, glazing and firing it herself. She claims her
bank woke up to the fact she was in business 'when my cheques stopped being
made out to Fiorucci and Threshers and started to be to suppliers in Stoke'.
Now aged 31, Bridgewater is the eponymous chairman (she will have no truck
with what she considers feminist-speak) of a company with a turnover of
Pounds 1.25m. Between a shop in London's Fulham Road and a factory in
Stoke-on-Trent the business employs about 35 people and has made the
transition from a 'girlie-craftie profile to market leader in 'casual
dining', as china buyers call it. And I feel I've barely started yet,' she
says.
Top of the list of problems faced by women in small businesses may be not
being taken seriously; close behind, however, are the double pressures that
particularly affect women of combining a business start-up and sustaining
family life and domestic responsibilities.
Bridgewater's workroom behind the shop is a pleasant confusion of children,
sofas and dogs. Husband Matthew Rice, painter and a joint managing director
of the company, will some days cook them all lunch there; other days she
will go the few yards back to their house. There have been times when she
has been able to get away with putting very few hours into work; at present
she is on a run of 10-hour days.
In case it all sounds too much like some neo arts and crafts movement idyll,
Bridgewater describes the diverse pulls on her time and attention as
'horrendous'.
Running a business 'suits single people', she says. 'I spent my twenties
creating a vehicle for my strengths; I've spent the four-and-a-half years
since we married trying to work out how to accommodate the business
alongside marriage and children. Those 'you can have it all' types, who make
it look so easy, are doing girls a disservice.'
* Starting Up - A Barclays Report on Britain's Small Business Men and Women.
Market Research Enterprises. Free from Paragon Communications. Tel 071-734
6030.
 -----------------------------------------------------------
   PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED BY WOMEN SETTING UP IN BUSINESS
 -----------------------------------------------------------
Not being taken seriously by                       45%
colleagues/business contacts
The additional burden of family                    40%
responsibilities
Sex discrimination by suppliers/                   26%
customers
Pressure to stay at home and                       16%
support their partner
Sex discrimination by                              14%
institutions/government
High cost of creche/nannies/                        9%
nursery facilities
 -----------------------------------------------------------
 Source: Barclays
 -----------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920728

