FT922-4176

FT  06 JUN 92 / Despatches: One woman's identity crisis


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   SOUTH African blacks distrust the police, the judiciary, the army


everything to do with the white state. The story of Anna Maleka makes it
easy to see why.
Eighteen months ago, she was shot and stabbed in an attack on a Soweto-bound
commuter train in which 26 people died. Two of her friends were slaughtered
in the incident: middle-aged, God-fearing ladies who had joined her in
singing gospel songs to pass the time on the tedious 30 km journey.
Maleka wants revenge, less for her suffering than for theirs. So, she has
decided to testify against her attackers - risking retribution from them
and, more importantly, from members of their family who remain at liberty.
She suspects that the assailants were members of Inkatha, the mainly Zulu
political party which has been involved in much recent township violence.
And she is firmly convinced - like most township residents - that Inkatha
has close links with the South African security forces; she fears her
attackers could use police channels to discover her address. None the less,
she is willing to risk her life to see justice done.
Unfortunately, the police and the prosecutor do not appear equally keen. Not
that they obstruct justice actively; but when it comes to blacks murdering
one another, they seem to find their motivation somewhat diminished.
True, such cases are notoriously difficult to prosecute, precisely because
witnesses are reluctant to come forward. But while the authorities know that
jungle justice applies in South African townships, where the life of anyone
who testifies against a criminal is worth little, they do surprisingly
little to counter this threat. Chasing the killer of a white farmer or
housewife is a high priority affair, but black-on-black violence commands
much less attention.
So, 18 months after the event, the prosecutor - Advocate HJ Broodryk, of the
Attorney General's office - says there is too little evidence to mount a
trial. He seems untroubled that so little headway has been made towards
punishing those responsible for one of the most gruesome incidents in the
recent spate of violence - despite a pledge from President de Klerk that
such cases will be investigated and prosecuted with vigour.
Maleka could tell him why the case is so weak: police have led witnesses to
believe that their identity cannot be concealed in a trial. They have called
victims to two identity parades to pinpoint their attackers, using one-way
glass to protect them. But they have said that one-way glass is only a
temporary shield: eventually, witnesses must identify their attackers in
open court and risk vengeance from family members sitting in the public
gallery.
Indeed, the policemen who organised the latest identity parade were so
cavalier about witness protection that they ushered Maleka through the wrong
door after the identification - straight into the presence of the accused.
After that incident, her fellow witnesses vowed to attend no further parades
and made clear they had no intention of appearing in open court.
Under South African law, witnesses can claim more protection than this.
Evidence can be heard in camera, and their identity disguised by other
means. But the prosecutor must apply for such protection on their behalf;
and when Broodryk was approached on the issue, his immediate response was
that if witnesses did not wish to testify, the state would compel them to do
so.
He threatened to jail Maleka if she was too terrified to appear in open
court; and although he relented and said he would consider requesting that
evidence be heard in camera, he made clear he had little sympathy for her
predicament. The court, he said, might well not accept her reasons for
demanding anonymity - assuming he decided to plead her case in the first
place.
He attempted to reassure me - Maleka works for a journalists' co-operative,
of which the Financial Times is a member - that the case would never come to
trial, so there was no cause for concern. Yet, prosecuting cases such as
this, actively and aggressively, must be the only way to stop future
incidents. Certainly, such trials are difficult to win; but the police and
the prosecutors have a remedy at hand - if only they could be bothered to
use it.

The Financial Times


London Page XXIV

920606

