FT924-12114

FT  22 OCT 92 / Yeltsin call to delay congress rejected by parliament


   By JOHN LLOYD and DMITRI VOLKOV


   MOSCOW


TENSION between reformists and hardliners brought upheavals in the Russian
parliament yesterday, as evidence grew of an approaching showdown between
the antagonistic groups.
The parliament yesterday heavily rejected, by 114 votes to 59, a request
made last week by President Boris Yeltsin to postpone the session of the
Congress of Peoples' Deputies, set for December 1, until the spring.
Mr Yeltsin wanted to avoid a clash between the more than 1,000-strong
legislative body, heavily dominated by Communists and nationalists, and the
reformist government - whose programme is now deeply unpop-ular.
The rejection makes a clash apparently inevitable, with the likelihood now
that the government will be voted out. Mr Sergei Kovalyev, a pro-government
deputy, said after the vote that the government's resignation was now
'almost inevitable'.
The parliament also called before it government ministers and senior
officials - including Mr Anatoly Chubais, a deputy prime minister, Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, the foreign minister, and Mr Gennady Burbulis, the senior
presidential aide - who had briefed foreign correspondents last Friday on
the threat of a reactionary coup against the president.
They had also warned of the formation of armed gangs by hardline forces
including Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker and a bitter
critic of the government.
None of the ministers and officials appeared, but a statement from Mr
Kozyrev was read to the deputies in which he said that 'we warned the
journalists, and we are warning now about an attempt at revanchism
(reaction) on the part of some members of parliament'.
The angry deputies then voted to create a 13-member commission, dominated by
hardliners, to investigate the ministers' actions and recommend what action
should be taken against them.
Later in the day, Mr Khasbulatov summoned a press conference to allege that
he was under constant surveillance, that his life was threatened and that
the government was becoming 'totalitarian'. He was later led from
parliament, looking pale, by Mr Yuri Yarov, one of his deputies.
In an intervention in parliament Ms Bela Denisenko, the assistant health
minister, said she had seen Mr Khasbulatov after his exit and had told him
that 'in my opinion, according to external evidence, you are in a state of
narcotic or alcoholic intoxication' - to which he had responded, she said,
with 'ungentlemanly behaviour'.
Mr Vladimir Issakov, leader of the nationalist Russian Unity group, then
accused Mr Yeltsin of public drunkenness during the Tashkent summit of the
Commonwealth of Independent States in May - a charge he had made at the
time, and which had then been denied by Mr Yeltsin .
The confused events received a further twist when it was learnt that a
gunfight had taken place between parliamentary guards and members of the
Moscow militia on Tuesday, during which one guard was shot dead.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921022

