FT922-4182

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: Only bucks on Broadway - Karen Fricker queries the
relevance of Tony Awards


   By KAREN FRICKER


SOME OF the best acting in New York was on display at the Gershwin Theatre
last Monday night at the 46th annual Tony Awards ceremony, as the theatre
community preened, patted backs, and pretended that it was still an honour
to win a Tony.
Tony nominees Roscoe Lee Browne (for for best supporting actor in August
Wilson's Two Trains Running) and Judd Hirsch (who won the best actor award
for his performance in Herb Gardner's Conversations with my Father)
inadvertently put the Tonys into perspective when, on a television chat show
several days before the ceremony, they were unable to name last year's
winner in Hirsch's category (it was Nigel Hawthorne in Shadowlands).
Though the stated purpose of the Tony Awards is to honour excellence in the
Broadway theatre, everyone in town knows that what the Tonys are really
about is money: Tony-winning productions attract audiences. The commercial
fallout from the awards began the day after the ceremony, when productions
which struggled through in the vain hope of winning awards and a boost at
the box office started posting their closing notices; the first casualty was
Manhattan Theatre Clubs' Productions version of Alan Ayckbourn's A Small
Family Business.
The Tony Awards system fails to acknowledge that, with a few rare
exceptions, excellent work does not originate on Broadway any more. Anything
good is more likely to be an imported profit-driven star vehicle like this
season's controversial Death and the Maiden. The creative work of the
American theatre now happens off Broadway, and in non-profit theatres and
experimental companies throughout the country. This year's ground-breaking
musicals were nurtured in the non-profit sector: Jelly's Last Jam was
developed at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles and Falsettos was born and
raised at New York's Playwrights Horizons. Of the nine plays nominated for
Tony awards this year, six originated in the American non-profit theatre;
Two Trains Running was supported by no less than five non-profit
institutions, along with the commercial Jujamcyn Organisation, before it
landed on Broadway.
The landscape of New York theatre is shifting and the line between
off-Broadway and Broadway starting to blur. Broadway's theatres are defined
by their size and geographical location - they must have 499 seats or more,
and must be located in the Broadway area (with a few exceptions). Several
large off-Broadway companies, including the Manhattan Theatre Club and
Playwrights Horizons, have ticket prices upwards of Dollars 35 with top
notch production values to match, and locations in or near the Broadway
area. What distinguishes these theatres, in the public's perspective, from
the non-profit Broadway companies - Lincoln Centre Theatres, Circle in the
Square, the National Actors Theatre, and the Roundabout Theatre Company -
which offers similar fare?
The exclusion of off-Broadway productions from the Tony awards is a pet
peeve of Frank Rich, the New York Times lead theatre critic. In an interview
this week Rich commented on the Tony system's limitations: 'It's as if
excellent films like sex, lies and videotape and The Player were made
ineligible for Academy awards just because they were produced outside a
studio, or a TV series like The Civil Wars was not eligible for an Emmy
because it was made by public television,' says Rich.
Dissatisfaction with the Tony system seems to be mounting. An article in
this week's Variety calls the awards a 'scandal', saying that many of the
650 producers, journalists, and other industry insiders who decide the
awards, ignore voting rules when casting their ballot. Voters who do not see
every show nominated in a category are not supposed to vote in that
category, but, according to Variety writer Jeremy Gerard, many still do.
Gerard cited the example of Metro, one of this year's least successful
musicals, which was nonetheless nominated for a Tony for best score. Less
than 75 industry voters actually came to see Metro, though hundreds voted in
the hotly contested best score category, Gerard said. The rules are broken
because the voting is not policed, and, according to Gerard, the Leage of
American Theatres and Producers, which administers the awards, does not seem
to care. Susan Harley of the Theatre League calls the Tony voting process an
'honour system'. Gerard calls it 'the industry's dirty little secret'.
Frank Rich doubts that the Tony system will change in the foreseeable
future. The Theatre League is an organisation with a vested interest in
maintaining the commercial system at the status quo. To give off-Broadway
theatres Tony eligibility would be to introduce competition that can mount
productions much more cheaply than Broadway producers can, since
off-Broadway does not pay union scale, and often has less elaborate
production values than Broadway. As long as there is a buck to be made on
Broadway, it seems, the Tonys will keep on going like they always have.
No plainer example of the problems with the Broadway system need be sought
than Mike Nichols' production of Ariel Dorfman's Death and the Maiden. The
play is much too threatening for Broadway. Dorfman's play is very, very good
but Tonys are awarded for productions as well as plays, and Nichols'
production is very, very bad, and did not deserve to be nominated.
Death and the Maiden is intense and searing; it is meant to raise a lot of
difficult questions. It is not a pleasant play. It is certainly not a
comedy, but that is how it comes off on Broadway. By the end of the first
act the audience should be climbing the walls, but in Nichols' production
they are rolling in the aisles. The scene where Paulina (Glenn Close)
reveals to Gerardo, her husband, (Richard Dreyfuss) exactly what tortures
were done to her is positively a laugh riot.
Close is the production's only saving grace and deserves the best actress
Tony she won for her committed performance. Nichols' focuses much of the
play's interest on Paulina and Gerardo's relationship, and particularly on
the husband's struggle between love for his wife, incredulity at the
extremity of her actions, and professional ambition; and this is where the
production really falls apart: Dreyfuss simply does not turn up the dial
high enough.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

920606

