FT923-9798

FT  03 AUG 92 / Italy ends link between wage rises and inflation


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


AN AGREEMENT to end Italy's 47-year-old system linking wage rises to
inflation was yesterday hailed by Mr Giuliano Amato, the new prime minister,
as an important boost to the country's competitiveness.
Business leaders also welcomed the deal, which was agreed late on Friday
night at a meeting between ministers, trade unions and employers.
Mr Amato, speaking on state radio, appealed to investors to take heart from
the agreement and have confidence in the Italian economy and the lira.
'The most important point for the Italian economy and for those who watch it
from the international markets is that it must have a phase of tranquillity
(to allow us) to work, produce, and become competitive again.
'From this point of view, what is decisive in this accord is what it makes
possible for factories, companies, the industrial sector.'
The lira has been under severe pressure for six weeks, reflecting investors'
anxiety about economic prospects and fears of a possible devaluation.
Central bank intervention to support the currency has contributed to a fall
in reserves at the end of June to L79,383bn (Pounds 37bn) against L86,341bn
at the end of May and L109,442bn at the same time last year.
Abolishing the scala mobile, which has set inflation-linked wage rises for
most of Italy's workers since 1945, was a central part of Mr Amato's
attempts to reduce inflation from its current level of 5.5 per cent and
lower the huge budget deficit. The government has set an inflation target of
3.5 per cent for 1993 and just 2 per cent for the following year.
Under the deal, workers, instead of looking forward to automatic wage rises
in line with inflation, will get a small payment of L20,000 a month for 13
months, starting in January next year and lasting to the begining of 1994,
including the normal Christmas bonus. This is considerably less than rises
under the scala mobile.
In return, the government has pledged to freeze public sector tariffs and to
consider allowing workers to claim against tax for any unexpected future
rise in the cost of living.
Eliminating the system has been a long-standing aim of the country's
employers. Mr Cesare Romiti, chief executive of Fiat, the largest private
sector company, said the deal, which will be finalised in September,
represented a vital step to improving industry's competitiveness.
Pay hikes finished, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920803

