FT924-11972

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (18): The law
protects you from bad tenants and low rents - As the slowdown in the housing
market brings letting and renting back into fashion, the Review offers
advice to families who are obliged to move


   By DOMINIC EGAN


IF THE road to hell really is paved with good intentions, then there can be
no doubt that the devil is reserving a particularly hot spot for the men who
devised the Rent Act of 1977.
It was intended to protect tenants from unscrupulous landlords, by giving
them security of tenure and the right to apply for the registration of a
'fair rent'.
In fact, the Rent Act drove many landlords to withdraw their properties from
the market, causing a shortage of rentable properties and pushing up rents.
However, the recession is creating a revival in the private rental sector.
Many homeowners, unable to sell their properties, are looking to let their
houses in order to provide a source of income.
But how do you avoid getting stuck with an unwanted tenant at the end of the
term? And how do you avoid getting stuck with what you consider to be an
unrealistic rent?
Fortunately, the lawmakers created a solution to the problem in 1988 - the
'assured shorthold tenancy'. This is a fixed-term tenancy of not less than
six months. It is intended to be a balanced package, which offers the tenant
a reasonable, if limited, amount of security and the landlord the right to
recover possession if he so desires.
The tenant has two elements of security. First, the landlord cannot (save
for exceptional circumstances) end the tenancy for at least six months. Even
then, the tenant cannot be turned out of the property without notice.
In reality, however, the tenancy is weighted strongly in favour of the
landlord. If the agreement is drafted properly, he can insist that the
tenant leave after a minimum of six months.
Another bonus for the landlord is that there is very limited control over
the rents payable under an assured shorthold tenancy. It is possible for a
tenant to apply to a body called a 'rent assessment committee' for a ruling
that the rent is excessive.
However, the committee does not have to consider such an application, and is
not allowed to make a ruling unless certain strict criteria are satisfied.
What if the tenant proves to be your worst nightmare, smashing the furniture
and annoying the neighbours with endless parties?
Your letting agreement should include a right of 'forfeiture', entitling you
to terminate the agreement if the tenant misbehaves. But be warned: the
definition of 'misbehaviour' can be a complex legal issue, and a court order
is needed in such cases.
Setting up an assured shorthold tenancy is relatively simple. Prior to
creating the tenancy, the landlord must serve on the proposed tenant a
statutory notice in a prescribed form. If you have found your tenant through
a letting agency, then it should supply you with copies of this notice,
together with a standard letting agreement. If you are going it alone, then
both can be obtained from a legal stationery office, such as Oyez.
The notice specifies that the tenancy is to be an assured shorthold tenancy;
the letting agreement must provide for a fixed term of not less than six
months, and provide that the landlord cannot terminate the agreement before
then. This is absolutely essential if the legal conditions are to be met.
Save for these requirements, the parties are free to agree whatever terms
they like. However, if the landlord has any sense, he will include in the
agreement a right in his favour to terminate the tenancy at some time after
the six-month minimum.
Once you have created the tenancy, you then take one last but very important
step. You mark your diary not once but twice. One of the dates is when the
tenancy expires. The other entry should be several months in front of that
date and should read: 'Time to make a decision about the tenancy'.
When you reach the decision date, if everything has gone well, you may wish
to grant another shorthold tenancy to the same tenant. If so, you simply
agree the new rent and any new terms with the tenant, exchange new
agreements and effect your new tenancy. It is very important that the new
agreement is concluded prior to the end of the first term.
Provided that the premises are the same as those originally let, there is no
need to serve another assured shorthold tenancy notice. It is, however,
essential that the new tenancy is created on or before the date the original
fixed term expires.
But you may well want to regain possession of the premises, or replace the
tenant. Much will depend on the termination clause which you originally
inserted in the agreement. You might, for example, include a right to
terminate the agreement at any time after six months, by giving one month's
notice.
If the tenant argues for a longer agreement, then you could have a 12-month
term, with two months' notice of termination. The options are limitless.
Should you fail to include a termination clause, or want to obtain
possession after the end of the fixed term, the whole business becomes more
complicated. When the fixed term expires, a 'periodic statutory tenancy'
will arise. The periods of this statutory tenancy will be dictated by the
regularity of the rent payments under the fixed term. This will, of course,
mean that most statutory tenancies will be monthly tenancies.
The tenant will be entitled to remain in the premises on the same terms and
at the same rent as those of the fixed term. The periodic statutory tenancy
may only be terminated in accordance with the provisions of the 1988 Act.
However, this is not a total disaster. All that has to be done is to serve a
notice on the tenant informing him or her that you require possession of the
property. Not less than two months notice must be given. (This procedure
cannot be used to obtain possession before the end of the fixed term, and if
the tenancy has continued beyond that date, the notice must expire at the
end of one of the 'statutory periods'.)
In theory, a court order is needed to back up this notice. But do not fret:
the law is on your side. The court must make an order for possession in
favour of the landlord if he has followed the stipulated procedure (detailed
in the Housing Act 1988).
As a consequence, there is little point in the tenant's insisting that a
court order be obtained. If the tenant should prove blind to reason, then it
will be necessary to serve a further notice on the tenant and to apply for
the court order. This second, or 'section 8', notice must be in a prescribed
form and notify the tenant of the court
proceedings. The order can be obtained from the County Court, whose
procedures are relatively user-friendly.
However, before you rush off to create your first assured shorthold tenancy,
you should check whether the proposed tenancy will qualify. Not all
tenancies can qualify as an assured shorthold tenancy. The letting must be
to an individual or individuals, not a company. The tenant must occupy the
premises as his only or principal home, and it must comprise a separate
dwelling. Thus, a weekend bolt-hole will not qualify, nor will holiday
lettings.
Another exclusion concerns premises shared with a resident landlord. Whether
or not a landlord constitutes a 'resident landlord' is a complicated
subject. But a tenant in a typical flatshare situation, where the other
sharer owns the flat, can enjoy no security of tenure, and cannot be granted
an assured shorthold tenancy.
Finally, if the tenant already enjoys security of tenure, either via the
1988 Act or the old Rent Act of 1977, the tenancy cannot be converted to an
assured shorthold tenancy. Yes, horror of horrors, the Rent Act (as amended)
is still with us, and will continue to be so until all the tenancies created
before January 15, 1989, expire or are terminated. Throw another log on the
fire, Satan]

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

921023

