FT923-10807

FT  28 JUL 92 / London Stock Exchange: Poor start to the new trading account


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


A DAY which had dawned hopefully for UK investors yesterday ended unhappily
with the FT-SE Index down nearly 30 points to below the important 2,350 mark
for the first time in 17 months.
The Wellcome share sale, on which so much market confidence had been
focused, disappointed many traders, although they felt obliged to admit that
Wellcome Trust had been successful in its sale of 270m shares at its
stipulated price of 800p.
Stock prices opened the first day of the new trading account steadily,
reflecting the easing in Middle East tensions as Iraq acceded to United
Nations' requests. Also encouraging was the Bank of Japan's reduction in its
discount rate in order to stimulate the economy. With the Wellcome sale
negotiations apparently concluded successfully over the weekend, equities
held around Friday's levels in the first half-hour of dealing.
This early confidence was undermined when dealing in the newly offered
Wellcome shares started at 8.30am. The first trades showed Wellcome at
825-830p but the price crumbled as the stock was 'kicked straight out', to
quote the head trader at one large non-UK securities house. Wellcome traded
below the 800p sale price on several occasions during the session, scraping
home to finish the session at 800 1/2 p, about 3 per cent down from Friday's
price.
The rest of the stock market then began to react to more pessimistic
developments, either announced or believed to be in the pipeline. A
Financial Times survey of the building contractor industry, indicating the
worst recession for half a century, dealt a fresh blow to confidence. There
was widespread belief that the latest survey of industrial opinion from the
Confederation of British Industry, due this morning, will also emphasise the
negative mood.
The cut in Japanese discount rate failed to stimulate the Tokyo market,
where the Nikkei Average shed a further 124 points.
The London market continued to fall virtually thoughout the session, and an
attempted rally was thwarted when an early gain in sterling was trimmed in
late dealings.
The final reading put the FT-SE Index at 2,348, down 29.2 and effectively at
the day's low point. Some dealers described themselves as 'bemused' to see
the Wellcome share price struggling to hold on to the 800p mark and spoke of
a 'very disappointing performance'.
However, other strategists suggested that the gloom might have been overdone
yesterday and that, with the Wellcome sale now safely out of the way, the
stock market could stage a recovery if global developments turned more
positive.
Seaq volume was swollen by the offer from BZW, the UK investment bank and
marketmaker, to accept other UK stocks as payment for the new Wellcome
shares.
Errors in reporting some of these trades caused temporary confusion, but the
Stock Exchange said that the day's final Seaq total of 563.9m shares was
correct; the total compared with 495m on Friday, worth Pounds 977.5m in
terms of retail, or customer, business.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920728

