FT921-14360

FT  16 JAN 92 / Algeria reaches into the past to avoid fundamentalist regime


   By FRANCIS GHILES


   ALGIERS


MR MOHAMED Boudiaf's decision, at the age of 71, to return to his country
from which he voluntarily exiled himself after 1963, to preside over a
five-man collegiate presidency until the end of next year, is symbolic of an
attempt by senior Algerians to reconcile their country with its turbulent
history, writes Francis Ghiles in Algiers.
Mr Boudiaf, who was said last night by one of his sons to be due to arrive
today in Algiers from Morocco, is one of the three surviving 'historic
chiefs' of the Algerian revolution, the men who launched the fight to end
132 years of French rule in their country. That struggle claimed 1m dead as
French were pitted against Algerians and communities were riven by violent
strife.
Mr Boudiaf, who has been adamant in his refusal to live under what he has
always considered to be a military dictatorship, will ostensibly lead a
jemaa, a sort of council of elders which, in traditional Maghreb society,
seeks to settle feuds and maintain tribal unity and prosperity.
However, Gen Khaled Nezzar, defence minister and the Algerian strong man
since the annulment of the second round this week of the elections that
might well have put the fundamentalist Islamic Salvation Front in power, was
also a member of the short-lived High Security Council and presumably was
important in the dramatic decision to recall Mr Boudiaf.
His ability to get on with Gen Nezzar and all the Algerian military, which
he has always distrusted, will be a key factor - unless Mr Boudiaf is to be
treated as mere window-dressing to avoid a violent split between Islamic and
secular Algeria in the wake of the ascendancy of the FIS.
Dr Haddam Tedjini, a man who hails from a much-respected traditionalist
family, is also a member of the collegiate presidency. He has occupied,
among other posts, the ambassadorship to Saudi Arabia, the presidency of the
Grand Mosque in Paris and the chair of the Family Planning Council. Also in
the five-man ruling body is Mr Ali Kafi, who is in charge of the war
veterans' association, and Mr Ali Haroun, a respected lawyer and minister of
human rights.
Algeria today is at the crossroads. Family ties, regional loyalties and
religion are the keys to understanding it. The appearance of a modern state
with a progressive ideology notwithstanding, these factors outweigh all
others, at street level and in government, and remain the real checks and
balances in a society which has yet to forge its identity nearly 30 years
after independence from France.
The divisions are only in part between haves and have-nots. The fault lines
fracture every professional, language, regional and social group in the
country.
The young Algerians who were educated in the post-1962 parallel system,
where Arabic was the medium of instruction, have not been given access to
the top jobs in diplomacy or industry.
Also, the lack of freedom in a single-party system, whose official discourse
denounced the west and heaped praise on everything Arab, also played its
part in fostering the idea that a return to traditional Moslem values would
purge society of 'perverted' western values.
Reconciling this country with its history, helping it to forge a less
confused sense of its own identity, is the challenge that Mr Boudiaf and his
peers face. He will need the support of a strong and competent government to
enact the painful reforms needed to buttress the liberalisation of the
economy and get people back to work.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920116

