FT922-13320

FT  13 APR 92 / Spanish government struggles to repair damage of inflation
data leaks


   By PETER BRUCE


   MADRID


THE SPANISH government is trying to repair the damage to its reputation in
international bond and money markets amid evidence that its monthly
inflation data is being leaked days before being officially announced.
Analysts and traders, particularly in London, have been angered by what they
see as the Spanish authorities' lax attitude to the leaking of the figures
and about what some market professionals believe to be market manipulation
by official institutions.
On Friday an unsigned article in a Madrid newspaper close to the finance
ministry suggested some officials at the national statistics institute (INE)
had been sacked for leaking information and that the numbers were once again
'absolutely secret'.
But late last week, the ministry also conceded it was still 'trying to find
out how' the US financial service, Telerate, had delivered the official
inflation figure up to 40 minutes before its main market rival, Reuters, for
the past four months.
Bond dealers in London say remarkably accurate rumours about the Spanish
inflation figure - well wide of market expectations  - circulated in the
City and in Madrid a few days before they were formally announced by the INE
in November, December and January. Dealers were angered further by
inaccurate guidance from both the Bank of Spain and the Treasury last month
that the February inflation figure would be much lower than it was.
Before the February consumer price index announcement (in March), dealers
bought heavily into peseta debt and the market collapsed just before
official publication. The monetary authorities nevertheless had offloaded
large volumes of short term debt. This suits Madrid which is loath to sell
long-term bonds while interest rates are falling.
In January and February, analysts were expecting high CPI increases in the
preceding months and on both occasions rumours began to circulate a few days
before publication which predicted much lower CPI rises with complete
accuracy. While Spain focuses on bringing inflation under control, the
monthly CPI figure is its key economic indicator.
'The December and January data were leaked,' said Ms Jan Samols, a bond
analyst with UBS Phillips & Drew. 'We were getting the leaks four days in
advance.'
Many analysts in London believe the information has filtered on to the
market through an as yet unidentified Madrid broker. Analysts visiting
Madrid have complained informally of the leaks and of inaccurate official
guidance.
'Everyone knows about the leaks,' said the head of the treasury department
at a large UK merchant bank. 'Last month (with the February CPI) you could
have made a lot of money on the bond markets.'
Mr Steven Major, senior bond analyst with Credit Lyonnais Euro-Securities,
said that by February 'things were getting quite bad. People were calling up
from Madrid claiming to know what the inflation figures were. It is highly
unprofessional.' Because some of the accurate leaks have widely contradicted
market expectations, they have embarrassed bond analysts, who advise
dealers.
The inflation figure does not seem to have been leaked a few days ahead of
the March CPI figure, due to be released by the INE this morning, but the
market is taking few chances and has remained flat ahead of the
announcement.
None the less, it will still be alert to a last-minute leak. Since November,
Telerate has beaten Reuters to the figure. Telerate is serviced by one of
Spain's most experienced financial journalists, Mr Primo Gonzalez. He has
beaten Reuters by up to 40 minutes through what he describes as superior
journalistic footwork.
While the finance ministry says it is trying to establish how Mr Gonzalez
does this, an official noted that 'last time it was only 10 minutes ahead'.
"We can move billions of pesetas in a one minute phone call,' remarks one
bond dealer in London. 'The Spanish authorities do not appreciate what is
happening here.' The INE said Reuters is being beaten because at the moment
the CPI figure is telexed to news agencies, its Madrid telex may be
occupied.
Telerate though, has been publishing the figure before the INE releases it.
Ms Samols says she called the INE to ask for a breakdown of the CPI after
she saw it come up on Telerate two months ago. She was told this was
impossible because it had not yet been published.
Mr Major remembers the market being heavily bid up the morning the February
CPI figure was being published. 'Suddenly the currency started to come off
sharply and bond yields started to go up,' he says. There was still nothing
on his Reuters screen and the INE had still not made its announcement.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920413

