FT924-5993

FT  24 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tory MPs form pro-Europe group


   By RALPH ATKINS


PRO-EUROPEAN Tory MPs last night launched the 'Positive Europeans' group
within the party and pledged to push for the the Commons stages of the
Maastricht treaty to be finished by May - regardless of the date of the
second Danish referendum.
The latest faction in the continuing debate over Europe claimed a membership
of more than 75 backbenchers, out of a total of about 240 Conservative MPs,
excluding members of the government
Mr Ray Whitney, the Tory MP for Wycombe, said that the Euro-sceptic
Conservatives 'have so far attracted disproportionate attention, given that
they are a small minority within the party'. He added: 'We intend to correct
this.'
After Euro-sceptic Tory MPs and the Labour party brought the government to
the brink of defeat earlier this month, Maastricht will return to the
Commons next week for the beginning of its committee stage. Little headway
is expected before MPs rise for the Christmas recess.
Ministers say the 'third reading' - the last of the Commons stages of the
bill before it goes to the House of Lords - will be completed by May, about
the time they expect the second Danish referendum on Maastricht.
The government has been deliberately vague, in order to appease the
Euro-sceptics, about what happens if the Danish poll is postponned.
The Positive Europeans might have the effect of making the government's
balancing act more difficult.
Mr Whitney promised: 'We shall be urging the government to proceed with the
committee stage of the Maastricht bill with a strict timetable resulting in
the third reading by May.' He said the group would take an active role
'during the committee stage of the bill in the Commons and in the public
debate outside'.
Last night the committee elected Mr Ralph Howell (C Norfolk North) and Mr
Ian Taylor (C Esher) as vice-chairmen, and Ms Jacqui Lait (C Hastings and
Rye) and Mr Stephen Milligan (C Eastleigh) as secretaries.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921124

