FT924-12230

FT  22 OCT 92 / Bundesbank dents hopes of lower Europe-wide rates


   By Our Economics and Foreign Staff


THE GERMAN Bundesbank engineered a cut in a key money-market interest rate
yesterday, triggering a slight easing in credit policy in some neighbouring
nations but dashing hopes that Europe as a whole may be able to move soon to
substantially lower interest rates.
Although investors in the main European stock markets took heart initially
from the Bundesbank's action, shares later fell back on the realisation that
the central bank is unlikely to move quickly to reduce its internationally
important Lombard and discount rates.
This mood of pessimism was reinforced after Mr Reimut Jochimsen, a
Bundesbank council member, said expectations of lower German interest rates
were 'exaggerated' and that the central bank would continue to pursue its
traditional goal of achieving monetary stability.
In yesterday's operation, the Bundesbank moved its securities repurchase
rate from 8.9 per cent to 8.75 per cent.
That was quickly followed by reductions in official interest rates in
Belgium, the Netherlands and Austria, countries which are closely tied to
German monetary policy.
In Italy, the state-controlled Banca Commerciale Italiana became the first
Italian commercial bank to cut rates since early September, when it
announced a drop of three-quarters of a percentage point.
However, the cut in the German rate was smaller than some market
participants expected and failed to dent investor demand for the D-Mark,
which gained on sterling, the Italian lira and the French franc. The D-Mark
also edged up against the dollar which closed in London just over 1 pfennig
lower at DM1.5070. But the D-Mark later lost ground in New York to close
against the dollar at DM1.52245.
On stock markets, investors in Paris pushed up prices by about 1 per cent on
news of the Bundesbank's move, but shares later fell back for a slight
overall loss. Prices in Frankfurt and Amsterdam closed lower on worries
about the deteriorating European economy.
Indications that the Bundes-bank is unlikely to cut its main interest rates
within the next month or so were underlined by the announcement that
Germany's broad money supply accelerated again last month, a sign that
inflationary pressures sparked by unification are not yet under control.
Even so, the 9.1 per cent annualised rate of expansion in the M3 measure was
well below the range of 10-12 per cent forecast by many economists.
It comforted those hoping that a broad easing in German credit policy might
soon help to loosen borrowing conditions across Europe.
Growth in German broad money supply accelerates Page 2
Capital markets Page 28
Currencies Page 35
World stocks Page 41
London stocks Page 44

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921022

