FT921-15457

FT  10 JAN 92 / Arts: Peter Grimes - Bavarian State Opera, Munich


   By ANDREW CLARK


Peter Jonas's appointment as the next intendant of the Bavarian State Opera
is already bearing fruit. He was able to offer Tim Albery's ENO production
of Peter Grimes to the Munich company, after its own well-advanced plans for
a Peter Hall/John Bury staging were scuppered by defects in the stage
hydraulics. The ENO Grimes, designed by Hildegard Bechtler, does not require
complex scene-changes, and the designers of this season's other new
productions in Munich have had time to adapt their ideas to the reduced
technical capacity. But the hydraulics problem has forced the State Opera to
modify its existing repertory - Gotterdammerung, for example, can only be
played as a concert performance and November's revival of Penderecki's Ubu
Rex was cancelled. In August, the theatre will close for at least half a
year - possibly for the whole of the 1992-3 season - so that the hydraulics
can be sorted out. All this comes only two years after the last lengthy
closure for backstage modifications.
But it's an ill wind . . . Peter Grimes has handed the company one of its
biggest triumphs of recent seasons. When the production was first seen in
London in April, Max Loppert praised it here as eye-and ear-opening, with
visual qualities of a north European, expressionist hue. Munich offers a
very different context. German audiences are no strangers to expressionist
art or the language of Brechtian theatre, and have none of the performance
tradition or wealth of associations which their British counterparts bring
to Grimes. Yet the production's merits are no less striking.
Albery treats Grimes in a way no German director would dare to do. He brings
the drop-curtain down during the interludes, preserving the integrity of
Britten's graphic sound-pictures. He dispenses with incidental details of
the borough and its personalities, depriving the Munich audience of the
work's quaint English colouring (which most German productions like to
stress). Instead, his abstract, anti-realist approach - particularly telling
in the shadowy chorus personality - focuses on Grimes as one of the great
tormented figures of 20th century opera, battling in vain against the
destructive forces in himself, in society and the elements. Albery deserves
credit for communicating his ideas so successfully to the Munich cast, who
sang the work in English and made every word understandable (Mrs Sedley's
'I've never been in a pub in my life before' raised a good laugh).
But this was just as much a musical triumph, thanks to Andrew Davis'
idiomatic command of the score and ability to inspire the best from all
around him. Choral and orchestral responses were crisp and full of
conviction. Davis, who will also conduct the work at Glyndebourne next
summer, lets the music speak simply and directly, supplying the quiet tragic
grandeur and detailed characterisation that is missing on stage. Like the
rest of the packed, enthralled house on the night I attended, I had never
imagined this music could be so moving.
Rene Kollo brings to the title role an unexaggerated humanity and
considerable stage presence. His Grimes is neither brute nor visionary: he
is lonely, unpredictable, heroically courageous. Kollo, balding and craggily
dishevelled, cuts a striking figure. The sustained top notes are a strain,
but he has not forgotten how to sing quietly, delivering the great mystical
solo at the Boar with precentor-like purity. Pamela Coburn's Ellen radiated
feminine sensitivity and goodness. Donald McIntyre's Balstrode was the
perfect old sea dog.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Photograph Rene Kollo as Grimes (Omitted).

920110

