FT922-4059

FT  08 JUN 92 / Economics Notebook: Buenos Aires puts out the inflation
fires


   By STEPHEN FIDLER, Latin America Editor


Even by Latin American standards, Argentina's inflation record over the past
30 years is something special. While world prices rose on average 14 times
between 1960 and 1990; in Latin America they went up 1.7bn times and in
Brazil 1.9bn times. In Argentina, prices increased by a multiple of 359bn.
So for most Argentines, the past year has offered something different.
Recently, retail prices have been rising between 1 and 2 per cent a month;
wholesale price inflation has been running at an annual rate of 5 per cent
or less.
This sharp drop is due to two factors: the creation of a surplus in the
budget and the tying by law, since April 1, 1991, of the Argentine currency
to the US dollar. This convertibility law more or less prevents the central
bank from issuing local currency unless backed by inflows of foreign
exchange.
Thus the central bank has been converted, nearly, into a currency board such
as that in Hong Kong, though an important difference is that the bank can
also issue currency against its volatile holdings of Bonex, a shrinking pool
of government-issue dollar-denominated bonds.
The Argentine government has, in effect, turned its economy into an economic
region of the US. Since Argentina has an annual per capita income of Dollars
18,000 less than the US and is distanced from it by several thousand miles,
history and language, it would be not be surprising that such an arrangement
can cause strains.
On the face of it, Argentina's economy should be under strain. Retail prices
have risen more than 30 per cent since the currency was fixed, against about
4 per cent in the US.
But if this suggests a dramatic loss of competitiveness for Argentine
industry, the reality is less dramatic. Most inflation has taken place in
the oligopolistic retail and services sector not subject to foreign
competition. This has turned Buenos Aires into one of the world's most
expensive cities but has yet to cause huge damage to industry. The
government has also cut tariff barriers, which, combined with fixing of the
nominal exchange rate, has put downward pressure on input prices.
The risk to competitiveness is that relatively high retail inflation -
compounded by forthcoming rises in value added tax rates and a broadening of
the tax's scope - could translate into demand for higher wages. This is
bound to bring increased pressure for devaluation.
Further pressure for devaluation from Argentina's protected industry may
grow as imports continue to climb. In 1990, imports totalled Dollars 4.1bn
(Pounds 2.25bn); in 1991 they nearly doubled to Dollars 8.1bn; this year,
they could reach Dollars 11bn.
However, the architect of the convertibility law, the economy minister, Mr
Domingo Cavallo, does not have much faith in devaluation. He believes
competitive benefits deriving from it are transitory in an inflation-prone
economy such as Argentina's where it takes only one or two months for such
advantages to be lost in price rises.
He might not be worried either by rising imports and the shrinking trade
surplus. Some imports are of capital goods, raising an abysmally low
investment rate which fell below 8 per cent of GDP in 1990; the rest are for
now adequately financed by inflows of capital helping to swell reserves.
Although the reserve inflow is swelling the monetary base, this is not
necessarily inflationary. Some economists argue that when inflationary
expectations drop sharply, people are willing to hold cash for longer and
the velocity of circulation falls.
In Brazil, it is easy to find sceptics about the Argentine economic miracle.
None the less, the gradualist policies of economy minister Mr Marcilio
Marques Moreira seem to be making slow headway against inflation, running at
about 20 per cent a month. Perhaps he might try a drop of Argentine
medicine?
Asked about this possibility last month, Mr Moreira said it would be
'unthinkable' to subject the Brazilian economy to the 'straitjacket' of a
fixed currency.
Indeed, such a move might risk putting the cart before the horse. The
Argentine government has been generating a primary surplus, even before
privatisation receipts, sufficient to allow it to finance interest payments
on debts in a non-inflationary manner. Better control of public finances was
evident in Argentina even before April 1 last year, but is far from proven
in Brazil, where the political process lacks credibility.
Mr Paul Luke, an economist with Morgan Grenfell asset trading unit, says the
reserves of the central bank in Brazil (the monetary base of a currency
board) - currently between Dollars 14bn and Dollars 18bn, depending on
definition - may be too small a proportion of an economy with annual gross
domestic product of more than Dollars 520bn. Argentina's reserves of more
than Dollars 7bn compare with an Dollars 80bn GDP.
Although Brazilian tariffs have been cut, they are three times the level on
average of this in Argentina. This may make transition to a new regime more
difficult in Brazil, since downward pressure on input costs in Argentina
would not be in place for Brazilian industry.
Of course, the eventual success of the policy is not proven in Argentina. Mr
Lawrence Brainard of Goldman Sachs in New York says, in the long-term, the
currency board system depends on interest rates influencing the real
economy. It not clear whether a 1 percentage point increase in interest
rates would have any noticeable impact in Argentina. 'The linkages in the
economy are a lot looser than in a place like Hong Kong,' he says.
Perhaps it is no coincidence that Mr Cavallo is an economic historian. For
Argentina has tried the currency board idea before. Late in the 19th
century, Argentina tied its currency to the pound sterling and became part
of the sterling area. In retrospect, these have proved to be Argentina's
golden years.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920608

