FT923-9799

FT  03 AUG 92 / Personal View: The lessons of debt


   By LAWRENCE SUMMERS


Is the developing country debt crisis behind us? The part of the crisis that
started in Mexico a decade ago, essentially involving commercial bank loans
to middle-income countries, is largely over.
To date, almost 40 per cent of private bank debt in highly indebted
countries has been covered by comprehensive debt reduction deals.
Arrangements under negotiation for Brazil and Argentina will raise that
figure to almost 70 per cent. A collapse of the international financial
system has been averted, and commercial banks have strengthened their
capital bases by building up reserves large enough to cover likely losses in
developing countries.
The two main ingredients of success were economic policy reform in the
debtor countries and co-ordinated action by the creditors. Official agencies
played an indispensable role in bringing together creditors and debtors, and
in helping to avoid divisions among creditors. The mix of effective debt
reduction and policy change to tackle fiscal imbalances and structural
impediments to growth has been a potent combination.
About Dollars 40bn (Pounds 21bn) flowed into, or back to, Latin America in
1991, especially to those nations, such as Mexico and Chile, that have gone
furthest in policy reform and commercial bank debt reduction. But it is too
soon for the world to turn its attention away from debt. A substantial
unresolved debt problem of low-income countries remains, especially in
sub-Saharan Africa. And there is a new debt problem looming with the Dollars
70bn held by the collapsing republics of the former Soviet Union.
Some 26 of the poorest debtor nations, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa, have
received official support through concessional lending, debt restructuring
and forgiveness. This support is linked to domestic policy reform which
improves their economic prospects and debt-servicing capacity. Yet most of
them continue to have unsustainable debt burdens. On average, these
countries allocate a quarter of export earnings to debt service but only
cover half of their contractual obligations. In the last decade, their
incomes per head have fallen by 20 per cent to less than a dollar a day.
Growth has been recovering in countries from Ghana to Tanzania, but it will
clearly be a long haul. Troubled low-income debtors cannot grow out of their
debt problem, the core of which lies in official debt - that is,
government-to-government bilateral loans. For many countries, a resolution
will involve substantial debt forgiveness, frequently going beyond the 50
per cent reductions of recent agreements under the Paris Club of official
bilateral creditors.
Official sources will have to continue to be the main providers of finance
for low-income countries, whether in the form of new concessional inflows or
debt reduction.
Relative to income, the sums required may be large for the poor debtors, but
they are small for the rich nations. Doubling all net resource flows to
severely indebted low-income countries last year would add Dollars 16bn - or
1 per cent of what the world spends on defence each year - to the budgets of
the industrialised world. This is a small price to pay for reversing the
decline in health, education and living standards that would otherwise
guarantee a bleak future for more than half a billion people.
Finally, there is the newly emerging debt problem for the former Soviet
Union. The debt-servicing difficulties of the past year will not evaporate
overnight. It is also clear that the key to restoring creditworthiness lies
in a sustained programme of structural reforms. But these will take time to
yield benefits and need to be adequately financed.
Given that imports have already fallen by 50 per cent since 1990, further
import compression is not the answer. A combination of new (largely
official) money and debt relief from existing creditors is. To be effective,
this must reduce the uncertainty associated with the current short-term
roll-over arrangement. A key lesson of the last 10 years is that
comprehensive debt relief programmes require official leadership. This
lesson is just as applicable to the former Soviet Union.
The crisis in Latin America may have passed, but if we are not to wait
another 10 years for the resolution of the crises of sub-Saharan Africa and
the former Soviet Union, it is important to apply the lessons of the past.
Resolving a debt problem requires strong domestic policy change supported by
adequate debt relief, with governments of rich countries and official
agencies helping with both resources and action.
The author is chief economist and vice-president of development economics at
the World Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920803

