FT923-9528

FT  05 AUG 92 / Mandela to lead march on citadel of white authority: The ANC
week of protest is about to enter a potentially dangerous phase


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


   JOHANNESBURG


SOUTH AFRICA'S week of protest enters its critical and most dangerous phase
today when Nelson Mandela leads a march on Union Buildings, the citadel of
white authority in the heart of Pretoria.
For the next three days, the focus shifts from the shop floors, target of
the 48-hour general strike which ended yesterday. Although factories will
still be the targets of sit-ins, much of the action moves to the streets of
towns and cities across the country, where the risk of confrontation with
the security forces is higher.
The ANC and its allies - the Communist Party and the Congress of South
African Trade Unions (Cosatu) - expect a huge turnout for today's march
through Pretoria's city centre to the steps of Union Buildings, the seat of
government.
An equally enthusiastic response is predicted in Cape Town, where motorists
were yesterday warned to steer clear of today's march from the black
township of Langa into the city centre.
If the massive stayaway that marked the strike can be followed up with a
massive turn-out for these and other rallies, demonstrations and sit-ins
that get under way today, Mr Mandela and his allies will have mounted the
most formidable organised protest against white rule that the country has
seen.
The days ahead, however, could also reveal the limitations of the ANC
campaign, intended to force President F W de Klerk to accept a rapid
transition to majority rule.
'The percentage of people who stayed at home does not tell us if they
support the ANC alliance's cause,' comments Professor Tom Lodge of
Johannesburg's Witswatersrand University and an authority on black politics,
'or if they would vote ANC in an election.'
A strong response to the campaign would help provide the answer, as well as
rebut allegations that the huge stay-away was due in great measure to
intimidation - the explanation offered by government, the Pan Africanist
Congress (PAC) and Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP).
'Keeping people away from work by threats, or by paralysing the transport
system, is easier than forcing them to attend rallies or take part in
sit-ins,' said a sceptical businessman yesterday.
But a weak or modest turnout is susceptible to another explanation: the high
price of protest.
Although many workers reached agreements with employers to work extra
shifts, or take the two days as holiday, thus not losing income, most
participants will have had their pay packets docked.
What is more, their jobs will be at risk, either because employers may take
a tough line, or because the strike could have proved the last straw for
businesses battling to keep afloat in a recession now in its third year.
These problems do not dampen the enthusiasm of Mr Jay Naidoo, the Cosatu
general secretary. Jubilant over the outcome of the first day of the
campaign, he vowed to 'continue the rolling mass action until the
(alliance's)  .. demands are met'.
The next few days will indicate whether the energy for what would be a
protracted effort is there.
Organisers of South Africa's week of protest announced plans to occupy city
centres and business districts today as millions of workers continued to
stay at home on the second and last day of the country's general strike.
There was no sign of a fall-off in support for the 48-hour strike which
ended last night, though employers' organisations contested ANC claims that
4m workers had stayed away. They estimated 2m had responded to the strike
call.
United Nations observers continued to monitor areas of tension, in
particular an ANC march on Bisho, the capital of the Ciskei homeland.
The South African news agency reported that heavily armed Ciskei security
forces were guarding routes into the capital.
The situation last night was said to be extremely tense.
In Natal, gunmen opened fire on a car carrying a senior ANC official in the
region, Mr Harry Gwala. Mr Gwala survived the attack uninjured. Some of the
worst violence of the past 24 hours took place in Johannesburg's Alexandra
township where five people were killed by unknown attackers early yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920805

