FT924-6346

FT  21 NOV 92 / World Stock Markets: Adjusting to life under President Bill
Clinton - Wall Street's election tactics


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


In this tumultuous election year, the stock market got its retaliation in
first.
Instead of waiting until after polling day, investors responded to what they
thought would happen - a win for the Democrats - well before November 3.
Investors imagined what life would be like if Governor Bill Clinton became
president and re-positioned their portfolios accordingly. The beneficiaries
were stocks closely tied to the economic cycle, especially those which would
benefit from heavy expenditure on infrastructure projects.
The biggest losers were pharmaceutical companies, on fears that a Clinton
administration would impose controls on drug prices to slow the pace of
healthcare inflation.
While there was plenty of activity in a few individual sectors and stocks,
there was no discernible pattern to trading in the months before the
election. From early July, when the Democratic challenger first began to
build a solid lead in the polls, to the campaign's final day, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average fell 3 per cent to just over 3,250, and the Standard &
Poor's 500 rose 1.7 per cent to around 420.
Secondary stocks, however, fared much better. Between July and November the
Nasdaq composite index rose more than 7 per cent to around 600, a move that
probably had more to do with the oversold nature of this market in the
spring and early summer than it did with the likely outcome of the
presidential vote.
Once the pre-election manoeuvres were completed, the result was an
anti-climax. Anyone who had looked for a big sell-off immediately after the
Clinton landslide - sparked by a pro-Republican Wall Street fearful of what
the new administration would do to the deficit and to top-bracket taxpayers
 -was disappointed.
Similarly, anyone who thought that equities might stage a big rally in
anticipation of a massive boost to capital spending and economic growth also
saw their hopes dashed.
Since polling day, the market has lacked a firm direction, and stock
performance has been decidedly mixed. The Dow has fallen just over one per
cent in the past two-and-a-half weeks, while the S & P 500 has posted a
small gain of just under one per cent.
Once again, secondary stocks have made a much more determined showing. The
Nasdaq composite index rose 5.6 per cent between November 3 and November 19
in extremely heavy trading. Although much of that rise was concentrated in a
few big names such as Microsoft, Apple Computer and Intel, demand was
reasonably widespread.
The gains here, however, have had little to do with the election result.
Part of the explanation is technical - secondary issues were heavily sold in
the first half of the year, led by depressed technology and healthcare
stocks. It was not long before many began to look cheap again, attracting
the attention of bargain-hunters and speculators.
The fundamentals were also moving in the right direction. A recent analysis
of corporate earnings shows that small companies reported better profits
during the second and third quarters of this year than their larger
counterparts. Smaller companies have also benefited from their relative lack
of exposure to overseas markets which are either entering or stuck in
recession. One factor can be tied to the election result and that is Mr
Clinton's campaign pledge to cut taxes on the capital gains which small- and
medium-sized companies earn from long-term investment holdings. Investors
have not been slow to act on the implications.
Secondary stocks aside, there are several reasons why the broader market has
failed to make a decisive move since election day. One is the economy.
Although there have been signs of life in the last week or so, they were
insufficient to convince investors that the hoped-for robust recovery is
around the corner.
Another is the lack of a lead from the president-elect and his transition
team. Both have taken great pains not to raise expectations too high about
what will be accomplished during the first months of the new presidency.
Specifics about which policies will be introduced first have been notable
for their absence. Reports have placed the size of an early 1993 economic
stimulus package as high as Dollars 50bn but Democrat advisers are refusing
to offer anything other than vague assurances that they will concentrate
their efforts on job growth and the economy.
The time Mr Clinton is taking over cabinet appointments has also left the
market in limbo. The question of who fills the top economic posts is
especially important. Investors would love to see Mr Paul Volcker, the
former Federal Reserve chairman, installed as Treasury secretary or perhaps
Mr Robert Rubin, currently co-chairman of Goldman Sachs. Either man would
bring much-needed credibility to the new administration.
Mr Clinton is unlikely to announce any appointments before next weekend's
Thanksgiving holiday. Until then, and probably until the new president is
inaugurated on January 20, the stock market is going to have to sit tight.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

921121

