FT923-6596

FT  22 AUG 92 / Hawks & Handsaws: Jobs for the boys


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


I PASSED a building site recently. There is not much building work in London
at present, given that construction is one of the 97,500 UK industries to
have received a pitiless booting from John Major, Norman Lamont, and their
masters at the Treasury. But this site was active. A man was at work:
probably late 20s, yobbo-jeaned, forehead invisible, knuckles dangling, the
Sun in his pocket, leering at passing women. He was working amid fumes and a
blaze of sparks, doing something to a girder. He was drowning in sweat.
I started to feel sorry for him, until I remembered that I have stopped
feeling sorry for Sun readers. I was transfixed, instead, by the thought
that there were no imaginable circumstances in which I would be capable of
doing what he was doing unless forced into it as a prisoner of war. We were
virtually different species. Our paths had diverged.
But it has given me an idea. For those of us who were at our desks this week
and not basting ourselves in Fiji, the most cheering news was the
proposition by Teresa Gorman, Billericay's Conservative MP, that for every
UK business that went bankrupt from now on, the government should sack a
civil servant at the Treasury - starting with the permanent secretary.
The Gorman plan won immediate support, in The Times, from macho pundit
Anatole Kaletsky, whose blow-torching of the Treasury and its do-nothing
smugness has been one of the summer's highlights for those who read good
newspapers.
It must be terrible to be torched by Kaletsky. The Gorman plan, he wrote,
should be put into effect immediately, with just one amendment to make it
fair. 'The mandarins should be given until Christmas to produce a clear
economic recovery. If they failed, the first ritual sacking, of Sir Terence
Burns, the present permanent secretary, would be set for New Year's Day.'
This could transform government policy overnight. While Lamont and Major
deserved part of the blame for the length and depth of the recession, 'the
greater culprits have been the Treasury officials who have been telling them
how to act, speak and think at each step of the economy's long decline. The
doctrine of ministerial responsibility, far from ensuring a democratically
accountable government, has long been a shield to hide the incompetence of
the top civil servants who make most of the government's decisions.'
The Gorman-Kaletsky plan would undoubtedly work, but it would succeed more
speedily with an additional refinement - if the mandarins knew in advance
what fate awaited them after January 1. Sacking is not enough. They would
retreat to their Dorset or Tuscan properties, spend their time pottering,
swim in lazy pools, sit among their roses, read Petronius and Seneca - and
thumb their noses at us from the comfort of retirement.
Instead, they must be punished. If the British economy is ever to recover,
the mandarins must know what lies in store if they fail to gird their loins
and get things moving. They must be put out to real work.
We will start with Sir Terence on January 1. We won't just sack him. We will
send him to live in Catford, give him a pair of jeans, some size 13 boots,
make him read the Sun, watch Eldorado, ride on public transport, work on a
building site, out in all weathers, cope with sparks and fumes, learn what a
girder is - a dog's life for Terry. We will see how he likes a taste of his
own medicine.
From New Year's Day - I promise - we will hear less and less rubbish from
the Treasury ventriloquists and their dummies: no gain without pain,
unemployment a price worth paying, vital not to throw the baby out,
credibility all important, things safe with us, old man, we know what we're
doing.
That should provide us with a memorable January 1. On January 2 we will sack
the second highest Treasury mandarin. I do not know his name. That is the
point. Mandarins are furtive, creatures of the shadows, never brought to
book. Which is what we would be changing. We would appoint the second
Treasury mandarin to the post of chief council tax collector in the borough
of Brent. January 3: rat-catching in the Chunnel.
January 3 is followed by January 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and so on. Of course it would work. By February we would
be humming; by March, in fine heart; by April, ruling Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920822

