FT923-6468

FT  24 AUG 92 / Monday Interview: The broad mind of travel - Martin
Brackenbury, president of the International Federation of Tour Operators


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


In David Lodge's novel Paradise News, an anthropologist called Roger
Sheldrake argues that the package holiday is the modern-day equivalent of
the religious pilgrimage, that guide books are devotional aids, and that a
dip in the hotel pool is a form of baptism.
'Tourism is the new world religion,' Sheldrake tells a fellow-tripper to
Hawaii. 'Catholics, Protestants, Hindus, Moslems, Buddhists, atheists - the
one thing they have in common is they all believe in the importance of
seeing the Parthenon, or the Sistine Chapel, or the Eiffel Tower.'
Modern tourism's gigantic migrations preoccupy Martin Brackenbury too. There
are currently about 360m people travelling abroad on holiday every year. In
the next 10 years, he says, that figure could double.
Brackenbury is one of the tourist industry's most senior figures, with as
many titles as there are delayed departures from Gatwick airport.
He is president of the International Federation of Tour Operators (Ifto),
which represents travel companies in 17 countries; chairman of the Tour
Operators' Study Group (TOSG), the big UK holiday companies' oddly named
trade body; chairman of the TOSG's trust fund, which brings tourists home
when companies fail; a member of the national council of the Association of
British Travel Agents; and a director of Thomson, Britain's biggest travel
group.
He is also, like the fictional Roger Sheldrake, a trained anthropologist,
having studied the subject at Cambridge. But he does not think much of the
idea that tourism's growth is linked to organised religion's decline. People
travel, he says, when they have money and political freedom.
'If you have growth in discretionary income, the propensity to travel
doesn't grow in a linear fashion, but in an exponential one,' he says.
As to political freedom, 600,000 people travelled to the west from
Czechoslovakia in 1989. The following year, after the collapse of communism,
the figure rose to 8.1m. Many east Europeans do not now have the money to
travel, but when they do they will join millions of other new tourists.
'The eastern Europeans will travel south, to the cheaper areas of the
Mediterranean, to parts of Greece. In Japan and the Pacific Basin there are
more people who will want to travel. And then there are lots of people who
until now haven't even considered travelling: Chinese, Indians.'
Given the profit these new tourists could offer to the company Brackenbury
helps run and to the others he represents, he is curiously ambivalent about
the prospect. On the one hand, he says, 'the underlying idea that people
should have the ability to travel must be a blow for freedom'.
On the other hand, 'too many people gathered together ruin a place. Some of
the eastern coastal resorts of Italy have become overdeveloped, anonymous,
and have lost whatever character they had.'
Roger Sheldrake's solution is to end tourism by pointing out to the
holidaymakers how miserable they are. 'Look deep into their eyes,' Lodge has
him say, 'and you will see anxiety and dread.'
Brackenbury agrees that holidays are stressful. 'There's a much higher level
of anxiety when people go away. They're not only going to a place which is
unfamiliar, through which they somehow have to shepherd their children.
They're also with their partner 24 hours a day for two weeks. That comes as
quite a shock.'
In the strangeness of the holiday environment, tourists cling to the
familiar. 'Tourism, in the main, is about people making migrations in very
large numbers for very short periods of time. So when they are taking a
holiday away from Germany and going to Majorca, they're seeking a German
holiday in Majorca. Equally, the English are seeking an English holiday in
Spain, not a Spanish holiday - largely because it's such a short time.'
The current trend away from hotel holidays to self-catering apartments and
villas does not imply greater confidence in dealing with foreign cultures,
Brackenbury says. People simply like the flexibility of self-catering.
Buying your own food does not require much contact with local people. Many
self-catering complexes have restaurants and supermarkets on site, which
sell what English or German visitors want to buy.
If the tourists want what they have at home, why don't they stay there?
'Part of it is habit,' Brackenbury says. 'You've got a holiday and you ought
to go away. If you stay at home, you end up doing odd jobs and watching
television.
'People see that by going away, they are enhancing their world in some way.
They are looking, in general, for new experiences.' But new experiences that
are unthreatening? 'Yes, in a rather controlled environment.'
Whatever the stresses of being abroad, Thomson's surveys show that people do
enjoy their holidays, Brackenbury says. He rejects the view that the foreign
holiday has gone out of fashion. The reported fall in European tourism this
year is purely the result of economic hard times, he insists.
The problems caused by tourism cannot be solved by reducing the number of
tourists because people are not going to stop taking holidays. 'Try denying
them the opportunity,' Brackenbury says. 'People, in general, feel the
better for the experience. It's revitalising in some way. People find that
by taking holidays they get a different perspective on their own activities.
Most people are so involved in what they do day-to-day that they don't take
time to step back.'
What the tourist industry has started to do is think about how to preserve
the environment and ambience of its resorts, Brackenbury says. The Majorcan
seaside town of Magaluf degenerated to the point where families were staying
away. It has had some success in winning them back by improving facilities
and curbing the owners of nightspots.
In the past, the tourist industry developed its Magalufs and, when they
became too downmarket, moved on to Greece, Turkey, Africa or the Caribbean.
'They could do that in the 1970s, and to some extent during the 1980s. But
talking to my colleagues in Ifto, they no longer believe that is possible.
The reason for that is there is nowhere else to move on to,' Brackenbury
says.
'That means that the places they've got, which they've invested an awful lot
of time developing, are the ones that they're going to have to stick with if
they're going to have a business for the future. That lies at the centre of
their concern with environmental issues. It's nothing to do with altruism
and long-term views on the planet. The only way we can make this business
work is if people are satisfied when they get there. It's entirely to do
with self-interest.'
Beyond such pragmatism, Brackenbury the anthropologist must surely have some
views on people's peculiar practice of leaving their home to spend two weeks
in a country where they do not speak the language and mistrust the food. If
it does not resemble the religious rituals of previous ages, what does it
resemble?
Somewhat reluctantly, Brackenbury ventures a guess. 'In simple societies,
you don't have any clear examples of what you would call leisure. But you do
have examples of celebration. They usually involve sacrifice of some sort or
initiation ceremonies, and people have high degrees of anxiety about that.
But they come out at the other side feeling part of something bigger and
somehow enhanced as individuals. And then they have a big celebration and
they collectively feel better. It seems to me that there are certain
analogies with that in taking a holiday.'
PERSONAL FILE
1943 Born Dorset. Educated Magdalene College, Cambridge.
1976 Senior partner, Urwick Orr and Partners, management consultants.
1984 Deputy managing director, Thomson Holidays.
1989 Main board director, Thomson Travel Group.
1991 President, International Federation of Tour Operators.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920824

