FT924-11417

FT  26 OCT 92 / UK Gilts: Attention focuses on change to PSBR rules


   By PETER MARSH


THE UK gilts market continued to gain ground amid expectations that lower
interest rates are likely in Britain over the next few months.
With the government's economic policy still the subject of some confusion,
many market participants feel that a move down from the current level of
base rates is unlikely to spur inflation in the short-term, a development
that helped long-dated gilts to share in the price rises of shorter-dated
stock.
As few indicators emerge of any early end to the recession, attention
focused on possible changes to the rules for financing the public sector
borrowing requirement which Mr Norman Lamont, chancellor of the exchequer,
may address this week.
Because economic activity in Britain over the next year or so seems likely
to be weak, there is little prospect that the PSBR will come down quickly
from the figure expected for the 1993-94 financial year of about Pounds
40bn.
That may put extra pressure on the Bank of England to find new ways to
finance the PSBR, through, for example, innovative funding techniques which
some believe Mr Lamont may announce in his Mansion House speech to
representatives of the City of London on Thursday.
While last week the government held off from signalling a further cut in
base rates, now at 8 per cent, many participants expect overall borrowing
conditions to ease significantly by the end of the year in the wake of the
new recognition in Whitehall that the reces-sion appears to be deepening.
Short-dated gilts rose by nearly 2 points as a result of this expectation,
with the benchmark 8.75 per cent stock due in 1997 yielding 7.22 per cent on
Friday night, about 40 basis points down on the week.
Against expectations by some in the market that price gains for short-dated
gilts would force up yields at the long end of the yield curve, long-dated
securities also saw a rise in price of up to 1.5 points.
The Treasury 9 per cent stock maturing in 2008 saw a yield at the end of the
week of 8.81 per cent, roughly 16 basis points less than on the Friday night
of the week before.
With the level of sterling not giving market participants any real cause for
concern, there is also the feeling in the financial community that the
Bundesbank will cut its main interest rates over the next month or so as the
German economy slows. Indications were provided by the German central bank
last week, when it engineered a reduction in a key money market rate by 15
basis points.
In this environment, especially given a new emphasis on speeding up growth
by Mr John Major, the prime minister, there seems little to stop base rates
coming down to 6 per cent by Christmas.
Changes of this sort should boost company profits and influence more of a
switch of funds to equities from gilts. At the same time, however, many fund
managers appear to want to keep relatively large amounts of cash tied up in
gilts and other government bonds on the grounds that the apparent lack of
inflationary pressures on the horizon make these instruments a reasonable
medium-term bet.
As for the Mansion House speech, Mr Lamont desperately needs to increase his
credibility in the City. The onus will be on him to come up with something
in his address that throws fresh light on how he proposes to manage economic
policy in the next six months - assuming the chancellor manages to survive
that long after his less-than-sparkling performance since the summer.
He may discuss ways of making it easier to fund the PSBR by counting towards
this gilts sold to building societies and banks. Such institutions are at
liberty to buy the securities - they are expected to purchase about Pounds
6bn worth this financial year - but the purchases do not count towards
funding as this would represent an over-loose funding policy that could be
inflationary.
But as Mr Nigel Richardson, a bond expert at S. G. Warburg Securities,
points out, in the current environment in which deflationary risks appear
stronger than any threat from inflation, the move towards a different
funding policy might appear to have some logic.
Assuming a PSBR next year of around Pounds 40bn, the government might have
to be faced with selling Pounds 3bn worth of gilts a month to ensure it has
enough cash for public spending. While most of the funding needs for this
year appear to be met, the Bank of England announced on Friday a new Pounds
1bn tranche of gilts to be sold from today which may help towards funding
next year's borrowing requirement.
The gilts are in the form of a new type of stock, 7.25 per cent due in 1998.
The price will be 99.50, payable 25 per cent down and 74.5 per cent in
January next year. The Bank also announced the Treasury would redeem at par
all the 9 per cent Treasury loan 1992-1996 on January 28 next year for cash.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921026

