FT921-14162

FT  17 JAN 92 / Fresh horrors on the high street: Robert Peston looks at the
impact of Hill Samuel's full-year losses of Pounds 409m on TSB


   By ROBERT PESTON


Don McCrickard, chief executive of TSB Group, held court yesterday in a dark
and gloomy neo-Gothic hall in the City, reminiscent of a Hammer Horror film
set.
The horrors were provided by the bank's results for the year to 31 October.
TSB has the dubious honour of being the first big UK bank to make
significant losses in a full year accounting period because of problems in
its domestic market. Hitherto, the banking sector's losses have stemmed from
ill-judged loans to less developed countries.
The story which Mr McCrickard unfolded was a version of Jekyll and Hyde. The
attractive face of TSB, its retail services division - providing insurance
and banking products to individuals - made a profit before tax and central
costs of Pounds 413m, a rise of 17 per cent. However, this contribution was
almost exactly matched by the Pounds 409m loss of Hill Samuel, the former
merchant bank which is now responsible for all of TSB's lending to
companies.
Hill Samuel was forced to make a charge - or provision - of Pounds 432m to
cover the risk of losses on its loans of Pounds 4.8bn. The ratio of this
charge to the loans is 9 per cent, which is high.
If the English clearing banks suffered losses on that scale, they would soon
be out of business. But TSB has significantly more capital than its rivals -
as a proportion of assets, almost twice as much - so it can absorb
relatively higher losses.
Further analysis of the results provides even greater cause for concern
about the quality of Hill Samuel's loan book. Hill Samuel has classified
Pounds 680m of loans as 'non-performing'.
Mr Dolf Mootham, the finance director who is soon to retire, provided an
explanation: 'When an account is wobbly, we classify a loan as
non-performing and stop taking interest on the loan through our profit and
loss account - though the borrower may in fact still be paying interest.'
However, Hill Samuel has made no provisions against these loans of doubtful
quality.
Mr McCrickard stressed that Hill Samuel was involved in very few of the
biggest corporate collapses of the past year. It did make provisions of more
than Pounds 60m to cover the risk of losses on around Pounds 100m of loans
to Brent Walker, the troubled leisure group, whose balance sheet is being
reconstructed.
But Hill Samuel's exposure to the late Mr Robert Maxwell's private companies
and to Maxwell Communication Corporation - which are in administration under
UK insolvency legislation - is 'de minimis', he added. Two years ago, Hill
Samuel had more than Pounds 80m of loans to these Maxwell interests, but
this has been reduced to between Pounds 1m and Pounds 5m, far less than the
English clearing banks.
The damage to Hill Samuel has been done by its loans to small and
medium-size businesses. The total provision can be analysed as follows:
Pounds 129m is the aggregate of individual charges of less than Pounds 1m;
Pounds 150m represents individual charges to 70 companies of between Pounds
1m and Pounds 5m;
Pounds 153m is the sum of charges, each in excess of Pounds 5m, to 14
companies.
Because so many of Hill Samuel's corporate customers are in difficulties, it
is little wonder that Sir Nicholas Goodison, TSB's chairman, said that the
current recession has been the worst ever for the UK banks. However, TSB
cannot simply blame economic conditions. It must bear much of the
responsibility for the scale of the losses.
In the 18 months after it bought Hill Samuel in November 1987, it expanded
its loan book by Pounds 3bn or 66 per cent, which is a rapid rate by normal
banking standards. It is not at all surprising therefore that there was a
deterioration in the standards used to assess potential borrowers.
Mr McCrickard blamed Hill Samuel's previous management, which has now been
replaced. 'The old management . . . could not cope with the bigger
business.' However, as a senior director of TSB at the time, Mr McCrickard
must take some of the responsibility for allowing the rapid loan growth and
for approving some of the bigger loans.
Hill Samuel can at least take some comfort from the bad debt trend during
the year. It made most of its provisions in the first half and made a
pre-tax loss of just Pounds 90m in the latter six months. Nonetheless Mr
Hugh Freedberg, chief executive of Hill Samuel, said that there had been no
improvement in the rate at which borrowers have been getting into difficulty
since the end of the year.
If TSB's attempt to become a bank for companies has been little short of
disastrous, its core activity, which serves 7m personal customers through
1,400 branches, has been modernised successfully, having been created out of
a series of dowdy regional savings banks.
It has the most successful life insurance operation of any bank, as measured
by the rate at which it sells policies to its own customers. According to
its market research, TSB is responsible for 40 per cent of all its
customers' purchases of life insurance and is now the UK's sixth-biggest
life and pensions company.
Its insurance operations made a profit before tax and central costs of
Pounds 118m, a rise of 19 per cent on an annualised basis. Meanwhile, TSB's
retail bank contributed profits of Pounds 295m, up 13 per cent.
Peter Ellwood, the chief executive of the insurance and retail services, has
over the past two years reversed a worrying trend of rising costs. In 1991,
there was no increase in the retail bank's staff costs. Total overheads rose
just 2 per cent.
As a result, the retail bank's ratio of costs to income - a key measure of
its efficiency - fell from 65.8 per cent at the end of last year to 59.4 per
cent.
However, Mr Ellwood admitted that the scope for further reduction in costs
is limited. He added that 1992 was going to be 'a tough year'.
The group as a whole should return to profit in 1992, the directors all
concur. Outside analysts expect around Pounds 200m before tax, although Hill
Samuel will probably remain in losses.
Sir Nicholas stresses 'management's confidence' in Hill Samuel's future. He
will know - from any of Hammer's great B-Movie shockers - that his own
livelihood is at stake if the ghoul is not tamed.
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
                  TSB GROUP                    HILL SAMUEL BANK
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
          Pre-tax           Bad debt        Bad debt       Pre-tax
        profit/loss          charge          charge      profit/loss
1987   Pounds 275.5m      Pounds  55m         na            na
1988   Pounds 420.1m      Pounds  45m         na            na
1989   Pounds 155.0m      Pounds  92m      Pounds   61m  Pounds  25m
1990   Pounds 312.0m      Pounds 261m      Pounds  -40m  Pounds 157m
1991   Pounds -47.0m      Pounds 654m      Pounds -419m  Pounds 432m
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Year end 31st Oct
 -------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 19 Photograph Don McCrickard, group chief executive (Omitted).
Photograph Sir Nicholas Goodison, chairman (Omitted). Photograph Hugh
Freedberg, chief executive of Hill Samuel (Omitted).

920117

