FT921-11936

FT  29 JAN 92 / Tories trip up in EC funds game


   By DAVID GARDNER


The long-running dispute between the government and Brussels over EC aid for
Britain's depressed regions has suddenly escalated. Prime minister John
Major yesterday said the money should be released 'speedily' to help fund
regeneration. But if Bruce Millan, European commissioner for the regions,
makes good his threat to block the funds because of the argument over the
way the money is disbursed, it means Pounds 1bn of grants for roads, ports
and other infrastructure could be lost over the next 12 months. David
Gardner in Brussels reports on the disagreement.
THE government's efforts to portray the EC aid row as partisan interference
have the look of a political boomerang.
The European Commission has threatened to withhold cash to depressed British
regions because of the government's policy on local authority spending.
But the affair appears to be merely a case of enforcing rules on regional
aid agreed unanimously in February 1988 at a summit of EC heads of
government - including the former prime minister Mrs Margaret Thatcher.
At that meeting the leaders agreed to double funds for laggard and
industrially stricken regions, but set legal conditions on how the money
could be spent.
At the heart of the dispute is whether the EC funds are additional to member
states' regional spending or whether governments, Britain's in particular,
are using them to reduce the cost of capital programmes and curb local
authority spending.
Commission dissatisfaction that the legal conditions are not being met has
put at risk some Pounds 1bn to which British regions trying to create new
jobs are entitled.
On top of the Ecu160m (Pounds 114.7m) for coalmining areas - the Rechar
funds - withheld last year, a further Ecu1.26bn earmarked for nine
high-unemployment areas from Merseyside to Strathclyde in 1992-93 may now be
blocked until the row is settled.
At the centre of the dispute is Mr Bruce Millan, Scottish secretary in the
last Labour government and now the self-effacing junior British commissioner
in charge of EC regional policy in Brussels.
At the weekend Mr Michael Heseltine, environment secretary, accused Mr
Millan of 'ganging up' with the Labour party to embarrass the government
ahead of the election.
Yesterday in the Commons Mr Eric Forth, junior employment minister,
criticised Mr Millan over the blocking of the Rechar funds. 'It is not
helpful to the communities involved or to the Labour party that a former
Labour secretary of state should be coming up with the sort of unhelpful
arguments to prevent availability of the funds to help communities in
Britain,' he said.
What the Commission as a whole is questioning is whether the regional aid is
reaching the targeted areas.
Most EC regional aid goes to southern Europe and Ireland (including Northern
Ireland), areas with per capita incomes 25 per cent or more below the EC
average. Britain receives about 38 per cent of the smaller pot for regions
in industrial decline.
This money should co-finance projects which would not otherwise go ahead,
and should have, as the 1988 regulation states, 'a genuine additional impact
in the regions concerned'. Thus, the row is about what, in jargon, is called
'additionality'.
The Commission says that a proportion of EC aid to UK regions is leaking out
to other local authorities which are not eligible, because it all ends up in
a single Treasury pot. 'We can see the tunnel carrying the money into the
Treasury,' a senior official says, 'but we can't identify it coming out the
other side. Eligible regions do not get the benefit . . . worse still,
signing up obliges them to draw down spending in other sectors in order to
match our funds.'
The UK says it takes the EC money into account at a national level and the
amounts - at least nationally - are greater than they otherwise would have
been.
But when sharing out rigidly controlled spending permission levels among
local government, it decides on the basis of overall capital needs rather
than specific projects.
'The possible availability of grants from the ERDF (European Regional
Development Fund) is not generally considered,' Lord Caithness, a junior
Foreign Office minister, wrote last April.
Shortly afterwards, Mr Millan saw seven UK ministers and emerged unconvinced
that the problem was simply one of 'transparency'.
If it were, officials in Brussels argue, the UK would be able to demonstrate
that the money is reaching its agreed destination, whereas repeated
complaints to Brussels from British local authorities indicate it is not.
The problem has been given a new twist because of the recently announced job
losses in the Selby coalfields in the Yorkshire area, and at the Ravenscraig
steel plant in Scotland. Mr Millan has said these regions could get more
money, but only if the 'additionality' question is settled.
No other member state has got into this difficulty, but there is no evidence
to support the UK government's charge of discrimination. Mr Heseltine's
remark that Mr Millan himself, when in government, operated the system he
now criticises ignores the fact that the rules were changed - with the
consent of a Conservative government - in 1988.
Denmark, for instance, had a system of sharing local government spending
which also presented problems, but changed it to comply with the 1988 rules.
Greece, which made substantial spending cuts to qualify for an Ecu2.2bn
balance of payments loan from the Community, had to restore to its budget
all reductions in 'additionality' spending and find the cuts elsewhere.
Italy had Ecu60m to which it was entitled reallocated to France last year
because of inability, rather than refusal, to provide matching finance.
This last precedent is more ominous for the UK. Mr Millan has only said that
the Ecu1.4bn in dispute 'could all be in jeopardy'. But one senior official
said last week that 'there could come a moment when the Commission has to
decide whether to hold this money or reallocate it to other member states'.
Mr Heseltine himself appeared to acknowledge the dispute as politically
damaging in a letter to cabinet colleagues leaked last month by Mr Gordon
Brown, Labour's trade and industry spokesman. The letter described the
government's arrangements for dealing with EC regional aid as 'no longer
tenable'.
He added: 'We cannot afford such an 'own goal' in areas which are
politically important to us.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8 Photograph The row is 'a constant source of friction and
recrimination, both from the EC and from local authorities and MPs', Michael
Heseltine (Omitted).

920129

