FT924-811

FT  22 DEC 92 / Arts: Salonen and the Philharmonia - Concerts


   By DAVID MURRAY


Last Wednesday young Esa-Pekka Salonen, one of the Philharmonia's two
'principal guest conductors', took the orchestra through Beethoven,
Schoenberg and Stravinsky; and on Friday, Liszt and Mahler. Hearing these
exercises was a stark confirmation that there really are, these days, honest
musicians who have only the dimmest inklings about any music that might
pre-date the Great War.
In Schoenberg's op. 42 piano concerto and in the Liszt A major, the soloist
was Emanuel Ax, who knew very well what he was about. He played the
Schoenberg from the printed score - which might explain a certain lack of
spontaneous flair; but he unfolded the music with as much lyrical delicacy
as confident purpose. It was pleasing to find that Schoenberg's language no
longer causes any detectable dismay: the audience responded to the concerto,
quite rightly, as if it were Rakhmaninov or Prokofiev.
Salonen provided ready, lucid support, as he did as well for the pianist's
elegant Liszt on Friday, but always with a flatter expressive profile than
his soloist's - who was thereby flattered, standing out as the judicially
eloquent voice. It was left to Ax, nevertheless, to explore both the shadows
and the poignant possibilities of both scores, which he did with loyal
imagination.
Everything else was worse. Left to himself with Beethoven's Seventh
Symphony, Salonen rendered it almost ridiculous. The long, bated-breath
introduction to the opening Vivace was taken up-tempo (to put it mildly]),
like the famous Allegretto after it, and yet neither meant anything much.
Although there are good musico-historical arguments for rejecting
'time-honoured' portentousness in this music, there is no excuse for
cantering heedlessly through it.
Salonen maintained a strict, nuance-free beat that took not the slightest
account of old-fashioned harmonic nodes, nor of the dramatic tensions which
radiate from them. The trio of the Scherzo arrived without any change of
dramatic colour; and every movement culminated in an accelerando that
sounded mechanical, propelled by no new musical insight. None of the
instrumental voices could do much more than keep up with the rush (the
Philharmonia players were visibly glum and recalcitrant). It was like
hearing an efficient Martian visitor delivering a score that meant nothing
to him.
Stravinsky ought to fall safely within Salonen's range, but the Orpheus
ballet is particularly tricky to bring off. It needs at once to pay audible
homage to its 18th-century models, and to preserve an astringent
20th-century tautness; here, it sounded flaccid, uncommitted and
under-rehearsed. After those disheartening Wednesday performances, one heard
Mahler's Third Symphony on Friday with a jaundiced ear. Yes, the brazen
orchestral declamations rang out - but where were the raw, seismic upheavals
in the first movement, the twinkling graces of the Menuetto, the comedy of
the Scherzo?
With the arrival of Anne Sofie von Otter's golden mezzo the dark 'Molto
adagio' after Nietzche and the boys'-choir-and-bells Allegro came into much
sharper perspective. At the end, the Philharmonia strings distinguished
themselves in the heart-wrenching Adagio. Mahler's daringly stretched
symphony relies nevertheless upon its initial, hugely dramatic premises.
With those reduced to such two-dimensional tameness, it was no wonder that
the whole symphony seemed too episodic to cut any serious ice with a modern
audience.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921222

