FT924-8318

FT  11 NOV 92 / London Stock Exchange: Stock market regains its confidence


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


FIRMNESS in the US dollar stocks and confidence that tomorrow's autumn
economic statement in the UK will be accompanied by a cut in domestic base
rates took the London stock market ahead yesterday. Although economic data
on both sides of the Atlantic gave little encouragement, share prices moved
up steadily and closed near to the day's best levels.
Trading volume increased, swollen by a handful of large share placings and
by the market's response to trading news and other corporate developments. A
rally in crude oil prices stimulated recoveries in the leading oil stocks,
and the pharmaceuticals attracted buyers again.
The FT-SE Index, uncertain at first in the wake of an unconvincing
performance from Wall Street overnight, climbed by more than 22 points at
midsession, moving significantly into Footsie 2,700-plus territory once
more.
London held up well against another cool start to the trading session in New
York, which was three Dow points down when the UK market closed. At the
final reading the FT-SE Index was 19.2 ahead at 2,714.6.
Seaq volume of 615.8m shares, against 517.5m, incorporated heavy trading in
the food manufacturing sector, where a placing of shares in United Biscuits
helped finance an acquisition in Australia; in food retailers, Asda saw
heavy volume.
The stock market appears to have factored in a one-point cut in domestic
base rates, expected to be announced either in Thursday's economic statement
from Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor of the exchequer, or very shortly
afterwards. But the domestic economic scene remained bleak, with comments at
the conference of the Confederation of British Industry underlining the
severe pressures on British manufacturers. Political uncertainties were
fuelled by proposals for an offical inquiry into the sales of defence
equipment to Iraq during the run-up to the Gulf war.
Firmness in the US dollar was reflected in gains in ICI, in spite of a
downgrading from a New York analyst, Glaxo, Rank Organisation and other
US-influenced stocks. There was strong support for BP and Shell after New
York opened, although US holders were sellers of some North Sea stocks.
The stock market retained its optimism in spite of disappointing producer
price statistics in both the UK and US. Once again, second line issues
outperformed the stocks in the Footsie list, indicating a widening of
investment interest on the part of the institutions.
Retail, or customer, business in equities topped the Pounds 1bn mark again
on Monday, extending the period of relatively high business levels. But
confidence among City securities firms was dented by a poor interim
statement from SG Warburg, the merchant banking and securities trading
house, where the share price fell heavily.
Share gains among the domestic store and consumer retailer groups were
modest, in spite of the expectation of another early cut in base rates.
Restraining the sector were hints of an impending rights issue from a
leading leisure group believed to be considering an acquisition.
The potential implications of the reported debt rescheduling at GPA, the
world's biggest aircraft lessor, continued to overhang the aircraft
industry.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

921111

