FT922-4451

FT  05 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Russia seeks credits to boost
gas production


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


RUSSIA IS set to boost its production of gas and of oil products by
returning to the Soviet method of attracting huge foreign credits for
investment in infrastructure.
Mr Boris Yeltsin, the Russian president, has signed a decree authorising the
state holding company Gasprom to raise up to Dollars 8.7bn in foreign
credits between 1992 and 1998. The hard currency earnings from gas exports
would be used to repay the debts.
Further decrees authorise the raising of unspecified amounts of credits for
investment in refineries and petrochemical plants. The official news agency
ITAR TASS said these decrees followed the appointment of Mr Victor
Chernomyrdin as the new energy minister, following the sacking of Mr
Vladimir Lopukhin from the post.
The decrees seem to indicate a turning away from a proposed strategy of
attracting foreign energy companies as partners and investors - instead
returning to the practice followed especially in the 1970s of borrowing
heavily from foreign banks and governments for industrial investments. The
credits raised will go to the refurbishing of pipelines and the construction
of new refineries. Oil refineries will be issued export quotas, the proceeds
from which will be used to repay the loans.
The total Soviet output of gas in 1991 was estimated at 810.5bn cubic
metres, or 40 per cent of the total world output. Much of that is exported
on long term contracts to Europe, especially to Germany.
Russia's share of the total last year was 642.9bn cu m, a slight rise on
previous years. The gas industry, which Mr Chernomyrdin headed as a Soviet
minister, has avoided the plunging output which has marked the oil sector.
However, in an effort to conserve supplies and to divert more to the export
market, Mr Yeltsin has also decreed that industrial consumers and power
stations will take a 10 per cent cut in gas supplies between June and
October of this year.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920605

