FT923-15577

FT  01 JUL 92 / TV-am drops Channel 5 bid


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE prospects for Channel 5 looked increasingly uncertain last night as
TV-am withdrew from the contest less than a week before the bids to run the
new television channel have to be submitted.
The breakfast television company, which announced in April that it was
backing a bid by the Entertainment Channel, decided to pull out after
looking at the final business plan.
Another potential backer of the Entertainment Channel, Mr Conrad Black,
chairman of The Daily Telegraph Group, is also unlikely to go ahead.
The decision means that there may be only one significant bidder - Five TV -
for the channel, which should reach about three quarters of the UK
population.
Thames Television has emerged as a significant force in Five TV - a
consortium that has been working on a bid for more than a year.
It was clear last night that Thames Television will be involved in a bid for
the Channel 5 licence but it is not yet clear what form the bid will take or
who the final members of the consortium will be.
As well as Thames, the consortium includes Mr Moses Znaimer, founder of City
TV in Toronto, CanWest, a Canadian-based international broadcaster, and Sony
Pictures, the Hollywood company.
Time Warner, the world's largest media group, is also being wooed as a
prospective participant in a bid.
The uncertainty is because whoever wins the licence will have to pay for the
retuning of millions of video recorders likely to suffer interference from
the Channel 5 signal. Many viewers will also need a separate aerial to
receive a good-quality picture, but the successful bidder will not have to
finance those.
Mr David Frost, the interviewer, and Mr Jeremy Fox, the independent
producer, set up the Entertainment channel and still hope to make a bid.
Yesterday Mr Fox said that under the existing terms of the licence proposed
by the Independent Television Commission he had to recommended to potential
shareholders that 'the risk was too great'.
The Entertainment Channel is however talking to Mr Silvio Berlusconi's
Fininvest in the hope of receiving financial backing.
Earlier this year Mr Berlusconi was enthusiastic about Channel 5 and then
decided to pull out. Now, apparently, he is in the process of changing his
mind again. Bids for the new channel are likely to be in the region of the
minimum Pounds 1,000 a year, and the ITC may decide not to award the licence
 -unless it is certain that the matter of retuning video recorders can be
dealt with effectively.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920701

