FT923-6433

FT  25 AUG 92 / Kabul exodus grows as rockets pound city


   By FARHAN BOKHARI


   ISLAMABAD


KABUL continued to be pounded by rockets yesterday as fighters loyal to
dissident mujahideen leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar continued their assault on
the Afghan capital.
A grain silo was reported hit and set on fire in the attack, raising fears
that the city's food shortage could become worse.
Western diplomats were among hundreds of people trying to flee to safe areas
in the Afghan countryside. More than 100,000 people have left Kabul since
the dissidents began unleashing continual rocket attacks two weeks ago.
French and Italian diplomats and the Bulgarian ambassador, who was injured
by shrapnel when a rocket hit his embassy at the weekend, left for Termez on
the Uzbekistan border.
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) handed overall
responsibility for its surgical hospital to the Afghan Health Ministry
yesterday, according to news agency reports. But Mr Armin Eric Kobel, the
local Red Cross chief, said the ICRC would keep 21 international staff in
Kabul.
All 17 hospitals in Kabul have been hit by the fighting and there is an
acute shortage of medicines. Only eight of Kabul's 17 hospitals are
functioning, according to United Nations officials.
The UN has moved all its international staff out of Kabul because of the
dangers.
The UN, meanwhile, is finalising a Dollars 10m (Pounds 5.1m) international
appeal for humanitarian assistance for Afghanistan. But western diplomats
are concerned that donors may hold back from making commitments until the
situation has stabilised.
There was an unenthusiastic international response to an appeal in recent
months for Dollars 180m for rehabilitation and reconstruction of
Afghanistan. So far, only Dollars 42m has been pledged.
The UN secretary general's personal representative on Afghanistan, Mr
Sotirios Mousouris, said in an interview last night: 'It is very unfortunate
that when hope finally seemed to come to Afghanistan, this conflict makes
the efforts of the international community very difficult.'
The dissident mujahideen launched their assault to back their demands for
the withdrawal and disarming of a militia group that switched allegiance
from former President Najibullah to the mujahideen last April.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920825

