FT924-11932

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (25): A more
flexible route than an AVC - Retirement Planning, You can use the money as
and when you wish, with no obligation to buy extra pension / Survey of Unit
Trusts


   By ERIC SHORT


FEW EMPLOYEES qualify for the maximum permissible pension and benefits from
their company pension scheme, and so may need to boost their income in
retirement.
The most tax-efficient method is by paying additional voluntary
contributions (AVCs). But an AVC scheme is inflexible, because the benefits
must be taken when employees take their pension from the main scheme.
Moreover, under all AVC arrangements made since April 1987, the accumulated
value of the contract cannot be taken as a cash sum, but must be used to buy
a pension.
Personal equity plans (Peps) offer employees either an alternative savings
vehicle to AVCs or a way to supplement an AVC.
Although investment into a Pep does not qualify for tax relief, unlike
investment into an AVC scheme, in all other respects a Pep matches an AVC in
tax efficiency, with investment in a gross fund and the proceeds being free
of tax.
In addition, a Pep has a flexibility not available to an AVC. Employees can
cash it at any time: they do not have to cash in simply because they are
have started to receive their company pension. Nor are they locked in if
they want to cash the Pep before they start to take a company pension.
This can be important if you have invested in an equity-based fund. With an
AVC contract, you must cash in when taking the pension, irrespective of the
state of the market. So if the market is depressed at retirement, you
suffer. With a Pep, you can wait for a time when the market is more buoyant.
More important so far as most employees are concerned: the accumulated value
is taken as a tax-free cash sum, to do what they like with it.
A further advantage of a Pep is that the investor can receive dividends
tax-free, boosting income while leaving the capital in the Pep.
Alternatively, a bigger boost to income can be achieved by purchasing an
annuity with the cash from the Pep.
Employees who are within a few years of retirement will need to make large
contributions to an AVC contract in order to produce a significant increase
in pension. For example, a cash sum of Pounds 5,000 would buy a pension of
only Pounds 36.88 a month for a man aged 65, and only Pounds 27.86 a month
for a woman aged 60, with the pension increasing by 5 per cent a year. If
allowance is made for a spouse's pension on the death of the employee, the
pension would be even lower.
In such circumstances, the employee could well decide that a cash sum is
preferable to the pension that the sum would buy, and that a Pep is better
than an AVC contract. In which case, certainly for the financially
unsophisticated, a unit trust Pep is usually preferable to one investing
direct in equities.
A great number of unit trust Peps are available, covering most sectors of
the UK equity market, and employees may at first be confused. There are,
however, certain general considerations that should be taken into account:
1, The employee is likely to be more concerned with capital growth than with
income; so he would be looking at growth-orientated unit trust Peps.
2, The Pep represents savings on top of the pension secured by his main
company scheme. Consequently he can afford to take risks for the opportunity
of greater growth. This means that the more volatile sectors, such as
recovery funds and smaller companies funds, may be worth consideration.
3, The UK equity market is currently unsettled, and this may deter employees
from investing in unit trusts. However, they need to keep in mind that,
historically, equities have always outperformed fixed-interest investments
and cash over all but very short periods.
4, Employees should check the charges that are made on unit trust Peps.
Finally, in selecting a unit trust Pep, they should check both the
investment record of the trusts they are interested in, and the reputation
of the investment managers.
At retirement, most employees exercise the option to forego ('commute') part
of their company pension in exchange for a tax-free cash sum. (Employees
retiring from public sector schemes automatically receive a tax-free sum).
Many want to boost their income in retirement, but also to preserve their
capital.
Until this year, a high-income unit trust, investing in selected UK
equities, had provided investors with a steadily rising income over the long
term, while the unit value had also risen to match the loss of value through
inflation.
This year has seen many unit trust managers having to cut income
distributions as companies have reduced their dividends. So the current
depressed condition of the UK equity market may not seem conducive to
investment in unit trusts. However, past records show that equity values
have recovered steadily from periods of reduced values; while companies
generally try to restore dividend cuts as soon as practicable.
At retirement, employees should also consider the so-called Fourth Age -
usually regarded as the time when they will reach 75 and could well begin to
require special care. So retirement is not necessarily the time when savings
end and they can go on a spending spree. They need to think of the future
and the possible special expenses during the final years of their lives.
The cash sum that becomes available at retirement could be set aside for
this purpose, but the underlying investment must provide a return that
matches inflation. Unit trusts still provide that hedge - though, because of
their volatility, they should be regarded as long-term investments. But a
retiring employee, investing for that Fourth Age, has at least 10 years in
which to save.
If immediate income is not a requirement, then the investment could be made
in growth-orientated trusts, with the option of switching to an income trust
at a later.
If women have to wait till 65 for their state pension - page 27

The Financial Times


London Page XXIII

921023

