FT921-15562

FT  09 JAN 92 / Sainsbury modifies Sunday contracts: Union attacks offer and
warns of pressure on wages


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


CONTRACTS that make Sunday part of the normal working week are to be offered
by J. Sainsbury, the largest UK food retailer, to all its employees, in
spite of union opposition.
Usdaw, the shopworkers' union, predicted yesterday that other companies
would follow - and that there would be a price war on wages in supermarkets
as well as on goods. It called on the government to punish retail groups
that breached the 1950 Shops Act.
Sainsbury stressed that the contracts were optional and that Sunday working
in its stores would remain voluntary. It said existing double-time payments
for Sunday working would continue 'for the time being', but were under
review. The company added that staff who worked on Sundays would always
receive a 'very significant extra payment'.
But Usdaw feared that Sainsbury was trying to follow the example of
Woolworth. The union explained that all Woolworth employees taken on since
April had been given contracts defining Sunday as a normal working day which
did not attract overtime payments.
Woolworth workers employed since April are paid time-and-a-half for Sundays
if they work 39 hours during the rest of the week. Workers who were with the
company before April are paid double-time for Sundays, irrespective of which
other days they work or whether they work Sundays within a 39-hour week.
Woolworth said its workers were paid according to contracts which, as in
most companies, varied according to job and length of service. It added that
many of its workers 'are interested in Sunday work whether on a contracted
or voluntary basis'.
Mr Garfield Davies, Usdaw general secretary, doubted whether the proposed
Sainsbury system would be voluntary: 'Staff will feel that their jobs are at
risk and prospects of promotion impaired if they refuse to work on a
Sunday.'
'It has been argued that only volunteers will be requested to work, but
anyone knowing the retail sector will know that there are an enormous number
of pressures, inducements and coercions that can be made to increase the
level of fear and insecurity among staff.'
Mr Davies also predicted that Sainsbury, which employs about 6,000 of
Usdaw's 350,000 members, would seek to scrap double-time working.
He had no doubt that other retailers would be unable to ignore developments
by Sainsbury. Tesco, for example, has negotiated an agreement with Usdaw for
double-time payments for Sunday working.
Mr Davies said Usdaw agreed with the Keep Sunday Special Campaign that there
was room for change in the law, but that any review should include all
interested parties.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920109

