FT924-1072

FT  19 DEC 92 / As They Say in Europe: The fairy-tale summit - Why the best
journalists believe what they are told


   By JAMES MORGAN


SPENDING a good part of the second week of Advent cooped up with 2,000
colleagues in a sports complex attached to the Meadowbank Thistle football
club is not my idea of fun. But that is where the Edinburgh EC summit took
us.
One becomes envious of people who are doing something else. It was only on
the way home that my mood of self-pity was lifted by an account in a Sunday
colour magazine of a day in the life of young woman who made her living
buying and selling handbags from a shop in London. She 'loved cars,' read
the Daily Mail and washed her hair every day. There is always someone worse
off than yourself.
That brief moment of relief was hardly compensation for an event in which
the media entered into an unholy alliance with the politicians to turn the
predictabilities of Edinburgh into a cliffhanger. 'The 12 seek a compromise
to avoid a major crisis,' said Le Monde. But, of course, it all came right
in the end, partly because the British were in their element during that
weekend.
Organising royal bust-ups, marriages and right royal rows comes naturally to
the island race. The production of a fairy-tale result is what matters, and
it always happens when the British are in charge: John Major told an
interviewer from the Edinburgh Evening News that the conference in London
last August on the crisis in the former Yugoslavia had been 'hugely
successful.'
So, on Monday the papers could breathe a collective sigh of relief. The
Berlin Tagesspiegel wrote: 'The 12 state and government heads achieved more
than could have been hoped.'
The main quality needed by a successful journalist is not cynicism, but
total credulity. You have to believe that there is a crisis atmosphere to
generate an atmosphere of crisis. You need an atmosphere of crisis to sell
newspapers. And a crisis is what politicians love to overcome. Imagine if
the headlines of last week had said: 'Major plans facile compromises to
bluff Danish at Edinburgh.'
So it was that many of the less committed squatting at Meadowbank got their
priorities right. The Americans and the Japanese had their eyes on the royal
re-match up the road at Balmoral. Stories, and conversations, became mixed
up in all sorts of ways. The caterer, Pru Leith, did the food for the
summit; the port of Leith was where the royal yacht Britannia docked so the
Euro-leaders could dine with the temporarily united royal family. (The
princess of Wales was placed next to the Spanish foreign minister, which was
seen as a kind of punishment for the wayward lass).
At least one paper tried to ram the stories together. France-Soir wrote:
'The household rows provoked by the Maastricht marriage contract have been
carefully suppressed by a juridical poultice of the same abstruse character
as that of the treaty. It will all be better than a divorce and we shall
applaud the papering over of cracks so long as it is not played out as a new
honeymoon.' (Do not make the mistake of believing it sounds better in the
original])
The notion of Scotland as a different country struck the representatives of
the international media forcibly. For many, it was their first visit to
Edinburgh, and it knocked them out. (The natives also put on their
traditional show of nationalism and resentment, which gave a lot of innocent
pleasure.)
Then there was that sense of isolation in which the Scots specialise.
British (or Scottish) Telecom ensured that although we could all make
telephone calls out, we could not receive any. As a result, BT received the
lion's share of the gigantic revenue always derived from such events.
But what of the meat of the meeting? In the end, much depended on whether
the charmingly named 'cohesion' countries (all those even poorer than
Britain) would settle for a Dollars 19bn handout or whether they wanted more
in the form of 'structural investment.' They settled in the end, partly
because they did well for themselves at Edinburgh
I glanced at the Diario de Noticias of Lisbon to see what would happen to
this sudden influx of other people's cash. The Portuguese prime minister,
Anibal Cavaco Silva, produced a well-judged ambiguity. He said he would be
'very demanding as to the use of Community funds.' Future summits may indeed
pay a good deal attention to what happens to 'cohesion money.' It might even
enable those who report such occasions to avoid having to concoct artificial
crises to generate interest and excitement.
The headline of the week echoed last week's story in this column about the
Swiss and Europe. The Journal de Geneve led its front page with:
'Liechtenstein isolates Switzerland even more.'
James Morgan is diplomatic correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921219

