FT921-480

FT  28 MAR 92 / Budget rejected in battle over Russian reforms


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE Russian parliament, raising the stakes in its battle against the
government's harsh market reforms, yesterday rejected a draft budget for the
second quarter and beyond.
It ordered first deputy prime minister Yegor Gaidar, who is trying to
restore the country to financial health by balancing the budget, to come
back with a new plan on April 20.
But the choice of that distant date suggests the standing parliament hopes
Mr Gaidar's government will either be thrown out of power or forced into
less austere financial policies by the Congress of People's Deputies, which
opens on April 6.
Reiterating claims that Mr Gaidar's policies were leading to ruin, Mr
Alexander Pochinok, chairman of parliament's budgetary committee, accused
him of misleading parliament with over-optimistic estimates of future tax
revenues and capital investment by the state.
The government's latest budget proposal - the parliament is refusing to
adopt a budget for the whole of the year in one go - provided for a deficit
of Rbs108.31bn in the second quarter, and of Rbs245.34bn for the whole year.
Expenditure is projected at Rbs555.6bn for the second quarter, and at
Rbs2,103bn for the whole year.
Mr Gaidar told parliament that the first two months of the year had shown a
budget surplus of Rbs12.2bn, suggesting that subsequent concessions on
social spending, among other items, had been responsible for a first quarter
deficit of about Rbs80bn.
Mr Gaidar said the government could afford to loosen budgetary policy for
the second quarter of this year because unpopular price liberalisation
measures had eliminated the monetary overhang - or surplus of roubles in
circulation - which has consistently undermined the rouble.
Although apparently conceding that a totally deficit-free budget was no
longer on the agenda for this year, he said budgetary policy would again
have to be tightened in the third quarter.
President Boris Yeltsin is understood to have ditched the official draft
Russian constitution following attempts by parliament's constitutional
committee to reduce his emergency powers, Leyla Boulton reports.
Although a new constitution has been one of Mr Yeltsin's chief political
goals, he has effectively killed the prospect of endowing Russia with a new
one to replace that inherited from the old communist empire at a sitting of
the Russian parliament on April 6.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920328

