FT921-14019

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK Company News: List of potential MGN buyers shortens -
Publishing software supplier could be first buy-out from MCC


   By RAYMOND SNODDY and ANDREW JACK


MERCURY Asset Management, the venture capital arm of SG Warburg, the
merchant bank, has decided against bidding for Mirror Group Newspapers.
The company is the latest to decide against trying to acquire the popular
newspaper group from the administrator of the private interests of the late
Mr Robert Maxwell, which account for a 51 per cent stake.
MAM, which last year bought National Transcomm, the privatised transmitter
and engineering business of the old Independent Broadcasting Authority in a
Pounds 70m deal, decided that there was too much complexity and uncertainty
to go ahead.
Mercury is the third potential purchaser to rule itself out before it was
even possible to make a bid. The others which expressed interest and then
changed their minds were Pearson, owner of the Financial Times and Mr Tiny
Rowland's Lonrho group, publisher of The Observer.
The main candidate now appears to be a management buy-out team led by Mr
Richard Stott, the editor of the Daily Mirror, backed by Electra, the
venture capital group.
A rival management bid could yet emerge however. Hambros Bank has also
expressed interest in putting together a consortium.
It seems improbable that anyone will be able to make a bid before MGN's
fully audited accounts are available for 1991. This is unlikely before
March.
Any potential purchaser will want to know precisely what the company's
assets and liabilities are and in particular how much money will be needed
to restore the MGN pension fund to financial health.
Meanwhile, the management of QED Technology, a subsidiary of Maxwell
Communication Corporation, is trying to complete a buy-out of the business
by the end of the month.
A deal would allow QED, a systems integrator and software supplier for the
publishing industry, to complete the purchase of a subsidiary of Norsk Data,
the Norwegian computer group.
Mr Jonathan Phillips, one of the joint administrators of MCC, had told Norsk
Data that an offer from QED made last August to buy one of its loss-making
subsidiaries could not proceed.
However, Norsk Data confirmed that it was still willing to sell ND Comtec to
QED if the sale could take place before the end of January. The offer
depends on QED's ability to buy itself out from MCC before then.
Mr Svein Sognen, executive vice-president at Norsk Data, said that a US, a
UK and a Norwegian company were also interested in buying the subsidiary
which also provides software to the publishing industry.
It also emerged that Berlitz International, MCC's language training and
travel publishing company, has been removed from the 'M&O' group of
companies controlled by Mr David Shaffer under the joint US/UK
administration procedures agreed on Wednesday.
M&O is the vehicle under these joint proceedings to handle Macmillan,
Official Airline Guides and 15 other subsidiaries of MCC.
The announcement came after a hearing in the New York southern district
bankruptcy court that approved arrangements governing the control of MCC
jointly under UK administration and US Chapter 11 bankruptcy legislation.
Five US banks have claimed ownership of most of the 55.6 per cent stake in
Berlitz that is also claimed by Macmillan. Mr Shaffer said it would not be
appropriate for Berlitz to be within M&O while there was dispute over its
ownership.
Credit Suisse, Swiss Volksbank, Advest of New York, Morgan Stanley and
Shearson Lehman are believed to claim ownership of the Berlitz shares as
collateral for loans extended to companies within the Maxwell empire.
Nimbus Records pension funds, UK and US, have not been part of the MCC
pensions funds since the company's acquisition by MCC in December 1987.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920117

