FT922-438

FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: Closet drama Romeo


   By ANDREW ST GEORGE


THE ROYAL Shakespeare Company's Romeo & Juliet has transferred from
Stratford-upon-Avon to the Barbican. David Leveaux' fine 1991 Stratford
version was the most sombre of the RSC's five stagings of the play since
1980. A compelling closet drama emerged, trusting to the play's text. It has
matured, improved, and now is even better. It makes exciting and intense
drama.
Shakespeare wrote Romeo in 1595. At 31 he balanced the play's issues deftly:
love, adolescence, parents, suicide, the claims of faction and the desires
of heart. Because the characters are always searching for newer, bolder
images, Romeo sits closer to the Sonnets than any other play. Its language
has a heady amplitude. This production recognises that: every phrase is
new-minted and made for the occasion, and supported by consistently fine
verse speaking.
Alison Chitty's set, a shadowy interior of panelled frescoes, is more
brightly lit (Alan Burrett) than at Stratford. The action becomes more
vivid, pushed forward on stage in the shallower Barbican auditorium. Beyond
the curtained and crepuscular chambers lies the brightly lit 'public haunt
of men", the daytime venue for Verona's brawling families.
Michael Maloney fills out Romeo wonderfully, every gesture a study and every
line a thought: the quintessence of 'drivelling love' and 'violent
delights.' Clare Holman as Juliet finds the wisdom which makes her more
mature than Romeo; her fine performance has greater scope than last year.
The balcony scene, all heartbeat and hesitation, is a delight.
Capulet (Jonathan Newth) is a violent father to Juliet and Mercutio (Tim
McInnerny) a violent friend to Romeo. McInnerny brilliantly turns 'Queen
Mab' into a psychosis, and jokes his way out of life: 'you shall find me a
grave man.' Dryden was right: Shakespeare killed off Mercutio 'lest he
should have been killed by him.'
This fresh, energetic production offers Romeo as a brawling diversity
unified not so much by plot or characters as by sentiment. Its pleasures are
transient: 'like the lightning which doth cease to be ere one can say it
lightens.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920627

