FT922-568

FT  26 JUN 92 / A high-stakes claim to France's political prize: President
Mitterrand's campaign to ratify the Maastricht Treaty is confounding his
conservative opponents


   By IAN DAVIDSON


The constitutional revision passed this week by the French parliament is an
important boost for President Mitterrand, but it is also much more than
that: it is a turning point on which he will be staking his presidency.
It is a boost in two senses. In the first place, it is a decisive step
towards the French ratification of the Maastricht Treaty. If ratification
gets through the referendum scheduled for the autumn, and if the Danish
problem is sorted out, President Mitterrand can claim an appropriately grand
achievement to crown his long political career.
At the same time, his campaign for Maastricht is proving a diabolically
effective device for wrong-footing his political opponents. Over the past
year, the conservative parties have become increasingly confident that they
will reverse their defeat of 1988, and win a smashing victory in the general
elections next March. The Maastricht debate seriously threatens this
confidence, because it strikes them where they are most divided and
therefore most vulnerable.
The centre-right UDF group and the Centrist party are wholeheartedly
committed to European integration and the Maastricht Treaty; but their
Gaullist allies are internally divided, between those who are at best
ambivalent about the treaty, and those who are completely hostile.
This division between the Gaullists and their partners has already become a
source of disagreement. It is bound to become more intense as France moves
from the phase of constitutional revision to the phase of ratification. If
it should turn into an open quarrel, as it may well do before the
ratification process is over, it could even prejudice the parties' ability
to work successfully together in the general election campaign.
These conservative divisions, and the near-certainty that they will get
deeper, must seem a sweet revenge for President Mitterrand. For more than a
year, ever since his calamitous appointment of Mrs Edith Cresson as prime
minister, he has been in the doldrums in the opinion polls. Her replacement
by Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the former finance minister, last April has given
the government a vital shot of optimism; but President Mitterrand himself is
still rock bottom in public opinion.
A year ago, the morale of the regime was so low that some people predicted
that President Mitterrand might be forced to resign before the end of his
term.
Yet his character made it more likely, even then, that he would not give up
without a fight, and that he would seek the high political ground to do so.
Maastricht offers this high ground. And with characteristic shrewdness, Mr
Mitterrand has organised the procedure and the timetable to exploit the
weakness of his opponents to the full.
By forcing the constitutional revision through the parliamentary procedure,
he has driven the conservative parties to display their widening divergences
before the public. The Gaullists have accused their ostensible partners in
the UDF and Centrist parties of 'collaboration' with the government.
The centre-right have retorted in kind, warning that they could not vote
with the Gaullists in a future election, and might even campaign against
them, if they were to vote against ratification of the Maastricht Treaty.
There is little doubt that Mr Jacques Chirac, the Gaullist leader, hopes
eventually to declare in favour of Maastricht. He still harbours
presidential ambitions; he knows that an anti-European label might make him
unelectable; in any case, it would be an impossible handicap if he were
elected. Yet he has not been able to impose this logic on his party.
On the contrary, his des-perate efforts to contain the Gaullists' internal
divisions have made it easier for the anti-Europeans to drive the party ever
closer to an anti-Maastricht position.
Last week the Gaullists abstained on the revision of the constitution in the
National Assembly, but voted against it in the Senate. This week they
declined to take part in the proceedings in the joint Congress in
Versailles, on the grounds that the the treaty was null and void, as a
result of the Danish 'no' vote.
Since the Danish problem almost certainly cannot be resolved before
September, this logic ought to require the Gaullists to vote against the
treaty in the French referendum. But Mr Jacques Toubon, the former
secretary-general of the party, has said that he was opposed to the
constitutional revision, but was in favour of the ratification of the
treaty. This is a position which it must be quite difficult to explain.
The Gaullists' dilemma has raised new questions about the balance of forces
between the conservative parties. In the pre-Maastricht era the Gaullists,
as a single party, were more disciplined and therefore stronger than the
somewhat diverse assemblage of Liberal and Christian-Democrat parties.
Today, it is the UDF and the Centrists which feel stronger and more united.
This is partly because they have no difficulty over the revision of the
constitution, but also because they have managed at the same time to impose
substantive amendments which the government was reluctant to concede.
Some commentators have concluded that the Maastricht debate is opening up
the possibility of a sweeping reversal of political alliances; by the time
the ratification struggle is over, the conservative alliance will be dead
and gone, but the ground will have been prepared for a new pro-European
alliance between the Socialists and at least parts of the centre-right.
Such a recomposition of the political scenery seems rather unlikely, at any
rate before the general election. The Socialists are probably too
contaminated as election partners, and public opinion is clearly poised for
a conservative alternative. On the other hand, the final fate of the
Maastricht Treaty may well not be resolved before next spring, in which case
the European quarrel between the conservative parties will also be alive
during the general election.
All this must be deeply satisfying to such a consummate political
manipulator as President Mitterrand. The Gaullist party is impaled on its
nationalist reflexes, and Mr Chirac is in the process of confirming that he
is not in strategic control of his party. For the moment the odds must still
be heavily in favour of a large conservative victory in the next general
election, but the Europe factor may shorten them dramatically.
Such calculations leave out the Mitterrand factor, however. French public
opinion has long been in favour of Europe, and the polls show a constant
margin of popular support for the Maastricht Treaty. But unless there is a
recovery in the president's personal popularity, there is a clear danger
that the electorate will decide on the day to vote against Mr Mitterrand,
rather than in favour of Maastricht.
It is in this sense that Mr Mitterrand is staking his presidency in his
Maastricht campaign. For if the Maastricht referendum were to fail, there is
little doubt that he would be morally obliged to resign. The poetic paradox
in the drama is that Mr Chirac may be able to maximise the chances of
President Mitterrand's resignation, by campaigning against the Maastricht
Treaty; but only at the price of reducing his own chances of being elected
in his place.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920626

