FT924-5984

FT  24 NOV 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Orchestrating an orderly
exit for the owners


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


Corporate finance executives in Manchester have started playing tunes on a
new instrument. It is called the Obo and Barclays Bank has been sufficiently
intrigued to start sending groups of managers to hear what is uttering
forth.
Obo is an acronym for a financial instrument, which the inventor, James Dow
of KPMG Peat Marwick, calls an 'Owner Buy Out'. For good measure, his
partner Malcolm Edge has ensured that any taxophonic qualities can be
pleasantly muted.
It is designed to allow a venture capital fund or suchlike to buy 20 or 30
per cent of a good, but highly geared, small- or medium-sized business so it
can fight on through the recession, probably pay off the bank, and live to
sell itself or float another day.
It hardly sounds revolutionary but Dow and Edge claim there has never been
anything quite like it before. They say it offers businesses, investing
institutions and banks a counter-recessionary strategy for the mutual
benefit of all.
Many good companies are tight against borrowing limits and are already
overgeared. Banks are refusing to lend more and know that opportunities to
recover lendings via receivership are poor, with prices depressed.
Meanwhile venture capital funds and other equity financiers are paralysed by
poor deal flow and illiquidity and are desperate to find some low-risk
equity investment.
The Obo theory is to find temporarily troubled, but fundamentally sound,
companies which, if they can get through the recession, have good prospects
of profit growth.
They have a proven management, but will have probably run out of the cash
reserves they felt sure would see them through the recession. These are
among the companies now beginning to fail - for no other reason than that
the recession has proved unreasonably long for their pockets.
The aim would be to sell or float a business in three or four years' time
when the trade sales and stock markets should be recovering. By then profits
should also be improving, together with prices.
Are these assumptions about recovery reasonable? Dow says price to earnings
ratios must recover - private company p/e ratios have been falling behind
the FT500 average now for four years and are currently 40 per cent adrift.
This discount should wither, he says, when recession eventually eases and
with it the pressure on margins and profits.
The value to the banks of the whole process would be to lessen their own
risks and this has prompted Barclays to send groups of managers, half a
dozen at a time, to listen to Dow and Edge. Similar seminars are planned
with other clearers.
Investing institutions, meanwhile, have a chance to take a stake in a proven
enterprise with a fair chance of exit and reasonable dividends in prospect.
But will business owners wear it? Some may have no choice if the alternative
is closure, but Edge claims to have devised a very tempting tax arrangement
to induce them. This involves the owner taking a scrip dividend equal to the
value of the investing institution's stake.
This would then be taxed as income, rather than a capital gain, and use made
of tax credits so that the net rate emerges as 20 per cent, rather the 40
per cent that would apply via the capital gains route.
If everything then worked to plan, the business could float, or sell, after
a few years with higher earnings and, hopefully, for one or two more times
earnings than would be possible now.
The investor would have a running yield plus a final capital receipt, while
the company owner would have two bites from selling and should make more
money.
Dow and Edge say there is real interest, with one deal already in the
pipeline.
There are a lot of assumptions, plus real faith that recession cannot go on
forever. The risk of their being wrong, they say, is worth taking.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921124

