FT922-711

FT  26 JUN 92 / Arts: Schippel, The Plumber - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


CP Taylor was a dramatist of prodigious output, better known in Scotland and
the north east than in London. When he died in 1981 at the age of 52, he had
written more than 70 plays, none of them before he was 30. His reputation
since has been rising steadily and his works will be much performed at this
year's Edinburgh Festival.
Taylor once said that he would be happy if half a dozen of them were
remembered. Whether Schippel, The Plumber would have been among his top six
is doubtful, since it is not typical of other work that I have read. It is
an adaptation of a piece by Carl Sternheim and set in Imperial Germany,
1913. Its potential to dazzle, however, must have been always there. It had
a West End run starring Harry Secombe in 1975.
The original Schippel was fiercely satirical. It is about bourgeois snobbery
on the eve of the first world war and contains some notable grovelling by
the middle classes to royal blood. It also sends up that very Germany
tendency to seek national harmony through music.
By now, whatever Taylor may have thought himself, the satire is dead, and
Schippel emerges as a thoroughly enjoyable comedy which occasionally moves
into high class farce. The aim of this group of solid bourgeois citizens is
to win the crown for singing quartets for the fourth year running. Since one
of their members has died, it is necessary to fill the gap. The choice falls
on Schippel, who has a tenor voice of which any German would be proud. But
as Schippel is only a plumber, and illegitimate to boot, his inclusion
creates social problems.
The solution comes in Schippel being allowed to marry the fetchingly
beautiful sister (Kate Buffery) of the leader of the leader of the quartet,
though not before the sister has had a romantic fling, which she expects to
continue, with the local prince. Being from different ends of the social
scale, the prince and the plumber get on perfectly well with each other. As
the prince remarks, 'it's just like Shakespeare - the prince and the
bastard'.
Jeremy Sams's production contains a profusion of German music (especially
Schubert) and some excellent singing. James Saxon as Schippel is several
times enthusiastically applauded for his rendering of the various Lieder.
That does not often happen to an actor. Saxon can act as well: note his
initial entry when he starts to eat the cream cake.
There is also a wonderful balcony scene with conscious echoes of Romeo and
Juliet: 'It's horribly difficult in the circumstances,' says Philip Franks
as the prince, 'to avoid cliches.' The set, which includes the balcony and
is designed by Lez Brotherston, is outstanding. The moon shines: the whole
stage is used to the full and when the top of the grand piano is raised,
even that reveals scenic surprises. The opening is a trifle slow; it belies
the fun that is to come.
Greenwich Theatre until July 25. 081 858 7755

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920626

