FT921-15301

FT  10 JAN 92 / International Bonds: Strong investor appetite for World Bank
issue


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE World Bank's latest global Dollars 1.5bn issue performed strongly
yesterday in the wake of heavy demand from investors.
The 10-year issue, with a coupon of 6 3/4 per cent, was priced at a spread
of 15 basis points over US Treasury bonds - at the low end of the expected
range. However, by late yesterday the spread had narrowed to as little as 10
basis points.
This prompted claims that the issue, brought by Deutsche Bank Capital
Markets and Merrill Lynch, had been priced too generously.
However, it was widely believed that a more significant factor had been
efforts by traders who had gone short of the issue, in the expectation of
the spread widening, to square their positions.
Around three-quarters of the issue is understood to have been placed in the
Far East and Europe, with Far Eastern investors the largest buyers. US
investors were said to be less attracted because of the narrow spread over
Treasuries.
Elsewhere, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development made its
debut for the year with an offering in the Swedish krona sector, swapped
into floating-rate dollars.
Priced at 30 basis points over comparable Swedish government bonds, the
issue was considered tightly priced. However, the small size of the deal,
reflecting the bank's modest current borrowing needs, meant that much of the
issue had been pre-placed.
A keenly-priced Dollars 200m issue from Forte, the UK hotels group, also
failed to set investors alight. The two-year bonds were brought by Goldman
Sachs and J. P. Morgan at a spread of 71 over the US government benchmark at
the re-offered price.
The short maturity enabled the borrower, rated A2 by Moody's and single-A by
Standard & Poor's, the US rating agencies, to offer a coupon of just 5 3/8
per cent.
The two lead-banks, which between them took around 80 per cent of the bonds,
are thought to have sold around half of their share yesterday. The bonds
were held at the fixed re-offer price throughout the day.
Meanwhile, Swiss Bank Corporation International was having a far easier time
with a five-year, Dollars 200m deal for Nestle Holdings.
The issue, carrying a coupon of 6 1/8 per cent and a powerful name for
retail investors, was sold out before the syndicate had been formed.
The spread of 24 basis points had tightened to 20 basis points in later
trading. The food group's US entity also brought a SFr300m, 10-year issue
yesterday carrying a coupon of 6 3/4 per cent.
Ontario Hydro, the Canadian utility, is expected to launch a global bond
offering next week to raise in excess of CDollars 1bn. The company said
yesterday it was planning the offer 'in the near future, subject to
appropriate market conditions.'
The names of the five lead-managers chosen for the transaction were not
named publicly, though they are understood to be Goldman Sachs, Industrial
Bank of Japan, Scotia McLeod, Merrill Lynch and RBC Dominion Securities.
The issue, likely to be at the 10-year maturity, will be the company's fifth
Canadian dollar global issue. It will take borrowings so far this year to
nearly CDollars 2bn, close to half the total projected need for 1992.
Imperial Chemical Industries, the UK chemicals group, said it was about to
launch a Dollars 200m 10-year bond issue in the US domestic market. The
bonds, issued by ICI Wilmington and guaranteed by ICI, will carry a coupon
of 7.5 per cent, and are priced at 99.75 per cent. The issue is co-managed
by Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch, with J. P. Morgan and Morgan Stanley
also acting as underwriters.

The Financial Times


London Page 19 Table (Omitted).

920110

