FT921-609

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Kinnock pledges action on health service


   By MICHAEL CASSELL


MR NEIL Kinnock, the Labour leader, last night tried to turn the election
into a referendum on the National Health Service, claiming that the NHS
would be completely broken up if the Conservatives were returned to office.
Speaking to supporters in Glasgow at the end of a week in which the health
service has dominated the campaign, Mr Kinnock said the Tories had not dared
subject any element of their health proposals to the democratic judgment of
the voters.
He claimed that the election of a Labour administration would stop the NHS
from being run 'like a stockbrokers or a chain store'. Under the Tories, he
said, the NHS would become a 'patchwork quilt of of profit centres'.
Earlier in the day Mr Kinnock rejected suggestions that Labour had been
damaged by the row over its party election broadcast based on the case of
five-year-old Jennifer Bennett, and said the controversy, which had prompted
enormous public support, was injecting fresh energy into the party's
campaign.
Mr Kinnock told the Glasgow rally that the Conservatives were 'utterly
determined to go on bulldozing, extending the commercialisation of the
health service, pushing the market into every nook and cranny of care,
multiplying the army of business managers, spreading the opt-outs, turning
every hospital into a trading unit, every general practice into a small
business'.
Broadening his attack on the Tories, the Labour leader said the voters had
only '13 days more to endure'. He said the Tories knew that they were losing
the campaign and that their 'sour, drab appeal to selfishness' was making no
impact.
He added that in their desperation ministers had abandoned any pretence of
positive campaigning and had been forced to resort to calling for help from
Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the former prime minister. Mr Kinnock said: 'They
brought in John Major because he wasn't Margaret Thatcher. Now they've
brought in Margaret Thatcher because she's not John Major.'
Mr Kinnock attempted to lay the blame for the recession firmly on the
shoulders of Mr Major, claiming that the prime minister was trying to
persuade everyone that he had inherited the nation's economic problems from
someone else.
He attacked the government for its inaction in addressing the problems of
the recession, and claimed it had not made any serious effort to solve the
country's economic difficulties.
He criticised Mr Major for claiming that the Conservatives intended to build
on the successes of the 1980s and the legacy of Mrs Thatcher. He told the
rally that all they could build on was a legacy of increased poverty,
homelessness, rising unemployment and industrial decline.
Mr Kinnock added that on election day the choice before the electorate would
be a Tory party the people no longer trusted and a Labour party which would
work for the whole nation's interest.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920328

