FT924-6274

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (6): Luxury - a dated concept in the
90s - Meretricious displays of wealth are completely passe now, says Stephen
Bayley in his philosophical view of what the rich buy


   By STEPHEN BAYLEY


LUXURY, at least as defined many of the goods people accumulate, is vulgar
and venal. Luxury, in my observation, is not necessarily about pleasure, but
more likely about excess.
Other than a meretricious and crass display of wealth, there is no good
reason, for example, why taps should be gold. In a sense, luxury is the
opposite of design. Industrial civilisation has the potential to provide the
best goods and services to the entire population at a modest cost and,
miserable as we may be in this fin-de-siecle, it is a fact that for many
western citizens this paradise has been achieved.
That is what all the early Modernist Bauhaus theory was concerned with. Now
stigmatised by those who would often wilfully aim to misunderstand them,
Modernist architects and designers were not trying to impose an austere
machine aesthetic on the glum and downtrodden people of Europe. Rather, the
metal furniture and concrete houses were just making the best of materials
available, making the most of contemporary possibilities. The classics of
modern design made a popular form of luxury commonplace in that for the
first time in history efficient, safe and beautiful furniture and appliances
became universal. That the word 'luxury' now connotes something more vulgar
and expensive than a Breuer chair or a Citroen 2cv is both a repudiation of
the Modernist adventure and a reaction to it.
The rot set into the meaning of 'luxury' in Britain when some time in the
1950s a hotshot marketeer working for Ford, the motor company, decided that
a premium priced model of the Ford Anglia might be ennobled with the name
'de luxe'. In the poetics of car specifications, de luxe meant the addition
of external chrome strips, elaborated mouldings around the rear light
clusters and two-tone upholstery. It was hard for words to recover from such
debasement.
In America, where the achievement of status has long been measured in terms
of accumulated possessions, the idea of luxury has acquired a fetishistic
quality. It can be defined by a powerful and evocative list of artefacts. In
her autobiography, Ali McGraw, the actress, describes her astonishment on
arrival in Hollywood. The house was mock Georgian on a huge plot, with an
artificially fed 300-year-old sycamore. There were scented candles (a sure
definition of luxury at work) and in the linen cabinets hundreds of bars of
Guerlain soap. She cannot have been under anything other than a very clear
impression that this was a luxury dwelling.
Although Flaubert, in his sardonic Dictionnaire des Idees Recus posed as the
homme serieux and defined luxury as 'the ruin of nations,' the French are
more confidant with their tastes and sense than the English or the
Americans.
There is something marvellous about French culture which allows intellectual
rigour to go hand-in-hand with intense sensual delight. The best French
cooking or wine is a challenge to the intellect as much as to the palate;
and while the German Modernists of the 1920s were doggedly making severe and
honourable metal furniture out of discarded industrial components, Le
Corbusier's 'Grand Confort' armchair kept the Modernist faith, but was also
a supremely elegant, comfortable and luxurious artefact.
The tradition continues: Andree Putman is perhaps the leading European
interior designer. She is rigidly modernist, but sensible of her clients'
and their customers' needs. She says: 'To God and to artists all materials
are the same.' This is a sophisticated belief that unites the purist ethics
of modern design with the sensitivity of a mondaine sensualist. No gold taps
here.
But, if in general luxury and modern design are at variance, then in the
past decade they have been at war. London and Paris have long established
tradesman-craftsmen houses specialising in luxury goods, whether Lobb shoes,
Purdey shotguns, Swaine Adeney & Brigg saddlery, Cartier watches, Christofle
silver or Baccarat glass.
So influential are these makers of exclusive premium-priced personal-ware
that entire personalities are defined by them, In France, a certain type of
woman is known by the deadly accurate acronym 'FHCP': Foulard Hermes,
Collier de Perles. In this way, luxury goods define their customers in a
process which anthropologists would recognise.
In France the luxury goods business is taken seriously. With typical French
panache for bureaucracy, 71 luxury goods makers (including Louis Vuitton,
Hermes, Cartier, Dior and Chanel) have formed the the portentously titled
Comite Colbert, as if to suggest malettiers, vignerons and joailliers are
providing the continuity of French artistic culture. Despite the recession,
the Comite Colbert reports rising sales.
One explanation of this may be psychological. A Paris psychiatrist called
Michel Lejoyeux says he has identified a form of obsessive-compulsive
disorder which seeks gratification from buying things, as if the act of
purchasing (irrespective of eventual use) establishes power and authority
over a harrowing world.
But the real explanation of the continued demand for luxury goods is social
and aesthetic rather than psychological. The 20th century has made the major
western economies rich in that most own, or have access to, a range of
machines - from the car through the video to the cellphone to the occasional
use of a Boeing 747. Marinetti's dream of motorways and aircraft is part of
our daily routine. As soon as those things - which by their familiarity and
accessibility are a triumph of our civilisation - become everyday, the
insecure or the greedy will seek specialist treatment. This is where the
taste for gold taps comes from.
It is why Donald Trump sends out morocco-bound invitations to his latest
pleasure palace. It explains the astonishing demand for the S-class
Mercedes-Benz, a car of boastfulness and arrogance three times more
expensive than other cars in its class.
The greedy and insecure take refuge in this limited definition of luxury.
They can find another version of it in the immature, brackish splendour of,
say, London's new Lanesborough Hotel. But in truth is there not something
inadequate about definitions of luxury which entail exclusiveness, expense
and rarity? Are not luxury goods consumers living in a costly fantasy world?
Of course, but maybe that is the source of the pleasure.
In times of excess, real pleasure is defined by experience rather than
merchandise. Only the most curmudgeonly would deny that lunch in Paris's
Crillon Hotel is a life-enhancing experience.
But then I look around and feel glad I do not have gold taps. In a crowded
world the great challenge is to make life more simple and less complicated.
Real luxury is the ability to choose how to spend your time and arrange your
space.
'Luxury' goods may be of supreme quality and may confer a certain cachet in
the village long-hut of the international rich, but the concept is dated and
limited.
Sixty years ago, in The Price of Things, Elinor Glyn had a character say:
'If one consciously and deliberately desires happiness . . . one must have
sufficient strength of will to banish all thought.' Writing today, she would
banish luxury.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921121

