FT921-15250

FT  11 JAN 92 / International Company News: Mercedes signs production deal
with Liaz


   By ANDREW FISHER


   FRANKFURT


MERCEDES-Benz, the vehicle subsidiary of Daimler-Benz, yesterday continued
the wave of German investment in Czechoslovakia, announcing its second truck
production deal in a week.
The German company yesterday signed a letter of intent in Prague with Liaz,
the Czech heavy truck manufacturer, on future co-operation. This follows the
deal signed on Monday between Mercedes and Avia covering light truck
production.
Mercedes, the market leader in Europe and the world's biggest maker of
trucks above six tonnes, said it will form a production network with the two
Czech companies to make vans and trucks. Its total investment in the venture
will be around DM350m (Dollars 233.3m) over five years.
Czech officials said Mercedes would have 31 per cent of the three-way
venture, Avia 49 per cent and Liaz 20 per cent. No figure was given for the
cost of Mercedes' stake. Avia and Liaz will contribute land and production
equipment to the project.
The Mercedes deal is further proof of the success enjoyed by German
companies in forging new investment links with Czechoslovakia. Volkswagen,
the motor manufacturer, is involved with the Skoda car concern, while
Siemens is taking control of both the energy and transport divisions of
Skoda, Pilsen.
Mercedes was not the only company interested in Avia and Liaz. Renault of
France also held talks over Avia, while Iveco (the truck subsidiary of
Italy's Fiat) and Volvo of Sweden were interested in Liaz.
The Mercedes venture is still subject to Czechoslovak government approval.
Mr Jan Vrba, the Czech regional industry minister has criticised the deal,
his objections reportedly centred on tax and trade concessions requested by
Mercedes.
The sites involved in the venture are Letnany, the Prague suburb where
Avia's most profitable plant is located and Jablonec, where Liaz has its
main plant employing nearly 2,000 people.
Mr Horst Zimmer, a director of Mercedes-Benz, said the partners in the
venture wanted to capitalise on the opportunities offered by the east
European market and raise the value of production in Czechoslovakia as
quickly as possible.
The truck models to be produced at the sites will range from vans and light
trucks to medium-sized vehicles and trucks over 10 tonnes.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920111

