FT922-495

FT  27 JUN 92 / International Company News: Tokyo keeps straight corporate
face - The outcome of Japan's 1,824 annual meetings


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


Yesterday should have been a day of reckoning for many Japanese company
presidents. After a year of falling profits, declining prospects and a
barrowload of corporate scandals, the presidents of 1,824 companies had to
explain themselves before their annual meetings.
In the event, even the heads of those companies which suffered the biggest
embarrassments in the past 12 months got off fairly lightly. Shareholders
were treated to waves of deep bows and ritual apologies, but few real
explanations of the events of the year and no resignations.
Perhaps the slickest performance was staged by Yoh Kurosawa, the president
of the Industrial Bank of Japan, Japan's top corporate bank. Despite the
fact that the bank's former chairman resigned last year over a scandal
involving illegal loans, Mr Kurosawa managed to finish yesterday's general
meeting in just 30 minutes.
'We will make the utmost efforts to regain people's trust,' Mr Kurosawa told
shareholders. 'We understand,' replied the members and IBJ staff in a
chorus.
Hideo Sakamaki, president of Nomura Securities, the stockbroking company
which was also last year involved in financial scandals, had a little more
trouble than Mr Kurosawa. But he, too, avoided entering into any serious
discussions with disgruntled shareholders.
One of the shareholders afterwards complained Nomura had organised
everything so well it was impossible to get answers to questions. 'It was
just a farce,' he said.
The day was considerably harder for Kiichiro Ito, the president of Tokai
Bank, which lost money last year through an illegal loans scheme in which
renegade managers forged certificates of deposit. Mr Ito had to spend two
hours 57 minutes before his shareholders, fending off calls for the
resignations of senior managers over the affair.
Mr Ito insisted that staying in post was a way of shouldering
responsibility. Shareholders angrily dismissed his excuses. 'There was
uproar,' said one man who attended the meeting.
Jiro Yokota, president of Tokyu Corporation, a conglomerate ranging from
railways to department stores, was also made to suffer. An elderly
shareholder interrupted Mr Yokota's opening speech. Shouting through a
megaphone he had smuggled into the hall, the shareholder called for an
explanation of revelations made last year that Inagawakai, a gangster group,
had bought large blocks of Tokyu stock.
Waving newspaper cuttings, the shareholder waited for answers but was told
the company could not comment on press reports because they were all
different. The meeting finished in 28 minutes.
The biggest meeting was held by Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, Japan's
largest company, which is burdened by a particular duty to small
shareholders.
After the company, formerly a government monopoly, was privatised in 1987,
millions of ordinary Japanese bought stock at prices of up to Y3.2m. With
the shares now languishing at around Y580,000, some 2,400 investors turned
up to yesterday's meeting demanding action to raise the share price.
The board politely took 34 questions from 10 shareholders. The directors
patiently explained they were trying to improve profits by increasing market
share and cutting costs.
That the meetings passed with so little incident was largely due not to the
patience of shareholders, but a change in the law. In previous years,
critical questioning was led by sokaiya - gangsters who specialise in
disrupting company meetings.
Persistent questioning by sokaiya could sometimes extend meetings into
marathons of as long as 13 hours. Companies which wanted to keep the sokaiya
away had to pay them off in advance - a useful source of income,
particularly for Sumiyoshi, Japan's third largest gangster group which is
known for its sokaiya.
However, a tough new anti-gangster law brought into force this year
yesterday kept the sokaiya at bay. Some 6,800 police were on duty, just to
make sure there was no trouble.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920627

