FT923-10770

FT  29 JUL 92 / Management: Back to school for companies - Why business is
taking more than a passing interest in education


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT


The telephone call came out of the blue for John Wells, works engineer at
William Blythe, the Lancashire chemical company. It was Hapton Primary
School, asking whether his company could help with a history project.
That casual call five years ago has taken Wells deep into the education
system. He has built up contacts with other schools, helped establish a
formal partnership between the business community and local schools, become
involved in the local training and enterprise council, has drawn the
Chemical Industry Association into contact with primary schools.
It was no simple act of charity. Wells goes so far as to claim that links
with education will 'enable us to carry on as an industry'. Chemical
companies, he reckons, have to have friends, and must keep an eye on the
environmental issues surrounding their business.
Wells and others like him on both sides of the Atlantic are twisting back to
front the old maxim, 'Before a company can do good, it must do well'. What
once was deemed philanthropy is gradually becoming an integral part of
business. Hesitantly, companies are becoming involved in education. They
feel forced to act by the twin pressures of heightened demand for
technological skills and the perception that the education system is
faltering. They are conscious that their case for commercial freedom goes by
default if they do not articulate it. To do well a company needs to do good.
'Coping effectively with resource needs and tensions introduced by
technological and educational change . . . will require partnership between
education, business, government and the wider community', wrote Michael
Heron, director of Unilever, the Anglo-Dutch household products and foods
group.
However, the immediate motives of companies are varied. This became clear at
a recent conference, organised in Birmingham by the Warwick University
centre for education and industry and the School Curriculum Industry
Partnership, two of the many organisations seeking to link the worlds of
business and education.
In the US, said Chris Marsden, British Petroleum's head of educational
affairs, 'the emphasis is on combating inner city deprivation and on school
improvement programmes'.
Indeed, according to David Goodman, vice-president corporate affairs at
Clorox, the Oakland chemical group, 'US companies spend Dollars 40bn on
remedial programmes for employees' - money which is siphoned off from other
investments.
The emphasis in continental Europe is different. It is 'on initial
vocational education and transition between education and work', Marsden
suggested. More particularly, in Sweden, observed Bjorn Grunewald, director
of the Federation of Swedish Industry, the approach is altruistic and
practical: 'Companies which are active get recruits more easily - and they
find it cheaper to recruit.'
The focus in the UK, Australia and New Zealand, said Marsden, 'has been on
reversing an anti-industry culture and introducing more vocational relevance
to the school curriculum'.
Oddly, though, UK schools may well be more active in this than UK companies:
it is estimated that while 90 per cent of the schools have established links
with industry, just 10 per cent of companies are involved with a school.
To be effective, a company's education initiatives must come from the top.
Thus large companies such as BP, Rover, the cars group, Whitbread, the
brewer, and Kingfisher, the retailing group, all have carefully drawn up and
publicised policy statements which set out what they want to achieve.
Indeed, Kingfisher, for example, recruited Ms Carol Kay, the former
headmistress of Haberdashers Askes Girls' School in south-east London, to
draw up a policy and clarify the group's activities.
The policies cover myriad activities. Ms Angie Rodriguez-Diaz, program
manager of the Digital Equipment Corporation, the computer group, has an
office in a school at Chelsea, Massachusetts. Here DEC volunteers help with
teaching English to ethnic minority youngsters or adopt a pupil, in a scheme
called mentoring, to create an individual relationship which can act as a
partial substitute for the absence of family support.
Clorox, working with the local chamber of commerce, carried out a survey of
the library needs of the 100 schools in Oakland, California, and then
devised a programme which meant that each school could refurbish its library
at a cost of Dollars 6,000.
In the UK, support for schools has tended to take a different form. The aim
generally has been to support and embellish the national curriculum rather
than to prop up the school system as such.
Thus, Rover has centres at its plants where school pupils can come with
their teachers to work on projects which contribute to their classroom work
on the curriculum.
And the British paper industry, with the School Curriculum Industry
Partnership, has devised material for classroom use that adds an industrial
dimension to the syllabus.
At the same time, increasing emphasis is laid on work experience - giving
students a taste of industrial training and commercial life. Sometimes work
experience and training become part of formal contracts, called compacts,
between employers and educational institutions.
North-west London is an example where a compact started with five schools
and supported by around 80 companies as diverse as Boots, the chemist,
Midland Bank, Bovis Construction and United Biscuits.
What is in it for the companies?
For BP, acknowledged Marsden, it is 'the licence to operate', calling up the
example of a chemical plant in a west Glamorgan housing estate, where there
is 'a level of community understanding' about the activities of the plant.
'Links to the school fed back to the community,' he said.
There can also be direct commercial benefits. Ms Rodriguez-Diaz noted that
DEC's activities in Chelsea were started as a pilot scheme. Now, she added,
'we think we have a model which we could package and sell'.
She also believed that the DEC employees who took part would emerge as
better managers. That is, if the DEC employees can succeed in bringing
skills back into the workforce, they can manage better within the
corporation.
'Our direct payback,' said Goodman, 'takes the form of making our own
employees feel closer to the company.' This is achieved by the company
supporting financially the organisations to which Clorox employees give
their time - in other words, everybody is in this together. Employees who
feel good about their company are better employees, Goodman observed.
Wells believed, too, that activity in the community helped managers develop.
'It helps me to understand the young people we might employ.'
At the same time it keeps him in touch with the turmoil in the British
education and training system - the complexities of national vocational
qualifications, for example.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920729

