FT921-1442

FT  24 MAR 92 / Brussels warns on fuel tax


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


THE European Community will not be able to meet its commitment to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000 without some form
of the tax on fossil and other forms of energy advocated by Brussels,
European Commission officials said yesterday.
Several member states had maintained that their own energy-saving and
anti-global-warming measures could meet the EC target without a tax.
But with a week to go before the deadline by which each of the 12 agreed to
submit a programme of 'complementary measures' to cut CO output, only three
member states - Germany, Denmark and the Netherlands - have done so. The UK,
which has promised to stabilise emissions only by 2005, has submitted its
white paper on the environment, This Common Inheritance, which lacks
detailed timetables on emissions.
Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana, the EC environment commissioner behind the energy
tax proposal, said: 'This proves that on a strictly national level, far from
being sufficient to deal with the emissions, the problem is that they
(member states) do not even fulfil these basic commitments.'
The national programmes are supposed to constitute one of three weapons  -
alongside the SAVE energy conservation programme and the carbon/energy tax -
in the EC arsenal against global warming.
The Commission had originally calculated that without a tax, the EC would
only meet three-fifths of its emission reduction target by 2000. It
therefore wants a levy falling half on fossil fuels and half on other forms
of non-renewable energy, equivalent to Dollars 3 on a barrel of oil, rising
to Dollars 10 by 2000, which member states would offset by tax reductions.
Industry has lobbied against the plan in proportion to the intensity with
which it consumes energy, arguing voluntary measures would meet the EC
target.
Ministers did, however, agree on tighter limits to the sulphur content in
diesel and heating oil. Sulphur in diesel will have to be not more than 0.2
per cent by October 1994, and 0.05 per cent by October 1996.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920324

