FT923-9850

FT  03 AUG 92 / Personal View: Fudge in fourth estate


   By JOHN PLENDER


'Television programmes about Northern Ireland ..viewers turn off at the very
mention of the subject. The story has been going hopelessly round in circles
for decades. There is no sex, no laughs, no charm, no hope.' That was Liz
Forgan, Channel Four's Director of Programmes, writing two months ago ahead
of last week's court judgement which fined the Channel and programme maker
Box Productions Pounds 75,000 for contempt.
She may nonetheless feel that the money was well spent. For the government,
in resorting to the draconian provisions of the Prevention of Terrorism Act
(PTA) to force journalists to reveal their sources for the first time since
the legislation was enacted in 1974, rescued the little noticed Dispatches
programme 'The Committee' from obscurity.
When it was screened last October it caused hardly a ripple. But now
millions know of allegations of systematic collusion between the locally
recruited security forces and loyalist terrorists in a campaign of sectarian
murder. The unprecedented legal battle has also backfired on the government
in another way. Despite the prospect of prosecutions under Section 18 of the
PTA, which carry a maximum five year jail sentence, the Royal Ulster
Constabulary has failed to extract the name of one of the programme's
sources, known as 'Source A'. This individual provided first-hand testimony
of how a secret committee, composed of RUC officers, loyalist terrorists and
prominent businessmen, sanctioned and organised the execution of Republican
supporters and, in one notorious case, an innocent catholic youth.
The Channel Four board was unanimous in its resolve to disclose these
matters in the public interest. Its confidence rested on the extensive
research and close supervision of the project exercised by the Channel's
most senior executives at every stage of production. From the outset those
involved were aware that the undertakings given to the programme's sources
could bring them into conflict with the PTA. They assumed, wrongly, that in
handing over virtually all their research material to both the RUC and
Scotland Yard they would have satisfied the demands of the law.
The dossier given to the RUC after transmission contained information on 19
members of the committee including the chairman - a member of the RUC
reserve who had met the programme's main researcher, shown him his police
medal, brandished a revolver and, as the court was to hear, had boasted,
'makes you wonder who runs this country, doesn't it'.
Shortly after the broadcast the RUC intimated to sympathetic journalists
that the programme had been hoaxed. There had been no terrorist conspiracy.
Yet the RUC seemed unembarrassed by its own use of emergency legislation in
the PTA to unmask the supposed hoaxer. After seven months of legal argument,
held in secret, the case finally surfaced amid a glare of publicity before
Lord Justice Woolf in the High Court.
The core of the case was the conflict between two different public
interests: exposure of a scandal, as against full compliance with the terms
of a valid legal order to produce materials deemed relevant to a terrorist
investigation - even if such compliance might prove fatal for Source A. This
clash was inevitable because Parliament, in passing the PTA, did not
envisage officers of a British police force promoting terrorism instead of
preventing it, which was precisely what the Channel Four programme claimed.
At the start of the proceedings, Lord Williams QC, counsel for Channel Four
and Box, made the position clear. 'We will bow the head, but will not bend
the knee,' he said. For the Crown, Mr Andrew Collins called for Channel Four
to be taken off the air if necessary to force compliance.
Lord Justice Woolf defused this confrontation with a characteristically
British fudge. He dismissed sequestration but rapped Channel Four on the
knuckles with a fine equal to the cost of a mere 15 minutes of advertising
time. And he failed to resolve the clash between the two public interests,
by proposing, wholly unrealistically, that Channel Four and Box should have
given only a qualified undertaking to Source A, saying that they would not
name him unless asked to do so by a court. Source A, who took weeks of
persuasion to appear in heavily disguised silhouette, would naturally have
declined the offer.
This weekend the RUC once again sought to discredit the programme by coming
up with a new hoaxer, witness X. The most striking feature in this is the
identity of the solicitor who witnessed his statement. Of all the solicitors
in Northern Ireland who could have acted for Mr X the RUC chose one of the
19 people identified by Channel Four and Box as members of the Committee.
Interestingly, witness X did not claim to have met any member of the
production team.
If Sir Hugh Annesley, the chief constable, has nothing to hide, as he
continues to insist, it is hard to see why he would not welcome the public
inquiry for which Channel Four has called.
The author, a Financial Times leader and feature writer, is a director of
Box Productions.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920803

