FT921-1206

FT  25 MAR 92 / IMF deal near for republics' entry


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


WESTERN nations are close to agreement on a formula that would open the door
for Russia and the other former Soviet republics to join the International
Monetary Fund this summer.
IMF members still have to decide details of how to calculate the republics'
share of the fund's capital, which in turn would determine the size of their
access to IMF financing, but they are expected to reach an agreement in the
next fortnight on a Russian quota of slightly more than 3 per cent.
This could allow the republic to borrow as much as Dollars 4bn (Pounds
2.3bn) a year from the IMF.
But Russian economists estimate that their country will need a total of
Dollars 12bn in foreign capital this year. Even if Russia's IMF membership
is completed by the summer, an IMF facility might not be in place before the
autumn, and in 1992 would be unlikely to amount to anything like the full
annual entitlement of around Dollars 4bn.
IMF members have not, however, fully resolved the question of whether to
calculate one global quota for the Commonwealth of Independent States, to be
divided up later among the republics, or to calculate each quota
individually.
This could affect the size of the quota, because it would determine whether
trade between the republics should be counted as international trade. Trade,
along with gross national product and international reserves, is a
significant component of the formulas the IMF uses to calculate membership
quotas.
Russian negotiators argued for separate quotas to be calculated for each
republic, and sought a quota of over 4 per cent for their own country. This
would have put them roughly on a par with Japan, whose quota is 4.2 per
cent, whereas the quota likely to be agreed would be closer to Saudi
Arabia's 3.4 per cent.
In the US, the administration has come under pressure in recent days to step
up its efforts to help Russia and the other republics, and President George
Bush has begun to show more enthusiasm for a bigger aid commitment.
The debate on an aid package was spurred by former President Richard Nixon,
who two weeks ago criticised the US response to the collapse of the Soviet
Union as 'pathetically inadequate'.
Mr Nixon's urgings have been echoed senior senators from both parties, led
by Democratic Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia and Republican Senator Richard
Lugar of Indiana.
The two men met President Bush and Mr James Baker, the secretary of state,
at the White House this week to encourage the administration to produce
substantial measures to help the emerging democracies of the former Soviet
Union.
Among the measures proposed is a large US contribution to a rouble
stabilisation fund, increased humanitarian aid and the repeal of a number of
Cold War curbs on trade with the Soviet Union.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920325

