FT924-11555

FT  24 OCT 92 / Where there's brass, there's Brian


   By CLIVE FEWINS


BRIAN Huntley-Egan has spent a lot of time on his knees in churches over
nearly 60 years.
For the past 30 he has spent most of his weekends - and a high proportion of
his holidays - restoring brasses in churches all over the country.
Now that he has retired from his job as a British Telecom engineer he is
finally able to spend most of his time doing what he enjoys most - adding to
the list of 500 brasses in some 300 churches that he has worked on over the
years.
'In the past I really did it for love - just charging for petrol and to
cover my costs,' he said. 'But now I am retired I am happy to accept what
parishes can afford. It is usually a day rate plus expenses, but even then
it would hardly support my wife and myself if we had to rely entirely upon
it.'
There is only one other restorer of church brasses approved by the Council
for the Care of Churches, and he also, does it largely for love. Now he has
more time Brian Huntley-Egan would like to view all the 4,000 or so brasses
in the 8,000 or so medieval churches in this country.
Today it is hard to appreciate how valuable brass was in the 15th and 16th
centuries. Indeed, metal of any sort was rare. To have a memorial brass -
and many were often commissioned during the life time of the person to be
commemorated - was a sign of great wealth.
An indication of just how valuable brasses were in medieval times comes from
those fascinating curiosities known as palimpsest brasses. These have been a
source of great interest to church brass enthusiasts over the centuries.
They are reused brasses, which have been re-engraved on the reverse, often
centuries later.
Another indication of how valuable brass was is seen in the occasional
skilfully soldered repairs probably dating from the time when they were
made.
'In those days production processes were hit and miss. Imperfect castings
were too valuable to throw out, so they mended them at the time,'
Huntley-Egan said.
It is to counter the possibility of theft that Huntley-Egan is called in by
parochial church councils. A loose brass is far more of a temptation to
thieves than one that is firmly fixed, and one of his services to old
churches over the years has been in devising a method of fixing using modern
resin glues.
Although brasses are, if anything, more valuable today than when they were
made, it is very hard for thieves to find a market for them in this country,
as they are all thoroughly catalogued and known by experts in the field.
However, that does not stop a handful of thefts every year. Inevitably some
find their way overseas and never return.
'When this happens the sad thing is that church councils often do not
realise that they have gone for days or even weeks because thieves usually
go for brasses that lie beneath carpets,' Huntley-Egan said.
'The wisest thing really is to have them refixed as soon as they begin to
loosen under foot when the rivets begin to wobble.'
Another way of avoiding theft is by repositioning brasses on church walls,
where they do not get damaged by passing feet and are much harder to steal.
However, Huntley-Egan thinks brass rubbers generally are opposed to this as
they like to see brasses remaining in their original positions - marking the
site of the burial of a person of note.
The way to avoid unnecessary damage from footwear is to do what most
churches and cathedrals do - rope the brasses off.
Proper rubbing does not damage brasses and can positively improve them,
Huntley-Egan said. Although there are many brass rubbing centres, where
facsimile brasses can be rubbed, there is nothing like working on the real
thing.
The best way to go about it is to become a member of the Monumental Brasses
Society. This organisation will supply a list of brass-rubbing centres in
the country where facsimiles cast in resin and brass powder can be rubbed.
It aims to preserve and conserve these remarkable memorials, of which there
are only about 200 - a 20th of the number we have in Britain - in the whole
of continental Europe and Scandinavia.
Information: The Monumental Brasses Society, Lowe Hill House, Stratford St
Mary, Suffolk CO7 6JX.
Bryan Huntley-Egan, 110 Clarence Road, Stony Stratford, Milton Keynes MK11
1JG.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921024

