FT921-1326

FT  25 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Major keeps up attack with European accent


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor and PETER NORMAN


MR JOHN MAJOR added a Euro-sceptical edge to his election campaign yesterday
as the Conservatives combined their harrying of Mr Neil Kinnock over
taxation and spending with an attack on Labour's inexperience on the world
stage.
Party strategists also seized on apparent differences between Mr Kinnock and
his shadow chancellor after Mr John Smith sought to clarify the type of
credit controls that might be put into practice by a Labour government.
Mr Smith's insistence that such controls would not operate directly on
borrowers was contrasted with Mr Kinnock's earlier suggestion that the
policy might lead to the reappearance of mortgage 'queues'.
Speaking at a Westminster press conference, Mr Major emphasised that a
re-elected Conservative government would take a hard line with Brussels over
the Com-munity's budget and farm policy.
Taking sideswipes at the interventionist instincts of some of Britain's
European partners, he also indicated that he remained to be convinced that a
single currency was practicable before the end of the century.
Mr Major, who was joined by Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, in his
attack on Mr Kinnock's leadership in foreign affairs, said: 'The question at
this election is a stark one. Who can you trust to defend our interests and
keep Britain safe?'
Using untypically abrasive language, Mr Hurd said that Labour's policy on
Europe had moved from 'total opposition to total subservience'.
The Conservatives, however, continued to direct most of their fire at
Labour's tax and spending plans, with Mr Major repeating his challenge to Mr
Kinnock to 'cost' Labour's manifesto pledges.
The prime minister said he would continue to put a Pounds 38bn price tag on
the Labour manifesto until the Labour leader offered his own figures.
That strategy was underlined by Mr David Mellor, chief secretary to the
Treasury, who launched an advertising campaign emphasising that the Labour
party's proposals would cost every taxpayer Pounds 1,250 a year.
Mr Mellor, however, agreed that the scope for any increases in public
spending under a re-elected Conservative government would be severely
limited by the impact of the economic recession on the Treasury's finances.
He said that the next public spending round would not be easy. While the
Conservatives would maintain 'priority' programmes, there would not be scope
for increases in other disdiscretionary expenditure.
Mr John Smith yesterday rejected suggestions that Labour would ration
mortgages, Peter Norman writes. The shadow chancellor said that the sole
form of credit management considered by Labour was strengthening of the
reserve asset ratios of credit institutions, but that would be unlikely at
present because of the depressed state of the economy.
Mr Smith, campaigning in the West Midlands, accused the Conservatives of
trying to create a 'scare' on the mortgages issue. He said high interest
rates - of the sort prevalent in the late 1980s - were also a means of
credit control that 'slaughtered industry'.
Mr Smith said that Labour had four economic objectives: steady economic
growth, low inflation, high employment and equilibrium in the balance of
payments.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920325

