FT924-6208

FT  23 NOV 92 / Windsor loss less than feared


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


AS SMOKE and steam lingered yesterday over the ashes of what were once some
of the most stately of Windsor Castle's 1,000 rooms, it became clear that
the art treasures had been less damaged by Friday's fire than had previously
been feared.
Last night, Buckingham Palace and Department of National Heritage officials
agreed that the biggest task arising from the blaze, which raged through the
800-year-old castle for several hours, is the restoration of the building's
fabric.
Some of the worst-damaged rooms had been stripped of most contents as part
of a three-year renovation programme which had been under way for months.
Buckingham Palace said: 'With all the help available to us and with the
royal collection's own team of conservators available, we will be able to
restore pretty well all the items to their former condition. It is clearly a
long haul but we are confident of success.'
Only a handful of works of art have been lost, although they include Sir
William Beechey's portrait of George III.
Some calls, particularly from Labour MPs, were made yesterday for the Royal
Family to contribute to rebuilding costs, although the government has
already acknowledged its responsibility for maintaining the fabric of
Windsor and other royal residences.
Mr Peter Brooke, the national heritage secretary, is expected to make a
statement in the Commons today setting out when and how reconstruction will
start.
Other than the certainty of department officials that reconstruction will
cost 'tens of millions' of pounds, the eventual bill is still in the early
stages of being estimated. Various reports of Pounds 50m-Pounds 60m being
required were indicated by officials as little more than 'guesstimates'.
Reports of how the fire started, ranging from a workman's cigarette to a
welding torch, were also dismissed as speculative. A team of forensic
experts arrived yesterday to investigate the cause.
Senior officers of the Berkshire fire brigade also rejected reports that
cost-cutting measures by the royal household had reduced fire cover at the
castle and had been a factor in the fire's early spread.
Mr Maurice Doyle, divisional officer, said that while the fire had shown it
was necessary to improve salvage expertise, 'we work with the castle fire
service all the time'.
Establishing the precise losses and damage to art treasures, furniture and
artefacts is likely to take time because of the need to cross-check the
inventories of items previously removed for the renovation and those piled
on the lawns by a human chain that included the Duke of York.
Tourists were still being allowed into unaffected lower grounds of the
castle yesterday but it is unclear as yet how tourism will be affected.
The 200-ft-long St George's Hall is devastated and roofless. The Waterloo
Chamber, scene of state banquets, is ruined and both the Grand Reception
Room and the great corridor are badly damaged.
They were among the greatest attractions of the state apartments which,
according to the English Tourist Board, were visited by nearly 650,000
visitors last year.
The state apartments were already closed to the public for the winter when
the fire struck. But there is no doubt that the fire is seen by the Royal
Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead as another blow to tourism on which the
area is heavily dependent, and which has been battered by recession.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921123

