FT924-8073

FT  13 NOV 92 / Three big Russian plants to be sold in next two weeks


   By JOHN LLOYD and REUTER


   MOSCOW


THE RUSSIAN government is to auction off three large industrial plants,
among them a large tractor factory near Moscow, in the next two weeks in
order to raise the profile of the privatisation programme before the opening
of the Congress of People's Deputies on December 1.
The Congress is expected to be highly critical of the government's economic
programme, and to demand its resignation. However, Mr Anatoly Chubais,
deputy prime minister in charge of privatisation, believes that both
managers and the public support the privatisation and that a successful
public offering of shares in big enterprises will deflect expected attacks
from both moderate and hard-line opponents of the programme.
The three enterprises are being readied for privatisation by their managers,
by officials from the state privatisation committee, and by foreign experts.
They will be the first parts of Russia's industrial sector to pass from
state to private ownership.
The auctions, which have been the subject of intense discussion and debate
over the past few weeks, will be limited to Russians.
The government has raised to 80 per cent the percentage of the enterprises
which must be sold for privatisation vouchers which are being issued to the
whole population. Cash will account for the remainder. The decree will
encourage citizens to retain their vouchers, each of which has a face value
of Rbs10,000. President Boris Yeltsin ordered the percentage increase in
order to endow the vouchers with greater value.
One effect of this is that foreigners wishing to take part in later
privatisations will have to acquire large numbers of vouchers, in which a
secondary market has already developed.
Russia yesterday froze its decision to pull out troops from around the
southern rebel republic of Chechnya, saying the region had broken an
agreement on their withdrawal, Reuter reports.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921113

