FT923-10846

FT  28 JUL 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: Soccer - the good, the bad, the ugly
/ Peter Berlin describes a contest between men and boys for gold, dollars -
and glory


   By PETER BERLIN


THE first of the Olympic soccer matches played in Barcelona called to mind a
philosophical conundrum that has long baffled bar-room philosophers. When is
a soccer ground half full and when is it half empty?
A crowd of 18,000 went to the 120,000-capacity Nou Camp stadium to watch
Italy beat the US. To Italy's top young professionals, such as Renato Buso,
whose previous big-time match had been in front of 80,000 fans at Wembley in
the European Cup final, Nou Camp must have seemed almost empty. To the US
college students, the noisy fans who did come made the arena seem almost
full.
Italy and Spain are the two most talented of the 16 under-23 teams which are
contesting the Olympic soccer tournament. The Italian team is packed with
players from Juventus, Sampdoria and AC Milan. Many of the Spaniards play
for Real and Atletico Madrid, and Barcelona.
But here Spain and Italy have a problem.
Before the tournament, the Spanish squad threatened to strike. They wanted
more money. They knew that the Olympics needed a good home squad to fill
seats.
With games at the Nou Camp and three other 40,000-capacity grounds, the
soccer tournament accounts for half the Olympic tickets on sale to fans. The
Spanish players also argued that they might be injured in the Olympics.
Their professional careers, they claimed, were not worth sacrificing for a
mere gold medal. For them, the Olympics represent risk.
In the US, in contrast, there is almost no professional soccer. For the
American players, and for those from eastern Europe, Latin America and
Africa, the Olympics are a shop window. The Games give them a chance to gain
what the Italians and Spaniards have and fear losing. If Italy or Spain do
not win the Olympic gold, it will be because will has triumphed over skill.
It was no surprise, then, that against Spain last Friday the Colombians came
out kicking. But in front of their fans the home team held their nerve,
kicked back and made their talent count in a 4-0 Group B win. In Group C,
Tomas Brolin, a star in Italy, and Joachim Bjorklund both played with the
same ferocity they showed for Sweden in the recent European championships.
The Paraguayans clattered into Brolin but he clattered back.
This is not to say the game was dirty. Outside the UK, players today are
trained to use violence with discretion and the Swedes and Paraguayans are
above all else well trained. The Swedish team is made up of men who recently
followed a long league season by reaching the semi-finals of the European
championship and the final of the European Under-21 competition (they lost
to Italy). Perhaps they are jaded, but I doubt it. The short, round Brolin
apart, they are a collection of strapping young athletes, fit, strong,
brave, their every move drilled and safe and predictable.
The Paraguayans, meanwhile, adopted the underdog tactics encouraged by
tournaments with a group format: play for a draw and hope something will
turn up. The game's few sparks came from Brolin. That is why he is being
paid a fortune to play in Italy while his team-mates are merely well paid
and play in Scandinavia.
Mercifully, the Italian team has flair to spare. If they had played 90
minutes against the US as they did the first 21, they would have won by an
American football score. Instead, they stopped trying. They allowed the US
to regroup, conceded a goal and ended the game hanging on to a 2-1 win.
Even so, it was a contest between men and boys. The difference in the
stature of soccer in the two countries was clearly demonstrated by
differences in the stature of the players. The Italians, 1.6kg a man heavier
and 8cm taller, simply looked more adult alongside the shorter, chunkier
Americans. In Italy, professional soccer has first call on the nation's
athletes; in the US the big men traditionally play football or basketball.
On the other hand, everyone here is desperate for the US to do well so as to
kindle enthusiasm for the 1994 World Cup. They are unlikely to win a medal,
but there are encouraging signs. In the 1990 World Cup the US took on the
full Italian team with a squad of well-disciplined athletes. This team
contains players prepared to trust their soccer instincts, such as winger
Cobi Jones and midfielder Claudio Reyna.
Traditionally, developing nations offer first the flair of ghetto football
and graft on discipline and work-rate later. The US, which started by
pinching athletes who were not big enough for other sports, are developing
in reverse.
Against Italy, Jones, the smallest player on the field, took on and beat the
hulking Italian full backs Baggio and Matrecano.
Everywhere they look in Barcelona the American soccer players will see the
Olympic mascot and be reminded of the humiliation they received at the feet
of his equally cuddly namesake. But even in defeat, Jones did his prospects
of a lucrative contract far more good than any of the Swedes or Paraguayans
did in avoiding defeat.
Meantime, Fifa, soccer's governing body, has fiddled with the rules again.
It has decided that goalkeepers may not handle back passes. This, says Fifa,
will get rid of 'negative' football. The Olympics is the first big
competition to be played with the new rule.
How the rule will effect play is not crystal clear because the players have
not yet absorbed it. Indeed, the Swedes did not even know that the rule
covered back headers, too.
Certainly fewer defenders have turned, when in no danger, and passed 30
metres back to the 'keeper. But they will start to do so again when they
realise that if the goalie is unmarked he can still trap the ball with his
feet, jog out of the area and welly the ball down field.
In tight defensive situations, though, the new rule has transformed play. In
the first 20 minutes of their match, Buso and his Italian colleagues pressed
the US defenders relentlessly. Sometimes the US played the ball creatively
out of defence; more often they panicked and belted it anywhere - usually to
the Italians close to goal - or panicked and did not belt it anywhere.
Once they adjust to the new rule, players can worry again whether the
stadium is half full - or half empty.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920728

