FT922-7129

FT  20 MAY 92 / International Bonds: Ontario's Dollars 2bn issue launched to
warm reception


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE PROVINCE of Ontario's new programme of large global bond issues was
launched to a largely appreciative market yesterday, enabling Dollars 2bn of
bonds to be soaked up with relative ease.
Against a positive background in the US Treasuries market, strong demand
from US investors set the tone and acted to bring in investors from Europe
later in the day. The 10-year bonds were offered with an indicated yield
spread of 64-66 basis points over the US government market but, given the
level of demand, it seemed likely last night that the deal would be priced
at the lower level.
For Ontario, which this year expects to raise around CDollars 10bn from the
capital markets to finance its budget deficit, the issue was an important
launch for its new funding programme. Had it chosen to raise money through a
smaller issue in the Yankee (domestic US) market, it could have offered a
yield spread of close to 60, some bond market professionals said. But the
price was widely seen to have been pitched at the right level to ensure true
global distribution for the issue.
Ahead of the opening in the Far East, around half of the bonds seemed
destined for the US. JP Morgan and Salomon Brothers, joint lead managers,
each of which took Dollars 600m of bonds, said the issue size would not be
raised, and that allocations would be scaled back.
The second huge dollar offering of the week seemed imminent last night: a
Dollars 1bn, five-year issue from Toyota Motor Credit. Judging by early
indications, the Toyota issue will also be priced attractively to ensure a
successful take-up, and the bonds could encounter strong demand.
For anything less than the sort of Dollars 1bn issue it is planning, Toyota
might expect to pay a yield spread of around 35 basis points over the
government benchmark. To succeed in placing the largest-ever international
bond issue by a corporate, however, it is expected to offer an extra 3-5
basis points, taking the yield spread to as much as 40 basis points.
Meanwhile, the Euromarket saw two other unusual dollar issues yesterday:
Dollars 200m of floating-rate notes from the Swedish National Housing
Corporation (SBAB), and Dollars 250m (raised from Dollars 200m) of five-year
bonds from Goldman Sachs. The floating-rate notes, yielding around 8 basis
points over Libor at the reoffered price, were aimed at a market which has
seen little issuance other than from banks recently. Coming from a strong
double-A credit, the issue was reported to have met firm demand.
Goldman's deal, priced to yield 91 basis points over Treasuries, was its
second in the international market (it had offered a 100-basis point yield
spread in the first issue, last autumn.)
During an active day, the Euromarkets also saw a pair of competing 10-year
Canadian dollar deals, both from high-class borrowers: the Inter-American
Development Bank and OKB. The former offered a yield spread of 43 basis
points, the latter 38, prompting some complaints that the latter was too
keenly priced. The IADB sold out quickly, while OKB was reported to have met
comfortable demand, the syndicate breaking later in the day to leave the
bonds trading at around their yield spread at issue.
Finnish Export Credit came with an Ecu300m, three-year transaction,
following the spate of shorter-dated Ecu deals of recent days. The maturity
was pushed beyond two years to get away from the high money market rates in
Ecu, which made very short bond yields appear unattractive, the lead manager
said.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920520

