FT922-4452

FT  05 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Food from Britain calls for
orchard aid


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


GOVERNMENT HELP in expanding British orchards in order to take up demand at
present satisfied by imported apples would reap rich rewards, according to a
report published yesterday.
Food from Britain, which promotes British products both at home and abroad,
said that the trade gap in fruit last year accounted for Pounds 1.7bn of the
Pounds 5.5bn food and drink trade deficit. While much of the imports are
accounted for by products such as bananas and citrus fruit, Pounds
500m-worth is accounted for by fruit that can be grown in the UK, and almost
half of it by apples.
The UK is only 45 per cent self sufficient in fruit that can be produced
here, and consumption is increasing. But investing in a new orchard is
risky, the report points out. Apples take several years to reach commercial
productivity after new plantings, giving a period of negative cash flows and
probably high borrowings. An added danger is that after five years the
chosen crop could have lost its appeal to consumers or been overtaken by
other market entrants.
However, the net return from the national deficit would be well above the
amount of investment needed if production was expanded. FFB believes an
investment of Pounds 100m would yield about Pounds 145m every year for at
least 10 years. If the government were prepared to give planting grants of
Pounds 30m over 13 years, or about Pounds 2.4m a year, the trade deficit in
apples over the lifetime of the new orchards would be reduced by almost
Pounds 1bn.
Mr Paul Judge, FFB chairman, called yesterday for a national strategy for
fruit. He suggested that a levy on all UK producers of between 1 and 2 per
cent of turnover would enable better promotion of their produce. He also
called for a reduction in the number of marketing organisations involved in
fruit. Most of the UK's 45 producer co-operatives had sales of less than
Pounds 5m, he pointed out, suggesting that only a handful had reached the
critical mass necessary to match the needs of supermarkets, which accounted
for almost half all fresh fruit sales.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920605

