FT923-15461

FT  02 JUL 92 / Anglo American sells itself to the world: The world's
largest natural resources group


   By PHILIP GAWITH


Just when Anglo American Corporation, the world's largest natural resources
group, decides to let in some light on its business, political events rudely
refocus attention on whether investing in South Africa makes sense.
Anglo's first roadshow for international investors reaches London today
after earlier performances in continental Europe. It has coincided with
South Africa's descent into political crisis following the Boipatong
massacre.
Mr Julian Ogilvie Thompson, Anglo's chairman, is phlegmatic about the
timing: 'Now is not an ideal time, but having said that, you're also not
going to run away from it.'
Anglo executives take comfort from the thought that the roadshow is intended
to offer a longer-term view of the company's prospects. In its 75-year
history, it has played a central role in South Africa's gold, platinum and
coal mining industries, and in the development of local manufacturing.
It has also survived the difficult years of apartheid, isolation, and
frequent tension with the government. Now the question is whether the group
can flourish in the new South Africa.
Anglo itself is not in any doubt. As one analyst notes, its executives
sometimes give the impression that, having headed off the threat from South
Africa's Afrikaans speakers, they are confident they can cope with any
challenge from the country's black community.
The future, however, will require satisfying domestic politicians and
international investors. Critics say Anglo's inbred business culture will
need to change. Mr Richard Stuart, analyst at stockbrokers Martin & Co,
says: 'The mood is not right for this massive, centralised company.
'Anglo American is pretty much an anachronism from an international point of
view with its cross-holding structure rendering management basically
unaccountable to shareholders.'
Mr Ogilvie Thompson argues that being bid-proof allows Anglo to take the
long view, 'without having to bother that if your quarterly results aren't
good enough Mr Kohlberg, Kravis and Roberts are going to come in and change
the whole thing'.
The complicated control structures reflect the fact that Anglo remains a
family business. Although Mr Harry Oppenheimer, son of the founder, retired
as chairman 10 years ago, his views feature prominently in this week's
presentation. Mr Ogilvie Thompson is unapologetic about the family
influence. 'I think any chairman of Anglo who didn't consult on the major
issues with someone who built the place up, someone that obviously has
ability and who has a substantial shareholding, would be a fool.'
Critics, however, say Anglo is run by too many polished Oxford-educated
courtiers, for whom relations with the family matter more than commercial
ability.
There are signs, however, that the group is changing. Anglo is discussing a
possible bid for some European food assets with Royal Group, an
entrepreneurial South African company, suggesting a new adventurism both in
terms of partners and markets. Mr Leslie Boyd's appointment as a deputy
chairman is evidence that an Oxford manner is not essential to rise to the
top.
With its three main associates - De Beers, Johannesburg Consolidated
Investment (JCI) and Minorco - over which it has effective control, Anglo's
market capitalisation at June 1 of Dollars 22.4bn (Pounds 11.7bn) makes it
the world's largest natural resources group. It controls 23 per cent of the
capitalisation of the Johannesburg stock exchange, down from 30 per cent in
1990, when gold mines were doing better.
That size makes it a natural target for a future left-of-centre government,
as South Africa moves towards majority rule. Anglo has years of contacts
with opposition figures on which to draw for goodwill, but it is impossible
to believe that a future government will not take some steps - such as
taxation of inter-group dividends - to encourage unbundling.
In the meantime, analysts forecast a fairly flat earnings performance for
the 1993 year. The best performance will probably come from financial
services, with banking profits reasonably buoyant in South Africa, and
interest income from Minorco, the overseas investment arm.
The main mining interests -
gold, diamonds, coal, platinum and base metals - are not expected to show
much change. Anglo owns stakes in some of the world's best mining assets.
Its gold mines are second in quality only to Gold Fields; Vaal Reefs and
Western Deep Levels are two of the richest gold mines in the world. Anglo
has considerable exposure to diamonds through De Beers and Anamint; and it
owns 24 per cent of Rustenburg Platinum, the world's largest producer.
Demand for these commodities is dependent on strong world economic growth,
however. Slow growth in the past two years has held down profits, and there
is no immediate prospect of an upturn.
Management has managed to keep gold production costs flat in nominal terms
since the end of 1990, in spite of double-digit inflation. But the mines
need a higher gold price to stop the inexorable profit squeeze. Gold
contributed only 11 per cent to equity earnings in 1992 compared with 41 per
cent in 1983.
Diamonds also need an upturn in the world economy, and a return of consumer
confidence. An end to the gloom in Japan, which accounts for about a third
of diamond sales, is particularly eagerly sought.
Anglo's industrial assets, held mainly through Amic, are not of comparable
quality to its mining assets. Some, such as motor manufacturer Samcor, are
in businesses where it is not easy to make money in South Africa. Others
supply the mining industry and have suffered from their cutbacks. A company
such as Highveld Steel is well regarded, but it also depends on improved
stainless steel and vanadium prices.
Anglo is a core holding in any institutional portfolio in South Africa,
partly because of its dominance of the local economy, and partly because its
exposure to commodities offers a hedge against rand depreciation. It remains
to be seen, however, whether its new interest in marketing itself overseas
attracts a wider range of investors.
 ----------------------------------
EQUITY ACCOUNTED EARNINGS
 ----------------------------------
Business activity         %
 ----------------------------------
Mining finance         21.6
Gold and uranium        9.4
Diamonds               24.5
Coal                    6.4
Platinum, base metals
 and other mining       9.0
Industry and commerce  14.3
Financial services
 and property           8.5
Investment earnings    93.7
Surplus on realisation
 of investments         7.2
Other net revenue       5.5
Prospecting            (6.4)
Total                   100
 ----------------------------------
Source: Annual report
 ----------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920702

