FT922-4518

FT  05 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Hard training


JOURNALISTS always think that leaked documents are the most exciting; in the
case of the tortuous debate about improving Britain's training system,
leaked documents also seem to be the clearest.
Recently there have been two: one from the business people who run the
fledgling training and enterprise councils and a second from Sir Geoffrey
Holland, permanent secretary at the Department of Employment.
The Tec leaders' note is of interest mainly because of the unrestrained
language in which it makes its case that 'the Tec movement is on a
knife-edge'. It argues that Tecs know their purpose and have the energy and
expertise to deliver, but they are being impeded by Whitehall inflexibility
and shortage of funds.
Sir Geoffrey's note has benefited from the thinking time allowed to civil
servants during a general election campaign. It is essentially a memo to the
new minister, taking stock and setting an agenda. As such, it is a good deal
sharper than any recollectable political speech on this subject.
Sir Geoffrey argues that Tecs are fragile ('dented but not irrecoverably')
and in danger of losing momentum. He explores three main remedies: the
adoption and vigorous pursuit of clear and publishable targets; a better
relationship between Tecs and their local education systems; and a more
effective national-level umbrella body.
The most striking thought which occurs in response to this list is the
extent to which it points a finger at the government itself. The
Thatcher/Major administrations have vacillated wildly about targets,
declined to require any formal link between Tecs and local education
authorities and resolutely defended the congeries of committees and cabals
which has connected the Tec network and central government.
This is then followed by a second thought. Local education authorities are
central to improved vocational education. But in pursuit of its education
reforms the government is drastically changing and perhaps destroying them,
without adequately considering how they are to be reshaped or replaced.
This is no way to treat the Tecs, charged as they are with such an important
aspect of Britain's competitiveness.
Targets, based upon the emerging system of national vocational
qualifications and the floundering Investors in People 'kitemark' for
training, are a prerequisite both for motivating Tecs and for judging their
performance, which ought in turn to be the eventual basis upon which they
are funded. Coupled with an appropriately flexible institutional structure,
based upon the now familiar purchaser-provider model, these changes would do
much to renew the momentum of Tecs.
And who knows, in the promised world of open government, perhaps those
involved could then also communicate in public.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920605

