FT921-11681

FT  30 JAN 92 / Shortage of gas raises pressure to liberalise market: An
imminent change in policy


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


THE government's expected move to break down barriers against gas imports
from Norway will be welcomed by the power industry as going part-way to ease
an anticipated tightness in supply over the next couple of years.
British Gas warned this week that there may be a shortfall in supply of as
much as 2bn therms a year by 1994, which could force the company to cut
supplies to large industrial users.
The Department of Energy's defence of 'Fortress Britain' on gas imports
coupled with its strong push for more competition in the domestic market has
become increasingly difficult to justify.
In addition, the UK will face growing EC pressure to open its market to
outside competition as Brussels presses ahead with liberalising the
community's internal energy market.
The UK has been one of the strongest supporters of a freer EC energy market
and could be seriously embarrassed if it maintains restrictions on foreign
participation.
The government's expected softening of its stance on imports follows the
conclusion of the first export deal by a UK company late last year. Then
Ultramar, the oil and gas group that has since been taken over by rival
Lasmo, reached agreement to export gas to the Netherlands from its Markham
field which straddles the border of the British and Dutch sectors of the
North Sea.
The Department of Energy has retained an unwritten ban on gas imports since
it vetoed a deal by British Gas to import supplies from Norway's Sleipner
field in 1985.
The government was concerned that the free movement of gas into the UK would
discourage development of some of its own more marginal North Sea gas
fields.
Last year in evidence to the Office of Fair Trading, which was looking into
the development of competition in the gas industry, the department repeated
its belief that excess UK gas supply could easily be soaked up by increasing
demand.
However, the OFT was unconvinced and came down strongly in favour of opening
up the UK market in order to weaken British Gas's monopoly grip on domestic
supply.
The only Norwegian gas that is imported into the UK comes from the Frigg
field as part of a long contract with British Gas. The company imports about
600m cubic feet per day of Frigg gas, but the field is declining, and, while
the contract accounted for 25 per cent of British Gas's needs when it
started nearly 15 years' ago, it now fills eight per cent of the company's
requirement.
Tight UK gas supplies and rising demand have pushed up prices in the past
year. British Gas has been forced to increase prices for gas it sells to
power station customers because of the huge and largely unexpected growth in
demand for new gas-fired power generation.
However, Norwegian gas is unlikely to bridge completely the immediate supply
gap that is looming for the middle of the decade. Norway will have little
spare capacity before the start-up of its giant Troll development in 1996.
At the same time, Norwegian imports are unlikely to be cheap. British Gas
recently broke off talks with the Norwegians because of the high price of
supplies - believed to be 21p to 22p a therm compared with the average rate
of 18p a therm in the UK.
Mr Nick White, gas industry specialist at Arthur D. Little, the management
consultants, said: 'We believe prices will rise by 20 per cent in the next
two years if the UK maintains a closed economy.' Mr White said that imports
could keep prices more stable towards the end of the decade, but will not
stop them increasing.
At the same time, a cross-Channel pipeline link could suck gas out of the UK
and bring UK prices into line with continental rates, which are now slightly
higher. The Channel link could provide access to cheaper gas from former
Soviet republics in the new Commonwealth of Independent States.
BRITISH GAS is overcharging large customers, the Major Energy Users' Council
said yesterday. The council sent a letter of complaint to British Gas last
week about price rises announced in January.
It said: 'Once again British Gas is abusing its monopoly.' The council
argued that the company was increasing prices to industry because Ofgas, the
industry watchdog, would not allow it to overcharge domestic customers.
British Gas said: 'We spelled out quite clearly that the increase of 1.5p a
therm would mean percentage rises of 3.8 to 6.2 per cent.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8 Map (Omitted).

920130

