FT924-5982

FT  24 NOV 92 / Technology: Crossed lines on European IT networks


   By ANDREW FISHER


Many British companies know all too well that in these days of prolonged UK
recession and increasingly global markets, their future lies in mainland
Europe. The export opportunities opened up by sterling's devaluation have
reinforced this perception.
The trouble is that companies do not always know the best way to go about
building up business abroad. They are aware of the customers they want to
attract or the sectors they wish to penetrate. They may also have a fair
idea of the sort of electronic systems they need.
But this is where their planning often starts to fall down, according to a
study carried out among industrial, financial, service and consumer
companies for 3Com (UK), part of California-based 3Com, which makes computer
equipment. It concluded that there is a worrying lack of agreement between
managers at different levels as to what their companies really need.
For instance, while main board directors tend to favour systems of strategic
value, such as those linking different business functions like manufacturing
and sales, managers responsible for implementing European networks often
take a narrower view, wanting facilities like electronic mail. Only 35 per
cent of directors see the latter as being important for European growth
compared with 52 per cent of network managers.
Also, there is a tendency to be over-ambitious. Nearly half of directors
expect their international data communications to increase by over 40 per
cent in the next 12 months, as do about a third of network managers.
Astonishingly, nearly 20 per cent of those polled expect growth to exceed
100 per cent.
This, says Tom Plimmer, 3Com's UK managing director, 'could lead to
complexity outgrowing capability'. The study, carried out by Business
Marketing Services with 50 directors responsible for strategy and 100
network managers, also revealed other worrying examples of inconsistency.
As many as 81 per cent of network managers believe they derive value for
money on their European networks; only 48 per cent of directors think so.
Moreover, less than a quarter of the companies have strategic networking
plans to support their growth. Hardly flattering to the network managers was
the fact that directors seem 'barely aware of their existence'.
There is also disturbing news for airline and hotel operators. More than 40
per cent of directors would consider video conferences as an alternative to
business travel, on which UK companies now spend Pounds 22bn a year.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921124

