FT922-7302

FT  19 MAY 92 / Parliament and Politics: Labour moves on selection reform


   By IVO DAWNAY, Political Correspondent


A SEVEN-year battle by Mr Neil Kinnock to reduce trade union influence over
the selection of Labour MPs advanced significantly yesterday when a key
party committee voted to replace an electoral college with a one-member,
one-vote system.
The decision, agreed by 11 to two votes of the national executive's
organisation sub-committee, looks certain to be endorsed by the full
executive later this month in a final gesture of support for the outgoing
party leader.
The move is also likely to stir controversy and opposition among party
traditionalists on the left and in the union movement when it comes up for
ratification at Labour's annual conference in the autumn.
Yesterday there were a number of abstentions and absences among important
union members of the 24-strong committee, including the GMB general union,
usually a firm supporter of the leadership.
Under the present arrangements, union branches affiliated to constituency
parties (CLPs) can command up to 40 per cent of the vote in an electoral
college, with the rest going to individual members.
A compromise reform proposal, broadly endorsed by conference last year,
allowed CLPs management committees to opt for one-member, one-vote or to
allow unions a role based on a third of a vote each for each affiliated
political levy payer. To avoid unnecessary contests, CLP committees would
first vote to decide whether to hold a contest at all.
Under Mr Kinnock's proposal, first mooted by the leader in 1985 and agreed
yesterday, that formula would now drop in favour of a straightforward
one-member one-vote
Doubts are continuing to linger, however, among some unions, with Mr John
Edmonds, the GMB leader, proposing that changes should be made only as part
of coherent overall review of Labour's union links.
Mr Kinnock was careful to emphasise that it did not represent an attack on
the unions but merely a necessary step to allow CLPs to begin the
reselection procedure next year.
Even before yesterday's meeting, though, Mr John Prescott, a candidate for
the deputy leadership, expressed serious reservations about the speed and
timing of the move.
Acknowledging in a BBC radio interview that the topic was sensitive during a
leadership contest in which union votes were being solicited, he warned
against a 'quick fix' that might be regretted later.
Mr Prescott said he had always been a supporter of one-member, one-vote, but
called on Labour to 'step back a little bit' to consider the unions' future
role in party affairs.
Later, the committee agreed to hold a special conference on European topics
in November. Discussion of changes to the system for electing the party
leader and deputy leader were postponed, however, leaving it unclear whether
any proposals will be submitted to this year's conference.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920519

