FT922-7319

FT  19 MAY 92 / BP in joint venture to challenge British Gas


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


COMPETITION in the industrial gas market intensified yesterday with the
launch of an Anglo-Norwegian joint venture that aims to be the 'major rival
to British Gas'.
Alliance Gas is a UK-based venture between British Petroleum, the oil and
petrochemicals producer; Statoil, the state-owned Norwegian oil and gas
company; and Norsk Hydro, the energy and chemicals group in which the
Norwegian government also has a 51 per cent share.
The company brings together the UK's biggest North Sea gas producer and the
two companies that have the largest Norwegian gas reserves.
Alliance aims for a 15 per cent market share of the industrial and
commercial supply sector by the second half of the decade, when British Gas
will have been forced to cut its share to less than 40 per cent.
Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, the industry watchdog, said
the company was a 'heavyweight entrant into the market'.
He said: 'I think it is an important milestone in opening up competition.
For the first time we have got Norwegian companies in the marketplace, which
is very important, considering Norway's extensive supplies.'
The company plans to supply customers of all sizes from the small commercial
sector through to power generators.
One of its potential strengths will lie in its access to long-term supplies.
Alliance announced yesterday that it had purchased the entire output of the
Hyde gas field, off the Humberside coast in the North Sea, due to come on
stream in October next year. The field, with proven reserves of 143bn cu ft,
will supply 55m cu ft a day.
In addition, Alliance has 50 per cent of the Ann field, operated by Phillips
Petroleum, the US energy and chemicals group, and interests in other North
Sea fields including the Anglia, Welland and Beryl fields. It will also bid
for a share when British Gas sells part of its contracted gas later this
year.
From 1996 onwards Alliance will be able to draw on substantial Norwegian
reserves, guaranteeing supply well into the next century.
Another strength will be a marketing arrangement announced yesterday with
East Midlands Electricity, similar to that already announced by five
regional electricity companies with Utilicorp, the second-largest US gas
producer. That will enable it to supply new and existing customers with both
electricity and gas.
Alliance is in discussion with several other regional electricity companies,
and Mr Kristoffer Maroe, managing director, said the company hoped to sign
at least one other similar deal.
Mr Maroe emphasised that in spite of its strong links with producers,
Alliance will buy gas and operate on an 'arm's length basis'.
He said: 'We aim to be a downstream-led, market-oriented supplier. If you
open our brochure you won't find pictures of North Sea platforms and
pipelines, but instead people talking to customers.'
Alliance aims to outperform British Gas on price, flexibility and standards
of service.
Significant question marks still hang over the deregulation process,
however. In spite of its size, Alliance faces difficulties similar to its
competitors'.
First, Mr Maroe admitted yesterday that an initial shortage of gas might
slow its entry into the commercial market in the early stages. The company
is reserving judgment about moving into the domestic market for the same
reason.
It also has to use British Gas's existing pipeline system, which the company
has agreed to hive off into an arm's-length subsidiary by the end of the
year.
But fears of a dispute over tariffs were fuelled last week by the insistence
of Mr Robert Evans, British Gas chairman, that the 4.5 per cent margin it is
permitted by Ofgas on carriage charges is insufficient.
Sixteen companies have now entered the challenge to British Gas. This was
made possible by the requirement of the Office of Fair Trading for British
Gas to halve its share of the industrial market - those users above 25,000
therms a year - to 40 per cent by 1995.
Mr Tim Eggar, the energy minister, recently announced that he would lay an
order before parliament in June lowering the threshold for competition from
25,000 to 2,500 therms. That will increase the number of businesses open to
competition from 20,000 to more than 200,000 from October.
Mr Eggar said he would review the threshold again next year, raising the
prospect of competition in the household market three years earlier than
previously envisaged.
Letters, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920519

