FT924-6258

FT  21 NOV 92 / Hopes grow for cut-price fighter project


   By QUENTIN PEEL


MR Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, insisted last night that the
planned European fighter aircraft (EFA) would not be built, but accepted
that a cheaper aircraft, with reduced military requirements, could still
emerge from negotiations.
In Rome, Spanish defence minister Julian Garcia Vargas said production of
the controversial fighter would be delayed by two years, but would be 30 per
cent cheaper.
Speaking after defence chiefs of Germany, Britain, Spain and Italy signed an
agreement listing the military requirements for the EFA, Mr Garcia said the
fighter would be cheaper and simpler and take longer to produce than
previously envisaged. He gave no details of the new specifications.
Mr Garcia hoped overall agreement on relaunching the EFA would be reached
soon.
British Aerospace, the UK partner in the programme, said it was encouraged
by Mr Garcia's statements, which suggested strongly that a compromise could
be reached.
Germany dismayed its partners in July when it dropped out of the
multi-billion-dollar EFA's production phase to pursue a cheaper alternative,
but has since indicated it was prepared to re-enter the project if costs
were scaled back.
In a television interview, Mr Ruhe accused colleagues of failing to back him
in his battle to scrap the original plans and build a cheaper version.
Mr Ruhe's bitterness suggests he has been forced to retreat and accept that
a new version of the old EFA will be built and not an entirely new aircraft.
He said the battle to reduce the price and military requirements of the EFA
was by no means over, in spite of reports that his ministry was ready to
accept what is in effect the same aircraft with less sophisticated
equipment.
The key now was to reduce the military requirements of the aircraft, and
Germany had drawn up a list of 10 elements where they could be significantly
reduced, he said.
He said a report by the 10 defence chiefs of the partner states should be
ready in December, and on that basis the negotiations could be finalised.
As far as Germany was concerned, no final decision on the production of a
new fighter was needed for at least three years, in order to have the
aircraft in service by 2002.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921121

