FT921-1460

FT  24 MAR 92 / Survey of Employee Ownership (2): Fewer lenders, smaller
deals - Finance for management buy-outs and the recession


   By SIMON LONDON


THE RECESSION has been a mixed blessing for managers looking to take a stake
in their own business. It has created opportunities for management buy-outs
from forced asset sales, but there is less finance available as lenders have
withdrawn from the market. In spite of a decline in the number of active
lenders, 400 transactions were completed during 1991. This is only slightly
down from the 440 deals struck in 1990 and well above the 360 deals closed
during the 'boom' year of 1989. However, finance for management buy-outs is
certainly more difficult to secure than in the late 1980s. Most deals are
now smaller and more conservatively financed. Statistics compiled by KPMG
Peat Marwick show that the total value of management buy-outs and buy-ins
amounted to Pounds 2.62bn last year, down from Pounds 2.8bn in 1990 and
Pounds 6.4bn in 1989. The average size of deals has fallen to Pounds 5.2m
from Pounds 13m over the same period. Lenders are insisting on more
conservative financing structures, including lower debt-to-equity ratios.
Again according to KPMG figures, the average debt-to-equity ratio for MBOs
during the second half of 1991 was 180 per cent, compared to 590 per cent in
the second half of 1989. As gearing levels have declined, there has also
been less use of mezzanine finance, subordinated loans which rank between
senior debt and equity in the event of winding-up. There is no shortage of
mezzanine funding available. Mr Erik Linnes, head of the Kleinwort Benson
Mezzanine Fund, estimated that UK mezzanine funds have around Pounds 300m
committed but unallocated finance available. A similar amount is looking for
a home in continental Europe.
But with senior lenders insisting on a less reliance on debt finance
overall, fewer deals have included a mezzanine portion.
Yet there is no question that mezzanine finance is here to stay. As overall
business confidence returns, gearing levels on management buy- outs will
probably return to near the long-term average of 270 per cent. Under these
conditions, senior lenders will probably prefer to see an element of
mezzanine finance in a deal, since it creates an additional loss-absorbing
cushion between them and the company.
For the moment, however, caution prevails. This is evident from the
covenants of recent MBO financings, which tie the buy-out team tightly to
strict profit and performance targets.
There has been a knee-jerk response to losses incurred on some infamous
buy-outs of the late 1980s. For example, the team heading the Pounds 629m
buy-out of Magnet in 1989 forecast annual pre-tax profits growth of 15 per
cent over three years. The eventual outturn was a profits fall even in the
year of the buy-out. The company is now in effect in the hands of its
bankers.
To some, the trend has gone too far in the opposite direction: managers need
some latitude in the long-term development of the business. Covenants which
are drawn too tightly can be counter- productive.
This same conservatism and lack of business confidence has also reduced the
number of new Employee Share Ownership Plans (Esops) being set up.
In the past around 20 per cent new Esops have been set up alongside
management buy-outs.
As part of the MBO financing, the management team simply sets up an employee
share trust, which then takes a stake in the company and grants options over
the shares to employees.
But as the number of larger MBOs has fallen, and as core debt finance has
become more difficult to secure, the number of buy-outs including an Esop
has declined.
Esops were first recognised under UK law in 1989. Unlike ordinary share
option schemes, an employee trust is set up to buy existing equity in the
market, rather than granting options over new shares which are subsequently
issued at a discount to market value.
However, the vast majority of Esops has been set up independently of
statute, which lays down strict conditions by which the trust must be run -
covering the election of trustees, for example. Lawyers have established
that Esops which do not comply with every letter of the law are still
entitled to the tax breaks granted to statutory Esops.
Other than MBOs, the rate of creation of Esops is closely linked to business
confidence and the outlook for corporate earnings. The employee trust's
purchase of shares is usually financed by a bank loan, guaranteed by the
company. This can eat into credit lines with banks.
The loan is serviced by the dividends that the trust receives from its
shareholding. However, this is never enough to cover all debt-service costs
and the company invariably has to make periodic 'gifts' to the trust. This
can use up valuable working capital.
Loans for the creation of an Esop carry the same lending margin as loans to
the parent company which guarantees the debt. As corporate lending margins
have widened, so the cost of running an Esop has increased.
In addition, initial legal and banking fees for setting up an Esop are
generally around 1 per cent of the value of the scheme. There are ways to
reduce the marginal financing costs of an Esop. For example, if the lending
bank holds the shares on behalf of the trust, any dividend income it
receives counts as tax-free franked investment income.
But there are clearly identifiable costs involved in setting up an Esop. In
a recession few companies feel they have either credit lines or working
capital to spare, and the creation of new Esops slowed almost to a
standstill.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920324

