FT921-15313

FT  10 JAN 92 / Chrysler aims to be a star in Motown: New products need to
show the motor group can beat the Japanese


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


   DETROIT


Mr Robert Lutz, president of Chrysler, is hogging centre stage at the
Detroit motor show.
While the financial community in New York was this week underlining the
troubled carmaker's financial fragility by further relegating Chrysler's
debt into the junk bond realm, Mr Lutz was intent on becoming the smash-hit
in Motown.
He has proved a notable survivor as he has jumped from BMW to Ford to
Chrysler. Now he is seeking to pull off the same trick for his financially
beleaguered company, whose survival is again on the line.
Chrysler desperately needs new products to stem the assault by the Japanese.
Last year for the first time it slipped out of its accustomed third place
behind GM and Ford in the US car market to be overtaken by both Honda and
Toyota.
An ill-judged diversification move deprived Chrysler of funds for new
product development in the mid-1980s, and the group is setting out to prove
that it has rediscovered - in the nick of time - its business core. That is
to design, develop and launch new products that are credible even when
measured against the benchmark of world-class Japanese competition.
The enormous funds needed for new product development mean its survival as
an independent carmaker will be on a knife-edge in the 1990s. Further,
raising new finance has been made more difficult by the downgrading of its
credit to below investment status. But Chrysler is making a brave statement
in Detroit this week.
On successive days it has rolled out to public view:
the limited-production Dodge Viper, a no-compromise, exotic, image-building
sports car with an 8 litre, V10 engine capable of 0-60mph in 4.5 seconds and
a top speed of 165mph;
its Jeep Grand Cherokee, a new top-of-the-range four-wheel drive sports
utility vehicle; and most importantly,
a new generation of large executive saloon cars, the result of a Dollars
1.5bn (Pounds 806.7m) development programme.
This, the LH project, is one of the most ambitious product strategies ever
undertaken by Chrysler, and marks its first all-new car programme for more
than a decade. The cars, to be launched in the autumn in North America as
the Chrysler Concorde, Dodge Intrepid and Eagle Vision, are aimed at
re-establishing Chrysler in the heartland of the US market for mid-size and
full-size executive cars, where it has lost considerable market share. The
range includes the New Yorker, to be produced next year.
The LH project is the most important result to date of Chrysler's planned
spending of around Dollars 16.6bn from 1991 to 1995 on new product
development and the modernisation of its facilities.
By 1995 it is aiming to replace all its car range, introduce the
sports/utility vehicle, a new pick-up, and develop five new engines and five
transmissions.
It is a daunting task for a company which lost money heavily last year - a
net operating loss of Dollars 553m in the first six months - and which, like
its rivals, is in the grip of the US recession, but unlike its rivals has
little compensating presence outside North America.
This week's product launches should show there is more than rhetoric behind
the Chrysler management's oft-repeated claim, that 'we are re-inventing the
way we do business'.
Mr Lutz insists that the company has made significant progress towards
becoming a 'lean' producer and towards matching Japanese levels of quality,
productivity and efficiency, not only in the manufacturing process, but as
importantly in the design, development and engineering of new products.
Chrysler's relationship with its Japanese partner Mitsubishi Motors has been
stormy, but it has been able to learn the benchmark standards set by the
Japanese at first hand.
With the LH car project, Chrysler claims that it has taken a full year out
of the development cycle, going from final clay model to first production in
3 1/4 years. The team of vehicle engineers was kept to a peak of 743
compared with the original budget of 1,400 and what Mr Lutz refers to
disparagingly as a cast of thousands at Ford and GM. Mr Glenn Gardner
however, who led the LH project, accepts that Chrysler is still '10-15 per
cent behind' Japanese efficiency levels.
The new car project has cost around Dollars 1.5bn, an enormous sum but Mr
Lutz claims it is less than half what Ford spent on its Taurus/Sable range
in the mid-1980s, and less than the Dollars 2bn originally budgeted.
Chrysler cut the number of expensive prototype development vehicles by 25
per cent, but Mr Gardner says it must take out another 20 per cent next
time. It was driving prototype vehicles 95 weeks before launch, 30 weeks
earlier than ever before.
Mr Lutz claims that the management revolution at Chrysler has been led by
the creation of 'platform teams' for each new product development. 'We've
brought perestroika to our company. We took our big, traditional,
monolithic, vertically-oriented hierarchies - our design department, our
engineering department, purchasing, manufacturing, sales and marketing - and
broke them apart and reorganised them into lean, nimble, vehicle-focused
platform teams.'
In its fight for survival and with the failed 1990 merger talks with Fiat
behind it, Mr Lutz says that Chrysler is now 'determined to stay
independent. You cannot motivate your people if there is a 'For Sale' sign
on the building.'
It remains to be seen whether the company's bout of perestroika is also
enough to motivate fickle US car buyers to start choosing Chrysler again.
Lex, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 15 Photograph Robert Lutz with the New Yorker, he says it will
help the group on the road to success (Omitted).

920110

