FT924-8311

FT  11 NOV 92 / World Trade News: Dunkel struggles to head off trade war -
Gatt chief on mission to US and Brussels


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS, DAVID GARDNER and DAVID BUCHAN


   GENEVA, BRUSSELS, PARIS


MR Arthur Dunkel, director general of Gatt, faces a thorny task on his
planned trips to Washington and Brussels to head off a transatlantic trade
war over oilseeds and revive stalled trade liberalisation talks vital to the
health of the world economy.
Mr Dunkel said yesterday his mission was prompted by a 'deep sense of
crisis' and the 'concern and helplessness' felt by many countries at the
failure of the US and EC to settle their row over farm trade.
His intervention was mandated by trade negotiators from 50 countries holding
a meeting in Geneva of the Trade Negotiating Committee of the Uruguay Round
within the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The negotiators made an impassioned plea to the US and EC to settle their
long-running argument over European subsidies to oilseeds farmers. This
dispute - which the US has threatened to escalate with punitive tariffs on
some European farm goods - is a main obstacle to a wide-ranging Uruguay
Round pact on liberalising world trade.
Meanwhile, officials of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development warned that failure to settle the trade rows would delay growth
and create unnecessary unemployment.
'Recovery could be retarded for a quite a long time and jobs put at risk
just because we don't have an agreement on one or two products,' said Mr
Bernard Molitor, vice president of the OECD's economic policy committee.
Mr Dunkel said he would be stepping in not as a mediator but rather as an
'intermediary' between the two economic superpowers and other participants
in the Uruguay Round of trade talks.
He will try to judge whether the US and EC are politically capable of
successfully concluding the Uruguay Round in the next few months. He would
also 'learn who is in charge' in Brussels.
His question was partly answered by Mr Delors, who said in the Hague: 'I am
more optimistic than 10 days ago because (EC ministers have). . . agreed a
common position, a dynamic position, with goodwill to conclude a fair and
balanced agreement, first with the US and after in the framework of the
Uruguay Round.'
Mr Dunkel faces an awesome responsibility in discharging the mandate he has
been given to avert a global trade war.
He will have two separate but linked objectives in view.
Firstly, he will be urging the two sides at all costs to settle the oilseeds
row before December 5, when the US has threatened to impose retaliatory
tariffs.
Trade diplomats in Geneva see this dispute as pivotal. The refusal of the EC
to comply with two Gatt panel judgments condemning its oilseeds subsidies as
illegal represents a fundamental challenge to the authority of international
trade rules.
But the US threat to go outside Gatt rules by imposing retaliatory tariffs
unilaterally would not only spark a ruinous trade war but damage, perhaps
fatally, the credibility of Gatt and its multilateral dispute settlement
mechanisms.
The five-year-old oilseeds dispute is technically separate from the Uruguay
Round since it relates to existing rather than future Gatt rules. But the EC
has chosen to link an oilseeds deal with broader negotiations on farm trade
reform in the round, holding the multilateral negotiations hostage to a
bilateral row.
Washington and Brussels last month came very close to agreement on these
broader farm subsidy questions.
Secondly, Mr Dunkel has the even more delicate task of seeing whether the US
and EC are in a position to decouple oilseeds and return to Geneva to
restart Uruguay Round talks. These have been stalled since December because
of the failure of the two big traders to settle their differences on farm
trade.
Negotiators stress that the six-year-old Uruguay Round, already two years
behind schedule, must resume now if the 108 countries involved are to
complete the wide-ranging negotiations, including country-by-country deals
on market access for goods and services, by March 1 1993.
This is the final deadline for the 'fast-track' voting procedure in the US
congress which requires legislators to approve or reject the Uruguay trade
round package without amendment.
Mr Dunkel said time was running out for the Uruguay Round. He noted that
with the US administration's 'fast track' negotiating authority expired in
March, Congress could then unpick any multilateral trade deal.
Several important issues remain unresolved in areas other than farm trade,
notably in services. Participants also have to conclude time-consuming
country-by-country negotiations on tariff cuts and market-opening measures
for services, which are likely to run well into the new year.
In Paris, France's Patronat employers federation yesterday expressed its
'deepest concern' at the recent hostile turn in the Gatt world trade talks,
and called for continued dialogue across the Atlantic and an end to US
'intimidation'.
The Patronat's statement is unusual not for its tone - which was
comparatively mild - but for the fact that it was issued at all. No pro-Gatt
industrial lobby has so far been willing to take on that of French farmers.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921111

