FT924-12135

FT  22 OCT 92 / Survey of Leman Region (1): Co-operation is the key -
Advocates of European unity are promoting regional identities. But
co-operation is easier said than accomplished between entities as
structurally and temperamentally different as those of Switzerland and
France


   By IAN RODGER


ONE of the most cherished strategies of the advocates of European unity is
to promote what they call the Europe of the regions.
The idea is to focus on those many regions in continental Europe where
shared culture, history and traditions cross national boundaries. By
encouraging people to have a greater sense of identity with their natural
region, it is hoped that the importance of national borders will gradually
diminish in their minds.
Switzerland, by virtue of its position as the meeting point of three of
western Europe's great cultures, is participating in attempts to build four
of these trans-border natural regions. The two most advanced are the
tri-national area around Basle, known increasingly as Regio Basiliensis, and
the bi-national region radiating out from Geneva, which is coming to be
known as La Region lemanique after the beautiful lake that is at its heart.
It is, of course, ironic that the Swiss, who have tried so hard for
centuries to stand aloof from their neighbours' struggles and who harbour
deep doubts about the very notion of European unification, are embracing
these attempts to promote regional identity with some enthusiasm.
But the main promoters of a Leman regional consciousness are the Swiss -
notably Mr Raymond Deferr, deputy governor of the Swiss canton of Valais,
and Mr Claude Haegi, minister of the interior, agriculture and regional
affairs in the canton of Geneva.
Mr Deferr was instrumental in setting up the Conseil du Leman five years
ago, an organisation bringing together leaders of the Swiss cantons of
Valais, Vaud and Geneva and the French departments of Haute-Savoie and Ain.
He is now its president.
Mr Haegi has launched an unprecedented project of joint regional planning
with the French regional government of Rhone-Alpes.
In the past, there were close links among the French- and Italian-speaking
peoples who lived in the western Alps, the House of Savoy ruling various
parts of the region from the 11th century until the end of the Second World
War.
Industrially, too, contacts reach back at least into the last century when
the precision components manufacturers of the Arve valley in Haute-Savoie
served the watch and clock makers of Geneva.
The city of Calvin, surrounded by France except for a narrow corridor
connecting it to the rest of Switzerland, has had access since 1815 to large
tracts of land known as 'zones franches', or free zones, in adjacent
Haute-Savoie and Ain from where it obtained food and building materials -
and where it sent much of its rubbish.
These zones and natural contacts contracted dramatically in the first half
of the 20th century, largely as a result of Switzerland's neutrality through
two world wars. Today, the economies of the various parts of the region have
very few links. 'We have more trade with Hong Kong than we do with
Haute-Savoie', says Mr Steven Bernard an economist at the Geneva Chamber of
Commerce and Industry.
The main link is the group of some 30,000 people who live in France but
commute to Geneva to work every day. The sheer size of this group has
created endless problems for governments on both sides of the border and has
gradually forced them to recognise the need for co-operative planning,
construction and use of infrastructure.
But co-operation is easier said than accomplished between entities as
structurally and temperamentally different as France and Switzerland. Swiss
cantons have a high level of autonomy and their leaders are accustomed to
making decisions. In France, everything has to be referred to Paris. As is
often said of the US and Britain, they seem to be two cultures separated by
the same language.
In the early 1970s, Geneva recognised that its neighbouring French
municipalities, which were basically dormitory towns, were having a great
deal of difficulty providing services because most of their residents were
earning their living and paying taxes in the city. Geneva authorities
proposed transferring a portion of these taxes to the municipalities, but
agreement was delayed for a long time because the national French government
insisted that the money be routed through Paris and refused to guarantee
that it would be passed on to the municipalities concerned.
Today, cross-border co-operation in what might be called the metropolitan
Geneva area is becoming more productive. In addition to the tax treaty,
cross-border public transport is improving as is co-ordination of emergency
and security services and facilities.
However, even at this local level, there are conflicts. The departmental
government of Haute-Savoie in Annecy has long neglected the area it calls
'Le Genevois francais', but a few years ago it responded to demands from the
area to do something to ease its dependence on Geneva.
At the time, Geneva itself was bulging at the seams and reluctant to take in
any more foreigners, so the prospects for satellite developments seemed
good. Today, however, the climate has changed radically and Geneva, with
10,000 people unemployed and an office glut, is aggressively seeking inward
investment.
This unexpected competition, combined with the general economic recession,
has made life much tougher for the plethora of industrial and technoparks
that have sprung up in the Genevois francais. The most ambitious, the
International Business Park in Archamps, has just managed to save one of its
showcase building complexes from bankruptcy.
Efforts aimed at wider regional co-operation are still in their early stages
and, perhaps inevitably, have spawned conflicting agencies with conflicting
powers and interests. Le Conseil du Leman, for example, groups the three
cantons and two departments but excludes the powerful Rhone-Alpes regional
government.
Rhone-Alpes, representing the French national government, has a formal
relationship with the canton of Geneva, but not with the other Swiss
cantons.
These differences come to the fore on particular issues. The Conseil du
Leman, for example, is a big booster of a high speed train link between
Geneva and Paris.
The Rhone-Alpes government, centred in Lyon, puts priority on building a
line from Lyon to Turin to help slow-growth areas in southern parts of its
territory.
Indeed, the Lyonnais wonder how serious Geneva's commitment to the region is
when it seems that the thing it wants most from the French is a fast train
to Paris.
Similarly, the Swiss want a new motorway built along the south shore of the
Leman in France because the existing north shore motorway is saturated.
Officials in Lyon make clear such a project is of little interest to them,
and presents considerable engineering and environmental problems at the east
of the lake where the mountains rise straight up from the lake shore.
Viewed from Lyon, the region lemanique does not make much sense at all. 'It
is a geographical region - that is, the upper Rhone watershed - rather than
a natural economic one,' Mr Jean-Jacques Faure, a researcher in the regional
government, says
What they would really like is for Geneva to play a role in their
development plan, which envisages a triangular pattern with Lyon, Grenoble
and Geneva at the points.
Each point should become a regional centre of excellence in various high
technology and scientific fields, they argue.
It would be wrong to imply a degree of animosity in these differences. It is
just that the French, who have long seen themselves as the poor cousins in
the region, now realise they have some cards to play.
Everyone knows that the creation of the European Economic Area (EEA) next
year - provided Swiss voters ratify the treaty creating it in a December
referendum - will increase the permeability of the border, and that will add
to the need for close co-ordination at all levels.
All sides now want to co-operate and are doing so. The canton of Geneva and
the Rhone-Alpes regional government have just agreed to sit down to try and
draw up a common development plan.
The members of the Conseil du Leman have underwritten the cost of reviving
an abandoned rail line on the south shore of the lake.
'Our first task was just to get to know each other. Now we have to move on
to concerted action,' says Mr Deferr.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921022

