FT924-11423

FT  26 OCT 92 / International Company News: ICI's trading casts shadow over
demerger


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


THE STOCK market has been hit by an attack of nerves about Imperial Chemical
Industries, Britain's biggest manufacturer.
It fears poor trading could force the company, which reports its third
quarter results on Thursday, to postpone plans to split itself into two
separate groups.
The plan, which was greeted with enthusiasm by investors when it was
announced in July, involves dividing ICI's activities between two companies.
Pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and most of its specialities operations would
form one, ICI Bioscience, leaving the rest, including industrial chemicals,
paints, materials and explosives, in a new ICI.
But the difficult trading climate in the chemicals industry could put the
demerger plan on hold.
Analysts expect ICI to produce pre-tax profits this year of about Pounds
610m, down from Pounds 843m in 1991 and Pounds 1.53bn in the peak year of
1989. The shares, which closed at Pounds 11.71 on the day of the demerger's
announcement, slipped to Pounds 10.47 last week.
When ICI made its July announcement it included an opt-out clause. 'Any
decision would be taken in the light of market and other conditions
prevailing at the relevant time.'
Since then, two factors have changed. Trading conditions in the chemical
industry have deteriorated significantly and the performance of the
pharmaceuticals division, which contributed more than half of ICI's profits
last year, has been disappointing.
Some analysts are concerned that the new ICI might not be sufficiently
profitable in the present economic climate and could be liable to a
takeover.
Meanwhile, the poor performance of the divisions allocated to ICI Bioscience
have also cast a shadow.
The pharmaceuticals operations have been hit by the rapid decline of its
best-selling product, Tenormin, the heart drug. One analyst believes the
division's underlying growth is only 1 per cent at present.
This may undermine ICI's plans for ICI Bioscience to make a public offering
shortly after the split to reduce the old group's debts.
If the split and public offer are postponed, ICI's dividend could come under
scrutiny. Pre-tax profits of Pounds 610m this year would leave the group's
55p dividend barely covered by earnings per share of about 56p.
Most analysts argue a dividend cut is unlikely, for this year at least. The
balance sheet is strong enough to maintain the payment and they believe the
board would remember the market's violent reaction when it slashed the 1980
dividend. ICI would probably prefer to dip into reserves rather than make a
cut. But the decision will not be taken until February.
However, next year the board's position may be more difficult if the trading
position deteriorates further.
Sir Denys Henderson, chairman, is expected to give some indication about the
split's prospects on Thursday. A final decision whether to go ahead will be
made next February.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921026

