FT923-6573

FT  24 AUG 92 / Banks braced for dollar fall: UK base rates may be increased
to maintain sterling within its ERM band


   By Our Economics and Foreign Staff


CENTRAL BANKS around the world are today braced for renewed pressure on the
dollar after the US currency breached its all-time low against the D-Mark at
the end of last week.
In the UK, pressure on sterling may require a rise in base rates to prevent
the currency's falling below its ERM floor.
Bank of England and Treasury officials were yesterday working on strategies
to support the pound yesterday as Mr John Major, the prime minister,
returned to London after his Spanish holiday,
Treasury officials said the government would do whatever was necessary to
maintain the pound within its ERM bands. A senior UK official added:
'Sterling's fate is out of our hands. The future of the pound depends on
what happens to the dollar and D-Mark.'
In the US, the likely response of the Federal Reserve, the US central bank,
to a further decline of the dollar was uncertain. In spite of the failure of
foreign exchange market intervention to halt the dollar's slide on Friday,
few Wall Street analysts believe the US monetary authorities are yet
prepared to raise interest rates to defend the dollar.
The pressures resulting from the strong D-Mark seem certain to be on the
agenda of a meeting of finance ministry officials from the Group of Seven
leading industrial nations - the US, Germany, Japan, Britain, France, Canada
and Italy - expected later this week to discuss a range of economic issues.
The dollar's decline led to a sharp fall in share prices on Wall Street, and
caused severe strains on the weaker currencies in the European exchange rate
mechanism, including the pound.
The US currency fell through its historic low of DM1.4430 in European
trading on Friday while the D-Mark's strength led to sterling closing in
London within two pfennigs of its lower ERM limit.
In late morning trading in Tokyo today the US currency was quoted at
DM1.424, having opened at DM1.4185 compared with a New York close of DM1.429
on Friday. Sterling was trading at DM2.799 against DM2.801 in the US.
Monetary officials in Europe are concerned that a further fall in the dollar
against the D-Mark could force several countries in Europe - including
France and Italy - to raise interest rates at a time of weak economic
activity.
In Germany, the Bundesbank is expected to come under renewed domestic and
international pressure to cut its high short-term interest rates, thereby
reducing the wide differential with US borrowing rates. This would depress
the D-Mark's value.
Mr Herbert Hax, head of the German government's council of economic
advisers, said: 'A large wave of international criticism of the Bundesbank's
interest rate policy cannot be excluded ahead of September's meeting of the
World Bank and the IMF.'
In the US, the consensus view is that US monetary policy should be dictated
mainly by the needs of the domestic economy which is still showing no signs
of a robust recovery. Some economists continue to predict further small cuts
in US rates if the economy fails to revive.
The dollar's decline, while attracting some media attention, has been
overshadowed by the presidential campaign. Over the weekend Mr George Bush
and Mr Bill Clinton traded punches on economic policy but neither saw the
need to speak on the dollar.
The Fed is unlikely to attempt to defend any particular value of the dollar,
although it would strive to reduce the rate of dollar depreciation through
carefully timed forays in the markets. The US Treasury is thought to have
supported concerted intervention in recent weeks as much to ease tensions in
the ERM as to defend the dollar.
Turbulence in markets is seen as mainly a consequence of excessively high
German interest rates rather than inherent dollar weakness. Policymakers are
concerned at the slowdown in global growth and believe that a reduction of
European interest rates would be a more appropriate way of stabilising
currencies than an increase in US rates.
If a further plunge in the dollar led to big falls in US share and bond
prices, however, the Fed might be forced to raise rates.
In Britain, City economists believe that the government may buy pounds
today. Another strategy thought to be under discussion at the Bank is to
strengthen sterling by raising the rates at which it lends money to
commercial banks and discount houses in the cash market.
A small rise in lending rates would not necessarily trigger a base rate
rise. But, by the close on Friday, prices in sterling cash and futures
markets were discounting a rise in base rates by a 1/2 point.
Page 4
US election rivals ignore dollar
Currency tacticians ready to defend the pound
Business braced for rise in rates
Some time to wait before Bundesbank budges
Other pages
Better news on the UK deficit, Page 6
Market falls under sterling's shadow, Page 16
Currencies, Page 23
The emperor has no plan, Page 26

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920824

