FT924-5995

FT  24 NOV 92 / Customers pay dearly despite a rainy season: Bronwen Maddox
analyses water company plans for meters and tackling leaks


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


WATER companies have never found it easy to persuade their customers that
water is scarce and expensive, and the present rain cannot help.
In the past two weeks Anglian Water and Essex Water have announced
compulsory metering for some of their customers. Both hope to curb the
demand for water by charging for it.
Essex Water is adamant: 'This is nothing to do with drought. We have less
rainfall than the rest of the country, the population is rising, and the
stark fact is that Essex is running short of water.'
Metering proposals have been controversial because water bills for large
families may rise sharply.
Nevertheless Ofwat, the water industry regulator, has given its backing
because it is worried that if companies have to build expensive new
reservoirs and treatment plants, the costs might also push up bills.
For the same reason, Ofwat is urging all companies, including those outside
the dry south-east, to look harder at the leakage of expensively treated
water from their mains networks.
By the end of this month, it will publish a report on the cost of supplying
water to each region, including figures on how much water is lost. Past
estimates have suggested that a quarter of water is lost, as environmental
and consumer groups have not hesitated to point out.
Much of the water industry is questioning whether metering and leak-plugging
are worthwhile, given the huge costs.
Water companies in England and Wales already install meters for most
commercial customers and all new residential properties. According to
industry estimates, it might cost Pounds 3bn to Pounds 4bn to fit meters to
all older domestic properties in England and Wales.
Mr Trevor Newton, group managing director of Yorkshire Water, says that
metering 'would mean spending the equivalent of a full year's capital
expenditure to upset two thirds of our customers - would you do it?'
Most of Yorkshire's customers live in flats or houses with rateable values -
the present basis for setting water bills - less than the average for the
region, so metering would probably lead to higher bills.
Mr Mike Rothery of Thames Water said: 'The industry is sceptical that
metering would actually reduce demand.' Ten small metering trials organised
by the Department of the Environment appear to have indicated falls in
demand of between 5 per cent and 10 per cent.
Mr John Browning, managing director of Bristol Water, is not convinced that
the savings last. 'At first people are very conscious of the meter, but
after a bit they seem to go back to their old habits,' he said.
Many water companies argue similarly that the benefits of plugging leaks may
be outweighed by the costs. Many companies argue that in regions where water
needs relatively little treatment, it may not be worth identifying all leaks
if the water simply returns to the water table.
In Mr Browning's view, the extent of leakage has also been overestimated. If
leakages on the customer's side of the wall are excluded, typical figures
for the industry might be as low as 6 per cent to 12 per cent.
It is hard to get accurate overall figures, though, because the companies
make very different assumptions when calculating leakage.
But by bringing the issue into focus, even if compulsory metering remains
largely confined to the south-east, companies may be encouraged to gather
better information on where water goes and why people use it.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921124

