FT924-12016

FT  22 OCT 92 / Uzbekistan holds to the old school: The Soviet-period
instincts that are slowing a reform of the economy


   By STEVE LEVINE


UZBEKISTAN's president, Mr Islam Karimov, appears anxious to persuade
frustrated foreign investors that he really is committed to free trade
policies. However his success may be hampered by his efforts to sustain his
government with a crackdown on his opponents.
Mr Karimov, an ex-Communist party boss whose Soviet-period instincts have,
until now, made for a slow pace of economic reform in this central Asian
republic, has been all but forced into a more liberal investment policy.
Experts say there will be at least a 15 per cent drop this year in
Uzbekistan's key foreign currency earner, its huge cotton harvest, so Mr
Karimov has moved to try to widen the country's economic base.
A new investment decree that took effect in August removed customs duties on
consumer products, suspended duties on all imports up until January 1994,
and relaxed rules on reinvestment of profit made by foreigners.
No one knows whether Mr Karimov will later render his decree ineffective by
issuing 'refinements', as he has done in the past. For now, though, the
small foreign community - attracted mostly by the 4.5m tonne annual cotton
harvest, in addition to ample gold and newly-found oil deposits - is
cautiously optimistic. 'I think there will finally be consumer goods in
Uzbekistan,' beamed Mr Abbas Khan, local manager of Karachi-based Tabani
Corp, who has lived in Tashkent for more than a decade.
Investor caution stems from Mr Karimov's past. The 51-year-old president is
among the former Soviet Union's least repentant ex-party bosses. The
accepted wisdom is that nothing of consequence happens in Uzbekistan without
his consent. He has been only a little less than rigid when it comes to
relaxing central control of the economy, and is absolutely intolerant of
opposition. Unlike its more flexible Central Asian neighbours, Uzbekistan is
probably not headed for any dramatic economic or political changes under Mr
Karimov's leadership.
Last October, he freed collective farmers to sell part of their cotton
harvest to the lucrative export market. Only six months later, he issued a
second decree requiring the farmers first to get permission from a
government office - effectively reversing his liberalisation.
Meanwhile, one by one almost all of Mr Karimov's critics have fled, been
arrested, or simply disappeared over the last few months. Three months ago,
the opposition leader, Mr Abdourahim Pulatov, was summoned to a government
office, outside of which a group of young thugs beat him with steel bars. He
is said to be recovering in a Turkish hospital. Mr Karimov has denied any
role, saying that the men's target was not Mr Pulatov, but somebody
accompanying the opposition leader.
To some degree Mr Karimov's policies are a reflection of his fear of
undirected change. The instability and fighting in neighbouring Tajikistan
and Afghanistan have particularly worried him, and he has ordered his troops
to seal up Uzbekistan's borders to prevent an inflow of arms.
Foreign businessmen do not seem particularly dismayed by Mr Karimov's
crackdown. But with cotton playing a central role in the country's economy,
they are becoming concerned about the 1992 cotton crop, which, despite signs
to the contrary, the government insists will meet forecasts.
As the world's third largest cotton producer, Uzbekistan depends on raw
cotton and textiles for 68 per cent - or Dollars 1bn - of its exports. But
foreign cotton experts say this year's unusually heavy rains in some cases
have forced farmers to replant ruined crops four times, as new flooding
destroyed each new planting.
They say the yield could fall even further than 15 per cent from the
forecast of 2.6 tonnes of raw cotton per hectare. Uzbek officials refuse to
accelerate their rigid, 30-day picking schedule, and the harvest thus could
spill over into November, when the rainy season begins and picking must be
halted.
Meanwhile, Mr Karimov is looking to other investors for hard currency. Oil
and gold deposits are particularly promising.
Oil was struck in March in the Fergana valley city of Namangan, and some
experts say there is more to be found. Mr Sadiq Safaev, deputy minister of
foreign economic affairs, says that US, Saudi Arabian and South Korean
companies have already submitted bids for separate joint ventures for
extraction, refinement and transportation at the Namangan site.
And analysts believe there is immediate potential in the country's gold
mines at Zarafshan. Uzbekistan is already the world's seventh largest gold
producer, and Mr Karimov is increasing production.
In a Dollars 75m deal with Denver-based Newman Mining Corp, the Uzbek
government will provide labour and energy, and the US company will
contribute technology, to extract 10m tonnes of gold annually, according to
Mr Safaev.
Regardless of Mr Karimov's eagerness to earn more foreign exchange, or
whether his new decree will hold, no one believes he will veer dramatically
from his plodding course.
'Uzbekistan has chosen the slower way to a market economy,' said Mr Vladimir
Ergashbayev, the vice-president of the Tashkent Stock Exchange. 'We think
that for a long time state structures will be the main part of the economy.'

The Financial Times


International Page 6

921022

