FT923-15726

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Hurd prepares to fight on
two fronts - Britain's foreign secretary explains his priorities to Philip
Stephens, Robert Mauthner and David Marsh


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, ROBERT MAUTHNER and DAVID MARSH


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
DURING THE next six months Mr Douglas Hurd will find himself at the centre
of two sets of equally delicate political negotiations. Both will test his
formidable diplomatic talents. Either or both may prove intractable.
As chairman of the Brussels Council of Ministers, the foreign secretary is
charged with steering the European Community's efforts to salvage Maastricht
from the wreckage of the Danish referendum.
At home he will be in the front line of Mr John Major's campaign to persuade
the Tory party that the treaties on monetary and political union are worth
rescuing.
In between he will be expected to add substance to the Community's
disappointing and often fractious efforts to end the fighting in the former
Yugoslavian republics.
If the issue is not settled at next week's Munich summit, any remaining
hours will be spent trying to break the deadlock between Brussels and
Washington in the Gatt trade talks.
The 62-year-old former professional diplomat is well-suited to the task. Mr
Hurd is loathed by a handful of anti-European irreconcilables in his own
party who see him as the architect of a 'surrender' to Brussels. But he
combines the confidence of his prime minister and of the mainstream of his
party with the respect of European colleagues.
Sitting in his office in Whitehall, he does not underestimate the
uncertainties. He is unsure whether the Danish government can finesse its
electorate's 'no' vote. The treaty's future must await also a French
referendum. In the House of Commons the case for Maastricht has to be made
all over again.
But Mr Hurd is an optimist. The Danish referendum has changed the game.
Britain no longer has to fight to get other EC leaders to negotiate on its
chosen agenda. He is reluctant to talk of a turning of the tide: 'Because
tides turn in all directions'. But: 'There are three things for which we
have been arguing for a long time and where the flow of ideas is in our
direction'.
The three - enlargement, subsidiarity and Community finances - will dominate
the presidency. Mr Hurd's task is to lay the groundwork to wrap them into a
deal at December's Edinburgh summit.
Despite a setback in Lisbon last weekend on the precise timing of
enlargement negotiations with the Efta applicants - Austria, Sweden,
Finland, Switzerland and, possibly, Norway - he says few have appreciated
the change of mood.
'A year ago a lot of people were very sceptical of letting in the Eftas, let
alone going further east. What we saw this last weekend was a consensus that
we should let maybe three or maybe four or maybe five join the treaty of
Maastricht.'
Just as importantly: 'It is agreed that they should be permitted, should be
allowed, should be encouraged without reopening all the institutional
questions'.
His European colleagues insist that formal negotiations cannot start until
Maastricht is ratified. But the preparatory work can be done this year. From
there: 'I think there is no reason that negotiations for this first wave
should not be completed in 1993, with ratification in 1994 and entry in
1995. That has always been our preferred timetable and I think it is
realistic.' And a wider Community means a more decentralised one.
That takes Mr Hurd on to subsidiarity, the cumbersome word his government
hopes to translate into the overriding philosophy behind Community
decision-making.
Everyone has his own definition. Mr Hurd prefers to call it 'minimum
interference' by the Brussels bureaucracy. Its current acceptance now is
another case where 'the flow of ideas is in our favour'. His task is to give
substance to the concept, to define the division of responsibilities between
Brussels and national and regional governments.
'Now, its not straightforward because there are plenty of places where it is
British interests which want the Commission to achieve a level playing
field.'
But Britain and Germany had ensured the principle was enshrined in
Maastricht. At Lisbon, others shared the ambition to make the Community less
intrusive: 'The Commission volunteered after discussion with us and others
not to wait for Maastricht but immediately to set in hand procedures by
which future legislation and existing legislation - this was a change I
proposed - should be examined against this principle.'
Anything that tames the Commission will win plaudits among Tory MPs. But Mr
Hurd intends to explain also that Brussels is not as omnipotent as some
often suppose. The Commission has the monopoly initiative on trade talks and
so on: 'But what are the big decisions for the Community? The handling of
Yugoslavia. How are we to deal with the former Soviet Union? What is to be
the future structure of European defence?'
On these, the pillared structure of Maastricht leaves the Commission without
authority: 'These are matters which are now quite clearly .. to be dealt
with inter-governmentally. It means that there is not a conveyor belt.' It
is a structure incidentally that leaves him happy to compliment President
Francois Mitterrand for his spectacular (and unilateral) mission to
Sarajevo.
Mr Hurd wants improvements to the way that ministers seek to co-ordinate
foreign policy; there is too much 'coffee-cup' diplomacy over lunch without
officials and detailed papers. That means the 'quality' of decisions is not
always as high as it might be. But the structure - intergovernmental and
without majority voting - is right.
Nor does Mr Jacques Delors quite live up to the demonology. The Commission
president would have liked a federal structure at Maastricht but that is not
what happened. Now: 'He is a realistic man. He is beginning to realise -
though not all his colleagues have - what harm has been done.'
That brought Mr Hurd on to his third strand: financing and, in particular,
the scale of the 'cohesion' funds needed to help the poorer countries of the
south. It was this which provoked the bitterest arguments in Lisbon, with
Britain among others refusing a commitment to double financial flows to the
southern countries.
Mr Hurd judged this a victory. In the past Britain's partners had tended to
make 'political decisions' which always resulted in more expenditure. 'Now,
the politics have changed and the political decision is not necessarily one
to spend more money.' Chancellor Helmut Kohl had been particularly helpful
in setting out the limits for his taxpayers. Reconciling the differences at
Edinburgh would not be at all easy, but Britain was no longer alone in
preaching prudence.
There is, though, a much bigger uncertainty than rows over money. However
skilfully Mr Hurd negotiates the obstacles to enlargement, subsidiarity and
a financing deal, Maastricht can only survive if the Danish people change
their minds.
Here he becomes cautious. Some weeks ago he provoked a flurry by suggesting
that a protocol might be tacked on to the treaty to soothe the Danish
electorate. But now he declines to second-guess the Copenhagen government.
'The Danes said in Lisbon that they needed time and it is for them to come
forward with ideas and then we can judge whether they can be put into
practice.' That they have promised to do in September. There can be no
question of coercion: 'I think they are under pressure from reality. . . .
But it would not be right to coerce them and they cannot be excluded. That
puts them in a key position. They accept that.'
If Denmark does deliver, can Britain? Tory rebels at present outnumber the
government's slim parliamentary majority. With the opposition parties they
might prolong debate on ratification indefinitely.
Assuming the treaties win approval in the French referendum, the government
will bring back the legislation to Westminster once Denmark has clarified
its position.
There is a clear hint Mr Major would seek to tame the rebels by making the
issue one of confidence in his government: 'What the prime minister has done
has been to make it clear that this is not a peripheral matter. It is an
essential part of government policy.' On precise timing though, Mr Hurd is
oblique. 'We shall have to judge when is the right time.' Much care had been
taken to explain the position to Britain's partners.
Edinburgh might yet demonstrate that Britain has at last moved to the
Community vanguard. But even for a natural diplomat, the game starts with a
lot of worrying 'ifs'.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920701

