FT924-1013

FT  21 DEC 92 / EC plans 1993 trade measures


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


THE EC will today consider plans to strengthen its arsenal of trade weapons,
including anti-dumping measures and quotas, in preparation for the official
launch of the single market in the new year.
The plans have drawn fierce protests from European toy, textile and footwear
importers, who fear a crackdown against cheap imports from China, Vietnam
and North Korea.
The plans - which some Brussels lawyers describe as the most far-reaching
trade policy revisions since the anti-dumping rule was adopted in 1968 - are
to be discussed at a meeting of EC foreign and trade ministers in Brussels
today.
According to the European Commission, the proposals are needed to streamline
trade rules and 'harmonise' quotas on non-EC goods among member states in
time for January 1 1993, when the single market comes into force. They
include several far-reaching measures.
The Commission wants to reverse policy by requiring that duties be
overturned by a qualified majority. At present, free-traders such as Britain
and Germany need only muster a blocking minority.
The introduction of 'Community quotas' in some sensitive sectors such as
footwear to replace quotas imposed on non-EC states. A Commission proposal
to allow the lower Court of First Instance to deal with trade complaints,
following a plea from an overworked European Court of Justice. Brussels
argues the shift could add to time taken before imposing defensive trade
measures.
So far, member states have divided along familiar lines, with the UK and
Germany set against southern members such as Spain and Italy, which are
worried that the single market could undermine EC trade policy.
Mr Peter Bahr, a Brussels-based spokesman for European footwear importers
and retailers, said the measures would cut low-priced footwear from China
and other target countries by 50 per cent at the expense of the consumer. It
would also leave the Commission in the driving seat on trade policy.
Today's meeting will also discuss a possible compromise over EC plans to
provide up to Ecu500m (Pounds 404.5m) funding for promoting high-definition
television to the European public.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921221

