FT923-10812

FT  28 JUL 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar slips after BoJ rate cut


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR slipped about two pfennigs on the foreign exchanges yesterday as
the D-Mark was boosted by Japan's latest cut in interest rates and
continuing strong sentiment for the German currency, writes James Blitz.
Analysts said the dollar had lost ground in a wave of trading that followed
another fall in the Japanese stock market and the Bank of Japan's  1/2
percentage point reduction in its discount rate. This gave a significant
boost to the German currency, pushing it up from Y85.09 to Y86.00 by the
close of European trading.
In turn, the rush to buy D-Marks fed through to D-Mark/dollar rates, pushing
the dollar down to a close of DM1.4840 in London from Friday's DM1.5000
finish. In spite of the discount rate cut, the dollar ended unchanged
against the yen at Y127.60. In New York the dollar finished easier at
DM1.4808 and Y127.45.
Analysts said the Japanese rate cut had emphasised the huge yield advantages
of the D-Mark against both the yen and the dollar. The US currency's fall
may have defined the effective limits of last Monday's central bank
intervention aimed at keeping the dollar off its lows.
For most of last week, dealers believed that the intervention had turned the
market, creating a two-way trade in the dollar once again. Now they are less
sure. 'It is a reminder to the central banks that intervention can never
reverse a trend, just slow it down a little,' said one US bank trader.
Two other factors pushed the dollar down yesterday. One was the inability of
dollar bulls to break an important technical barrier at DM1.5050 last
Friday, which led to a downturn. The other was the spate of poor economic
data that is expected this week, starting with today's consumer confidence
figures which the market believes will be poor.
Sterling was the victim of these movements in cross trading. After rising in
the morning to DM2.8539, it retreated with the dollar to a close of
DM2.8430, more than  1/2 pfennig below its previous close. There were no
intrinsic factors pulling the pound down yesterday, but an analyst said the
market still had no positive catalyst to buy the British currency.
Trading in the European Monetary System was otherwise quiet. The lira picked
up slightly, ending at L756.2 against the D-Mark, compared with L757.5
previously. Dealers said its upside potential would be limited until the
market sees in what shape the government's budget deficit reduction package
emerges from the current parliamentary debate.
At the other end of the grid, the Portuguese escudo was close to its ceiling
against sterling, with a 6.22 percentage points differential between the two
currencies at the close.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920728

