FT921-14071

FT  17 JAN 92 / Salvadorean peace pact ends bloody civil war


   By DAMIAN FRASER


   MEXICO CITY


THE government of El Salvador and its former rebel opponents signed a peace
agreement in Mexico City yesterday, ending the country's 12-year civil war
in which some 75,000 people died.
President Alfredo Cristiani signed the treaty and shook hands with the
10-member negotiating team from the left-wing FMLN guerrilla movement. He
called on the former rebels to help in the reconstruction of El Salvador.
The treaty concludes almost two years of UN-sponsored negotiations, which
culminated just before midnight on December 31, when the two sides resolved
their main differences and announced their intention to sign the treaty.
Under its terms, the Salvadorean army will be purged of its worst human
rights offenders, see its size halved within two years, and lose
responsibility for internal security. In return, the FMLN has agreed to
de-mobilise by October 31. It announced that it would turn its weapons into
monuments of peace. A permanent ceasefire will come into effect on February
1.
A new national police force will be set up, both led by and mainly composed
of civilians, but open to some former FMLN members. The government has
promised to enforce and accelerate existing procedures for land reform, and
to give the FMLN ownership of some of the land it has been occupying.
Mr Boutros Ghali, the new UN secretary-general, presided over the ceremony
with 10 heads of state and Mr James Baker, US secretary of state. The UN
chief said El Salvador 'must not be forgotten now peace has broken out'.
Mr Bernard Aronson, US assistant secretary of state for the Americas, said:
'There are special needs in El Salvador . . we are going to do what we can
to help'.
However, he would not commit the US to specific aid for El Salvador, saying
only that the US would shift resources from the military to national
reconstruction, as and when the FMLN demobilised.
The US has financed El Salvador and its army to the tune of Dollars 4bn
during the civil war. Mr Aronson added: 'The US can be proud of our
involvement in El Salvador' - without that, 'there would be no peace today'.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920117

