FT922-13423

FT  11 APR 92 / How To Spend It: Life's just as nice at a lower price - The
rise of Recession Chic


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


IN THE US, where, they tell us, everything comes bigger if not better, the
recession has triggered some serious role-playing. Even Julia Roberts, the
Los Angeles Times informs us, turned up at a Hollywood do wearing a
shapeless frock, no make-up and hair that looked as if she had cut it
herself. Not, you understand, that she doesn't have other frocks in the
closet, make-up on the shelves and hair that has been expensively given the
'no-cut' look - but appearances, it seems, are all. The Look is The Message.
Low-key chic is IN, never mind that economic lift-off seems to be under way.
Now that they are getting the hang of Recession Chic nobody seems inclined
to change tack just yet. Ripped jeans, no make-up, tangled hair are all the
rage. No need to fret and fiddle constructing the look yourself - buy it
off-the-shelf. A designer called Jim Trenton, who I guess at this rate will
not have to wear his own line for long, has taken the sweat out of the whole
business with his line of Poor Wear 'non-attitude clothing'. At America's
most revered store, Nordstrom, it is selling the way sequins used to sell
when they thought the champagne would never run dry.
Back here in the UK, where we never were quite so much into sequins and
glitter, the swings and mood changes are less marked. But almost everybody
knows somebody who is out of work, whose business has gone bust, whose
bonuses have been axed, whose expenses have been cut. Subtly, slowly,
attitudes have changed. Waste and excess have begun to offend. In circles
where once champagne was the most common aperitif, today it is probably a
New World sparkling wine; where once wardrobes were updated each season,
today serious thinking goes on before another designer number joins the
rack. Simpler pleasures are no less fun. Recession Chic has reached these
shores.
WITH PRICES at a top London crimper going through the roof (well over Pounds
50 seems par for the course) those who do not fancy the 'no-cut' unkempt
look could do what many a chic head does - book into a top salon at an
unfashionable time and let a trainee (under supervision, of course) do the
cutting. It is worth asking your hairdresser if he or she has a special rate
and time.
In London, for example, Schumi, 16 Pont Street, SW1 (tel: 071-235-3888) will
charge just Pounds 20 for a wash, blow dry, cut and conditioning if you come
(by appointment) between 10 am and 3 pm on a weekday and let a junior
stylist (overseen by Heinz Schumi) do the work. Molton Brown, 58 South
Molton Street, W1 has regular model evenings on Mondays at 5.45 pm when
trainees wield the scissors, but appointments can also be made during the
day. The price is Pounds 8 for a wash, cut and finish, but it usually
involves some hanging about.
Those with a good eye and time to browse can risk sifting through
second-hand shops and jumble sales, otherwise dress agencies do a lot of the
sifting for you. Doyennes of the dress agency world are Pandora at 16/22
Cheval Place, Knightsbridge, London SW7 (mostly mainstream designers such as
Chanel, YSL, in excellent condition, suits, dresses, ballgowns and
accessories at roughly half price, the seller gets quarter-price) and The
Frock Exchange, 450 Fulham Road, London SW6 (second-hand designer labels of
all ranges - Arabella Pollen balldresses at Pounds 80 as well as Next,
Jigsaw and good quality Marks & Spencer). Sign Of The Times at 17 Elystan
Street, London SW3 has more adventurous labels like Joseph, Edina Ronay,
Zandra Rhodes.
Rokit, 225 Camden High Street, London NW1 specialises in vintage American
clothing mainly from the 1950s - chiefly patronised by the young or for
those looking for off-duty clothes. Look for original Second World War
flying jackets and 1930s Levis
The Designer Sale & Exchange Shop, 61D Lancaster Road, London W11 sells
samples and seconds from the most recent season as well as second-hand
clothes. You need time and patience to sift through the range but is well
worth it.
The ethnic look that is currently so much in vogue is a great deal less
taxing on the purse than the plush silks and satins of the faded country
house school of decorating. However, it needs a little care to make sure the
house does not end up looking like a cheap and cheerful souk - and not all
ethnic shops are cheap.
Global Village, for example, is currently purveying a very sophisticated
ethnic look at prices to match, but Habitat is now looking much revived and
many of its wares are very affordable: thick, white wool rugs for under
Pounds 100, director's chairs for less than Pounds 20, and straight-backed
wicker dining chairs for Pounds 59 are all excellent value.
More good news for those furnishing on a budget is the opening next week of
The Pier at 200 Tottenham Court Road, London W1. Though there has been a
store in Richmond, south west London (now closed) for some time, the new
store is far bigger and more comprehensive and aims to bring authentic craft
products from around the globe to a mass market. When the shop opens (on
April 15) nothing will cost more than Pounds 400 (the price of a rattan
sofa).
Now that simplicity is the mood and swags and ruches are out of date, simple
cottons, tickings and muslins make dressing a window a much less expensive
affair. Many readers have found PN Jones Trading, Silk Merchants, of 18
Holly Grove, London SE15 an excellent source of inexpensive cottons,
cheesecloths, silks and cotton rep.
Though The Conran Shop, 81 Fulham Road, London SW3 is generally considered
by the impecunious to be out of their financial reach it is worth knowing
that the fabric department sports some marvellous buys - there is Indian
cotton khadi at Pounds 4.50 a metre, in beige or white, seersuckers at
Pounds 5.95, Supercot at Pounds 7.50 a metre and a plain oatmeal linen at
Pounds 7.95.
If you prefer your curtains ready-made then scour the auction houses for
textile sales. These often have marvellous fabrics which can be adapted to
fit your own windows (remember, of course, to go armed with all the
measurements you need and to examine the fabrics carefully before you raise
a hand.)
The Curtain Exchange is exactly what it sounds - a place where customers may
buy and sell each other's unwanted, cast-off curtains. What is available
depends on what has been brought in - it may be a pair of simple checked
gingham kitchen curtains or it could be a grand decorator's mistake.
There are now seven branches - two in London, at 133 Stephendale Road, SW6
and 54 Abbey Road, NW8 and ones in Boxford, Essex, Devizes, Wiltshire,
Cheltenham, Glos., Hurstpierpoint, Sussex, and Tarporley, Cheshire. If you
are selling you will get 60 per cent of the sale price; if you are buying
you will find some wonderful bargains.
Curtain Shuffle, at 194 Maxwell Road, Beaconsfield, Bucks, offers much the
same service. All curtains are guaranteed in excellent condition, sellers
get 60 per cent of the sale price and all sorts of ancillary services, such
as a valuation service and advice on cleaning. Alterations are also
available.
A chap lucky enough to be in a good job probably needs a good suit if he
wishes to hang on to it. While designer suits and M&S may well pass muster
for many, for some there is nothing for it - a well-cut traditional suit is
essential kit. With a Savile Row suit these days costing an average of about
Pounds 1,200, it is worth looking at some of the other choices.
At Bernard Weatherill, 8 Savile Row, London W1X 1AF they are frank about how
hard the combination of the recession and uncertainty over the future of
hunting has hit them. 'We have had a very rough time,' says managing
director Hugh Holland, gloomily.
In an attempt to garner the patronage of successful young professionals, 'to
keep our workshops busy' the shop is reducing prices across the board. So
from now on you can order a pukka Savile Row suit for 17 per cent less than
before (for Pounds 1,000 instead of Pounds 1,200) and anybody who hunts can
have a hunting coat (made-to-measure, of course) for Pounds 725 instead of
the usual Pounds 1,000.
Timothy Everest is a tailor who works from an old Huguenot house in
Spitalfields - you walk through the door into a time warp and an older, less
expensive world.
For around Pounds 550 (depending on the fabric) Timothy Everest will make
you a proper bespoke suit. For Pounds 325 he will give you a made-to-measure
suit with slightly less handwork but still fitted and cut in the traditional
way. He is at 4 Princelet Street, London E1 (tel: 071-377-5770).
Henry Rose and John N Kent at 11 Old Burlington Street, London W1 (tel:
071-734-2687) are proper traditional tailors who will make completely
bespoke suits for about half the usual Savile Row price, largely by dint of
keeping overheads down, turnover high and profit margins low. Prices start
from Pounds 525 a suit.
Bertie Wooster of 284 Fulham Road, London SW10, which specialises in
second-hand clothes, now has a new venture - dealing in unclaimed bespoke
clothing. Hard times in the City have meant that unclaimed suits are
currently languishing in several august Savile Row establishments. Rather
than write them off completely they sell them to Bertie Wooster, which in
turn sells them to its customers. Prices range from Pounds 40 for a blazer
to Pounds 95 for a morning coat. City suits are somewhere around Pounds 75.
Redmayne is an old-establishd gentleman's outfitters which due to its
address (30 High Street, Wigton, Cumberland, tel: 06973-42221) is able to
charge reasonable prices for high-quality work. Bespoke, Savile Row-style
suits cost between Pounds 700 and Pounds 800 (fittings in Wigton, London or
Edinburgh).
A popular service, though, is for Redmayne to copy a favourite suit, stitch
for stitch, line for line, in a fine fabric of your choice for between
Pounds 350 and Pounds 400. From June 1 both services will be available to
customers in the US - ring John Underwood on 201-825-7800.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920411

