FT924-6027

FT  24 NOV 92 / US warns of 5m more ozone cancer cases


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


   COPENHAGEN


DEPLETION of the ozone layer will cause a sharp increase in cancer over the
next century - including 5m more cases and 70,000 deaths in the US alone - a
top US government official warned yesterday.
The prediction from Mr William Reilly, administrator of the US Environmental
Agency, came in Copenhagen at a United Nations conference on the ozone
layer, at the start of three days of talks where 92 countries are trying to
bring forward the phase-out of ozone-depleting chemicals to 1996 from the
year 2000.
Mr Reilly said the cost of implementing the existing protocol was Dollars
35bn (Pounds 23bn) for the US. The cost of the accelerated programme was
Dollars 2bn, but Mr Reilly expected it would save 10,000 lives by 2075 -
Dollars 200,000 a life.
Industrialists at the meeting warned that businesses worldwide were
stockpiling chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) - some of the chemicals considered
most damaging - in anticipation of an early production ban.
The ozone layer absorbs the sun's ultraviolet radiation, which can cause
skin cancer and cataracts in humans and lower crop yields. Dr Bob Watson, a
leading atmospheric scientist, said: 'There is now evidence that ozone is
being depleted over heavily populated areas of the northern hemisphere by
about 3 per cent in summer and 5 per cent in winter.' He added that even
with existing controls depletion levels could double by the year 2000.
The World Meteorological Organisation, which recently warned that ozone
levels over northern Europe were lower than usual this year because of cold
weather, said yesterday levels over Scotland were 20 per cent below average
in mid-January this year.
Delegates were wrestling over the importance of adding two new chemicals as
they sought to renegotiate the Montreal protocol of 1987. The protocol
regulates ozone-damaging substances - HCFCs, a less damaging replacement for
CFCs, and methyl bromide, a fumigant used for preserving fruit and grain.
Mr David Maclean, UK environment minister, said: 'If you want to get rid of
CFCs - and they are the bad guys - you must turn to HCFCs.' According to one
leading international chemical manufacturer, industry put off adopting HCFCs
for fear they would eventually be banned too.
He believed US carmakers were stockpiling the chemical to enable them to
carry out six-year service warranties on cars at low cost.
Mr Reilly said that while he did not have details of US manufacturers'
plans, 'it would make sense for them to put together a CFC bank for
servicing existing stock', a comment that was denounced by environmental
groups as 'extremely unhelpful.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921124

