FT923-9792

FT  03 AUG 92 / Making refugee safe zones work


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER, Diplomatic Editor


CONFUSION continues to surround the concept of 'safe zones' for refugees
from Bosnia-Hercegovina, an idea spawned at last week's United Nations
conference in Geneva on refugees in the former Yugoslavia.
With an estimated 500,000 refugees in the region without adequate shelter
for the coming winter, and tens of thousands of others continuing to knock
on the doors of other countries, a co-ordinated solution for the Bosnian
refugee problem has become a matter of extreme urgency.
Rejecting the proposal by Germany, which has taken more than 200,000
refugees from the region, that country-by-country quotas should be
established, most of the participants agreed that local and regional
solutions should be found for the problem.
Both France and Britain have stressed that transporting refugees abroad
could encourage the very process of 'ethnic cleansing' - creating ethnically
pure regions - for which the Serbs have been condemned by the international
community. Moreover, that would make the return of the refugees to their
homes, which everyone agrees should be the ultimate objective, much more
difficult, it is argued.
However, treating the refugee problem 'close to home' is easier said than
done in a country where fighting is going on in widely dispersed localities
and where clearly defined front-lines do not exist. It presupposes the
setting up of safe zones, which are not only administered by the UN, but
which require at least some military protection.
Since the concept of safe zones was not clearly defined even by those who
proposed them at the Geneva conference, it is hardly surprising that many
initially saw them as similar to the Kurdish 'safe havens' set up in
northern Iraq after the Gulf war. It has since become clear, however, that
the main protagonists of the idea recognise the impracticality of such a
solution.
The safe havens set up in northern Iraq were made possible by the
co-operation with the US-led coalition of a neighbouring Nato ally, Turkey,
which provided it with military air bases, and also by the comprehensive
defeat of the Iraqi armed forces in the Gulf War.
In the case of Bosnia, however, a large number of troops armed with mortars
and artillery, and backed by aircraft based in Italy and on US and allied
aircraft carriers in the Adriatic, would have to be provided for an
indefinite period if refugee areas were set up in a war zone. That would be
tantamount to a full-scale military intervention, which most western
countries want to avoid.
What is envisaged, therefore, is to set up protected refugee zones either in
regions of Bosnia not been affected by the conflict, or in Croatia, where UN
monitors are already on the spot, or even on the other side of the Yugoslav
border in neighbouring countries.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920803

