FT921-15456

FT  10 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Educating the majority


NATIONAL TESTING reaches state secondary schools this year, with most
14-year-olds due to sit pilot tests in mathematics and science in June.
English and technology will be added next year, when the tests become
compulsory, and history and geography will follow in 1994.
The tests are welcome, and should help to monitor and stimulate pupils'
progress at a time crucial to their prospects of succeeding in public
examinations. Less satisfactory, however, is progress in two other vital
areas in 11-19 education: the creation of an effective 'vocational route',
and reform of A-levels.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, education secretary, dismisses as 'a myth' any belief
'that the education system across the rest of Europe is somehow perfection
compared with our own'. Lump school-leavers together with sixth formers, he
told a Commons committee last month, and 'we are absolutely in line with the
crowd for 16-year-olds', with almost 90 per cent in full or part-time
education or training.
Perfection is not to be found in this life, and there is no such place as
'the rest of Europe'. It is not, however, a myth that Britain's record in
post-16 vocational education lags well behind that of France and Germany, to
take concrete countries. And however you play the numbers game, Mr Clarke's
90 per cent is achievable only by lumping in all Youth Trainees (barely half
of whom gain any qualifications at all), and that proportion falls
dramatically among 17 and 18-year-olds. Put bluntly, British education
abandons most school-leavers of average and below-average ability.
Lightweight
Britain's failure to develop institutions akin to Germany's Realschulen
(technical high schools) and Berufschulen (vocational training schools) is
at the heart of the problem. The government's current reform of vocational
qualifications, particularly its promotion of new general vocational
qualifications, are steps in the right direction. But early indications
suggest that many of the new qualifications will be lightweight and far too
job-specific. And since ministers refuse to countenance any compulsion on
employers to train young employees, those in work will benefit little from
them.
For 16-year-olds able to jump clearly through the GCSE hoop, prospects are
far brighter, with small A-level classes and a broad range of degree courses
and universities all before them. But if A-levels are indeed, as Mr Clarke
told the same committee, 'about the one bit of the system which works at the
moment', it bodes ill for the rest. For few now believe that three
single-subject A-levels make for a satisfactory post-16 curriculum.
More challenging
More does not necessarily mean worse. A broader post-16 curriculum,
including English, maths and a foreign language as compulsory courses,
should prove more - not less - challenging to students than the status quo,
and make the illiterate engineer, innumerate historian and monolingual
everything figures of the past. The International Baccalaureate is an
excellent and proven model: IB students study six subjects (including the
above), three at a higher level and three as subsidiaries, and their final
grade depends upon performance in all six.
Some wish to see a single baccalaureate as the goal of both 'academic' and
'vocational' students. But that is a lesser issue, except for those who
believe that parity of esteem can be imposed by fiat. The priority is to
promote reform on both fronts, without exacerbating fears that the A-level
'gold standard' is to be debased in the process.
In any case, a greater barrier to mobility between the two routes lies in
the division of post-16 students between sixth forms (offering only A-levels
and GCSE re-sits) and further education colleges (many with poor academic
records but catering for BTECs and other vocational courses). Pupils need to
be more aware of choices open to them at 16 - which is why, of all the
education cuts of recent years, those in local careers services are among
the most damaging.
This is the third in a series on British education policy.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920110

