FT921-14167

FT  17 JAN 92 / The Lex Column: The lure of cheap mortgages


FT-SE Index: 2,541.6 (+4.5)
In its own small way, yesterday's cut in UK mortgage rates is distinctly
encouraging. In guessing that UK interest rates have peaked, the building
societies are no better informed than the rest of us. But they are seeking
to stimulate the housing market in the critical spring season; and if, as
the equity market is tentatively suggesting, retail spending is starting to
pick up, this could provide a fillip.
The equity market's confidence is perhaps more broadly based than that.
Yesterday's most striking feature was the collapse in drug stocks and the
surge in cyclicals such as British Steel and ICI. This mimics recent events
on Wall Street, where defensive stars of 1991 such as Merck and Coca Cola
have been savaged while cyclicals like steel have soared. As a measure of US
belief in recovery, this is a healthy sign. In the UK, it may be more a
matter of picking high yielders on the grounds that their dividends are not
so vulnerable after all. But that too represents confidence of sorts.
The fall in UK drug stocks - Glaxo alone accounted for 10 points off the
FT-SE yesterday - is simpler. As in the US, the sector benefited hugely last
year at the expense of the cyclicals. But in the UK the effect was much more
exaggerated in both directions, so that yesterday's 10 per cent rise in
British Steel and 5 per cent fall in Glaxo does little to close the gap. In
addition, it looks as if UK drug stocks have been supported lately by US
buying; and if US investors have fallen out of love with Merck, there is the
less reason for them to support Glaxo.
As for the direct effects of the mortgage rate cut, the lack of movement in
the housebuilders yesterday suggests that the market is not expecting too
much. Coming after the suspension of stamp duty and the attempts to stem the
flow of repossessions before Christmas, a half-point cut is not to be
sniffed at. But the housing market is locked in an unprecedented state of
depression, real interest rates remain high without the compensating
prospect of capital gains, and the approaching election is still a barrier
to confidence.
Abbey National's initiative may nevertheless have important consequences for
its competitors, not least the already struggling wholesale lenders which
rely for funds on the money market. Abbey has also widened its margins
significantly in the last couple of years, and is therefore in a strong
position if the battle for market share intensifies. Barclays' announcement
yesterday of a new capped mortgage could be a sign of things to come. It
could also be a reason for not getting carried away with bank shares,
whatever their yield attractions.

The Financial Times


London Page 18 Graph (Omitted).

920117

