FT921-3765

FT  12 MAR 92 / Arts: Death in Venice - Covent Garden


   By MAX LOPPERT


This remarkable opera returns to Covent Garden nearly 20 years after its
first appearance there (four months after the Aldeburgh first performance,
in the Aldeburgh staging). Then, and in the subsequent 1975 and 1978
revivals, the performer of Gustav von Aschenbach was Peter Pears, for whom
the role was written; thereafter, three leading English tenors proved able
to develop it beyond the confines of the 'premiere production' - Anthony
Rolfe Johnson (for Scottish Opera), Philip Langridge (also for Scottish
Opera), and Robert Tear (for Glyndebourne Touring Opera).
On Tuesday the Aschenbach was Mr Langridge; and his magnificent performance
may be taken as a symbol of the way the work itself has taken root and
blossomed over the intervening years.
He is, needless to say, not 'better' than Pears or the other tenors also
mentioned; but he makes the work so completely his own that, at least while
we watch and listen, it seems impossible to imagine it differently done. In
the last 12 months Mr Langridge has already shown to London audiences his
superbly achieved accounts of Peter Grimes and Captain Vere at the ENO, so
his ability to compass with absolute mastery the last, longest and perhaps
most taxing of the roles Britten wrote for Pears was hardly in question.
It is the combination of completeness and naturalness in the delivery that I
find so astonishing. No touch of 'art' seems to mark Mr Langridge's eloquent
utterance of words, no sense of voice-managing his leanly graceful colouring
and shading of phrases. Every hint of actorish self-consciousness has been
purged from his absorption, physical and spiritual, into the character's
development.
The conversational tone adopted at the start is fluent, accurate and easy;
it lends to Aschenbach's piano-accompanied recitatives of meditation a
quality of privacy, of rugged, rueful honesty-with-self that sets the tone
for the opera's journey into uncharted areas of the psyche. A theatre
properly a couple of sizes too large for this opera shrinks in dimensions
around its central character; and because Mr Langridge and the producer,
Colin Graham, appear to have worked so closely together to shape the drama
as a fluid unfolding with Aschenbach as its fixed focal point, the
performance gains a musico-dramatic intimacy of rare vibrancy.
One seems to see the world through Aschenbach's eyes, breathe with him, feel
his shocks of emotional awareness at first hand. In theory (formed by past
experience of the work in the theatre) Act 1 is badly in need of nips and
tucks to the 77-minute-long text that Britten was never able to authorise;
in practice I was, on this occasion, gripped almost without let-up
throughout the whole opera. This is, of course, not just the hero's doing;
the parts played by the conductor, Steuart Bedford, in supporting and
sustaining the peculiar quality of intimacy noted above, and by Mr Graham in
creating an ensemble that catches and contains it, are splendidly evident.
In common with Deanne Bergsma (a consummately elegant and delicately
characterised Lady of the Pearls) but unlike Mr Langridge, they belonged to
the 1973 team of Death in Venice 'creators'; it is wonderfully satisfying
that their grasp of the work should have matured so obviously. The
diaphanous sound-world of the opera, its transformations from mysterious
murkiness to translucent brightness, its 'psychological' uses and contrasts
of timbre, are native territory to Mr Bedford; its structural forms are
second nature to Mr Graham.
The production is in fact entirely new, though linked with the old one by
John Piper's original designs, which now serve (along with
turn-of-the-century black-and-white Fortuny photographs of Venice) as
projections on the three screens, framed by gleaming silver poles, that form
the entire set. A revolve whirls new scenes and locations into place, and
proves a vivid, never too obvious metaphor for the sea-changes which, in all
senses, Aschenbach undergoes.
On Tuesday the manipulation of imagery seamlessly growing and fading in
intensity seemed not yet entirely smooth; but the style of the production is
so carefully gauged, and so 'right' in arguing its own case, that passing
imperfections were of small importance. Mr Graham has not sought out a Death
in Venice stripping-away, of the kind so brilliantly undertaken by
Glyndebourne Touring Opera in 1989. In its freshness and acuity of
understanding his staging has its own proud modernity.
Alastair Macaulay will be writing about Kim Brandstrup's new choreography.
My feeling is that, in its closer involvement in the 'story-line', the dance
element now serves the larger demands of the opera more successfully than
first time around, marvellous though Ashton's beach games were in dance
terms; and that the Tadzio of Giacomo Ciriaci is the best the work has yet
seen, an embodiment of the 'mortal child with more than mortal grace'
unforced in dramatic vigour and un-cloying in beauty and grace.
Of the large singing cast, expertly positioned and moved, there must be at
least brief mention of Michael Chance's limpid offstage Voice of Apollo and
of Linda Kitchen's onstage Strawberry Seller, Paul Crook's Hotel Porter and
Bruno Caproni's English Clerk (a marvellous small part strongly sung). To
the various embodiments of the Traveller Alan Opie brings virtuoso
showmanship infused with a perfectly judged degree of menace, and a voice
impressively clean and flexible if lacking a degree of bass-baritone
darkness.
This is an opera whose protagonist, a mature man and artist, embarks on a
voyage of sensual self-discovery which brings with it both life and death;
substitute Aids for cholera, as many in Tuesday's audience must constantly
have done, and Death in Venice becomes (in the words of Mr Graham's
programme postlude) 'more topical than ever for all such sufferers and to
those who must have compassion for them'. But topicality alone is not the
reason why the stature of the work should seem to grow with each passing
year.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920312

