FT923-6442

FT  25 AUG 92 / Poll shows Russians want free sale of land


   By LEYLA BOULTON


WHAT Russians most want in terms of privatisation is the only sort which is
not yet allowed: the free sale of land.
In an unprecedented opinion poll on Russian economic reform, 67.81 per cent
of respondents said the best result so far has been an elimination of
shortages in shops. In second place, 19.06 per cent welcomed an increase in
the number of retailing outlets as a result of the legalisation of street
sellers and kiosks.
But the nation's top complaint, cited by 31.5 per cent of 4,000 respondents
around the country, was the shortage of banknotes, which has meant big
delays with pay packets. Second came the near-elimination of the value of
savings as prices rise sharply while interest on savings accounts rises
slowly. Another 18.5 per cent cited an increase in crime and corruption.
Completed just as the government announced a scheme to give away industrial
assets through a mass voucher scheme, the poll showed that 53.6 per cent
believed the free sale of land should form the basis of privatisation.
The government, which sees private land ownership as essential, has
threatened to hold a referendum to challenge parliament's insistence that
land cannot be resold for 10 years. The poll was conducted by the Centre for
International Sociological and Market Research in Moscow.
Just over half the population believed assets should be given away. Only
6.89 per cent of the population supported the government's preferred method
of auctioning them. President Boris Yeltsin has issued a decree reversing an
attempt by Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the parliamentary speaker, to take over
the Izvestia newspaper.
Izvestia yesterday published an order by the Russian leader telling the
Committee for State Property to strengthen the hold of Izvestia's publishing
house over its property.
Mr Khasbulatov, irritated by criticism from the paper, decreed this summer
that it should be handed over to the Russian parliament, a move widely
attacked as an attempt to curtail press freedom.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920825

