FT922-4230

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: A measured dose of realism /
Studying the lessons from the investment ombudsman's report


   By JOHN AUTHERS


THE INVESTMENT ombudsman's annual report, published this week, administered
doses of common sense for clients and salesmen.
Complaints decreased slightly - from 89 to 67 - in the year to end-March but
compensation paid out rose from Pounds 22,655 to Pounds 114,272. The largest
amount was Pounds 25,031, up from Pounds 8,715 last year. About half the
cases were resolved in favour of the complainant.
Richard Youard, the ombudsman, pin-pointed some problems. He found no
evidence of bad faith but plenty of misunderstanding, caused by several
factors. His long-term solution is education.
He said: 'Greater public awareness of the basic aspects of investment would
significantly reduce the number of cases. Continuing public education is
needed. Fear of the unknown is still a predominant reason for the public not
to invest as they should in their own interests.'
In many cases, investors had unreasonable expectations or did not understand
equity risk, even though it had been well explained to them. If the markets
go down, the ombudsman will not step in when unit trust prices also go down.
He is also highly unlikely to step in when a company underperforms despite
its best efforts. Investors can complain - but cannot expect compensation.
As Youard put it: 'They (the company) got it wrong but they weren't
negligent.'
There was, however, one case where redress was made after exceptionally bad
performance. The complainant had put in around Pounds 80,000 which declined
20 per cent over three years while the market in which it was invested rose
by around a third. In a letter, the company had assured the client it would
do better than an alternative in fixed interest securities. Thanks to this
implied guarantee, the institution involved eventually had to pay out
'around Pounds 10,000.' But Youard emphasised that this case was highly
unusual.
Youard is more bothered by the poor notes taken by intermediaries when
interviewing clients. Normally, a simple fact-find is used: the intermediary
sits down with you and takes down the necessary details. Many companies now
produce standardised forms for this.
But Youard says: 'We still see far too many cases where the fact-find has
been carried out in such a slovenly manner than no one afterwards can say
with any reliability what the customer asked for and what the investment
adviser thought his duty was.'
One successful complainant was a woman aged 82 without dependants. She had
sold her house and wanted to look after her retirement. But there was no
evidence that her 'adviser' had asked about any of this in the fact-find. He
guided her into an unsuitable long-term growth investment.
Youard questioned the idea of salesmen working as advisers. 'It is quite
possible for a salesman to be a salesman and an adviser at the same time but
it is difficult and, because a salesman instinctively sells, things can go
wrong.'
He also found fault with cost disclosure for unit trust products, a live
issue at present as the Securities and Investments Board has yet to decide
on new rules to follow the disclosure rules on life assurance. The Unit
Trust Association is also planning reforms to pricing.
The ombudsman claimed the present 'health warning' for unit trusts - which
says the price of units can go down as well as up - was misunderstood and
should be given greater prominence. He said: 'What, in my view, is required
as a matter of urgency is the abandonment of the present warning and its
substitution in a prominent form by such words as 'you may get back less
than you invested'.'
He found that the 'bid/offer' price spread for unit trusts also was
misunderstood. Three prices are offered for unit trusts. One is the
cancellation price, which is technical. The others - which are likely to be
more important - are the 'offer' and the 'bid' prices. The former is the
price at which investors can buy; it is greater than the latter, at which
they sell. The spread between the two allows for management and
administration costs.
Youard said he would be delighted if the expression 'bid-offer spread' was
abandoned forever 'since I have seen far too many cases where it has been
wholly misunderstood by the investor.' As a substitute, he suggested a
simple statement that the cost of the manager's services, expressed either
as an amount of money or as a percentage, would be deducted from the
investment on the first day.
Philip Warland, director-general of the Unit Trust Association, agreed and
said this would This would make sense, as it would, to quote one leading
figure in the unit trust industry, 'remove the last layer of opacity in unit
trust pricing.' Warland added: 'He's pushing against an open door. The UTA
believes that further simplification of pricing is desirable and we are at
the moment consulting our members.'
The investment ombudsman deals with disputes between customers and members
of Imro, the Investment Managers' Regulatory Office.
If you have a complaint about an Imro member, you should talk to the company
and then, if necessary, report it to Imro. Problems which cannot be resolved
at this point will then be passed to the ombudsman. IMRO's free complaints
leaflet: Office of the Investment Ombudsman, 6 Frederick's Place, London
EC2R 8BT.
IMRO's help-line, for those who have questions about a complaint, is on
071-628-6022.
SIB central register of members: tel 071-929-3652.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920606

