FT922-4095

FT  08 JUN 92 / Eggar urges deal on coal for power


   By JULIET SYCHRAVA


THE GOVERNMENT has attempted to speed the privatisation of British Coal by
increasing pressure on the electricity industry to agree a new deal with the
corporation.
After months of stagnation, there are signs that the generators and British
Coal have agreed to work towards a 'wedge-shaped' deal under which the
generators would buy about 45m tonnes of coal a year, falling to about 30m
within a few years.
That compares with the 65m tonnes the generators buy annually under
contracts that end next March. It would initially generate about 90m
kilowatt hours a year - about half the total electricity market open to the
generators.
PowerGen, one of the two large generators in England and Wales, will this
week put an offer based on that deal to the 12 English and Welsh regional
electricity supply companies. The generators will not agree to buy coal
unless they can sell the electricity it generates to the regional companies.
PowerGen, which previously seemed reluctant to agree a deal with British
Coal at all, is now understood to believe a deal can be done, although
British Coal's prices are still above world levels.
The regional electricity companies are dragging their feet, in spite of
prompting from Mr Tim Eggar, the energy minister. He is understood to be
keen to secure a deal in time to put legislation for British Coal
privatisation before the Commons this autumn.
One regional company chief executive said: 'We have no reason to sign a deal
at all except a predetermined government timetable.'
The regional companies are concerned because the captive domestic market
will be liberalised progressively after 1994 and they may find themselves
with a long contract to buy coal-fired power and no customers for it.
They are also concerned that Offer, the industry regulator, might penalise
them if it proves that they could have supplied customers with cheaper
power.
National Power, the other large generator in England and Wales, recently
offered the regional companies a coal-based deal. But they said both
generators were failing to give them adequate details of the coal deal, and
are hesitant to expose themselves by signing individual contracts.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920608

