FT922-7309

FT  19 MAY 92 / Cheese factory faces clash over business culture: Rival
plans for the future of a Wensleydale creamery


   By CHRIS TIGHE


FRIDAY is the day of reckoning for Dairy Crest's Hawes creamery in Upper
Wensleydale, a cheese factory at the centre of a clash of business cultures.
On one side is Dairy Crest, the Milk Marketing Board subsidiary that is
closing the North Yorkshire creamery at the end of this month and moving
production of Wensleydale cheese to its Longridge plant in Lancashire.
Opposing the closure is the Hawes Dairy Rescue Committee, led by local
businesses convinced that by saving Wensleydale's last commercial
cheese-making site they can create a viable small business and an employment
lifeline for the remote upper dale.
Backing the rescue committee are Yorkshiremen, both born and adopted, who
are scandalised at Dairy Crest's assertion that Wensleydale made in
Lancashire will taste just as good.
On Friday, when the committee presents its buy-in bid for the creamery to
Dairy Crest, it will be hard economics, not sentiment, that decides whether
there is a future for the cheesemaking tradition brought to Wensleydale by
French monks 800 years ago.
The committee's bid is being formulated by Mr Keith Johnson, financial
director of Thomas Weatherald, Wensleydale joiners with a Pounds 15m annual
turnover.
He says: 'I think Dairy Crest thought we would just lie down and play dead.
Now they realise we aren't that sort of people.'
When the creamery's closure was announced three weeks ago, Hawes' population
of 1,100 was stunned. The town is 25 miles from any other town and without
the creamery jobs young people are likely to leave.
Mr Peter Annison, chairman of the local chamber of trade, estimates that the
creamery, which employs 59 people and is Hawes' largest private-sector
employer, provides a quarter of jobs for men in Hawes.
Local authorities and job creation agencies are also worried. A decade of
establishing small factories by the government-funded Rural Development
Commission has so far generated only 30 jobs.
Mr Richard Harvey, the Yorkshire Dales National Park officer, says any
development of the creamery site for non-industrial use - such as housing -
would be blocked.
The commission and local councils are supporting the rescue plan. Local
people have promised finance, from small sums to more than Pounds 20,000.
'It's total 100 per cent commitment,' says Mr John Blackie, rescue committee
spokesman.
Feelings are running high in Hawes. Fourth-generation grocer Mr Basil Allen,
who in summer sells 1,000 pounds of Wensleydale a week, insists that nothing
compares with cheese made from the milk of cows grazing on limestone
pastureland full of dales flowers.
Jim Metcalfe, who eats Wensleydale in traditional style, roasted in a tin
with milk, says: 'It's one of the best cheeses there are. It must be when
the Queen Mother likes it best.'
Everybody agrees the rescue bid must be a viable business but it is evident
that Dairy Crest is unconvinced it can be.
The creamery was bought by the Milk Marketing Board in the mid 1960s for
Pounds 500,000 from Wensleydale entrepreneur Mr Kit Calvert, who had rescued
the business in the 1930s and made it a commercial success.
Dairy Crest says the creamery needs a 'massive injection of capital' to make
it cost-competitive and to satisfy the stringent requirements of the
supermarket chains, its key customers. Investment, it argues, cannot be
justified as consumption of regional English crumbly cheese has fallen by 33
per cent in the past five years.
The creamery, it concedes, is operating profitably, but switching production
to Longridge will maximise the profitability.
The campaigners believe, however, there is a niche market for a creamery,
employing about 20 people at first, to produce and promote Wensleydale for
smaller outlets as a specialthe parallel with Hawes ropemakers Outhwaite &
Son which he and his wife bought in 1975. Although tiny in rope industry
terms, it has grown to employ 22 people with an annual turnover of Pounds
500,000.
The rescue committee says Dairy Crest has been obstructive by failing to
provide figures needed to formulate a bid and insisting on removing
virtually all cheesemaking equipment. Mr Blackie says: 'Clearly Dairy Crest
doesn't want us to have a chance to buy the dairy, to set up a trading
company.'
Dairy Crest insists that it is not trying to stifle a bid but wants to
ensure that the campaigners realise the stakes in a competitive marketplace
are high. It says: 'We are Dairy Crest, we are used to making cheese, we
have decided to pull out.'
Any rescue attempt also faces the issue of milk quotas. Sometimes there are
national milk shortages and the proposed abolition of the present Milk
Marketing Scheme was announced in the Queen's Speech.
The campaigners, formulating a buy-in financed mainly by Dalespeople, are
undeterred. Mr Johnson predicts: 'I'm confident we can rescue something out
of the situation.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920519

