FT922-4105

FT  08 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Cosmopolitan mix keeps support
for European unity alive - Saint-Denis


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   THE spirit of Maastricht is alive and well


on the surface, at least - among the many races and creeds milling around
the market in Saint-Denis on the northern outskirts of Paris.
Saint-Denis has an incongruous mix. It is one of France's most cosmopolitan
towns; Corsicans, Arabs, Poles and Africans mill through the streets. The
kings and queens of France lie buried inside the town's single-tower Gothic
cathedral. The town hall is run by the Communist party, which believes the
Maastricht treaty is an affront to national freedom. One in four of the
town's residents vote for the extreme right-wing National Front, whose
leader Jean-Marie Le Pen is France's chief anti-Maastricht campaigner. And
yet, on the evidence of the market-place, Saint-Denis is decidedly
pro-European.
The Danish vote against Maastricht has made almost no impact on 10 French
nationals picked at random from this colourful gathering.
Half of them were of foreign extraction - proof of France's tradition of
assimilating people of different cultures. Seven of the 10 said they would
definitely vote for Maastricht in the referendum announced by President
Francois Mitterrand on Wednesday, one said no and two had not made up their
minds.
'Anything that moves to a single Europe is good,' says Mr Hamadache Arezki,
39, a trader selling billowy underwear to Saint Denis' larger ladies. Mr
Arezki considers himself badly informed on the details of Maastricht, and
then reels off most of the main points with startling expertise. Algerian by
origin, Mr Arezki thinks of himself as French.
The National Front and the Communists won a combined 50 per cent of the vote
in regional elections held in March, so it is surprising to find so many
people in the streets confessing to be pro-European.
Mr Le Pen's supporters blame immigrants - 28.5 per cent of Saint Denis'
population is foreign - for the 14 per cent unemployment rate, four points
above the national norm. Saint Denis is also poor; nearly half its
households have no car and a quarter have no bathroom, toilet or central
heating, according to a study by the town hall.
Perhaps the town's non-Europeans think the EC will improve their lot, while
the anti-Europeans want to defend their livelihoods against a possible
increase in immigration. Significantly, the only firm anti-Maastricht voter
in the FT's straw poll was of French origin.
Mrs Francoise Dauphet, a middle-aged woman who works in a clothes shop,
says: 'I'm glad the Danes said no. Perhaps the single European currency is a
good idea. But opening the frontiers is bad. There are already too many
immigrants in Saint-Denis and too much unemployment.'
Mrs Dauphet, who says she votes for the neo-Gaullist opposition, adds: 'Look
what happened when Germany let down the wall. We don't want that here.'
A young French girl, sitting at the information desk in the nearby town
hall, claims never to have heard of Maastricht, let alone its treaty. In any
case, questions on Europe's future are not her business and should be
addressed to the electoral office she says, a reflex which shows typical
French belief that the public administration knows everything.
The office is run by Mr Philippe Chartier, a polite, bespectacled
26-year-old, who agrees that average French people are not well enough
informed on the content of the Maastricht treaty, and have lazily left the
subject to their respected administration.
Public ignorance may have contributed to the Danish problem, he says, adding
that this factor might have been underestimated by the French government.
'French people tend to see Maastricht as a source of conflict between
political parties, rather than for what it is,' he says. Mr Chartier
believes that voters will view the Maastricht referendum as much as a chance
to express a view on the increasingly unpopular Mitterrand presidency as on
the treaty. The referendum could thus backfire.
'Even so, I think only four out of 10 in France will say no,' he says.
Back in the street, a surprising number of locals talk about the need for
Europeans to band together against perceived US domination. Mr Bernard
Mascheroni, 61, a part-time landscape painter, sips black coffee in a bar as
he argues 'European union will make us all stronger, so that the EC can
resist US imperialism'.
The threat to national identity is a marginal problem for a multiracial
district like Saint Denis, he points out. 'The Danes might be right,' echoes
the barwoman, Mrs Chantale Monetti, who does not know how she will vote.
The painter's fear of the US is echoed by Mr Albert Baum, 67, a Polish
tailor, who adds that the EC should try to imitate a US federal system.
'It's not a perfect model, I know, but it works,' he says. Mr Baum would be
happy to pay his bills in Ecu, rather than francs.
'The Danes have got it all wrong. You can't make a European union and
completely satisfy everyone. This is the problem of Europe and they have to
accept that,' says Mr Baum.
Like others he fears the average Frenchman or woman is not well enough
informed to vote rationally on Maastricht. 'People will just vote on what
they are told.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920608

