FT924-8080

FT  13 NOV 92 / Cavallo refuses to be blown off reform path: John Barham
interviews the Argentine economy minister


   By JOHN BARHAM


ARGENTINA'S financial markets have been beset by an atmosphere of crisis
this week. Persistent rumours of the impending resignation of Mr Domingo
Cavallo, the economy minister, have combined with a widespread belief that
the government's commitment to economic reform is wavering and a growing
unease over the worsening balance of trade.
For the first time since March 1991, the foreign exchange markets pushed the
US dollar above its maximum official rate of one peso to close at 1.004
pesos on Wednesday. This week the Central Bank had to sell Dollars 108.4m in
hard currency, equivalent to 1.6 per cent of its reserves, to support the
peso. Argentina has seen a Dollars 111.2m net capital outflow so this far
this month, while prices on the stock exchange have fallen 13.2 per cent.
Yesterday, markets were calmer, with share prices rising 1 per cent at
lunchtime. But sustained demand kept the dollar slightly above its parity
with the peso, despite a 5 percentage point rise in interest rates to 28-30
per cent a year.
In the midst of these anxieties, Mr Cavallo reaffirmed in an interview with
the Financial Times his unswerving commitment to economic orthodoxy, saying
he had 'the full support of President Carlos Menem and of the people.'
He dismissed fears that Mr Menem's political agenda was interfering with the
advance of reform: 'President Menem knows that the first sign of populism
will lead to a reversion of expectations, capital outflows and inflation, at
a phenomenal political cost.' Mr Menem wants to amend the constitution in
order to run for re-election in 1995.
Mr Cavallo said that while the economy was unlikely to be a winning factor
in the 1993 mid-term congressional elections, as it was in 1991, 'we will
lose the elections totally if we weaken and respond to demands of populism.'
He recognised that the elections, scheduled for next September, required him
to win Congressional approval for two key reform laws by May, after which
'the electoral climate will make it difficult' for the laws to clear
Congress.
Union pressure has blocked passage of bills reforming the social security
system and the labour market, both of which are seen as necessary to improve
the economy's efficiency. Mr Cavallo said the government was 'working hard'
to win approval for these bills, and the stalled 1993 budget.
Unease that his reforms are unravelling became acute after Mr Cavallo raised
import barriers last month and admitted that Argentina would have a trade
deficit in 1992 for the first time in 11 years. But he insisted that the
protectionist measures were temporary, while permanent reforms of the tax
and tariff structure, announced at the same time, would increase exports and
investment.
A key objective, he admitted, was to slow imports from Brazil - Argentina's
partner in the nascent Mercosur common market - which were rising 5-6 per
cent a month. This was an 'external shock' that had to be neutralised, he
said. Argentina's trade deficit with Brazil hit Dollars 900m in August.
Mr Cavallo said that while he maintains his original 'political enthusiasm'
for integration with Brazil, instability there meant the pace of integration
had to slow. This did not mean 'that I am thinking of leaving Mercosur and
applying to join Nafta: what I say is that all countries must have their
options open.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921113

