FT922-439

FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: Quest for cultural identities - Short stories


   By LUCASTA MILLER


MONKFISH MOON
by Romesh Gunesekera
Granta Books Pounds 11.99, 138 pages
THE WRECKING YARD
by Pinckney Benedict
Secker & Warburg Pounds 7.99, 208 pages
SLEEPWALKER IN A FOG
by Tatyana Tolstaya
Virago Pounds 13.99, 192 pages
THE MEAT EATERS by Michael Collins Jonathan Cape Pounds 13.99, 279 pages
'YOUR stories are like exquisite cut-glass bottles with all the scents of
life in them,' Gorky once wrote to Chekhov. The comparison was apt.
Combining a finely chiselled structure with the impressionistic ability to
distill all the subtleties of character and situation into 20 or 30 pages,
great short stories have a crystalline perfection that the broader
brushstrokes of the novel completely miss.
But the fiction market in Britain seems strangely unappreciative. There is
not much of a forum for single stories in broad circulation publications.
Tony Lacey, publishing director at Penguin, admits that multiple-author
anthologies of tried and tested stories do well: 'But with a new writer, a
first novel is far more appealing than a book of short stories.'
Bill Hamilton, at one of the oldest-established literary agencies, AM Heath,
suspects that publishers and readers share a misplaced snobbery: 'Novels are
weighty, and people often mistake quantity for quality. There's also the
perception that English literature, unlike Russian, has no short story
tradition.' Dostoyevsky's wonderful description of the birth of Russian
prose fiction - 'we have all come from under Gogol's Overcoat' - puts the
genre right at the centre. But in England, the short story has been more of
a poor relation, intimidated by its big brother, the novel. Among
contemporary classics in English, Nadine Gordimer (South African) and
William Trevor (Irish) come most easily to mind.
Russian, Sri Lankan, American and Irish, these four volumes, three of them
by new writers, seem to reinforce the idea that short stories are a
non-English phenomenon. They all use the medium to explore questions of
cultural identity. But stylistically, each response to the space confines of
the genre is highly individual.
It is the Sri Lankan writer, Romesh Gunesekera, who gets closest to Chekhov
in tone. Given limited space, his writing works by implication, making words
and images mean more than they actually say but without making them
portentously symbolic. Superficially unambitious, the stories in Monkfish
Moon focus on individuals rather than grappling hand-to-hand with big
issues. But they achieve real emotional depth.
One of the best, 'Captives', is beautifully structured around an English
couple's two-day stay in a Sri Lankan hotel. Half-formed thoughts and
suppressed feelings are conveyed with oblique precision. When the hotel
owner notices the woman looking at a vase of lilies, he is suddenly
embarrassed - the stamens look obscene - which says more about his own
unacknowledged sexual longings than about the flowers. No descriptive detail
in these sympathetic stories is superfluous. And the characters are real,
living, breathing people.
In contrast, Tatyana Tolstaya (in her second collection of stories,
Sleepwalker in the Fog) is more theatrical. Not content to allow everyday
objects to take on metaphorical significance without pointing it out, her
stories are bursting at the seams with feverish, highly-charged language.
Written in English, her stories are all set in Russia. And the impact of her
literary inheritance is splintered. The lonely bore from the sanatorium
whose friends turn against him has something of Chekhov. But another story -
about childhood memory and lost love - strains towards Turgenev's lyrical
nostalgia. Yet another - with its blinding vision of a misanthropic angel -
recalls Dostoyevsky's surrealism. But whatever the style, Tolstaya gives the
impression of a passionate ventriloquist, forcing the mouths of her
characters rather than simply giving them the space to speak for themselves.
If Tolstaya's writing is packed with emotive imagery, Pinckney Benedict
strips his sentences down to the bare minimum. His theme, in The Wrecking
Yard, is rural America. But, too spare to be comfortably naturalistic, his
style works best in stories which seem to be hankering after some
inexpressible, mythic truth.
In the last story, 'Odom', an old man at the margins of society is battling
against nature. We see him cinematically, dynamiting trees, drilling into
rocks. The detailed, slow-motion description of his destructive tools takes
on a curious, pregnant intensity. But we are never invited to enter his
mind. Alienation rather than empathy is what Benedict achieves at the end of
the day. But if the larger meaning remains opaque, the writing is
preternaturally clear.
After this laconicism, Michael Collins' The Meat Eaters is bewilderingly
wordy. All concerned with Ireland, his nightmarish stories assault you with
horrendous images - the girl with a bomb in the stomach of her plastic doll;
the mute child sexually abused by Old Mickeline, 'the man who dreamed of
lobsters'; the dead baby in a drawer. But there are too many adjectives, too
many digressions, and not enough focus. The secret of the short story is
selection.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920627

