FT921-3782

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: As one door closes, there's always Lord Sutch


   By DAVID OWEN and RALPH ATKINS


IS THAT it?', exclaimed the seasoned Downing Street watcher as Mr John Major
gave a second left-handed wave and retreated behind the black door of Number
10.
After so much waiting, the manner in which The Day was named was
anti-climactic in the extreme. A brief speech. A handful of questions. And
it was all over.
As a media event, it was low-key even by the right honourable member for
Huntingdon's standards. It was little surprise that Mr Major finally made up
his mind over a hearty 8am breakfast of poached eggs on toast.
An early indication of the day's undramatic tenor came later in the morning
as ministers arrived at Downing Street for a cabinet meeting.
Tired television crews broke into a chorus of the chant: 'Ere We Go] Ere We
Go]' in a bid to induce an official nod or wink of confirmation.
Most ministers had left their official cars at the far end of Downing Street
to walk the last few yards, perhaps preparing for life after government.
As little as 10 minutes before Mr Major's 1pm announcement was due, the
distinctly subdued atmosphere persisted. One political editor scrutinised
the Cheltenham racecard.
There was a mild stir among waiting journalists as the famous black door
again swung open to reveal a bouquet of flowers. This was whisked - along
with a personal note from the prime minister - to a waiting car and onwards
to Mrs Margaret Thatcher, the 'delighted' recipient.
At 12.58pm precisely, Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman, the formidable
Conservative MP for Lancaster, put in an unexpected appearance, taking up a
strategic position among waiting journalists.
Her presence was a mystery, but all was revealed a few moments later when
she greeted the emerging prime minister with a shrill cheer.
During his brief stint at the microphone, Mr Major was accompanied by an
inscrutable Mr Chris Patten. As he listened, one of the Tory party
chairman's few discernible gestures was to shake his head vigorously at one
pressman's suggestion that this might be a dirty campaign.
'There's Lord Sutch,' shouted a man with a ponytail as we threaded our way
back through the gaggle of tourists clustered around the gate separating
Downing Street and Whitehall.
And, sure enough, there was the life and soul of the Monster Raving Loony
party, resplendent in trademark top hat and glittering gold suit.
The notorious rocker was telling anyone who would listen that he had come to
be notified of the election date in his capacity as Britain's
'longest-serving party leader.'
Meanwhile, Britain's shortest-serving party leader was preparing for the
most important month of his political life.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920312

