FT922-13370

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Defeat dawns on opposition that has lost its
rosy glow


   By IVO DAWNAY


AS THE Champagne corks popped around Conservative Central Office's
neo-Georgian building in Smith Square, dawn rose to beer cans and tears at
Labour's down-at-heel headquarters in Walworth Road.
There, on the steps, Mr Neil Kinnock - dog-tired after the three-hour drive
from his constituency - made his closing remarks of the campaign.
'It is essential that the Labour party retain the vitality and the unity
which it demonstrated in recent years and manifested so well during this
general election campaign, ' he said.
'We are and we will remain the only party capable of offering an alternative
government. . . . We will continue therefore to appeal to the breadth of the
nation; to appeal to its best qualities of generosity and creativity and to
its desire to build economic success and to build fair opportunities.'
Such noble sentiments could not disguise the bitterness he felt nor his
continuing bemusement that that 'breadth of appeal' proved insufficient to
see him to Downing Street.
Before him stood the three audiences he has addressed frequently over the
past three weeks. On the scruffy office terrace were Labour's backroom
workers and the motley crew of showbiz stars who had returned from the wake
in a slick Millbank office block to share in the cruel denouement.
In front of him were the massed media, coralled for the last intrusive
camera shot. And behind them, cut off by a line of police, were the human
flotsam and jetsam of Southwark - the ragged underclass  - whose plight his
campaign had, at least in part, sought both to raise and address.
Yet it was key players of the election who were conspicuous by their
absence: the skilled workers and junior managers of southern England whose
votes deserted once again across the river to the more bourgeois comforts of
Westminster.
It was the failure of these voters to turn out, not the fate of Neil
Kinnock, that is the overriding issue that Labour's strategists must now
confront. 'Hampstead and Highgate voted for us, Basildon voted against,' one
party insider said.
Many party supporters laid much of the blame on the tabloid press. Baroness
Blackstone, warden of Birkbeck College, London, observed that in the last
few days of the campaign, canvassers on the doorsteps had found voters
earning only Pounds 9,000 a year who were convinced they would be hit by a
John Smith budget.
She said: 'Whatever anyone says about the press being ignored, it has the
effect of a drip on a stone.'
That too is only part of the story. Wearing her more contemplative hat as a
founder of the Institute of Public Policy Research, the left-leaning think
tank, the Labour peeress also acknowledged that the Hampstead-Basildon
conundrum was a key factor.
Labour had once again captured the guilty middle-class but it had still
signally failed to make substantial inroads into the C2s and the lower ranks
of middle-management. How to address this perennial question is now at the
heart of Labour's post-mortem.
In the medium term, without a root and branch rethink, the party's fate can
only get worse. Fighting in the worst recession since the war on the most
mild-mannered economic programme ever concocted (pace higher-rate
taxpayers), Labour still lost. It now must face a constituency boundary
reform that will almost certainly cost it another 20-odd seats.
Already yesterday simmering anger in Scotland suggested that a schism north
of the border may not be far off. Although the Scottish nationalists did
poorly on Thursday, they might reap their revenge on Labour in the local
government elections next month, provoking an implosion in the Scottish
Labour party.
Arguing for an all-party anti-Tory alliance in Scotland firebrands such as
Mr George Galloway, returned for Labour in Glasgow Hillhead, were yesterday
talking seriously of non-violent civil disobedience campaigns.
What then are the forces behind a full-blown realignment of the left
nationwide - a Lib-Lab anti-Tory coalition that will concentrate Britain's
political dogfight into something closer to Democrats versus Republicans?
Although this - called only half-jokingly the Popular Front of the Mind -
has long been the dream of many progressive intellectuals, support among
Labour's blue-collar rank and file has always been thin.
It may now grow, but only gradually. There are also obvious Catch 22 factors
that lie behind the idealistic chat. If Mr Paddy Ashdown's price for a deal
is a firm commitment to proportional representation, Labour, though drifting
that way under its own steam, might easily split.
Professor Ben Pimlott, also of Birkbeck College and a founder of the radical
Samizdat magazine, pointed out yesterday that Lib-Lab pacts always favoured
the Liberals. If Mr Ashdown's voters did not feel like obeying a truce, many
of them would simply peel off to the Conservatives. Labour coalitionists had
no alternative port of call. 'A Lib-Lab pact sounds nice and sensible, but
it doesn't look like happening.'
Yet a number of Labour leaders - some from unexpected roots  - are being
forced to contemplate a deal.
Mr David Blunkett, the party's local government spokesman, can hardly be
decribed as a yuppy but yesterday even he was spelling out stark choices. He
said: 'There are only two ways we can get rid of the Tories: by winning a
straight majority or by a pact with the Liberals that apportions seats
between us.'
With the gritty views of a one-time Labour leader of Sheffield, Mr Blunkett
is one of many who believe that the campaign, as in 1987, was too public
image and opinion led. He thinks it was Mr Major's direct approach on such
issues as proportional representation and Scotland in the last few days that
swung the voters behind him.
'Politicians should run campaigns on the lessons they learn from their
surgeries. If you hand it over to professional communicators you lose
something.' Mr Blunkett added: 'Style can never replace straight talking and
high principles.'
That said there were none yesterday who dared argue that the blame lies with
the leader. Most Labour strategists believe that even had the
confidence-inducing Mr John Smith headed the team, the scale of the party's
defeat suggests he could not have crossed the tape in front of the
Conservatives.
Yet by early afternoon it was already clear that - genuine sympathy for Mr
Kinnock aside - the telephone lines of the key players in a future
leadership contest were already buzzing. Few doubt that one will take place,
ending at the Blackpool conference in October.
For the unions, Mr Smith, the sober-suited shadow chancellor, will prove the
obvious safety-first choice. But if he runs there are others who must decide
whether they can make their pitch, if only to put down a marker for future
contests.
Mr Gordon Brown and Mr Tony Blair, the trade and employment spokesmen, have
both been repeatedly tipped as the 'skip a generation' options. Mr Robin
Cook, the PR supporter and shadow health spokesman, has been named as a
figure who could bridge the gap between the left and the constitutional
reforming right.
Mr Bryan Gould, the environment spokesman, could be a dark horse while Mr
John Prescott, the bluntly-spoken leftwinger at transport, could bid for the
blue-collar vote.
Each must reconciled themselves to the fact that this contest will be
different. Personality alone will not decide the race, a credible agenda
must be laid before a party still incredulous at its defeat.
What is more the winner has to devise an answer to the conundrum that Labour
has still not resolved: how a reformist party can successfully win a mandate
from a country that has proved itself, once again, ever more cautiously
conservative.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920411

