FT922-4187

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: All hung up in Piccadilly - Patricia Morison braves
the crowds at the RA's Summer Exhibition


   By PATRICIA MORISON


A GERMAN friend has just asked me why anyone gives a damn for the Royal
Academy's Summer Exhibition. Inching around the hot, foetid, crowded
galleries was an experience she rated on a par with rush-hour on the
Northern Line. And as for the critics pretending to review this artistic
equivalent of the Tower of Babel, who are they trying to kid?
Of course the Summer Exhibition, now in its 224th year, is not everyone's
glass of Pimms. As my fair-minded friend noticed, the whole way the thing
works is indeed deeply random. This year, some 12,000 works were submitted
out of which the hanging committee of Royal Academicians selected 1,736
works for exhibition. Academicians themselves, it is worth remembering, get
their six works in nem. con.
Even if everything exhibited were a masterpiece, it is obviously impossible
to judge the merits of such a sheer quantity of stuff - or indeed, even to
see it. Many paintings are 'skied', hung so high that small ones become
pretty near invisible. And it is a pretty horrible way to treat paintings,
to cram small works - landscapes, portraits (human and animal), still lives
 -virtually frame to frame in the notorious Small South Room.
But then, that's the way it has always been, and even in Babel it was no
doubt possible to pick out individual voices. And that is any serious
art-lover's best hope of the Summer Exhibition. This year, moreover, they
have been fiddling about to improve the hang, although not in the end to
much effect. Unfortunately, the most obvious consequence has been that Peter
Blake has spread the vulgar principle of 'pack 'em in' over into Gallery IX.
An extraordinary jumble of 300 images covers every inch of wall, all of them
representational, most very small.
How democratic in spirit, one might feel; how nice that all those amateur
artists can even get their pictures into the Show at all. Or is it not
merely patronising, to treat the work of fellow artists as if they were no
better than picture postcards in a collage? It is a triumph that even in
this Liquorice Allsorts nightmare, Patrick Procktor's 'Cape Coloured' stands
out, a sombrely elegant painting not undermined by the feeble pun of hanging
it beside two other paintings which also feature park benches prominently.
As for the first gallery with its international big guns - Tapies, Clemente,
Baselitz - it looked even more of a disjointed mess than last year.
Sculpture, too, was a real disappointment. Another year, there should be a
separate sculpture showing in the upstairs gallery - assuming there really
is some decent work to show. This year, I gave it a circuit all of its own,
but it made no difference. Pretty well all of it struck me as dull or simply
ghastly.
One exception was Linda Bareham-Stanley's 'Dying Man', a polished male torso
resting against a pillow of rough-hewn rock. I really enjoyed Bryan Kneale's
sculptures, especially his large, skeletal 'Pelican', a study of the
preposterousness clumsiness of the beast. Kneale's sketches of a nude were
powerful and sexy. Curiously enough, the show is remarkably short of good
nudes, apart from Nicholas Granger-Taylor's small and highly accomplished
studies.
I simply report that Sandra Blow's 'Whisperings' won the Charles Woollaston
award for most distinguished work. It did nothing for me. Winner of the
Korn-Ferry Award was Michael Andrews's 'A View from Uamh Mhor', one of the
most monumental works in the exhibition. It is a good painting for Rio week.
Drips slide down the canvas, blending sky into mountains, from mountains
into streams. This is a romantic panorama of an eco-system, grand and
untouched by man - and finally, a little dull and over-blown.
Several RAs were noticeably disappointing, among them Leonard Rosoman's
portraits. That said, once more I found immediate and intense pleasure in
the work of Peter Greenham, in Ben Levene's still life, Jennifer Dickson's
etchings of magical gardens, Philip King's vibrant self-portraits, and
Richard Eurich's seascapes. These last looked well grouped beside intensely
glowing pastels of sea and river by Richard Cartwright. He is one of my
discoveries of the Show, as is John Rushton in the last gallery, where it is
all too easy to skimp. I like his deft, extremely muted watercolour
portraits.
Returning to old favourites, Carel Weight has a wonderful showing this year,
with his figures in suburban streets and parks who convey that intangible
feeling that something is terribly wrong. 'Old Man in the Snow' has but one
figure, but conveys equally well the sense of suppressed terror.
Mick Rooney also has a strong show with his own mysterious scenes of
peasant-looking, even folksy types, trapped in claustrophobically cluttered
rooms.
A little painting, 'The Estuary' by Peter Kelly, was hung rather high but,
with that caveat, tremendously took my fancy for the loneliness conveyed by
the simple image of an elderly man gazing out at the sea. Michael Upton's
paintings I also marked as exerting a quiet magic. So yes, 1992 is by the
lights of this peculiar event, a good show, and the voices did speak from
the cacophony.
The Summer Exhibition continues at the Royal Academy, Burlington House until
August 16 in association with Guinness plc

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

920606

