FT923-9495

FT  05 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Peace-making at the UN


SOMETHING has gone badly wrong at the United Nations. Just when it ought to
be more capable of concerted action to make and keep the peace than ever
before, the organisation presents a sorry spectacle: wracked by petty
squabbling, starved of funds, and confused about priorities.
Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the secretary-general, accuses western members of
the security council of hypocrisy, parsimony and worse; western governments
respond with leaks aimed at undermining him. The row could seriously
debilitate the body that was supposed to have found new vigour and unity
after the Cold War.
Mr Boutros Ghali's frustration - however undiplomatically expressed - is
understandable. He is being criticised by Security Council members for
poorly handling a predicament that is not his creation but theirs. It is,
after all, largely at the behest of western governments that the UN is being
asked to confront an expanding range of tasks; the same western governments
are simultaneously refusing to give the organisation the requisite resources
or political backing. Instead of trying to shoot the messenger, they should
remind themselves of the solemn commitments they made only six months ago at
UN headquarters.
At the suggestion of Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, 15 world leaders
gathered for the first Security Council summit. They renewed their pledge to
respect and implement the principles of the UN Charter. And they asked Mr
Boutros Ghali to report on how the organisation's role in preventing and
ending conflicts could be enhanced.
The result, produced in June, was 'an agenda for peace' - an ambitious
document calling for an intensification of preventive diplomacy; the
deployment of peace-keeping forces to pre-empt potential inter- or
intra-state conflicts; the use of so-called 'peace-enforcement units' when
conflicts occur; and the creation of a rapid reaction force of troops from
member states on which the secretary-general could call at short notice.
Cease operations
The world's latest convulsions have underlined the need for ambition on this
scale. But the UN is sorely over-stretched already, with member states owing
it Dollars 1.75bn in overdue contributions for peace-keeping and other
activities; it says it will have to cease operations at the end of the year
if it does not receive a speedy injection of cash. The lion's share of the
arrears is the responsibility of one country: the US.
In a sense, the current conflict is a natural outgrowth of this mismatch
between ambitions and means. But it also exposes the contradictions between
the grandiose rhetoric of the UN Charter and the inevitable national
instincts of its signatories. The secretary-general is trying to turn the UN
into a real force for peace-keeping and peace-making with a coherent,
internationalist agenda; as Mr Boutros Ghali sees it, the leading paymasters
are continuing to pursue their own interests and leaving the UN to sweep up
the mess.
Humanitarian tragedy
The flashpoint has been the civil war in Bosnia-Hercegovina. When the
European Community negotiated what it thought was a ceasefire and then asked
the UN to monitor its implementation, Mr Boutros Ghali's patience broke.
Regional organisations, he expostulated, should be at the service of the UN,
not the other way round. And in any case, why was the world worrying so much
about Yugoslavia while ignoring the arguably much worse humanitarian tragedy
in Somalia?
In principle, Mr Boutros Ghali is right to press this point. The UN will be
irrevocably damaged if it comes to be seen as preoccupied only with the
concerns of the rich countries.
At the same time, the secretary-general would stand a better chance of
success in his campaign if he adopted a subtler approach. The UN is seldom
short of rhetoric and not often over-blessed with forceful diplomatic skills
based upon a realistic assessment of what is possible. In the longer term,
changes in the composition of the Security Council might make the task of
balancing disparate demands on the UN easier. But no secretary-general will
escape the need for a close and effective working relationship with the UN's
paymasters.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920805

