FT924-8155

FT  12 NOV 92 / Bank urges stable prices


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Editor


INFLATION WAS put back on the UK economic policy agenda yesterday by Mr
Robin Leigh-Pemberton, the governor of the Bank of England, in a powerfully
argued speech in support of stable prices.
In his Bank of England lecture at the London School of Economics, he
emphasised that inflation, rather than encouraging economic activity,
involved serious economic costs.
Some problems were familiar. Merchants were forced constantly to revise
their price lists, while index-linked tax systems were less than perfect.
But the governor said there were other more significant costs that arose
when inflation could not be anticipated.
Rising prices distorted the signals needed for an efficient allocation of
resources in the economy. In particular, inflation made it difficult to work
out the real rate of interest.
This could lead to inappropriate investment decisions and have significantly
adverse consequences for growth.
Societies could suffer loss of output and welfare through unexpected changes
in inflation.
Sharp variations in the price level could have a big impact on the
distribution of income and wealth, notably between debtors and creditors.
Variable inflation could make companies keener to invest in projects with a
short-term pay-off.
Initiative and ability became channelled into activities to avoid the cost
of inflation or to seek to exploit it, rather than being channeled into more
productive uses. Savers could demand a risk premium, raising the cost of
borrowing.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton added that it was wrong to settle for an inflation rate
of, say, 5 per cent.
'Whenever inflation is viewed as acceptable,' he said, 'it is possible to
settle for an alternative rate which is just a little higher.
The end result is an inflation rate that is high and rising, and which is
costly to reduce.'
He said that in the long run there was no evidence that the UK was more
inflation-prone than other industrialised societies.
Britain's record had been bad in the post-war period, and especially in the
1970s and 1980s.
But for many hundreds of years, apart from the great Tudor inflation, price
levels had been stable in the sense that they tended to return to their
original level after periods in which prices rose and fell.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton said: 'Even in the inflationary sixteenth century, prices
rose by a factor of just under four, whereas since 1900 prices have risen
over 40-fold.'
Editorial comment, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921112

