FT921-483

FT  28 MAR 92 / Rio's Earth Summit may have trouble getting off the ground:
Preparations for the environmental conference underline North-South tensions


   By DAVID LASCELLES


PREPARATIONS for the world's largest environmental conference in Rio de
Janeiro this summer are in danger of running into the sand. Delegates from
the 160 countries that will attend the Earth Summit are grappling with an
immense agenda and deep disagreements between rich and poor countries over
who should pay for the world's green problems.
After four weeks of its final five-week preparatory meeting at the United
Nations in New York, members have agreed little more than 10 per cent of the
agenda. Many of the discussions on the main documents have become bogged
down in detail.
Although the organisers have resorted to late-night sessions to deal with
the backlog, the meeting will start its final week on Monday with a mountain
of work still ahead.
'We were up till 1 am arguing over commas and brackets,' moaned a weary
delegate earlier this week.
On the face of it, the preparatory meeting has been overwhelmed by the sheer
size of the task put before it. Delegates are being asked to approve
thousands of pages of agreements and action programmes covering everything
from greenhouse gases to the role of children in protecting nature. This was
part of the democratic process whereby every member of the UN was entitled
to put its green concerns on the table.
But observers say the torrent of words conceals deeper tensions - deadlock
even - between national interests, in particular between the rich countries
of the North and the poor countries of the South.
The Third World sees the summit as an opportunity to press the
industrialised world for more aid. Thus, the summit agenda has been expanded
far beyond immediate green issues to include the eradication of poverty,
liberalisation of world trade, and large-scale transfers of technology from
North to South. The Group of 77 Third World countries with Pakistan as its
spokesman has proposed a new 'green fund' as a conduit for fresh aid.
Although the North is prepared to make some fresh funds available, it is
equally determined to resist what it considers to be unreasonable demands
for money. And that, in turn, is jeopardising proposed agreements to
safeguard the natural environment - biological diversity, forests, oceans,
the atmosphere - all of which will require large amounts of money and
technology.
Mr Maurice Strong, the summit's Canadian organiser, presented delegates at
the outset with detailed estimates of environmental clean-up costs running
to more than Dollars 100bn (Pounds 58bn) a year. But he now concedes that
the New York meeting is unlikely to agree any document with hard money
numbers in it.
'There will be agreement on the basic principle of new and additional
resources,' he says, 'and some broad agreement on the framework and
mechanism that will permit decision on final commitments - which can only be
made at Rio.'
It will certainly be an achievement if the agreement includes the words 'new
and additional resources'. These are the buzz words which would imply that
the North has accepted the need to provide new money specifically for the
environment - which is likely. But the North will avoid committing itself to
actual sums, whether in dollars or as a percentage of GNP.
Mr Curtis Bohlen, the representative of the US, which has been taking the
toughest line at the talks, injected some excitement into the proceedings
when he used the magic words for the first time on Tuesday. But he hedged
the US commitment by stating that new money would have to come from 'public
and private sources', and would have to be efficiently used.
The fact that President George Bush has not yet even agreed to attend the
summit points to the depths of US reservations, about not just money but
economic measures to curtail harmful emissions which might also stifle the
US economy in this election year.
The expectation is that the North will end up agreeing to make an extra
Dollars 3bn-Dollars 6bn available for Third World aid specifically tied to
environmental goals. But it will insist that the money be channelled through
an existing institution, such as the World Bank's three-year-old Global
Environment Facility. This is far from the figures Mr Strong proposes. But
as a concession, the North may also agree to give the Third World a greater
say in how the GEF spends its money.
'It's not as bad as it looks,' says a delegate from an EC member country.
But this is not a view shared by the wider ranks of country representatives
and lobbyists.
Mr Gordon Shepherd, an official with the World Wide Fund for Nature, decries
'a lack of political will' by summit participants to get to grips with a
looming environmental crisis. Mr Martin Khor Kok Peng, a member of the
Commission on Developing Countries and Global Change, says: 'The South is
rather disappointed.'
It is always possible that the urgency of the final week's deadline will
hasten the pace. But it is unlikely to alter the fundamentally opposed
positions which have been exposed by the talks so far.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920328

