FT923-15380

FT  02 JUL 92 / Pay disclosure 'has improved'


   By PAUL TAYLOR


LARGE British companies are disclosing more information about how much they
pay their directors, but most still fall short of the recent Cadbury
committee guidelines, according to a study published today.
The report produced by Monks Partnership, the remuneration advisers and
consultants, also shows that top directors' pay increases in industrial
companies slowed last year to an average 8.4 per cent from 11.4 per cent in
1990.
In the financial sector, directors' pay increased by an average 8.9 per cent
compared with 14.5 per cent a year earlier. But the study also shows that
more than a quarter of top directors saw their remuneration fall in the past
12 months.
Although three quarters of FT-SE 100 companies disclosed that they had a
remuneration committee as recommended by the Cadbury report on corporate
governance, only seven met all the guidelines. They were British Gas; Tesco,
the supermarket chain; British Airways; SmithKline Beecham, the
pharmaceuticals group; Guinness, the international drinks group; TSB Group,
the banking group; and Glaxo, the pharmaceuticals group.
Mr Tony Vernon-Harcourt, managing director of Monks, said: 'Improvements in
the disclosure of top pay have been evident over the past two years . . .
For companies with turnovers of over Pounds 2bn, the percentage of
organisations exceeding the legal minima governing disclosure has risen from
30 per cent in 1989 to 54 per cent last year.
'But there is still a long way to go. As this report shows, only seven of
the FT-SE 100 do all the things Cadbury recommends on pay - and the Cadbury
guidelines are not particularly onerous.
'We argue that much of the criticism . . . over directors' pay might be
avoided if they took proper steps to show how pay awards arose and the
relationship between bonus payments, salary increases and company
performance.'
According to the study, based on analysis of more than 1,200 annual reports,
directors of oil, chemicals and pharmaceuticals companies enjoyed the
biggest total earnings increases at 17.9 per cent.
Mr Vernon-Harcourt said that pay increases generally remained above the rate
of inflation. 'Top directors' pay tends to be a lagging indicator in a
recession. It comes down more slowly than the pay of the workforce as a
whole. By the same token, we have found in previous recessions that it also
rises more slowly when the recovery begins.'
United Kingdom Board Earnings. Monks Partnership, Debden Green, Saffron
Walden, Essex, CB11 3LX. Pounds 175.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920702

