FT924-6114

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (8): West closes the gap
 -The eastern European industry


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON


THE RECENT decision by Mercedes-Benz to shelve indefinitely plans for a
DM1bn truck plant at Ahrensdorf in former east Germany underlined both the
high cost of making trucks in German plants and a far more cautious
assessment of future growth in the European truck market.
But it also sent shivers of apprehension wider afield, and especially in
Czechoslovakia where the German truck maker's plans to take a significant
stake in two of Czechoslovakia's three big truck producers, Avia and Liaz,
have still not been finalised.
This is partly a reflection of the general delay in closing deals following
the June elections and pre-occupation with the forthcoming divorce between
the Czech lands and Slovakia. But it also reflects government reluctance to
grant the tax concessions and set up the tariff barriers sought by Mercedes
to protect its investment. There has been no hint that a deal will not
eventually be signed, but the prospect of lower than expected sales in both
eastern and western Europe has certainly reduced the urgency.
Mercedes announced its intention to take a 31 per cent stake in Avia,
Czechoslovakia's principal manufacturer of small trucks, followed by a 20
per cent stake in Liaz, the main producer of heavy, on-road trucks in
January. The statement followed an 18-month competition with Renault
Vehicules Industriels (RVI) for Avia, and competition with Iveco of Italy
which was interested in taking a stake in Liaz.
Iveco subsequently turned to Tatra, Czechoslovakia's famous producer of
heavy off-road vehicles. But a planned Iveco-Tatra link has been put on
hold. The original plan was to invest an initial Dollars 20m in a 51 per
cent joint venture.
Iveco's interest in Tatra is part of a long-term strategy to develop its
presence in the heavy, off-road truck niche which the Italian company sees
as an area with big growth potential.
Demand for heavy duty vehicles suited to harsh terrains and bitter
temperatures is expected to rise dramatically as the tempo of oil and gas
exploration rises in the former Soviet Union. Robust vehicles such as these
will also be needed once long neglected infrastructure, mining and other
resource projects get under way.
The timing of such a recovery remains obscure, but it could be sooner rather
than later as the privatised Russian economy, and other resource-rich
republics like Kazakhstan, build up a growth momentum and open up to foreign
investment.
Tatra already has an enviable reputation throughout the former Soviet Union
and recently sold more than 1,000 vehicles to Saudi Arabia during the Gulf
war. But Iveco also sought a commercial, production and engineering
agreement with Uralmash, builders of the tough Ural-5323 and other off-road
trucks.
The deal with Uralmash, based on President Boris Yeltsin's former power base
of Yekaterinaburg, (formerly Sverdlovsk) should give Iveco access to the
Uralaz plant at Miass, near Chelyabinsk. This means a production base close
to the Urals mining and industrial areas as well as the oil, gas and
mineral-producing areas of Siberia, precisely the main growth markets for
off-road trucks. Under the agreement Iveco proposes to assemble a
specially-adapted 'arctic' version of its Iveco-330-30 at the Miass plant
and help to develop future Uralaz vehicles.
Meanwhile, Renault, frustrated in Czechoslovakia, shifted its focus to
Poland, where it is exploring the prospects for assembling and producing
trucks and delivery vans at the Star plant in Starachowice, south of Warsaw.
Star, which at its peak turned out 14,000, 11-tonne trucks a year, was
classic communist-style vertically integrated enterprise in a typical
one-company town. It had its own steel works and foundry and dozens of
inter-connected component and motor plants feeding into the main factory.
Its market virtually disappeared overnight as state enterprises and its
military customers ran out of money. Private entrepreneurs, meanwhile, opted
for lighter and more fuel-efficient imports.
Renault, too, is seeking tariff protection and other guarantees before
converting the plant to produce the vans and light vehicles now in demand.
The question of tariff protection is becoming the deciding factor in the
approach of smaller truck companies. Scania, for example, originally planned
to sell trucks into the eastern European market from its Swedish base.
Instead, in October, it announced a joint venture project with Kapena of
Poland to assemble R113 and R143 models near Klupsk, close to the Baltic
coast.
But not only truck makers have been seeking to expand their markets. Eaton
Corporation of the US is prominent among western component manufacturers
seeking future markets in Russia and the former Soviet Union.
Some, like Cummins engines, the world's largest independent diesel engine
manufacturer, have already taken the plunge. Last year Cummins signed a
long-term joint venture agrement, Kamazdisel, to produce engines at the
Kamaz plant.
Through these, and a host of other joint ventures, licensing agreements and
other ways, western truck makers and suppliers are starting to change the
shape of the industry in the east, and busy filling what was once the
biggest gap in the emerging global market place.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921123

