FT923-9696

FT  04 AUG 92 / Amato plays the chaos card: Robert Graham on the coalition's
prospect for success


   By ROBERT GRAHAM


Mr Giuliano Amato's strongest card in his efforts to end Italy's political
inertia remains the dramatic prospect of Italy tumbling into chaos if his
government fails. In less than a month, Mr Amato has created a far wider
margin for manoeuvre than anyone thought possible for his four-party
coalition of Christian Democrats, Socialists, Social Democrats and Liberals.
By exposing Italy's financial plight, he has established a consensus for
action. This was demonstrated by the way Mr Amato has managed in record time
to force through a L30,000bn (Pounds 13.96bn) emergency economic package
even though his coalition has a mere 16-seat majority in the chamber of
deputies.
The second card up his sleeve is the reluctance of the parties to face early
elections. The parties are divided, discredited and have no money, while the
electoral system is in need of reform.
Yet the resignation last week of Mr Enzo Scotti, the foreign minister, was
an uncomfortable reminder to Mr Amato that Italian politicians have little
sense of state. This was not a case of a minister resigning over a
disagreement on policy. It was entirely related to the internecine battles
within the Christian Democratic party.
The party has been in turmoil since the April 5 general elections, which saw
its vote total fall sharply. Its traditional personal feuds have been
heightened by confusion over how it should reshape itself in the
post-communist era.
Mr Scotti resigned because he refused to obey a controversial new rule that
cabinet members must resign their parliamentary seats. He opted to return to
his seat in parliament and will probably throw his hat into the contest for
the key post of party secretary.
The turbulence inside the party could derail the entire government since it
remains by far the largest party and has brokered power throughout the
post-war era.
Yet the 54-year-old prime minister's skilful negotiating ability and his
good cross-party contacts should not be underestimated. The parties appear
to recognise that Mr Amato has opened the flood-gates to change. The real
issue has become whether the Amato government can manage such change or be
overwhelmed by it.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920804

