FT921-15215

FT  11 JAN 92 / This is the season of morosite: As They Say in Europe


   By JAMES MORGAN


LAST week it was the Angst-ridden German press, this week the morose French.
Morosite is the favourite word in French newspapers these days. Le Figaro
wrote about it last Monday: 'The President (Mitterrand) beats all
unpopularity records . . . 62 per cent have no confidence in him. Without
doubt the economic crisis, whose causes are not solely French, can in part
explain the general morosite. But it does not excuse the government's
impotence with regard to growing unemployment.'
The same day Liberation looked forward to elections in 1993 and the settling
of accounts with 'the long republican reign: the artifices, the compromises,
the postures - they are all worn out. There remains only brutal urgency.'
As I read these words a handout from the French National Statistical
Institute landed on my desk. It noted that growth had been at 1.5 per cent
last year, exports were up and inflation was 3 per cent. If that was the
situation in Britain, John Major would be certain to win the coming
election.
In Les Echos of Paris, Patrick de Jacquelot examined the roots of British
morosite and thought things could get worse: 'The prospect of a Labour
victory could encourage the markets to get out of sterling in coming months.
It is therefore very possible that the pound will enter a vicious circle: a
sharp fall in the currency will force the government to raise interest
rates.' That would 'cast a further shadow over the government's record which
will increase the chances of a Labour victory and would weaken sterling
still further.'
So, one infers, Labour should promise something profligate to force the
government to raise interest rates.
If you wanted to be really morose, you could have celebrated Christmas last
week in Russia. The papers made the armed forces their Yuletide theme. The
army daily, Krasnaya Zvezda, warned: 'Men with epaulettes are not pawns in
political games . . . The armed forces are the last institution remaining
from our former state which is capable of stabilising society.' But it
concluded that now was not the time to send in the tanks. The paper, like
all Moscow dailies wished its readers a Merry Christmas. The last time that
happened must have been January 1917.
There are islands of good cheer, however. Corriere della Sera of Milan found
one. 'Lombards - the rich men of Europe,' ran a headline. According to an EC
study Lombardy is the richest region in the Community. The Corriere is
really the Lombard Daily News. It said this success had been gained not so
much by rich dynasties (a swipe at the Agnelli-Fiat fiefdom of Piedmont) but
by an 'army of workers. The miracle has been created by the silk workers of
Como, the hosiers of Castelgoffredo . . . all led by the financiers, the
bankers and mega-managers in their Lombard headquarters.'
Another cheerful individual is Johann Georg Reissmuller of the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung. He has made his mark as a sort of unofficial Croatian
government spokesman, in addition to his duties as chief fulminator in
Germany's leading daily. On Monday he wrote: 'Up to now the Serbian
government thought it pointless to keep to any ceasefire. But now the
Belgrade leadership sees that Europe's timidity over Serbia is diminishing.
They think that the recognition of Croatia and Slovenia might be followed by
further steps. So it might be advisable to stick to a ceasefire. Had the
EC-states offered recognition earlier, the Croatian people would probably
have been spared many horrors.'
There is a hostage to fortune, but I hope he is right.
One hundred years ago next Tuesday, Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and
eldest son of the Prince of Wales, died. It was a few days after his 28th
birthday and six weeks before his marriage to Princess Mary of Teck who
comforted herself with his younger brother George and later became Queen of
England. The Illustrated London News at the time argued that deaths of
privileged people could be in the public interest. 'It is well that the
sense of mortality . . . should occasionally temper the less wholesome moral
influences arising from vast differences in worldly station, from birth and
rank, from wealth and luxury, or from the fame of distinguished
achievements. Humanity is more easily reconciled to these apparent
inequalities of position, and is delivered . . . from the evil spirits of
envy and scorn by witnessing impressive instances of the sudden end of a
highly favoured life.'
That brings us back to morosite: perhaps there could be an improvement in
the public mood if more celebrities took the plunge . . . as it were.
James Morgan is economics correspondent of the BBC World Service.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920111

