FT922-3956

FT  09 JUN 92 / Philippines fails to deliver power to the people: The severe
shortage of electricity has hit the economy harder than any of the natural
calamities that have befallen the country recently


   By JOSE GALANG


   MANILA


SOME RESIDENTS of metropolitan Manila are not exaggerating when they
complain these days that in this age of laser technology they still cannot
enjoy the simple benefits of electricity.
Because of a severe supply shortage, power is rationed among industrial and
residential users in the Philippines' main island of Luzon, including Manila
and its suburbs.
Mrs Corazon Aquino, Philippines prime minister, last week ordered government
agencies to cut red tape and speed approvals for new power plants to ease
the power crisis which is hampering economic development plans.
Present plants are either old or inefficient so that they break down more
often than usual. Drought has stalled production at hydroelectric plants,
which account for much of available capacity.
The effects of the crisis have been more devastating to the economy than any
of the natural calamities - a killer earthquake, the mammoth eruption of
Mount Pinatubo, and a string of 'super-typhoons' - that have befallen the
Philippines recently.
The plants run by state-owned National Power Corporation (Napocor) meet only
three-quarters of the daily demand of some 3,150 MW on weekdays.
Power cuts, or 'brownouts', have already cost Manila industries some 20bn
pesos (Pounds 465m) in the first three weeks of May alone, according to Mr
Raul Concepcion, head of an inter-agency task force monitoring the
situation.
A 620 MW nuclear power plant, completed towards the end of the
administration of ousted president Ferdinand Marcos, was ordered mothballed
by Mrs Aquino because of suspicions of corruption in its financing and
questions over safety However, no new capacity was put up in place of the
nuclear plant.
The crippling electricity shortage has kept the local business sector edgy
over prospects of resulting aberrations in operating costs and markets. Some
industries are said to be contemplating laying off up to 150,000 workers if
the long power interruptions continue.
More importantly, the situation could again militate against efforts to
attract foreign investment, considered essential for the fledgling economic
recovery to be sustained.
For the short term, the solution seems to lie on the installation of gas
turbines and transportable diesel-powered plants. But being petroleum-fired
these tend to be costly to operate over long periods.
A plan for privatisation of Napocor plants, or even the awarding of
maintenance contracts to private groups, is being closely studied and much
is expected from the build-operate-transfer and build-own-operate schemes
offered to entice private groups into power generation.
Mr Wencesalo de la Paz, presidential energy adviser, says that Napocor is
providing for a 7 per cent annual increase in capacity starting this year.
By 1993 it expects to put on line 800 MW and by 1994 another 600-700 MW is
due. If these new plants are put in place as planned, there should be a
buffer of about 900 MW by 1994, which could allow Napocor time for
maintenance shutdowns to upgrade its facilities.
Investors, however, may not be willing to wait that long.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920609

