FT924-11409

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (1): The national euphoria is over - As
Germany's economy slows down, the real cost of unification and the
subsidising of east Germany is becoming painfully clear


   By QUENTIN PEEL


IT WAS ALWAYS clear that German unification would be a painful process, but
quite how traumatic and prolonged that pain may prove to be is only now
emerging
The euphoria of unification two years ago blinded many, including Chancellor
Helmut Kohl, to the real scale of the adjustment needed in transforming an
unreconstructed Communist economy and society into a capitalist one.
The threat of economic recession in the west has opened many eyes to the
real costs of subsidising the east, in a society where problems in the past
have been dealt with simply by throwing more money at them.
The lack of compatible structures in the former East Germany -
administrative, commercial and social - capable of supporting the
western-style social market economy has meant that everything has had to be
built up virtually from scratch. In the meantime, all the old structures
have collapsed.
After two years of insisting that unification could be accomplished
relatively painlessly, that it could be implemented quite swiftly in the
east, and at the same time without significant tax increases in the west, Mr
Kohl has started to prepare his people for a much longer haul.
'We know today better than we knew two years ago that this truly secular,
unique event brings with it huge problems, more than many - including myself
 -had expected,' the Chancellor told the German Bundestag in last month's
budget debate.
Senior government officials estimate that it could go on costing west
Germany up to DM150bn a year in net transfers to the east for the next
decade.
Officials also recognise that it cannot go on indefinitely being financed
from the capital markets, but must mean both strenuous budget savings in the
west, and almost certainly new tax increases.
Any weaker economy than the west German one could not even begin to
contemplate the sort of financial transfers already carried out in the two
years since unification. A quite extraordinary effort of reconstruction is
already under way, involving every aspect of the physical infrastructure of
the former Communist state. The problem is that at the same time, east
German industry has collapsed, and shows very little sign of sustained
recovery.
If the western economy was growing fast, the cost of east German subsidies
might appear more manageable. But the artificial boost which followed
unification is over, and there has been no revival in the international
economy to give an export-led boost in the west.
All forecasts for economic growth this year and next are being revised
downwards. The result is that depression in the east is reinforced by
gathering fear of recession in the west, and the mood in the nation as a
whole is increasingly gloomy.
To compound the economic stress, the country is now facing an unprecedented
influx of would-be immigrants, above all from eastern and southern Europe.
They claim asylum, under Germany's liberal asylum laws, but they are in
reality economic refugees from the collapse of the Soviet empire. Numbers
could reach as many as 500,000 this year. They are also an easy target for a
mindless minority of German youths, alienated in the east by the collapse of
their system and their job prospects, and in the west by the very
materialism of a successful capitalist culture.
The skinheads responsible for attacking asylum-seekers hostels are scarcely
thinking neo-Nazis, but they have created a climate of fear at the possible
revival of right-wing extremism, both within Germany and abroad.
The opinion polls show a slow but steady increase in support for the parties
of the far right, led by the Republicans, who would gain more than the
minimum five per cent necessary for seats in the Bundestag, if there were
elections tomorrow. It is a prospect which has the large parties rattled.
AT the same time the whole country is suffering - like the rest of western
Europe - from a general disaffection with the political establishment.
There is a mistrust of politicians, reflected in consistently low ratings in
all the opinion polls, with Chancellor Kohl coming out frequently bottom.
It is a moment which seems to cry out for clear leadership, yet that is
precisely the sort of leadership which does not suit Mr Kohl. He is the
ultimate politician of consensus, the master of prevarication, who blurs his
own position on every issue until the outline of a possible compromise
emerges from the ongoing debate.
It is a form of leadership which has suited Germany in the good times, but
it could prove a liability now that hard choices have to be made on spending
priorities.
That is not entirely fair. Mr Kohl has given a lead on one issue, and that
is his passionate and very personal commitment to European union - to an
ever more closely integrated European Community. It is the one theme on
which he has sought to rally his people, yet, ironically, it is one issue on
which they appear to be getting doubtful themselves.
There is still a majority in the polls in favour of the Maastricht treaty on
European union, and there is an overwhelming majority in parliament in
favour of ratification, but on the specific question of whether a single
European currency should replace the Deutsche Mark, there is a very clear
majority against.
Even the German business community shares some of the growing scepticism
about the value of the European Community and its single market to the
German economy.
The Chancellor has now put his faith in a new hope: a 'solidarity pact' to
persuade the business sector, trade unions, the opposition Social Democrats
and the 16 federal states to back the government in a deal to help finance
the costs of unification. It is supposed to be negotiated by the end of the
year.
There are signs that such a pact may be possible, if only because of the
growing fear on both sides of industry that the recession is upon them.
Mr Richard von Weizsacker, the state president, and increasingly the voice
of reason speaking out above the muddled political debate, singled out two
key challenges - financing German unification, and coping with immigration -
as nothing less than touchstones of German democracy. It was a sombre
warning.
And yet one of the great strengths of Germany's post-war system has been the
country's capacity to find a consensus, and defuse confrontation. The
challenge of unification is simply the biggest challenge it has had to deal
with so far.

The Financial Times


London Page I

921026

