FT924-5970

FT  24 NOV 92 / Arts: The Drottningholm saga


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


There is nothing to beat arriving at Drottningholm. The boat from Stockholm
takes a little less than an hour and brings the evening's audience to the
summer palace of the Swedish royal family, where the court theatre has stood
perfectly preserved for 200 years.
This programme at the Barbican on Saturday, one of the highlights of the
'Tender is the North' festival, was an ambitious undertaking. The arrival by
boat could hardly be replicated, but much else that makes this Swedish
theatrical treasure special was. The entire stage structure had been rebuilt
on the platform with wings and flies left open so that the audience could
see the theatre's skeleton in action. Then we were given a history of the
theatre and excerpts from performances there.
Built in 1766, closed and mothballed only 26 years later, Drottningholm
slumbered until the 1920s when a theatre historian uncovered not only the
building intact, but also original painted scenery and the complete
18th-century stage mechanism. All of this was related at the Barbican as a
staged drama with the role of Queen Louisa Ulrika, the theatre's founder,
being taken by the Swedish soprano Elisabeth Soderstrom. Nobody more fitting
could possibly be found. Soderstrom made her own debut at Drottningholm in
1947 and recounted how the audiences used to be made up of American
tourists, who wanted their photos taken with the singers afterwards.
Today the theatre attracts a different visitor. It has become a leading
centre of period performance practice in music. A small authentic orchestra
led off the second half with a delightfully quirky account of 'Spring' from
Vivaldi's Four Seasons. There were ballet excerpts to music from
Drottningholm's great period. Anita Soldh sang a gently dramatic aria from
Haeffner's Electra and the mezzo Monica Groop gave a fruity account of
Handel's 'Where shall I fly?' from Hercules.
With this performance Soderstrom herself takes over as the theatre's
Artistic Director. It was an auspicious start, entertaining, informative,
well chosen and presented. The London audience will have taken away a good
idea of what a visit to Drottningholm means.
Sponsored by Scandic Crown Hotels UK. Drottningholm Court Theatre tour
sponsored by Swedish Shell

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921124

