FT921-1463

FT  24 MAR 92 / Survey of Employee Ownership (1): Poised at the crossroads -
New fiscal incentives and the availability of finance for management buyouts
spurred employee ownership plans. But the aims of the movement - to share
the rewards of capital more widely and provide new motivation for employee
shareholders - are still distant goals in too many cases, writes


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE growth of employee share ownership in the US and the UK was one of the
phenomena of the financial world in the 1980s. From being an idea touted by
a small band of idealists, the drive to put shares into the hands of workers
grew into a mass movement which gained broad-based support from workers,
managers and existing shareholders, with strong political backing. There are
now reckoned to be around 11m workers in the US covered by share schemes,
while some 4 per cent of adults in the UK, or around 1.7m people, own shares
in the companies for which they work. Two main forces have been behind this
expansion of worker ownership - the tax system, and a plentiful supply of
bank finance. The surging stock market also helped, encouraging financially
inexpert employees to believe that owning shares is a worthwhile thing to
do. All three have become less significant factors in the 1990s - and the
volatility that has crept into stock markets may even have destroyed the
faith of some employees in the idea altogether. The result: employee
ownership is at a crossroads, poised between a further leap forward, as its
advocates say is coming, and a retrenchment. Which way it goes will depend
on whether companies and outside shareholders come to believe firmly that
share ownership motivates employees and leads to improved financial
performance (a case that has never been conclusively made). The tax system
provided the main springboard for the 1980s expansion of employee ownership
on both sides of the Atlantic. In 1984, the US Congress allowed banks to
deduct half of the interest they receive on loans to employee share
ownership plans (Esops) for tax purposes. The incentive led to a surge in
the use of Esops in the US.
In the UK, meanwhile, a series of measures from the late 1970s led to the
introduction of a range of schemes designed to place shares into the hands
of workers. Shares handed out under such statutory arrangements were to be
treated as free from income tax, though they did not escape tax on capital
gains. With income tax rates at a high level for much of the 1980s, the
attractions to a worker - particularly a highly paid one - of receiving
capital gains rather than income were obvious. Not surprisingly, shares
turned into a disguised form of remuneration, not different in character
from the range of other fringe benefits offered by many companies,
particularly to their executives.
Things have changed. The tax support for Esops in the US has come under
attack after the perceived abuses of such schemes in the late 1980s. And in
the UK, the equalisation of income tax and capital gains tax rates has
removed much of the attraction for using shares as disguised income (though
some tax benefits remain).
The second factor which helped to spur greater employee ownership in the
1980s - the financial backing of banks - has also receded. This is due in
part to the unwillingness of many of the world's biggest banks to increase
their loan portfolios as aggressively as before, if at all: they will be
subject to more stringent capital adequacy rules from 1993, and need to
ration the use of their funds more carefully.
A further factor has been the recessions in the US and UK, which have
greatly reduced the leveraged buy-outs (also known as management buy-outs)
which drew heavily on bank finance in the 1980s. The over-borrowing of many
such vehicles has led to more cautious financial structuring of buy-outs in
the 1990s.
As a result, lending to Esops in the US has tumbled. Last year, it amounted
to around Dollars 2bn, a fifth of its level two years before. Management
buy-outs are still being completed, but on a far smaller scale than before.
The Esop has yet to catch on in a big way elsewhere. By harnessing bank
finance to acquire shares for workers, and by using existing shares rather
than newly-created ones (and thereby avoiding diluting the stakes of
existing shareholders), Esops offer the best opportunity for large-scale
employee ownership, rather than the drip-feed offered by other share
benefits.
But in the UK, the idea has been slow to catch on - around Pounds
300m-Pounds 400m has been lent to Esops so far, according to New Bridge
Street Consultants, an employee benefits consultancy.
The 1980s boom in employee ownership may have ended: but there are
continuing factors which suggest that the trend could be set to continue in
the 1990s, albeit in a different form.
The continued privatisation of enterprises around the world, and the use of
share incentives by companies which operate internationally, provide the two
main thrusts.
Privatisation has advanced the cause of employee ownership in two ways. It
creates new publicly-traded companies: with more workers in the private
sector of the economy, share ownership can be spread more widely.
This is especially true in eastern Europe, where the creation of joint-stock
companies is making employee share ownership (and indeed all other types of
share ownership) possible for the first time since the nationalisations
earlier this century.
Privatisation also creates the opportunity for management buy-outs, with
workers going the whole way and taking full control of their enterprises. In
the UK, for instance, privatisation of bus companies has acted as a spur to
management buy-outs, and the sale of trust-owned ports looks likely to have
a similar effect.
Employee ownership is now more prevalent in the bus industry than in any
other industry in the UK, according to a survey by Capital Strategies, an
employee buy-out adviser: employee-owned firms account for around a third of
the private-sector bus market.
Meanwhile, it was recently announced that three of the UK's biggest trust
ports - Tilbury, Medway and Clyde - are to be sold to their managers and
employees (though the transfer of the ports into private ownership has not
been a smooth process: the first to be privatised, Tees & Hartlepool, caused
a political uproar when the employees and the highest bidders were passed
over.)
A second factor likely to lead to wider employee ownership over the next
decade is the use of share schemes by companies which operate
internationally. US and UK companies, for instance, have begun to export
share incentives to workers outside their home territories, encouraged by
the apparent success of such schemes at home.
Legal and fiscal differences have held back the export of such schemes,
making them a time-consuming and expensive process. But that has not stopped
companies pushing ahead. Guinness, the UK drinks and leisure group, last
year offered share incentives to employees in 21 countries, modelled closely
on the savings related share option scheme it has maintained in the UK for
many years (under this, employees save for five or seven years and use the
money at the end of the period to take up options on shares at a discount to
the share price at the outset). The average take-up rate by employees
outside the UK is an impressive 60 per cent.
Guinness' approach is unusual. More commonly, companies shape share
incentives to meet local tax and cultural factors, creating a patchwork of
schemes around the world. But according to Mr Mike Redhouse, Guinness's head
of remuneration and benefits: 'We knew that this would cause a huge amount
of work to implement, an administrative nightmare to operate and
inequalities between employees in different countries.'
The development of such incentives in internationally active companies
varies greatly, according to a report on financial participation in Europe
conducted by The Wyatt Company, a remuneration and benefits consultancy. UK
companies have done most to export financial participation schemes
(including profit sharing and savings plans, as well as stock option and
purchase schemes): more than half use such arrangements abroad, compared to
around three quarters at home. By comparison, while a similar proportion of
German companies offer incentives at home, only 40 per cent have exported
the idea. Companies based in other European countries had done far less for
their workers abroad.
Nor is there any common pattern in how companies introduce benefits
overseas. According to The Wyatt Company, 47 per cent of US companies
operating in Sweden have introduced share options for their workers there:
by comparison, only 11 per cent of US companies in France have similar
benefits. Again, tax and cultural differences predominate.
The European Commission, in its drive to create a single labour market in
the EC, has made efforts to overcome these differences, though it has
stopped short of legislating on the subject.
Last year, it issued a recommendation that member states encourage the use
of financial participation. The Commission also intends to study the
possibility of creating common structures for share schemes to apply across
the Community, although any legislation on the matter is likely to be years
away.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920324

