FT922-612

FT  26 JUN 92 / OECD Economic Outlook: Maastricht sets stiff test for EC
states


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


ONLY three EC nations can meet the Maastricht targets on fiscal policies
without heavy curbs on government spending, says the OECD. For Italy,
Greece, Belgium and the Netherlands, meeting the limits would need spending
cuts over the next seven years.
The OECD study highlights the difficulties faced by many countries in
achieving the targets to reduce state borrowing before economic and monetary
union around 2000.
The problems are worsened by high interest rates and the economic slowdown,
which has pushed up government borrowing for many countries.
Only France and Luxembourg meet both targets for general government net
borrowing and gross government debt. According to the guidelines, these
should by 1999 be no more than 3 per cent and 60 per cent respectively of
gross domestic product.
Four nations would have to cut spending (assuming unchanged tax rates) to
meet one or both of the limits. Of these, Belgium and Greece face measures
that 'would probably be too severe to envisage'. They would have to cut
spending by 6.6 per cent and 6.1 per cent a year respectively up to 1998,
while Italy's spending would need to be trimmed by 7.7 per cent a year. The
Netherlands would have to reduce spending by 0.3 per cent a year.
For the other eight EC nations, five would have to take tough, if more
moderate, action to achieve the targets. These nations would have to keep
increases in spending during the next seven years below levels envisaged for
1990-92 or below the levels experienced during the 1980s.
Just three countries - France, Britain and Luxembourg - would experience
little difficulty in meeting the targets.
This is because they already meet the limits, or because the permitted
spending increases during the 1990s are smaller than, or the same as, those
applying during the 1980s or projected for 1990-92.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920626

