FT923-6467

FT  24 AUG 92 / Justinian: The perils of private life


   By LOUIS BLOM-COOPER QC


Amid the welter of public discussion over the stealthily photographed
indiscretions of the Duchess of York spattered across the pages of the
tabloid newspapers last week, little attention has been paid to the
inactivity of the law.
That is because in this country there is no legally enforceable right to
privacy. This was demonstrated all too clearly by the dismissal by Mr
Justice Latham of the 11th-hour application by Mr John Bryan, the Duchess's
adviser and companion, for an injunction against the Daily Mirror, which
proceeded to publish the photos.
But supposing there were to be a new tort (a civil wrong) for the invasion
of an individual's private life. Would it, as it is widely claimed, inhibit
investigative journalism and prevent publication of matters which are
newsworthy or of legitimate concern to the public?
It is important at the outset to distinguish between the methods used by
journalists to acquire information and take photographs, and the decisions
of editors to publish. The Calcutt Committee on Privacy and Related Matters
in 1990 accepted that private lives should be protected from public
exposure. The committee proposed that three forms of journalistic trespass
should be made criminal. The government has not said whether it accepts or
rejects these proposals.
However, Calcutt stopped short of endorsing the claims for a civil remedy.
Its proposals failed to discern that invasion of privacy goes beyond what
objectively appears to be physical invasion. Publication of private matters
is the cause of the hurt and harm to individuals. Preventing journalists'
investigations may not in practice be easy, or even desirable. Publication,
however, can be more readily visited by a pre-emptive legal strike - namely
the injunction.
There's the rub. If those whose private lives are threatened with exposure
could readily invoke the mighty protection of the law courts, the danger to
press freedom would indeed be great. But the courts' approach to the
prevention of defamatory publications indicates that a privacy law would
give no such encouragement to prospective plaintiffs. The media have a right
to publish libellous material, of course always at the risk that they may
have to pay damages - sometimes inordinately large sums of money - if they
cannot subsequently justify what has been published.
The courts have said time and time again that they will not stop publication
of defamatory statements in any case where the person who wants to publish
is prepared to defend what he has published in any court action. Threats by
angry clients and their solicitors to stop the presses rolling with
last-minute dashes to the High Court are largely bluff.
It is worth recalling Lord Denning's remarks in a case in 1969: 'The court
will not restrain the publication of an article, even though it is
defamatory, when the defendant says he intends to justify it or to make fair
comment on a matter of public interest. The reason sometimes given is that
the defences of justification and fair comment are for the jury. But a
better reason is the importance in the public interest that the truth should
out. The right of free speech is one which it is for the public interest
that individuals should possess, and, indeed, that they should exercise
without impediment, so long as no wrongful act is done. There is no wrong
done if it is true, or if it is fair comment on the matter of public
interest. The court will not prejudice the issue by granting an injunction
in advance of publication.'
In like fashion the courts would retort to any action brought on the grounds
of an invasion of privacy. The mere raising of the defence of public
interest would instantly stifle any injunction pending the trial. English
courts do not generally countenance prior restraint any more than do their
American counterparts employing the first amendment to the US constitution
guaranteeing freedom of the press.
The newspaper that publishes the activities of public figures or politicians
would thus hardly be deterred from publishing anything that it wished, save
for the long-term potential of having to fight a case for damages in the
courts. But that is precisely what every editor has to consider when judging
the risk of a libel action for something he wishes to publish.
Too much of the debate on privacy is focusing on the extent to which private
lives of public figures are fair game. While the public figure issue is of
great significance, the threshold decision, whether society should accord
legal protection to the private lives of all its citizens, needs to be made
before discussing any differing standards for those who choose to be engaged
in public affairs.
Over 100 years ago two distinguished Americans wrote the most influential
law review article ever written in the English language on any subject. It
led to privacy laws being introduced in every jurisdiction of the US. Samuel
Warren and Louis Brandeis (later to become a Supreme Court justice) wrote in
1890: 'The intensity and complexity of life, attendant upon advancing
civilisation, have rendered necessary some retreat from the world, and man,
under the refining influence of culture, has become more sensitive to
publicity, so that solitude and privacy have become more essential to the
individual; but modern enterprise and invention have, through invasion upon
his privacy, subjected him to mental pain and distress, far greater than
could be inflicted by mere bodily injury.'
Those words are apposite in modern Britain.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920824

