FT924-6574

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: Transamerica sets IPO date


   By NIKKI TAIT


TRANSAMERICA, the San Francisco-based financial services group, is to float
a majority interest in its property and casualty insurance operations on the
US stock market. The newly-independent company will be headed by Mr Jon
Rotenstreich, a former president of Torchmark Corporation, the insurance
group.
Transamerica first revealed it planned to get out of the property-casualty
business in July. However, at that stage, it was mulling whether to sell the
business, demerge it through a distribution of shares to Transamerica
shareholders, or go for an initial public offering (the US term for a
flotation).
Yesterday's announcement suggested the IPO would go ahead next spring, and
involve the sale of new shares, plus part of the existing Transamerica
holding.
Proceeds from the sale of the new stock would go towards strengthening the
property-casualty company's surplus, while Transamerica would use funds
raised from the sale of its own shares to pay down debt, repurchase capital
stock or invest in continuing operations. The west coast company, which
holds a 25 per cent interest in Sedgwick Group, the UK insurer, added that
it planned to sell its remaining shares in subsequent offerings.
The property-casualty operations represent the 27th largest P-C insurance
business in the US, with assets of Dollars 4.8bn. Transamerica said it
intended to purchase Sedgwick shares held by the insurance division, and
would retain Transamerica Insurance Group's 51 per cent interest in River
Thames Insurance, a London-based reinsurer.
The parent company said it would not be able to gauge whether it makes a
profit or loss on the disposal until the IPO price is set, but any loss
would not exceed Dollars 75m after-tax. Yesterday, the shares rose Dollars 1
1/2 to Dollars 45 1/8 in early trading.
Mr Rotenstreich, meanwhile, is perhaps best-known as the president of
Torchmark who, in 1990, waged an ultimately unsuccessful bid campaign by the
Birmingham, Alabama insurer against American General, a much-bigger
insurance company.
Prior to this, he was vice-president, treasurer and chief financial officer
at IBM, and before that, a managing director and general partner at Salomon
Brothers.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921120

