FT922-7240

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (5): A cloud over credit - Stefan
Wagstyl considers Japan's difficulties


   By STEFAN WAGSTYL


JAPANESE BANKS face their most severe financial recession since the second
world war. Fears that they might not be able to cope with the strain are so
widespread that the authorities last month took the unprecedented step of
announcing estimates of banks' financial results, and gave an official
assurance about the health of the banking system.
The banks' main problem is a shortage of capital, compounded by an increase
in bad loans caused by the collapse of the financial boom of the late 1980s
when stock and land prices soared.
At the same time, a slow-down in the Japanese and world economy is reducing
openings for profitable new business, so limiting the opportunities for
banks to restore their balance sheets with increased profits.
Bankers say it could take five years to get over the difficulties caused by
bad loans. It is premature to talk of a credit shortage - since loan demand
is sluggish in Japan due to the economic slow down. But any recovery could
be stifled by the lack of credit. At the very least, borrowers at home and
abroad could find credit more difficult to secure than at any time since the
1970s, and more expensive.
The outlook is not wholly bad - banks have responded rapidly to the
challenge, weeding out unprofitable business and concentrating on boosting
profits. The stronger banks will remain formidable competitors in domestic
and international markets; the weaker are in danger of losing their
independence.
Also, even though deregulation has reduced the Japanese authorities' ability
to control the markets, both the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance
have made it clear that they will support the banking system. The
authorities are determined Japan should not suffer the ignominy of its first
post-war bank bankruptcy. 'Our banking system is very sound. Excessive
concern is unnecessary,' says a ministry official.
Furthermore, if Japanese banks are suffering, so are many of their
international competitors, as shown by the current cash crisis at Olympia &
York, the Canadian property developer.
The finance ministry said operating profit for all 153 Japanese banks rose
26.8 per cent to Y3,659bn (Pounds 15.5bn), boosted by declining interest
rates. Pre-tax profits fell 17 per cent to Y2,799bn, due to aggressive
write-offs for loans and investment loans, including those related to the
property market. Net after-tax profits fell 24 per cent to Y1,379bn.
These figures show how banks have exploited recent declines in interest
rates to increase their lending margins, and their success in cutting costs.
However, the results are historic. More important is the amount of capital
banks have for the future and the extent to which this will be eroded by
write-offs on bad loans.
The problem is to meet the international capital adequacy standards set by
the Bank for International Settlements, which come into force at the end of
March 1993. Most leading banks met the BIS standard of 8 per cent ratio of
capital to assets at the end of March 1992. But Japanese banks count as
capital a portion of their unrealised gains in securities - and these were
hit by the stock market's sharp fall since March.
Banks can improve their capital adequacy ratios either by boosting capital
or by cutting asset growth. Japanese banks have done both: they raised
equity until the stock market plunged in 1990, then they took out
subordinated loans, which for BIS purposes count as a form of capital.
Meanwhile, they cut asset growth sharply - from a peak of above 15 per cent
in the late 1980s, to an estimated 4 per cent in the year to the end of
March 1992.
Banks plan very small increases in assets this year - and little or no
growth in overseas assets. However, they intend to wait until the second
half of the year before they made any drastic decisions, such as turning
away needy borrowers. They hope that the current extreme weakness in the
stock market will prove temporary. Borrowers in some sectors, notably
property, are squealing for credit. But their problems do not stem from
BIS-imposed constraints, but from the worldwide plunge in property prices.
Fortunately for Japanese banks, BIS rules contain no sanctions. It will be
for the Japanese finance ministry to decide what penalties to impose  - and
it is unlikely to do anything which might undermine the banks' interests at
such a delicate time. US and European regulators are also unlikely to put
pressure on Japan for fear of the possible impact on international
confidence in Japanese banks.
Much depends on how much bad debt needs to be written off. According to the
finance ministry, write-offs for all banks rose sharply last year to
Y639.3bn. The ministry estimates leading national banks had
Y7,000bn-Y8,000bn in bad loans at the end of the fiscal year, that is loans
on which no interest had been paid for six months. However, all but
Y2,000bn-Y3,000bn was covered by collateral, said the ministry. Since, even
after recent stock market falls, banks had unrealised portfolio gains of
Y17,000bn, banks could easily cope with bad loans, said the ministry
official.
Industry analysts put total bad loans at up to Y20,000bn, sometimes more.
However, much depends on how such loans are calculated. Similarly, the value
of collateral is often difficult to establish, given that much of is
property and the property market is now weak.
Squeezed by the shortage of capital and mounting bad loans, bankers are
naturally cautious about new lending. They are seeking better security and
higher margins than in the high-growth years of the late 1980s. They are
also likely to favour old-established blue-chip Japanese companies over
other customers they may know less well. However, since blue-chip borrowers
pay lower rates of interest than most clients, even they may find credit a
little tighter. For example, banks have been asking customers with large
cash balances as well as borrowings to use a portion of these balances to
repay debt.
But with the Japanese economy still slowing and companies cutting
inventories, it is is too soon to forecast how severe any credit shortage
might be. Certainly, those who know they will need funds next year, to
refinance existing borrowings or bonds which fall due, are worried.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920520

