FT924-1047

FT  19 DEC 92 / DTI 'to clear' NatWest in report on Blue Arrow


   By ROBERT PESTON, Banking Editor


THE Department of Trade and Industry has received the report of its
inspectors into allegations that National Westminster Bank and its deputy
chairman, Mr Tom Frost, misled a previous DTI inquiry into the Blue Arrow
affair.
Bankers who have seen excerpts from the report, presented to the DTI on
December 1, believe that Mr Frost and the bank have been cleared of serious
offences. The report is unlikely to be published until after Christmas,
according to government officials.
The latest DTI investigation was launched in March. It was prompted by
allegations during the Blue Arrow trial last year that Mr Frost had
concealed documents from DTI inspectors during an investigation into the
Blue Arrow affair carried out in 1989.
During the trial, a barrister said a draft memo on NatWest's involvement in
the Blue Arrow rights issue, containing handwritten notes made by Mr Frost,
had not been submitted to the inspectors.
Separately, Mr Hugh Hudson, a NatWest employee who conducted an internal
inquiry into the affair, said he felt 'let down' by Mr Frost and Sir Philip
Wilkinson, a former NatWest deputy chairman, for not supplying him with all
relevant documents.
However, bankers who have seen excerpts from the new DTI report believe Mr
Frost has been vindicated. Lord Alexander, NatWest's chairman, is expected
to be particularly pleased since he took the unusual step of calling for the
second DTI inquiry.
He asked for the probe in an attempt to end the speculation about Mr Frost's
role, which he felt was damaging the bank.
After it was launched, Mr Frost was replaced as NatWest's chief executive by
Mr Derek Wanless. Mr Frost said he was stepping down in order to devote
'sufficient time' to assisting the inquiry in an attempt to clear his name.
He said that he planned to retire from the bank next August. He has recently
played a more active role in the bank's affairs, having kept a low profile
for several months.
The focus of the earlier DTI inquiry was how NatWest failed to disclose for
several months that it had acquired a substantial exposure to Blue Arrow's
shares through a rights issue by the employment agency group even though, in
normal circumstances, its exposure should have been disclosed to the stock
exchange.
That inquiry was followed in 1991 by a trial of NatWest Investment Bank,
County NatWest and UBS Phillips & Drew - and seven individuals - who were
accused of conspiring to mislead the market over the Pounds 837m rights
issue.
Four of the individuals were convicted but had their convictions quashed on
appeal. The others were acquitted.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

921219

