FT921-12064

FT  29 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Parties fight on council services -
Citizen's Charter


   By ALISON SMITH


THE TWO main parties took the Citizen's Charter campaign into the debate on
local-government services yesterday, as each claimed the monopoly on
effective measures to provide quality in council services.
The claims came as ministers emphasised that the government had taken no
final decisions on how compulsory competitive tendering (CCT) should be
extended to local-authority white-collar services such as architecture.
Mr Michael Portillo, the local-government minister, said that although the
government had suggested a 'double envelope' tendering process in the
consultation paper published last November, it was looking to professional
bodies to make suggestions on devising a system.
The process involves considering bids first against a quality threshold, and
then selecting the lowest bid from those which pass that threshold.
But the proposal has been criticised by the Audit Commission, the
local-government watchdog, which has made it clear that if there is to be an
extension of CCT, it would prefer a continuation of the present
arrangements. The commission believes that technical competence and quality
should be judged alongside cost considerations rather than the two elements
being separate.
As MPs began detailed consideration of the local-government bill, Mr
Portillo stressed that it was about improving local services. People should
not conclude that because it talked in terms of efficiency, economy and
effectiveness that it was not concerned with quality, he said.
Mr David Blunkett, Labour's local-government spokesman, said that the
government's opposition to proposed Labour changes to the bill, such as
those which would enable councils to introduce customer contracts, exposed
its stance as 'hollow rhetoric'.
He warned that ministers would still have 'unfettered power to fix the
privatisation of council services' even under proposals to restrict their
ability to set new rules for CCT.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920129

