FT922-4435

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (8): Burdened by expectations -
Profile, Derek Keys


   By PHILIP GAWITH


WHILE THE architecture of South Africa's constitutional future is
painstakingly negotiated at the Convention for a Democratic South Africa
(Codesa), the responsibility for the economic foundations of that structure
is lodged squarely with one man - Derek Keys, the minister of finance, trade
and industry and economic co-ordination.
His task is as onerous and demanding as his title is long. It is also, in a
wry sort of way, simple. He must arrest the declining standard of living of
South Africans which, if it continues unabated, will undermine any
constitutional settlement. The real gross national product per head of
population declined to R3,275 in 1991 from R3,905 in 1981.
The main issue is growth, as Mr Keys has many times stressed since taking
office in January - he assumed the Finance portfolio in May following the
resignation of Mr Barend du Plessis. Though constitutional politics still
dominate the public agenda in South Africa, the urgent need for growth is
beginning to take on mild tones of hysteria, and not without reason. South
Africa recorded negative economic growth of 0.5 per cent in each of 1990 and
1991 and looks set for another year of negative growth in 1992.
As Mr Keys is discovering, the burden of expectations is enormous. Though he
comes to the job with the unanimous blessing of the business community, he
has already been ambushed by free-market critics, particularly in the areas
of tariffs and taxes, distressed at his unwillingness to engage in
precipitate, across-the-board cuts. Others, less concerned by ideology, are
nonetheless bemused at his approach to the task at hand. A grand plan to
turn around the economy is sought, and none is forthcoming. Instead, Mr Keys
resorts to tantalising vagueness with phrases such as 'There's nothing to do
but return to the old virtues'.
Those familiar with the Keys method, however, warn against confusing style
and substance. Thus Brian Gilbertson, Mr Keys's successor as chairman of the
mining house Gencor, and one wholly admiring of his achievements, comments:
'In four years of working for Derek I never saw him do any work. When I
would come into his office he would either be reading the FT or standing at
the window looking at the pigeons outside.' On reflection, he says, there
were four or five instances in which he saw Mr Keys working. He hastens to
add, though, that Mr Keys was always impeccably prepared for board meetings,
and his interventions, measured in their frequency, were often decisive.
A memorable anecdote about Mr Keys concerns the occasion on which he
returned a memorandum delivered to him for decision by two senior managers
with the comment, 'I don't feel like Solomon today.'
What Mr Keys's civil servants make of his management style is not a matter
of public record. Some of it they will like, such as his habit of praising
his senior lieutenants lavishly, and empowering them to take important
decisions. The flip side of this they are likely to find most disconcerting
 -his resolute insistence on delegating not only the power to take
decisions, but the responsibility for them, too.
Those wishing to assess how Mr Keys is likely to approach his job would do
well to examine his time at Gencor. During the five and a half years there
he achieved enormous success, much of it attributed to his managerial style
and proficiency. He turned around an unwieldy, bureaucratic conglomerate,
whose performance and rating were poor, into a highly-rated,
entrepreneurially-driven and successful one. His main tools were to
decentralise the group structure, empower the management and focus the
group's activities through its mission of achieving real growth.
His present task may be different, but there can already be no doubt that he
is practising the same managerial principles.
For Mr Keys, the way to achieve higher growth is through more investment,
and the way to encourage this is through raising levels of confidence. This
is not something he can achieve unilaterally: political uncertainty and
violence are outside his ambit. Where he can achieve a great deal, however,
is through helping forge an economic consensus among the main political
actors.
With the establishment of an economic forum, on which the state and all the
main business and labour bodies are represented, the wheels of co-operation
are in motion. To the question of whether the forum is not just corporatism
of the sort discredited in many other countries, Mr Keys replies: 'This
country would register an economic advance if we got to the corporatist
stage.'
A crucial question is how long Mr Keys will have in office. Most businessmen
believe he needs at least five years, presiding through the transitional
phase and into the first post-apartheid government. His lack of political
and ideological baggage is a plus factor, but as one ANC spokesman
commented: 'He's a very nice fellow, but at the end of the day he's in an
apartheid cabinet.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920605

