FT921-1475

FT  24 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Portugal grants aid to farmers
hit by drought


   By PATRICK BLUM


   LISBON


THE PORTUGUESE government, faced with what could turn out to be one of the
country's most severe droughts in decades, has decided to allocate about
Esc20bn (Pounds 80m) to help farmers in the most badly affected areas.
A separate line of emergency credit to help farmers facing financial
difficulties may also be launched soon if the situation does not improve.
The government aid, which will be partly funded by the European Community,
will go mostly to farmers raising livestock and growing grain.
The decision was well received by several farming associations that had been
pressing the social democratic administration for urgent action to avert
what they claimed was a 'catastrophy' threatening the livelihood of
thousands of farmers.
Large parts of the interior and of the Alentejo in the south have not seen
any rain for months and local farmers fear they will lose their livestock
and crops unless the weather changes within days rather than weeks. In many
areas entire communities have joined in emotional processions and in special
prayers for rain.
Daily reports in the newspapers and on television have been filled with
pictures showing dried up wells and rivers in the middle of parched and
cracked land, with emaciated cattle feeding on scant patches of dried up
grass.
The drought could not come at a worse time for Portuguese agriculture, which
already suffers from the lowest productivity in the EC. With the advent of
the community's single market, protection and price subsidies are having to
be cut drastically, and many farmers already say they will not be able to
survive the increase in competition from imports.
Farmers have accused the government of failing to defend their interest in
the community and last summer launched a spate of spontaneous demonstrations
that took the government and the established farm unions by surprise.

The Financial Times


London Page 34

920324

