FT922-4112

FT  06 JUN 92 / The Lex Column: Lloyds blinks first


At least the choice facing Midland investors is now simple: whether, with
Lloyds out of the game, they should accept Hongkong Bank's offer. The
chances are a majority will do so. Midland's shares may have closed
yesterday some 6 per cent below the HSBC bid value. But that is natural for
a paper offer whose value will fluctuate with the hugely volatile Hong Kong
stock market till it closes on June 25.
The more awkward question is where Lloyds goes from here. Its chief
executive, Mr Brian Pitman, has gone to extraordinary lengths to persuade
the City that a partnership with Midland was the best way forward. Now he
looks uncharacteristically bereft of direction. Few predators would pull out
of a deal only hours after they received special permission from the
government to buy shares in the market. Not to have foreseen the price
required to stay in the game smacks of naivete, to say the least.
There is perhaps a mitigating factor. In deciding to pull back, Mr Pitman
was true to his long-standing aim of maximising shareholder value. The
mathematics can never be precise, but there may be something in the argument
that at a price of say 520p, Midland shareholders would have been handed an
unfair share of the merger benefits. If so, Lloyds did right by its own
investors, especially given the chance of the MMC imposing conditions on the
deal.
Many would argue, however, that there was something left for Lloyds'
shareholders even at the higher price. That leaves the nagging suspicion
that Lloyds also felt under pressure to pull back because its persistence
had antagonised the authorities. The abiding memory will be of its strategic
mistake in embarking on an exercise which, thanks partly to the early
publicity it attracted, acquired a momentum of its own. One has to hope that
Lloyds will conduct itself with greater circumspection in the future,
especially as it has surplus capital to burn.
As long as it sticks by its commitment to shareholder value, there is little
chance of Lloyds switching to an alternative target like the TSB or the
Royal Bank of Scotland. Nor would it necessarily suffer from sitting tight.
Higher shareholders' funds would reduce the bank's return on equity. But
Lloyds would have the capacity to raise market share if other banks ran into
capital constraints as a result of bad debt provisions.
A high capital ratio should also be good for its share price to the extent
that it promises dividend security through the next recession. Indeed, the
biggest danger might not be that Mr Pitman will risk his reputation again.
It could be that he will now bring forward his retirement and hand over to a
successor who will try to succeed on the acquisition trail where he has
failed.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920606

