FT921-15214

FT  11 JAN 92 / Wine: Has Champagne's bubble burst? - Edmund Penning-Rowsell
asks if best bubbly is unreasonably expensive


   By EDMUND PENNING-ROWSELL


YES, CHAMPAGNE is expensive: a luxury product for a special occasion, it
always has been. But is it, as widely thought, excessively dear in the UK?
Several factors have contributed to this belief. Firstly, the rise in the
price of champagne grapes. Secondly, the sharp decline in trade in the
second half of 1990 following the Gulf War. (The restaurant trade, normally
accounting for 60 per cent of UK sales, was badly hit.) Thirdly, after price
rises at the beginning of last year media speculation suggested that
non-vintage brands of the Grandes Marques might rise to Pounds 20 a bottle.
This increased the apprehensions of those accustomed to buying Pounds 11 or
Pounds 12 champagnes from supermarkets. These are made from lower quality
grapes and partly at least from second and third pressings.
Obviously, no industry can ignore price increases in the cost of its raw
materials: more than 13 per cent in 1989 and a further 20 per cent in 1990.
However, as champagne is a blended wine, with, desirably, an age of three
years in bottle before being marketed, the cost of the 1.3 kilos needed per
bottle can be evened out. Also, the big producers of Buyers' Own Brand
champagne that can legally be sold after one year in bottle will save
interest charges on stock of at least 10 per cent a year.
The UK wine trade has to take account of increases in duty and VAT in the
last Budget, so that together they now total Pounds 1.75 a bottle. Yet,
apart from such leading houses as Bollinger and Roederer, whose non-vintage
cuvees were already touching Pounds 20 a bottle by autumn 1990, the majority
of Grandes Marques are still well below this figure: Moet & Chandon NV Brut
Imperial, representing 20 per cent of UK sales, sells for Pounds 17.95:
about 25 per cent higher than in 1989, taking duty rises and VAT increases
into consideration.
Looking on the positive side, the age and therefore the quality of champagne
should now be higher, for stocks have risen. Moreover, the Champenois
realise that increasing world competition from sparkling wines means that
they can only keep ahead by improving quality, and for the last two years a
campaign has been running to improve pressing and fermentation methods.
Nevertheless, with 1991 sales estimated at 200m bottles against an
unexpected large vintage of 276m, both growers and merchants have a problem
that could increase, rather than diminish, in recession. Last year the
officially recommended FFr2 reduction in price to FFr30 a kilo was willingly
paid by the merchants, who after the failure in 1990 to renew the official
contract system of distribution, had to keep faith with the growers with
whom they had made personal three-year contracts to buy their grapes.
Although the co-operatives, particularly those who had been energetically
promoting their own brands, including Jacquart and Nicolas Feuillate, have
suffered severely from the slowdown in sales, the growers have not yet felt
the need to sell more of their grapes to the merchants. The 47 per cent of
the 1991 harvest that the growers' sold was identical with the proportion
sold in 1989 - the last year of the contract system.
Yet, neither the merchants nor the co-operatives can go on buying growers'
grapes on the same scale. Those who make or market champagne under their own
labels are likely to face greater difficulties in continuing to sell almost
half the champagne bought in France. Stocks at the end of the 1990/1991
campaign last year amounted to 795m bottles  - four years' sales stock -
compared with 2.9 years' sales stock in 1989/1990. It is now almost
certainly above four years.
Are grape prices likely to go down for this year's vintage? Those merchants
whom I asked this question had varying replies. Some, on the basis of this
being the last year of the three-year personal contracts, said no. Others
thought that the recommended price might fall by 10 per cent to FFr27 a kilo
for the top village wines and to FFr24 for those on the basic 80 per cent
level. One or two envisaged a franc less. Generally, it was agreed that much
would depend on the size of this year's crop and the state of the world
economy.
A small crop is already being prayed for. Continued recession could bring
grape prices down to FFr20.
Will there be a new contract between growers and merchants that is more
flexible - perhaps omitting the basing of price on the average ex-cellars
cost of bottles in the previous year? The merchants are against a new
officially sponsored contract for the present arrangements suit them very
well: particularly the big groups which can count on adequate credit. They
can argue that Brussels would be against any officially fixed price, as a
restraint of trade.
However the growers form a powerful lobby, some are already nervous about
the future and, if trade continues poor, they might well demand some
guarantee for the disposal of their grapes. No one wants to return to the
inter-war years when growers had to accept miserably low prices for their
fragile produce.
Occasional consumers of champagne may be assured of no price increase of any
note this year. Indeed, there may be some decreases if the vintage is large
and the market still severely depressed. At the lower end some substantial
deals at ex-cellars prices, around FFr50 a bottle, took place before the end
of last year. And, as they have inflation in France too, unchanged prices
mean a real reduction. Although imports here are down by 40 per cent the
fall in consumption is less than half that amount.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII Photograph Champagne country, Montagne de Reims,
Villers-Marmery and vineyards (Omitted).

920111

