FT924-779

FT  22 DEC 92 / UK Company News: Regrouped and ready for the fray -
NatWest's investment banking arm


   By ROBERT PESTON


NATIONAL WESTMINSTER Bank's history in investment banking has been littered
with disappointed hopes.
Since the London stock market was deregulated in 1986, it has been embroiled
in two financial scandals, it has consist-ently made losses or poor
financial returns and a series of senior executives have quit.
However, Mr Martin Owen believes the curse has been lifted. In June he
became chief executive of NatWest Markets, which is a new division of
NatWest combining its investment bank with that part of the commercial bank
serving big com-panies.
'All of NatWest Market's businesses are forecast to be in profit in 1993,
even after full absorption of costs', he said in his first interview since
taking the helm.
The aim is for the business as a whole to make pre-tax profits equal to a 14
per cent return on capital, in addition to the risk-free return on the
capital. He said that means it is intended to make between 15 per cent and
17.5 per cent in total.
His confidence stems from the six months review of the businesses which he
has recently completed. Nonetheless, the challenge he has set himself should
not be underestimated.
If NatWest was brave - some would say foolhardy - to enter securities
trading in the first place in 1986, it is now being even braver by
integrating its securities and investment banking activities with its
lending activities.
In the process, it has created a huge new hybrid institution, with capital
of Pounds 3bn and assets (loans and securities) of Pounds 65bn.
By contrast, its main UK rival, Barclays, has combined foreign exchange and
treasury operations with its investment bank, Barclays de Zoete Wedd, but
balked at including corporate lending in the new division.
Lending bankers are widely regarded in the City of London as undesirable
bedfellows for the more highly paid - and some would also say 'more highly
strung' - investment bankers. Institutions attempting to integrate them have
typically faced difficulties, because they have different business time
horizons (the investment bankers generally have a short-term dealing
mentality).
Nonetheless, NatWest Markets has appointed 40 senior managers - called
service originators - to talk to corporate clients about the full range of
lending, securities and investment management products. These clients make
up 80 per cent of the UK's 300 biggest companies.
In the process of merging the commercial banking and investment banking
operations, certain overlaps have been identified. So in the next few months
a couple of hundred jobs will go from NatWest Market's current tally of
5,000.
Last week, 50 jobs were lost in the global custody - or share registration -
operations in Bristol and 70 people are going because of the decision to
give up a seat on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
The review has also involved an element of 'rebranding', at a cost of less
than Pounds 500,000. A small design company, Ingleton Thomas, has invented a
new logo, incorporating the initials, NWM.
In addition, County NatWest Ventures' name is being changed to NatWest
Ventures, to match the name change of the equities trading operation.
Mr Owen has also belatedly recognised the value of the name, Wood Mackenzie,
which is the name of a broker it acquired after Big Bang. Its corporate
stockbroking business, providing advice to companies on share issues, is
being renamed NatWest Wood Mackenzie.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921222

