FT923-10673

FT  29 JUL 92 / Judges decry overloads on scales of justice / A look at why
the Appeal Court dislikes the complexity and length of the Blue Arrow trial


   By ROBERT RICE


THE Serious Fraud Office received a clear warning yesterday from the Court
of Appeal not to overload indictments in future serious fraud cases.
Giving reasons for quashing the convictions of four defendants in the
year-long Blue Arrow trial, the court said: 'We have no doubt that the
length and complexity of this trial were directly attributable to the length
and complexity of the indictment.'
Much of the court's criticism was aimed at Mr Justice McKinnon, the trial
judge, and Mr Nicholas Purnell QC, the senior prosecuting counsel. But the
judges' comments will not make comfortable reading for Mr George Staple, the
new director of the SFO, as he frames indictments in cases arising out of
the Polly Peck and Maxwell affairs.
Mr Staple has said he sees no need for the SFO to abandon its present
approach of throwing the book at defendants rather than concentrating on its
best six or 10 counts.
'We can't be put in a straitjacket,' he said. 'These cases are big and they
are complex. Justice often requires a number of defendants and a number of
charges.'
Yesterday, while accepting the SFO had to ensure an indictment was not
overloaded and directed against too many defendants, he reiterated that the
prosecution still had 'to convey the full sense of criminality to the jury'.
Throwing the book at the defendants in Blue Arrow was unnecessary, the court
said. The late take-up of the rights issue provided a central issue
involving eight defendants that could have been tried manageably and fairly.
The prosecution's 'persistent adherence' to the notion that the case should
be tried as a whole had caused it to lose sight of the effect that would
have 'on the mechanics of and the limitations imposed by a jury trial'.
Without laying down firm guidelines, the court made clear where the limits
of acceptability will lie in future.
Any indictment charging conspiracy to defraud must give particulars in
support of that charge. Yet they must not be more than is necessary, bearing
in mind the limitations of jury trial. To add more than is necessary amounts
to overloading the indictment, even though particulars added are regarded as
relevant by the prosecution.
The prosecution must also exercise restraint in presenting evidence so that
only 'essential evidence is produced and inessential but relevant evidence
is not'. It is up to trial judges to indicate when they think inessential
evidence is threatening the manageability and fairness of a trial.
Lord Justice Mann said the SFO should 'always and anxiously consider'
whether the offence, in spite of their interrelationships, 'threaten a trial
of greater length and complexity than is an ineluctable necessity. If they
do, then the prosecution must reduce the number.'
The court said that in the Blue Arrow case, Mr Justice McKinnon should have
used his powers to reduce the first trial to the central issue of the late
take-up involving eight defendants - something he tried to do too far into
the trial by summing up only on the late take-up, an action that had
constituted a material irregularity in the trial.
Lord Justice Mann said trial judges should use preparatory hearings in
serious fraud cases to express views about parts of the prosecution case
they regard as inessential.
The trial of Mr Asil Nadir, scheduled to begin next March, will provide the
first test of Mr Staple's resolve not to be placed in a straitjacket.
The former Polly Peck chairman originally faced 66 charges of theft and
false accounting. Mr Justice Tucker, the appointed trial judge, has declared
that he expects to see no more than 10 counts on the indictment when the
case comes to court.
Last month, he dismissed 46 of the 66 charges faced by Mr Nadir. The SFO
appealed against that decision, and the Appeal Court's judgment is expected
shortly. Mr Staple has indicated that, if the SFO wins, it will reinstate
the charges before paring the indictment down to 16 specimen charges.
To guarantee that there is never another trial such as Blue Arrow may,
however, require more fundamental change than mere restraint by the
prosecution and a more robust attitude by trial judges.
When the second Guinness trial collapsed in February, the government
promised an urgent review of serious fraud cases. Five months later, the
momentum for change appears to have stalled.
Sir Nicholas Lyell QC, the new attorney general, appears happy to leave the
issue to the Royal Commission on Criminal Justice, not expected to report
until next summer, and to the Law Commission, the government's law reform
body, which has since 1987 been looking at replacing the offence of
conspiracy to defraud with a general fraud offence.
Any fundamental change to the present system will require primary
legislation. If the government waits until both commissions have reported
before taking action, it will be 1994 before reforms can come in. By then,
the next round of big fraud trials will be well under way, if not completed.
Mr Justice Henry, the Guinness trial judge, said recently: 'Without
legislative changes, I do not believe that things will get better, in fact I
am certain that they will get worse.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920729

