FT923-9472

FT  05 AUG 92 / UK Company News: Harland Simon acts to restore credibility -
Shareholders approve planned disposal aimed at reducing debt


   By ANGUS FOSTER


AFTER NEARLY six months of turmoil Harland Simon, the control systems
company, yesterday appeared to have won a breathing space in which to try
and restore its credibility with shareholders and customers.
The company, which has seen its market value collapse following unexpected
losses and a qualified set of accounts, gained approval from shareholders to
sell Vickereys, its specialist blade and equipment maker, for Pounds 8.1m to
Thermo Fibertek of the US.
The sale, which still requires Office of Fair Trading approval, is the first
of several planned disposals. It will reduce Harland's net borrowings of
about Pounds 12.3m and restore shareholders' funds which, following losses
and provisions last year, fell from a restated Pounds 18.9m to Pounds 8.1m.
The disposal, and the re-appointment of directors and auditors, were passed
at Harland's annual and extraordinary meetings yesterday. Unusually, the
meetings were closed to the press - a decision described by one of the
company's advisers as 'rather silly'.
According to institutional shareholders present, the meetings were free from
acrimony. The only questions asked concerned the large number of Harland
board directors, and why Mr George Neophitou, newly-appointed finance
director, owned no shares in the company. However, shareholders remain
extremely concerned despite a series of briefings by the company over the
past few weeks.
'No-one is going to risk knocking the company at this stage. But if it
doesn't do what we expect it to in the next few months, we are in trouble,'
one major shareholder said.
High on the list of priorities are further management changes. Mr Roy
Ashman, former chairman and the driving force behind the company, was
replaced in February by Mr David Mahony, a former chairman and an industrial
adviser to Hambro's, the company's financial adviser.
But Harland's attempts to recruit new non-executive directors, and a new
executive chairman, have so far been frustrated by controversy over its
relationship with Perfect Information Ltd (PIL), a loss-making information
service.
One possible candidate is understood to have become hesitant following
adverse comment about PIL, and the failure of Harland's auditors to confirm
the ownership of a stake in the company held through a Liechtenstein trust.
The auditors, Price Waterhouse, therefore qualified Harland's accounts
because they could not conclude whether PIL was an associate.
Harland has now bought the outstanding stake, taking its holding to 63 per
cent. Mr Ashman has retained 27 per cent and is refusing to sell.
Institutional shareholders say a bigger worry is that PIL remains
loss-making and finding a buyer will be difficult. One analyst estimated
closing down PIL, the other possible option, could lead to further
write-downs and restructuring costs of more than Pounds 3m.
Harland said yesterday that negotiations had advanced for the sale of
Contraves, the electronic control company bought last year. An overseas
buyer had begun due diligence on the acquisition, the company said.
Harland's shares remained unchanged at 17p, giving a market capitalisation
of just under Pounds 3m. Before a profits warning in February, the first
indication that the company had problems, the shares touched 653p, giving a
market value of Pounds 115m.
Mr Mahony repeated an earlier warning that the company may not return to
profit this year. But Harland again insisted that its underlying business
had not been affected by the collapse in its share price and shareholder
criticism.
One institutional shareholder warned that speculation about the effects of
Harland's troubles on its business could be self-fulfilling if customers
started delaying major orders.
Harland rarely comments on orders before they are won. So far this year the
only significant contract announced was a medium-sized order from Royal Mail
Parcel Force.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920805

