FT921-15545

FT  09 JAN 92 / Management: Bouquets that are not to be sniffed at - Philip
Rawstorne visits Chateau Latour, where prestige has a higher priority than
profitability


   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE


Chateau Latour is one of the ultimate brands, says Michael Jackaman,
chairman of Allied-Lyons, the UK drinks and food group, which owns the
Bordeaux premier cru.
'For 300 years, Latour has been a benchmark of quality. Its reputation
enhances our entire drinks portfolio. It spells out Allied's long-term
commitment to international premium brands. It is the jewel in the crown.'
It was for its prestige rather than its profitability that Allied acquired
Latour in 1988, paying Pounds 58m to add the 53 per cent shareholding of
Pearson, publishers of the Financial Times, to the 25 per cent it already
owned. It has since increased its stake to 95 per cent.
Jackaman admits that such an investment would have been difficult to justify
on a more basic calculation of return on capital. Despite the fact that a
dozen bottles of Latour's 1961 vintage would fetch about Pounds 5,000, the
Medoc estate - whose value has now risen to about Pounds 160m - makes annual
profits of only Pounds 5m.
The prime objective in managing the brand, therefore, is to maintain and
improve its reputation for excellence; to ensure that it retains its place
alongside, if not ahead of, its rival first-growths, Chateau Lafite, Chateau
Margaux, and Chateau Haut-Brion.
Financial returns are readily sacrificed to maintain the quality of the
wine, says David Orr, director of the estate, who previously ran Allied's
fine wine business in the US.
Grapes for the grand vin come only from vines grown in the 100 acres of
gravelly soil that comprised the original 700-years-old estate overlooking
the Gironde. This is the terroir - the French word that encompasses the
area's soil, sub-soil, drainage, aspect and micro-climate - which gives the
wine its singular, slow-maturing savour.
Only the grapes from vines that are more than 10 years old are used and
fruiting is restrained to improve quality by severe pruning and by thinning
the bunches of green grapes in July.
Selective picking at harvest time ensures that any grapes judged unfit for
the grand vin are used with fruit from younger vines and those in the
outlying areas of the estate to make a second wine, Les Forts de Latour, and
sometimes a third, classed simply as Pauillac. Les Forts fetches half the
price of the grand vin and Pauillac, half the price of Les Forts. Rigorous
control of quality continues during fermentation - in the first stainless
steel vats to be used in the Medoc - and afterwards in the blending. The
result is that, even in the best of years, Latour produces no more than
20,000 cases of grand vin.
The wine is sold in the year after the vintage while it is beginning its
maturation in new barrels of French oak. 'It is like selling a future,' says
Orr. 'The wine will not be ready for drinking for 20 years. For the buyers,
it represents an enormous act of faith.'
The price at which it is offered takes account of the quality of the vintage
and economic conditions, particularly in the main markets, the UK and US.
The 1990 vintage was offered last year at Pounds 22-Pounds 25 a bottle. 'We
try to lead the market in a responsible way,' Orr says. 'The health of the
entire Bordeaux business is important to us.'
There is no difficulty in finding buyers. The spread of international
markets, from Austria to Japan, helps to offset any problems in any one
country. 'The key for a first growth,' says Orr, 'is not in selling but in
selling well'.
Allied has only limited control over marketing and distribution because of
the French government's concern that it should not by-pass the
long-established channels through Bordeaux merchants.
But it has modified the process. It retains 15-20 per cent of the vintage
each year, building stocks that can be sold in years, say, when frost cuts
production, as in 1991.
The wine is sold to only half of the 120 Bordeaux negociants; the amounts
allotted to individual merchants are limited; and the chateau sells direct
to a number of wine importers.
Though Latour's claims as one of the world's great wines were first
proclaimed in the UK in advertisements in the early 1700s, the chateau no
longer advertises its product.
Its reputation is fostered discreetly and conservatively, but with some
vigour. 'The wine has to be seen in the right places - the best restaurants,
Oxbridge colleges, London clubs,' Orr says. It is sold direct to the Elysee
palace and the British embassy in Paris and was served at the recent G7
dinner for Mikhail Gorbachev in London.
One exclusive tasting is arranged in Britain each year; and last year 324
magnums of vintages ranging from 1961 to 1988, worth Dollars 250,000, were
tastefully presented at a New York gathering of wine buffs.
'It is important to talk to the top wine merchants and importers, to wine
writers and collectors,' Orr says. 'There are perhaps 50 to 75 collectors
around the world; a network of connoisseurs which monitors the progress of
first growths as closely as others follow stocks and shares, but who buy the
best wines to drink and not as an investment.
'It is a very small world but its opinions are vital to the wider perception
of Latour.'
An almost obsessive attention to detail - from the alignment of the
chateau's tower symbol on the cork with that on the label of each bottle, to
the arrangement of flowers in the chateau itself - goes into ensuring that
nothing detracts from that perception.
'We are very conscious of Latour's historical heritage,' Orr declares. 'It
is the product of centuries of intensive cultivation and it is our task, as
the latest in a long line of winemakers, to ensure that it passes to the
next generation with its prestige higher than ever.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14 Photograph (Omitted). Photograph Chateau Latour, 'spells out
Allied's long-term commitment to international brands. It is the jewel in
the crown' (Omitted).

920109

