FT921-15262

FT  11 JAN 92 / UK Company News: KPMG resigns as Manchester Ship auditor


   By ANDREW JACK


KPMG Peat Marwick, the accountancy firm, has resigned as auditor to the
Manchester Ship Canal after it was issued with a writ for more than Pounds
1m in damages related to tax advice given to the company.
Both KPMG and MSC stressed yesterday that the resignation was to prevent a
conflict of interest as a result of the legal action against the firm's tax
department and had nothing to do with its audit.
But the action leaves the company with little time to appoint a replacement
firm and complete the audit within the legal time limit at the end of
February.
MSC claims that in 1988 KPMG's tax consultants said it was eligible to
receive more than Pounds 8m in tax relief concurrent with the construction
of a building in the Trafford Park enterprise zone in Manchester.
In fact, it could only receive this sum over several years, and it says that
the delayed payment has cost it more than Pounds 1m.
However, KPMG said last night that it would strongly contest the legal
action.
MSC warned KPMG of possible action last April, and issued a writ in October.
The firm hinted that it might resign on December 13 to prevent any
compromise of the audit, and did so on Christmas Eve.
MSC is one of the few companies constituted under the 1845 Companies Clauses
Consolidation Act, rather than the Companies Act. It is obliged to hold its
annual general meeting within two months from its year end of December 31,
and any change of auditors - who must be appointed individually rather than
as a firm - needs to be approved by the shareholders.
The company is convening an extraordinary general meeting of shareholders on
January 29 to recommend the appointment of two partners in the Manchester
office of Robson Rhodes as replacement auditors.
The annual meeting is already scheduled for February 27, and shareholders
must receive the accounts at least two weeks before that date.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920111

