FT924-7997

FT  13 NOV 92 / Japanese managers to be paid in product vouchers


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


ABOUT 6,500 managers at NEC, the Japanese electronics company, are to make
an important contribution to its sagging sales figures by taking part of
their pay in vouchers which can be swapped for an NEC home computer or
television set.
There is an honourable tradition of Japanese workers taking pay in corporate
kind. Staff at Matsushita Electric set the standard in prewar days by
accepting light bulbs instead of yen when times were tough.
With times tough again, NEC and Sanyo Electric, another electronics
manufacturer, are asking managers to take part of their year-end bonuses, an
important component of the Japanese salary, in product vouchers worth
between Y100,000 (Pounds 530) and Y300,000.
When such vouchers were last issued, by Matsushita and Mitsubishi Electric
in the middle of the yen appreciation crisis six years ago, a small
secondary market quickly developed.
Matsushita managers generally have a home already well stocked with their
employer's products, so the vouchers were sold at a discount to friends or
given to relatives.
This year, NEC employees at or above the level of section chief must take at
least part of their bonus in vouchers. Ordinary workers will receive a 0.03
per cent increase on last year's final bonus, which was equivalent to about
2 1/2 months' salary.
'The idea of the 0.03 per cent increase was to improve morale among the
workers. If bonuses were to fall, it would seem that we have real problems,
but things are not that serious,' an NEC official said.
Sanyo has asked senior managers to take a 10 per cent bonus cut and accept
another 10 per cent in kind. Other companies, including Hitachi, have cut
executive pay by between 10 and 20 per cent and curbed the corporate
contribution to their karaoke and golf habits.
Electronics manufacturers are having a difficult year. First half profits
were down by 73 per cent at Mitsubishi Electric, 71 per cent at NEC and 51
per cent at Matsushita. Sanyo is expected to report a loss in its financial
year which ends on November 30.
The Ministry of Finance made another gesture this week to enable employees
to make a humble contribution to the corporate good by relaxing controls on
share ownership programmes, usually 'clubs' with compulsory membership.
It is common for companies to expect workers to devote 5 per cent or more of
their salaries to stock purchases. Under the new law, companies can raise
the percentage to prop up prices in a still ailing Tokyo stock market.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921113

