FT923-9634

FT  04 AUG 92 / The Barcelona Olympics: New kings of middle distance - Even
Qatar is making strides as a running power and could emulate Cuba


   By PETER BERLIN


AFTER Javier Sotomayor, the high jump world record holder, became the first
Cuban man in 16 years to win an athletics gold medal at the Olympics, he
walked out of the arena in tears. At the entrance to the tunnel he was
embraced by a Cuban official.
The ubiquitous television camera was on hand to catch the touching scene.
Suddenly, the face of the older Cuban appeared 30ft high on the huge screen
at the Montjuic stadium. One after another, journalists in the press stand
stopped tapping furiously at their computers and gazed up for a moment. A
murmur went along the press bench: 'Alberto Juantorena.'
In Montreal in 1976, Alberto Juantorena became the first man since Paul
Pilgrim in 1906 to win both the 400 metres and 800m at the Olympics. (Ann
Packer of Britain, another 400m specialist, had won silver in the 400m and
gold in the 800m in Tokyo in 1964).
Juantorena was also the first 800m champion from outside the US, Britain or
Australasia. He had hardly run the 800m before the Games and when he broke
the world record in the final it seemed the 800m would be transformed
forever.
The 800m had been dominated by middle-distance runners with a kick. They
would spend 600m jostling for position and then sprint off the final bend.
Juantorena started his sprint on the first bend.
But the future belonged to the man who came fourth, Britain's Steve Ovett,
and his ilk: runners who could stay with a fast pace and still accelerate at
the end. Ovett won Olympic medals in the 800m and the 1,500m in Moscow in
1980, as did his compatriot, Sebastian Coe. Said Aouita of Morocco won the
5,000m in 1984 and came third in the 800m in Seoul. The middle-distance
runners had reclaimed their race.
Even in Seoul, when Paul Ereng of Kenya, another former 400m runner, won the
800m, he ran a tactical race. His better-known team-mate Nelson Kiprotich
sacrificed himself by setting a sharp early pace for Ereng. On Sunday, Ereng
trailed in last in his heat. A former champion struggling to recapture his
greatness is a sorry sight. When that champion is burnt out at 25 it makes a
particularly pathetic spectacle.
But even while Ovett, Coe and Peter Elliott were regularly appearing in two
middle-distance finals, things were changing. In Los Angeles and Seoul,
Joaquim Cruz of Brazil won medals in the 800m and then failed to appear for
his 1,500m races. In Los Angeles, Ovett regretted not following this
example. The 1,500m final was his seventh race in nine days. He was carried
from the track on a stretcher.
As recently as last year, at the world athletics championships in Tokyo, the
800m was squeezed in early in the Games schedule and then, following a brief
respite, the 1,500m starts.
When the Barcelona timetable did away with that separation, and increased
the gaps between rounds, nobody complained. None of the eight men who
advanced from the 800m semi-finals on Sunday night were even entered in the
1,500m heats yesterday morning. Tony Ward of the British athletics team said
that Peter Elliott might have considered the 800m-1,500m double if he had
been in top form. But Elliott is absent, injured, and so, yesterday morning,
was the great Aouita.
Aouita's injury and Ereng's elimination mean none of the Seoul medallists in
either race will reach a Barcelona final. The 800m final tomorrow will be a
contest between the old and the young.
There are three veterans of the 1988 final who are unlikely to have another
chance. Johnny Gray of the US, the perennial front-runner always passed in
the final dash for medals, is 32. Kiprotich and Jose Luis Barbosa of Brazil
are both 31. Their chief rival on past form is William Tanui, 28, another
Kenyan. But the fastest qualifier was Curtis Robb, 19, the rapidly-improving
Briton.
The 1,500m heats are a poor indicator of form. It is possible to finish
seventh, as Edgar Martins de Oliveira of Brazil did yesterday, and still
advance. The key is to set a fast pace from the start, squeezing the
no-hopers out of the pack like peas from a pod.
Pop] There goes a Laotian. Pop] There goes a Rwandan. And - in yesterday's
first heat - Pop] There goes Briton Steve Crabb, suddenly 20m adrift and
battling Kim Bong-Yoo of Korea for eighth.
Qatar's Sulaiman Mohamed ran a perfect race in the final heat, pulling the
train along for nearly four laps while one runner after another tumbled out
of the guard's van. He was caught on the line by David Kibet of Kenya but
the heat was the fastest.
Qatar has never had an Olympic athletics finalist, though they have Lee
Evans, the Mexico 400m champion, in Barcelona as a coach. Al-Raheem Talal
Mansoor missed a place in the 100m final by 0.01 seconds. Muftah Ibrahim
Ismail qualified for tomorrow's 400m final by coming third last night in his
semi-final heat and now Sulaiman gives them a third chance to break their
duck.
You read it here first: in athletics, Qatar is about to become the Cuba of
the Gulf.
One of the legacies of Coe and Ovett is the large and noisy contingent of
British athletics fans in the Montjuic stadium every day, cheering their
heroes. Yesterday they were in place promptly at 10am, drenched by a storm,
ready for the start of the 200m heats.
As Linford Christie, Britain's 100m champion, won his heat on cruise
control, he was greeted by a roar. But the fans saved their biggest and
warmest reception for Kris Akabussi as he made his ungainly but effective
way over the obstacles in the 400m hurdles.
Afterwards, the fans joined the gaggle of Britons haggling for tickets in
the Olympic souk that has developed outside the main complex.
There is plenty of Olympic action to come.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920804

