FT924-6394

FT  21 NOV 92 / Man in the News: A case of double vision - Andrew Buxton


   By ROBERT PESTON


The man born to be chairman of Barclays is facing unrest in his realm.
Andrew Buxton is scion of one of the families which has held the reins at
Britain's biggest bank for a century. At the beginning of May, a month after
his 53rd birthday, this private family man - described by friends as
'unflappable' and 'unflamboyant' - became its chief executive. He is
scheduled to become chairman in January.
Some Barclays' shareholders - already disappointed by the scale of losses
the bank faces on imprudent company loans - have become unhappy at the
prospect of so much power being concentrated in one person's hands. For the
first time, Mr Buxton this week acknowledged the unrest.
He made a concession which he hopes will pacify them. Though he still plans
to take the chairmanship, he said his dual role would 'be kept under review'
by the board. If a different sharing of management responsibilities seemed
necessary, he would give up one or other post.
The statement does not appear, however, to have reduced pressure on him.
Shareholders said they were in no mind to drop the issue.
Mr Buxton and the Barclays' board accept that combining the two roles runs
counter to the consensus on best management practice, as enshrined in the
report of Sir Adrian Cadbury's committee on corporate governance. However,
Mr Buxton argues that other directors, notably Sir Peter Middleton, the
former Treasury permanent secretary who is a deputy chairman of Barclays,
act as a counterbalance.
His views are echoed by Sir Martin Jacomb, another Barclays' deputy chairman
and an influential board member: 'The board is completely satisfied that the
checks and balances (in the management structure) that Cadbury wanted are
there,' Sir Martin said.
But Mr Buxton must make a special effort to show shareholders that Barclays
is adopting best management practices, because he has on occasion faced the
slur - which colleagues say is unfair - that his rise owed something to his
membership of the 'Barclays families', as they are known in the bank.
These are a number of inter-married clans which owned local banks in the
18th and 19th centuries. The banks were merged in the 1890s to form
Barclays, but the families continued to occupy senior positions on the
bank's regional boards.
In the past century, only two chairmen, including Sir John Quinton, the
present incumbent, have been drawn from outside the families' ranks. As
recently as the mid-1980s, about a quarter of the main board directors were
connected to the families (though there are now only two family members on a
board of 21).
Mr Buxton said before he joined the bank he was never particularly aware of
his family connection with Barclays. However, the Buxtons, an East Anglian
family, were closely involved in the private Overend Gurney Bank, which was
absorbed by Barclays.
He joined the bank in 1963 - after reading philosophy, politics and
economics at Pembroke College, Oxford, and completing national service in
the Grenadier Guards - largely because of the encouragement of his
step-father, Mr Alexander Grant, a local Barclays director.
Mr Buxton's first job was as a clerk in a branch - since buried beneath a
roundabout - in west London's Holland Park. He then rose steadily. He had
first-hand experience of the 1973-74 recession as head of a special team set
up to work with companies, especially property businesses, which faced
financial difficulties.
His rise accelerated in the 1980s. In quick succession, he became general
manager for East Anglia and the east Midlands, then head of a new corporate
banking division. In 1987 he temporarily acted as chief executive of
Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the investment banking subsidiary which Mr Buxton
helped to set up. In May 1988, he became group managing director.
'My progress in the bank has always surprised me,' he said yesterday from
Riyadh, where he is visiting the bank's Middle Eastern clients. 'I would not
like to think of myself as ambitious.'
In the spring, he was chosen to become both chairman and chief executive by
a sub-committee of the Barclays' board which was considering who was to
succeed Sir John.
Directors have rather different recollections of the sequence of events.
There is, however, a consensus that there was not a coup to oust Sir John.
On the other hand, although Sir John was probably content to retire next
year, he is believed to have been disappointed that he was asked to give up
his executive duties to Mr Buxton in May this year.
Sir John may have found it galling to go at the nadir of the bank's
fortunes. Analysts believe Barclays may make its first loss this year.
A Barclays' director said the board was overwhelmingly convinced that the
time had come for new blood at the top, because the bank faced different
challenges from those Sir John confronted when he became chairman in 1987.
Mr Buxton has to reshape the bank so that it can cope with the aftermath of
the lending explosion of the 1980s and the slow economic growth expected in
the coming few years. That means cutting costs and withdrawing from business
earning a low return.
Though the board might have preferred to split the roles of chairman and
chief executive, it did not see how this could be done. There was no one
inside the bank, apart from Mr Buxton, qualified to be chief executive,
according to one director.
But, he added, the board was also reluctant to break a Barclays' tradition
by appointing a non-banker as chairman - Sir Peter Middleton was not thought
experienced enough.
The board hopes that in time a natural candidate for the post of chief
executive will emerge from inside the bank to take Mr Buxton's executive
duties. It does not want to ask Mr Buxton to revert to the sole position of
chief executive for fear of alienating him.
As for Mr Buxton, he said that if the board decided there should be another
chairman, 'I would accept it'. But he added: 'I would feel a sense of
disappointment.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921121

