FT922-4121

FT  06 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Customers will find out if they were right


   By DAVID BARCHARD


WHILE THE takeover battle raged, there was little doubt that Hongkong and
Shanghai Bank was the choice of Midland's staff and customers.
Small businessmen and tenant farmers were among Midland customer groups that
stood up to be counted against the Lloyds bid. Now that it looks probable
that Hongkong will take over Midland, what changes lie ahead for the
customers?
Outwardly, many things will doubtless continue much as they always have done
at Midland's 1,800 branches. Marine Midland, Hongkong Bank's US subsidiary,
retains most of its traditional upstate East Coast American character more
than a decade after it was taken over.
But Midland will now become part of a global group whose twin specialities
are retail banking and small businesses with commercial instincts developed
in the dynamic markets of south-east Asia. That, combined with the stronger
capitalisation of the group, should mean a wider range of services with a
greater emphasis on efficiency.
The good news for Midland customers is likely to be superior banking
technology, operated at less cost and tailor-made for customer needs.
Hongkong Bank has developed one of the most advanced banking computer
services in the world, carrying out most of its own software design work
internally.
Even before Lloyds had withdrawn from the fray, Hongkong Bank had announced
plans to unify and standardise Midland's computer systems and link them into
its global network by 1996, through HBS, a new centralised computer system
being built at a cost of USDollars 105m (Pounds 58m).
Hongkong's products have been built to service small businesses and
companies scattered across many countries. The undisputed star among these
services is Hexagon, a computerised office and home banking system. Last
month Hexagon was linked to Midland's computer network. It has not yet been
offered to customers, but Banktrack and Cashtrack, two of its component
services, are soon to be available.
Hongkong expects to make sharp reductions in the cost and the number of
employees needed at Midland's computer operations. It employs only 580
computer staff, compared with Midland's 1,280.
The defeat of the Lloyds bid means that small businesses will not get the
goodies Lloyds promised them if the offer succeeded.
Yesterday Sir Jeremy Morse, Lloyds chairman, made clear that although the
bank will do what it can for its customers, without the economies of scale
that would have come from a merger with Midland, the scope to introduce such
improvements has become much more limited.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920606

