FT922-644

FT  26 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Climbing copper prices boost
trading at LME


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


CLIMBING COPPER prices yesterday sparked one of the busiest trading days on
the London Metal Exchange for several months. Other metal prices -
particularly those of zinc and tin - followed in copper's wake. But some
analysts quickly discounted suggestions that buoyant metals prices were
indicating a rapid world economic recovery.
Copper, used in a wide range of industries such as construction, transport
and communications, historically has been a leading indicator of economic
recovery. However, at present its price was being pushed up not by any
strengthening of demand but by worries about supplies, suggested Mr David
Humphries, an economist at the RTZ Corporation, the world's biggest mining
group.
Metals demand in Japan, which accounted for about 18 per cent of world
usage, would fall this year. Prospects in the European Community, accounting
for 30 per cent, were looking dim because Germany, the driving force, was
'coming off the boil,' he added. Only in the US, accounting for 25 per cent
of world metals usage, was demand showing signs of recovery.
Mr Graham Deller, analyst at the Metals & Minerals Research Services
consultancy group, pointed out that OECD industrial production - an
important indicator of potential metals demand - was lower in the first
quarter this year than in the final quarter of 1991 and was unchanged in the
1992 second quarter. MMRS was looking for industrial production to improve
by only 0.5 per cent this year.
'As industrial production usually leads metals prices by about six months,
even if there is a pick-up in the second half of this year, we would not see
any big pick-up in metals prices until late 1993 or even 1994,' said Mr
Deller.
Copper's price in dollars jumped to the highest level for more than a year
on the LME at one point yesterday. Three-month copper closed last night up
Pounds 13.75 a tonne at Pounds 1,277.
Three-month zinc closed at Dollars 1,277.50 a tonne, up Dollars 32. Traders
suggested this reflected fears that the market's technical tightness would
continue for some time. Mr Humphries said: 'There has been so much technical
activity in the zinc market I'm reluctant to say whether any price movement
is evidence of anything at all.'
However, he said tin continued to reflect substantial production cuts in
recent years. Three-month tin closed last night at Dollars 6,852 a tonne, up
Dollars 115.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920626

