FT921-14067

FT  17 JAN 92 / Prospects of talks on Ulster recede


   By RALPH ATKINS


THE PROSPECTS of 'round-table' talks on Northern Ireland taking place before
the general election receded sharply last night as the Northern Ireland
Office said that, in spite of discussions with local leaders, 'we are not
moving forward'.
Mr Peter Brooke, Northern Ireland secretary, met the nationalist Social
Democratic and Labour party yesterday to discuss how to overcome the biggest
obstacle remaining - whether talks could continue if interrupted by a
general election.
Mr Brooke is expected to meet Mr Gerry Collins, the Irish Republic's foreign
minister, today to discuss possible ways forward.
Meetings with Unionists are likely next week. The Northern Ireland Office
said the chances of making progress were 'receding . . . but it would be
wrong to stop at this point'.
Mr John Hume, SDLP leader, objects to the Unionists' insistance that they
could not necessarily continue talks if a Labour government were elected. He
says that represents an additional 'pre-condition'.
His party says talks should take place on the same basis as those last
summer, when Mr Brooke succeeded in bringing the main parties to the
negotiating table but failed to reach any agreement on Northern Ireland's
political future. Sinn Fein, the political wing of the IRA, is excluded from
the talks.
The imminence of the general election has altered the political atmosphere
in Northern Ireland. Unionists object to Labour's policy of Irish
unification by consent. Although officially it is denied, some Unionists may
also be hoping to hold the balance of power after the general election.
Mr Brooke had hoped for a meeting with all the province's political leaders
this week but that plan appears to have been shelved. The talks he envisages
would start with internal government in the province before considering
relations between north and south Ireland and between London and Dublin.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920117

