FT924-6481

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (10): Puzzling figures may be wrong -
Damian Fraser's guide to staying well-informed


   By DAMIAN FRASER


SINCE Mexico is awash with financial newspapers, magazines, newsletters,
government bulletins and press releases, one might think that obtaining
accurate and timely information is an easy matter. However, a lot of the
material published is of little use or misleadingly presented, while much
that would be useful never appears.
First port of call should be the National Institute of Statistics, Geography
and Informatics (Inegi), responsible for national accounts and other
official statistics. Based in the state of Aguascalientes, it is managed as
if it were an autonomous organisation, though it answers to the finance
ministry.
Inegi receives praise from international agencies, such as the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development, which are impressed by its s t a
t i s t i c a l techniques and professional integrity. It is responsible for
producing and/or disseminating basic economic statistics - quarterly GDP by
sector, monthly trade figures, monthly i n d u s t r i a l surveys and
monthly urban employment surveys. Every 10 years it conducts a general
census - the latest is for the period 1980-90 - and every five years a
general economic census.
While its information is usually accurate, it is not always accurately
reported, in part because press releases that accompany statistics are often
extremely misleading. On any given month, it is quite possible Mexican
newspapers will report four different trade figures.
Mexican idiosyncrasies also make some figures puzzling. Unemployment is
recorded at about 3 per cent, which no-one takes seriously. But this
reflects a tight United Nations definition of unemployment - anyone who has
worked more than a hour in a week is considered employed.
Lack of unemployment insurance in Mexico means just about everyone finds
some work for an hour. However, Inegi produces about 10 variations of
unemployment figures, to account for under-employment not captured by the UN
definition.
For these and other reasons it is best to obtain information direct from
Inegi. For recent economic figures, information can be received by fax
through a new service open to subscribers, known as Infofax (91-800-49059).
Alternatively, Inegi will send statistics by modem, or PC-disk.
Inegi's 1990 census offers a rich mine of material. All the population and
housing statistics are available on PC-diskette (and very soon on CD-ROM) at
a state, municipality, locality and even by 'block' (ie, four or so streets)
level.
Armed with the correct PC-disk you can discover the educational attainment
of residents, or the number of houses with electricity, running water,
sewerage, electricity in any specified block of streets in any Mexican town.
Such information could be used by a local p l a n n e r deciding where to
build a hospital, by businessmen interested in opening a supermarket, by
political parties wanting to target probable sympathisers and so on.
After Inegi in importance comes the Bank of Mexico. It produces figures for
inflation, foreign reserves (only three times a year), money growth, balance
of payments and financial markets.
Like Inegi, the Bank of Mexico has the infuriating habit of not saying
publicly and well in advance when its figures are to be released, nor can it
then be relied on to stick to the date. It does not even advise its
subscribers when its monthly indicators are ready. The Bank of Mexico has
the same source as Inegi for much of its material, and it is a mystery why
it is much slower in publishing its figures.
However, government departments and state companies are usually worse than
the Bank of Mexico. Perhaps the worst offender is Solidarity programme, an
anti-poverty project now under the Ministry of Social Development. While the
government is quick to reel off the number of new clinics, schools and homes
with potable water that Solidarity has delivered, academics complain there
is much less information on inputs, and thus the effectiveness of various
parts of the programme.
M e x i c o' s f i n a n c i a l newspapers and magazines provide an enough
information to overwhelm even the most enthusiastic reader. Since the M e x
i c a n press tends to attribute more significance to what important people
say than to what has actually happened, much of what is published can be
safely ignored. But senior government ministers occasionally drop
tantalising hints about the state of the economy in obscure places, so it is
usually worth reading their statements.
Perhaps the best source of financial and private sector information is
Infosel, the financial wire service owned by the Monterey newspaper El
Norte. This gives real time prices on equity, money and c o m m o d i t y
markets and market-related information on the companies and politics as it
becomes public. It also provides summaries of the Mexican and international
press.
Infosel has nearly 1,000 subscribers, and can be seen in the office of
practically every stockbroker, finance director and senior finance ministry
official. The main drawback is that with a market as volatile as Mexico's,
it becomes compulsive watching, and uses up much of the day.

The Financial Times


London Page V

921120

