FT921-11734

FT  30 JAN 92 / Business Law: Tax bill in US Congress seems to promote
takeovers


   By LEO HERZEL and WILLIAM A SCHMALZ


AN IMPORTANT tax bill pending in the US Congress would permit depreciation
of intangibles, including goodwill, for tax purposes. This would appear to
eliminate a major US tax barrier against take-overs.
Just a short time ago, Congress had been carefully scrutinising possible tax
incentives for acquisitions, such as deductions for interest expense, with
an eye towards removing them.
Now it is considering a proposal that appears to increase the tax
attractiveness of acquisitions, especially those in which large premiums are
paid.
In July last year, Congressman Dan Rostenkowski, who is chairman of the
powerful Ways and Means Committee, introduced a bill, HR 3035, adding a new
section 197 to the Internal Revenue Code. This was entitled 'Amortisation of
Goodwill and Certain other Intangibles'.
The bill would provide a uniform 14 year amortisation period for goodwill
and other intangibles.
While the bill did not come to a vote during 1991, it seems likely that it
will become a part of some future legislative package since both the
Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service support it.
Because the bill has such an important bearing on acquisition planning,
Congressman Rostenkowski has proposed that, when it is reintroduced into
Congress, it should be made retroactive to the date of its original
introduction last July.
The inability to deduct or amortise amounts paid for goodwill has long been
one of the main constraints in tax planning for acquisitions in the US.
While businessmen recognise that goodwill may be an important business
asset, they also recognise that its value may be fleeting. During the 1980s,
the large premiums paid in acquisitions often resulted in prices that
greatly exceeded the value of tangible assets, further increasing the
significance of the non-deductibility of goodwill.
By allowing amortisation of goodwill, HR 3035 would appear to increase the
attractiveness of acquisi-tions.
A closer examination of the proposal, however, reveals that the motive
behind it is not to provide a tax incentive for acquisitions.
During the 1980s, as the premiums paid in acquisitions increased so did the
incentives for creativity by tax advisers. Acquirers did not accept
fatalistically that the large premiums they paid had to be additional
goodwill.
Instead, the assets of targets were closely scrutinised to ensure that no
possible depreciable or amortisable asset was overlooked.
Along with patents, licences, favourable contracts, the deductible assets
uncovered included such items as:
workforce in place (experience and composition of existing workforce);
information base (business records, operating systems, etc);
customer-based intangibles (market share and composition);
and supplier-based intangibles (any expected special value in the future
from the acquisition of goods and services).
In many instances, the result was that the amount of the purchase price
remaining to be allocated to goodwill was quite small.
However, the Internal Revenue Service challenged many of these claimed
deductions.
Disputes between the Internal Revenue Service and taxpayers involving very
large sums of money ensued over whether these intangibles existed, the
appropriate period for their amortisation, and the portion of the total
purchase price that could be allocated to them.
The disputes are only now beginning to wind their way through the audit
process. Final resolutions by settle-ment or litigation are likely to be
years in the future.
Moreover, because of the highly specific factual nature of these disputes, a
resolution in one case usually provides only limited guidance for other
acquirers and the Internal Revenue Service.
These problems are the driving force behind the proposed legislation.
The uniform amortisation period for intangibles is intended to eliminate
disputes over the existence, value and life of intangible assets.
The bill is designed to be neutral with regard to tax revenue although
savings are anticipated from the reduction in complex disputes. Hence, the
amortisation of goodwill is expected to be financed by increasing the
amortisation period for some intangible assets.
For example, acquired computer software would be amortised over 14 years
rather than the current five years and covenants not to compete would be
amortised over 14 years rather than their likely much shorter lives.
Generally, the benefits (or detriments) of this new legislation would depend
on whether an acquirer bought assets rather than stock. Business
considerations may limit an acquirer's ability to choose.
For example, an acquirer may strongly prefer to buy assets because of
concerns about large, difficult-to-measure liabilities of the business being
acquired.
On the other hand, an acquirer who must make a hostile tender offer can only
buy stock.
A purchase of stock would not automatically permit an amortisation of the
acquired corporation's goodwill since the goodwill itself would not have
been purchased. An acquirer could elect to treat a purchase of stock as a
constructive purchase of assets for tax purposes and thereby come within the
scope of this new provision.
However, generally, this would not achieve the best tax result for an
acquirer because of the immediate taxable gain on the difference between the
purchase price and the tax basis of the assets.
In any contemplated acquisition, the effects of the proposed legislation
should be reviewed in detail.
In situations where, under existing law, large values could be ascribed to
intangibles for which a short useful life could be established, this bill
might reduce the tax benefits from an acquisition.
In situations where the major intangible is clearly goodwill, the bill could
make the acquisition much more attractive.
Accordingly, even if the aggregate effect on the value of acquisitions is
unchanged by the legislation, the allocation of values among individual
acquisitions may be changed drastically, making some previously unacceptable
deals attractive - and vice versa.
Any company considering an acquisition in the US should analyse the likely
effects of this bill and watch its progress in Congress.
The authors are partners in the Chicago office of US law firm Mayer Brown &
Platt.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

920130

