FT924-5929

FT  24 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Carlton consortium poised to gain control
of ITN


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


THE Carlton Communications-led consortium last night effectively won control
of Independent Television News, with the support of the news organisation's
top management.
A final deal offered last week to ITN shareholders, at present the ITV
companies, was accepted by companies holding 74.7 per cent of the shares.
As soon as the acceptances pass 75 per cent - and that will only need the
support of any of the small ITV companies which have not yet been formally
approached - the offer becomes unconditional.
The fundamental change in the ownership of ITN now seems certain to go ahead
because Thames Television, which ceases to be an ITV company at the end of
this year, has agreed to sell out for Pounds 14 a share.
At the same time Granada, Scottish and Anglia have agreed to join the
consortium.
Granada, Carlton, Central, London Weekend and Reuters will each have 18 per
cent with the 10 per cent balance held equally by Scottish and Anglia.
The consortium members are committed to raising up to Pounds 30m for ITN to
tackle a Pounds 5m a year lease deficit on its London headquarters.
When Mr Michael Green, chairman of Carlton, takes over as ITN chairman the
property problem is like to be at the top of his list.
The Pounds 14 a share offer will also be available to TVS and Television
South West, two other departing ITV companies.
The other ITV companies will only get par for their Pounds 1 shares but the
terms of a new supply agreement averaging Pounds 53.3m a year over five
years will be smoothed out to help companies in the first year of the new
franchises.
Yorkshire Television asked for and got a review of progress after two years.
It was concerned that ITV companies who were no longer shareholders in ITN
would also benefit from any cost-savings.
Undertakings have also been given on editorial and managerial independence.
Under government legislation the shareholding of ITN will have to change
again by the end of 1994.
By then 51 per cent of ITN has to be owned by non-ITV companies. The plan is
to bring in a US broadcaster.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921124

