FT922-13439

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Investment fillip for Peps


   By JOHN AUTHERS


PERSONAL EQUITY PLANS underwent a volcanic shift this week, even though the
nation opted for continuity.
From the start of this week, investors have been allowed to fill a Pounds
6,000 Pep with unit or investment trusts (unless the trusts have a
predominantly non-EC content, in which case the maximum Pep investment
remains Pounds 1,500).
Fears about the election seem to have moved many investors to do so - big
houses such as Fidelity, Save & Prosper and Invesco MIM all reported that
business had been much brisker than usual for the first week of the tax
year.
Those who bought a Pep this week, on the apparently muddled thinking that it
was a good idea to dive into equities immediately before a Labour government
took power, will now be feeling rather smug.
Yesterday's elated stock market reaction, however, has not dampened many
analysts' expectations of strong equity gains in the next nine months. And
that makes the opening offer discounts available from some managers all the
more enticing.
Schroders and Fidelity are offering a 1 per cent discount on unit trust Peps
until May 29. Scottish Widows has a similar discount until April 30 in a
range of three Peps.
The tax advantages of Peps mainly apply to those investing in income, but
'Recovery' or 'Special Situations' trusts, which aim for capital growth, may
appeal to those who believe that the economy will now grow sharply. The
combination of tax advantages, low charges, and the broader diversification
of unit trusts, means that fund managers now have a potent alternative to
life assurance-based products.
Understandably, fund managers rushed to offer their new Pounds 6,000
collective investment Peps, with one, Schroders, even managing to make an
announcement within an hour of the chancellor's speech on Budget day itself.
As Pounds 6,000 unit trust Peps are relatively cheap for managers to run, a
sharp increase in Pep marketing by life insurance companies can be expected.
The new Peps should have a number of advantages over the existing range of
life assurance products such as single-premium bonds and endowments, on
grounds both of performance and tax-efficiency, so this move should be
welcome.
However, this does not necessarily mean the death of the existing 'top-up'
Peps, where managers offer investors their maximum Pounds 3,000 in a unit
trust, and then supplement this with an extra Pounds 3,000 held in a 'pot'
of complementary equities.
Robin Berrill, managing director of Henderson, points out that most people
who want to put Pounds 6,000 into an equity-based investment in one year
would want the extra opportunity of holding some direct equities in any
case. But he accepts that demand for top-up Peps will be reduced to some
extent.
His company is offering the '3-Way Pep' for 'sophisticated' investors. This
allows an equally spread Pep invested in unit trusts, investment trusts and
direct equities, or 100 per cent in either a unit trust or an investment
trust.
Marketeers might now try to sell plans as a financial planning tool, and
package them in different ways. Peps could, for example, be packaged for
school plans, or, in conjunction with term assurance, for backing up
mortgages. Attempts to do this have so far largely been unsuccessful, mainly
because direct equities are, rightly, perceived as a risk investment. Now,
more strenuous Pep marketing can commence.
The ability to fund Peps through regular savings is also central to this new
appeal, which explains why one measure in the small print has infuriated
managers and could, they say, significantly dampen demand for this form of
long-term saving.
Keith Crowley, marketing director of Invesco MIM, one of the market leaders,
was angered by the Inland Revenue's ruling that, from now on, all long-term
regular savings plans held in a Pep should be formally renewed, with full
documentation from the saver, each year.
He thinks this could have a 'very negative impact' on the market for Pep
saving plans, which have a tough battle against endowments, which are less
tax-efficient but still heavily sold.
Crowley points out that the chances of losing Pep accounts through 'inertia'
are great, and that investors who have only held a plan for one or two years
could be left with small, inefficient holdings.
The Unit Trust Association also lobbied hard for a change to this rule.
Julian Shersby, of the UTA, said: 'It would be impossible to have the money
coming in via a standing order, but leave the fund manager with no authority
to invest it in the plan until a signature had been obtained.'
The Revenue relented slightly after hearing such complaints, and the rule
will not now come into force until the beginning of the next tax year
(1993-94). But it still wants to keep the rule, to guard against savers
fraudulently taking out more than one Pep.
Plan managers are likely to continue arguing for a change in the rules. They
are wise to do so. Now that they have at last been given the opportunity to
show that they can deliver tax-efficient long-term saving vehicles, it would
be a pity if this administrative glitch knocked them back.
Market conditions are now favourable. And even over the last ten years,
collective trust savings schemes have beaten life assurance endowments.
According to figures from Micropal, if you had invested Pounds 50 monthly
for ten years in the Law Debenture investment trust, the investment would
now be worth more than triple the total money paid into it. If held in a
Pep, no CGT would be paid on it. Law Debenture, an independent international
general trust managed by Touche Remnant, is the best performing investment
trust savings scheme.
Meanwhile, endowment returns look less healthy. Pearl Assurance, which led
last year's Money Management survey of endowments over ten years, is now
offering a pay-out of Pounds 7,561 for those who have saved Pounds 3,600 in
premiums - only just doubling investors' money.
It would be a pity if administrative red tape barred the way to the highly
efficient saving which Pep savings schemes now offer for another five years
to come.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920411

