FT922-13276

FT  13 APR 92 / UK Company News: New generation looks to the future - The
recession-battered UK mortgage market


   By DAVID BARCHARD


AFTER THREE years of recession in the housing market the UK mortgage
business is littered with the corpses of former hopefuls who entered it at
the height of the 1980s mortgage boom.
No fewer than thirty mortgage portfolios belonging to smaller lenders are
currently on the market.
Some of the stars of the 1980s mortgage market, such as National Home Loans
and The Mortgage Corporation, have more or less put lending on a backburner
for the time being.
Others have given up completely. Chase Manhattan sold its mortgage business
to the Household Mortgage Corporation last year, while Canadian Imperial
Bank of Commerce has been seeking a buyer for many months.
Prior to this some American banks, such as Chemical Bank and Bank of
America, abandoned the UK mortgage market even before the housing boom had
ended because of balance sheet pressures in the US. Citybank, however, one
of the survivors, has remained in the market. Little is also heard these
days from United Bank of Kuwait and Sumitomo, the two foreign banks which
attracted widespread publicity in the mid-1980s by undercutting other
mortgage lenders.
However, one group of recent entrants to the UK mortgage market shows no
signs of folding its tents. It is the group of banks from mainland Europe,
mostly from France, which entered the market in the late 1980s with a view
to learning about the British mortgage industry in advance of 1993 and the
Single European Market.
'We want to be in most of the European Community countries and this is the
best mortgage market in Europe, with more transactions and a higher
percentage of home ownership than anywhere else. It is also the easiest to
get into since there are fewer government restrictions,' says Mr James
Schoedinger, chairman of UCB, a French mortgage and commercial lender, owned
by Compagnie Bancaire and the Paribas Group.
UCB entered the UK mortgage market in 1986 by buying up Commercial Credit's
mortgage operation which then had a book of Pounds 200m. It now has 16
branches and a mortgage book of Pounds 2.7bn which would put it nearly half
way up the table of the top twenty building societies.
Other French banks in the UK mortgage market include Credit Agricole, with a
book of Pounds 600m; BNP, which bought Chemical Bank's mortgage book in 1989
and now has a book of Pounds 2bn, Credit Fonciere and Societe Generale. The
last two are represented by a joint venture called Capital Home Loans which
has a book of Pounds 200m.
The stream of new recruits has not dried up. Credit Lyonnais is currently
setting up a UK mortgage operation, to be run by Mr Alan Guyatt, the former
manager of Chase Manhattan's mortgage operation. French banks have been able
to enter the UK market and stay in it partly because most of them are
state-owned institutions which are not under the same capital constraints as
their competitors in other countries.
But they are not alone. One Italian Bank, San Paolo, remains in the UK
market and another Italian housing finance specialist institution says that
it is still contemplating entering the UK.
Scandinavia is represented by Mortgage Trust, owned by Scandinavian Bank,
with a mortgage book of around Pounds 1bn.
Hypo-Bank, Germany's second largest mortgage lender, also entered the UK
market in 1989 as Mortgage Services and has since built up a sizeable
lending book of about Pounds 1.5bn.
'It was difficult to get the business at that time but we have also had
fewer problems than the earlier entrants did. We want to expand into a high
quality long-term book,' says Mr Peter Sewell, managing director of MSL.
MSL has kept a low profile in the UK market partly because Germany has a
highly regulated housing finance system which, unlike France or Spain, most
foreign banks have so far regarded as an almost impossible tough nut to
crack - Single Market or no Single Market. 'There are a lot of lessons to be
learned on both sides. The UK can learn a lot about fixed rate mortgages
from the Germans,' says Mr Sewell.
The Europeans in the UK mortgage market have learned some painful lessons
themselves. Last year UCB made a profit of around Pounds 6m on its mortgage
business, but not everyone has found it so easy.
Like the other 1980s specialist mortgage companies, the UK mortgage
subsidiaries of the European banks sold most of their mortgages via the life
assurance industry and panels of intermediaries. This was the sort of
lending which later turned out to be most risky.
Mr Pierre Dardalhon, chief executive of Capital Home Loans, says: 'We are
not a money-losing operation, but it is difficult to make a profit in this
market.' Mr John Schuster, chief executive of BNP Mortgage, says that all
the European lenders are now going for quality.
They all look set to stay in the UK. Though none of the other lenders can
rival UCB's 16 branches and 700 staff, most now have substantial presences
in the UK. Even the newest entrant, Credit Lyonnais, has an existing network
of eight branches handling corporate business. A generation of mainland
European bankers is growing up with personal experience of life in the UK
markets.
The unspoken question among many British banks and building societies is how
long will it take before at least some of these continental mortgage
operations develop into springboards for full scale retail banking
operations.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920413

