FT921-15207

FT  11 JAN 92 / Property: Marble at all this - Apartment blocks on the Costa
del Sol


   By AUDREY POWELL


IF YOU fancy an apartment in the 17-acre Spanish beachside development of
Los Granados, adjoining Puerto Banus marina on the Costa del Sol, it would
be as well to like marble.
The interior and interior facades of the three apartment blocks - 322 units
altogether - are of white marble. Staircases, floors, terraces, even the
flower boxes are of marble. The lifts are lined with the stuff.
So far, one block has been completed. (Some 750,000 sq ft of marble has been
used on this block, with the administration office and beach club.) Marble
'bricks' pave the walkways. In all, when the other two apartment buildings
are finished, some 1,930,000 sq ft of marble will have gone into Los
Granados.
The apartment blocks form a semi-circle facing the sea; they are on four
floors. Rear windows look out at La Concha mountain. Each building has its
own swimming pool and penthouses, and the ground floor apartments have
private pools. There is a choice of units containing one to four bedrooms.
Those at ground level have their own gardens, raised 6 ft above the communal
garden for privacy.
The beach club has a restaurant, gymnasium and indoor heated swimming pool.
There are three tennis courts. The colourful life of Marbella is a few
minutes away, and the Costa del Sol offers 27 golf courses; a number
expected to rise to 40 by 1995.
Prices for Los Granados apartments range from about Pounds 250,000 to Pounds
1m, for a penthouse. Maintenance charges average Pounds 4,000 a year.
The estate is a joint venture between Immobiliaria Espacio (whose parent
company is under the direction of a former Spanish minister of finance), and
Kepro, a subsidiary of Kemper, a Chicago insurance company. (For the
Marbella site office tel: 814353 and in the UK tel: 081-743-5988).
Los Granados sales are said to be improving, but elsewhere it is hard to
detect significant signs of an upturn along the coast. Knight Frank &
Rutley, one of the UK's larger estate agencies, has closed the office it
opened last year at Guadalmina on the Costa del Sol; this has been taken
over by Barbara Wood, who managed the office for KFR. It is now being run as
BD Wood Property Services, in association with Knight Frank & Rutley.
It seems that KFR did not envisage a recovery in the market coming quickly
enough - though 'it seems to have perked up in recent months.' KFR will
continue to give Wood the international back-up needed to benefit sales of
higher priced properties. Wood concedes that, at this level, things have
been 'extremely difficult' over the last 12 months. 'However, recently we
have achieved a number of sales between Pounds 200,000 and Pounds 1.5m.'
Moving further along the Spanish coastline towards Gibraltar, Hamptons
International is offering the last dozen or so units in the holiday complex
at Alcazaba Beach, Estepona, where prices have been reduced by 40 per cent.
Two-bedroom, two-bathroom apartments that came on the market at Pounds
145,000 are now Pounds 89,000. (Tel: 071-493-8222 in the UK.)

The Financial Times


London Page XIV Photograph Part of the first phase of the Los Granados
(Pomegranates) Estate next to Puerto Banus (Omitted).

920111

