FT921-3916

FT  12 MAR 92 / Technology: Multilinguals on the open road - As Europe's
single market approaches, Della Bradshaw examines systems that translate
documents into several languages


   By DELLA BRADSHAW


In less than 10 months' time there will be a single European market: but
there will not be a single European language. As a result manufacturers
wanting to sell their wares across boundaries will be forced to translate
their product information.
Ahead of the pack, Xerox, the US electronics company, has long translated
its technical documentation for use in Europe. Although translation services
have traditionally been a cottage industry, Rank Xerox turned to computer
technology for assistance.
Machines at Rank Xerox in the UK now translate 10,000 pages a year from
English into 10 European languages. Mike Scott, of Rank Xerox's Language
Technology Centre, believes the machines can at least halve the time it
takes to complete the task.
As pressure on manufacturers to reduce product lead times increases,
computers are proving ever more valuable, says Alan Portela, vice president
of marketing for Systran, of La Jolla, California. 'Today large corporations
that have to translate huge manuals in a short time have only one option -
machine translation.'
Manufacturers emphasise that time savings can only be achieved if the text
follows a narrowly-defined format. 'The system can only translate what has
been stated in a sentence, not what could possibly have been meant,' says
Thomas Schneider, manager in charge of linguistics and terminology at
Siemens-Nixdorf, in Munich.
This means the systems are best suited to the translation of instruction and
maintenance manuals, where the documentation is bulky but where clarity of
expression rather than elegance of phrase is required. 'They are designed to
work on logical English - not poetry,' says Phil Wrenn, senior applications
engineer at Intergraph, the US computer group.
Nevertheless, different types of translation machines are suited to
different types of text. Machines fall into three types:
Batch systems, where a document is fed into the computer in one language and
emerges in a second language. The Systran and Siemens-Nixdorf machines fall
into this category.
Computer-assisted, or interactive, systems where the text is translated a
sentence at a time, and constantly checked by a human translator. If the
computer cannot find a word in the dictionary, then it will stop and prompt
the translator to help.
Computerised dictionaries, which are used as an aid by translators. Although
not as sophisticated as the first two, these dictionaries ensure that
several translators working on a single text use consistent terminology.
Batch systems are most effective for technical literature and need three
types of dictionary, says Jane Mason, language technology consultant at the
Rank Xerox Language Technology Centre. These are a general dictionary -
English to French, for example; an industry dictionary for, say, the
pharmaceuticals industry; and one developed for the specific company.
Working on short, terse sentences - Mason recommends training the authors to
write text with translation in mind - the results can be extremely
effective. A human translator using a batch system could translate between
5,000 and 10,000 words a day. Most of the manual work would be at the
'post-editing' phase, once the machine had completed its task. A human
translator working alone could manage only 1,500 words a day.
However, if inadequate preparation is done, the results can be of little
use, says Scott. 'It's a one-shot system. If it has the wrong terminology it
would repeat the error over and over again. When it is below the 70 to 80
per cent correct level, you might as well translate it sentence by
sentence.'
By comparison, interactive systems enable a translator to handle between
2,000 and 4,000 words a day, but the advantage is that they can be used for
translating more general text - sales and marketing information, for
example.
Many large US companies, such as Eastman Kodak, General Motors and General
Dynamics already use machine translation systems. In Europe, companies have
been more hesitant, although the German software house Sap and the German
subsidiary of Philips are among several large companies that have taken the
plunge.
The European Commission, too, uses computer translation systems. It has also
begun a programme to develop its own system, Eurotra, which will handle nine
European languages. A small-scale prototype has been developed, says Sergei
Perschke, programme manager, which can handle scientific and technical
documentation. However, he reckons it will be a further 10 years before an
operational system can be produced.
'As far as the technology is concerned, the computers are quite
appropriate,' Perschke points out. 'The main problems are linguistic.'
Each language presents its own problems, says Schneider. English has a lot
of words such as 'back', which can be a noun, adjective or participle. In
German, on the other hand, words can have an almost free word order - with
the object at the beginning of the sentence or the subject at the end.
Recent years have seen a great improvement in the software. Whereas systems
used to translate a word at a time, they now work on phrases or whole
sentences, and relate one sentence back to another. So if the sentences 'The
cat sat on the mat. It drank a saucer of milk,' were translated, the
software would recognise that the 'It' of the second sentence referred to
the cat, not the mat.
Today's machines also incorporate artificial intelligence techniques. So the
Intergraph system teaches itself to recognise the words within the context
of the article it is reading, says Wrenn. The first time it translates a
document for a particular company or industry it will get only about 45 per
cent of the words correct. But learning from the corrections it will achieve
up to 95 per cent accuracy by the time the fourth or fifth document, on a
related topic, is translated.
On the document production side Systran, Siemens-Nixdorf and Intergraph have
all combined translation software with publishing software, so that a
document can be produced that incorporates both text and diagrams or
photographs.
Developments in computer hardware, particularly of smaller and more powerful
machines, have also benefited machine translation customers.
Intergraph, for example, has transferred its software from a Digital
Equipment Vax machine to workstations running under the Unix operating
system and Siemens-Nixdorf plans a similar move.
However, the fall in the price of hardware is unlikely to have a striking
impact on the price of the overall system, says Schneider, as the software
has proven so expensive to develop - in the case of Siemens-Nixdorf some
DM60m (Pounds 21m).
'If you look at the development costs, the software is dirt cheap to buy,'
says Schneider. A typical system with five workstations would cost DM
250,000.
This overhead means that only large users - those translating more than
2,000 pages a year - would benefit from buying their own equipment. But both
the larger translation agencies, and some of the manufacturers, offer
services for smaller companies.
Rank Xerox, for example, sells translation services through its Language
Translation Centre. Anyone with a 200-page document for translation would
find the service economical, says Scott.
In the US, Systran offers a range of services. Companies can even have
on-line access to the Systran database, to send their documentation over the
phone line for translation. This costs about Dollars 13 (Pounds 7.50) a page
and, says Portela, is suitable for companies that need between 50 and 100
pages a month translated.
Systran can also carry out the machine translation of a text and then send
it to a traditional translation agency to apply the post-editing polish. The
documents are then returned to the originating company in a camera-ready
form - photos and diagrams included - for printing. Portela estimates the
cost of this is about Dollars 25 a page. A traditional translator would
charge Dollars 50 a page.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920312

