FT924-6230

FT  23 NOV 92 / France ponders farm deal rejection


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


THE French government this week faces a critical decision as to whether to
carry out its threat of rejecting the agricultural trade deal struck on
Friday night between the European Community and the US in the face of bitter
opposition from France's farmers.
The government is expected to delay taking a final decision until after a
National Assembly debate on Wednesday, the same day that France's farmers
plans to stage nationwide protests against the proposed agreement. Meanwhile
French officials will today start trying to hammer out a compromise at a
meeting in Brussels before the European Commission meets on Wednesday.
France faces an unenviable choice over the farming deal. If it accepts the
draft agreement the unpopular Socialist government, desperately hoping to
win back public approval in the four months before next year's general
elections, would almost certainly face stormy protests from the farm lobby.
However, if France rejected the agreement it would not only risk triggering
a trade war with the US but also finding itself isolated within the
increasingly fragmented EC in the throes of this autumn's currency crisis
and the acrimonious debate over the ratification of the Maastricht treaty.
Last night Prime Minister Pierre Beregovoy, speaking on French television,
said Friday's draft agreement was 'unacceptable' and said it would 'involve
a reduction in exports under circumstances that would be intolerable for our
agricultural economy'. He said he hoped to secure the agreement of other EC
member states to block the proposals and it would only be after Wednesday's
meeting 'that we will know whether France is isolated'.
Mr Beregovoy appeared to be pinning his hopes of averting a domestic
political crisis on wringing a last-minute compromise from the EC by
stressing that France was chiefly concerned about the incompatibility
between Friday's deal and last May's reform of the EC's Common Agricultural
Policy (CAP). The concern here is that production cuts under the US/EC
compromise might be more than those already agreed under the CAP reform.
Mr Beregovoy has urged the EC to analyse whether the deal would contravene
the CAP.
The right-wing opposition has attempted to exploit the government's
embarassment. Mr Francois Bayrou, general secretary of the UDF, one of the
largest opposition parties, said he 'supported' the government's opposition
to the deal but criticised its handling of the negotiations.
The opposition may abstain from Wednesday's National Assembly debate thereby
ensuring that the socialists take full responsibility for the consequences.
Meanwhile there were angry protests outside government buildings in Reims,
Lille and Meurthe as French farmers started their protests against the US-EC
deal in the run-up to Wednesday's demonstrations.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921123

