FT923-10990

FT  28 JUL 92 / Baghdad hails 'victory' over UN weapons team


   By MARK NICHOLSON, Middle East Correspondent


IRAQ yesterday proclaimed it had won a 'brilliant victory' over the United
Nations by reaching agreement for a team of 'neutral' UN weapons experts to
inspect an agriculture ministry building.
Under the agreement, which defused the most serious threat of resumed allied
military action against Iraq since the Gulf war, a team of seven UN
inspectors, led by Mr Achim Biermann, arrives in Baghdad today to complete
inspection there of the ministry building, from which a previous UN team had
been barred since July 5.
However, Mr Rolf Ekeus, chairman of the special commission investigating
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, said on his way to Baghdad that he was
pessimistic that the team would now find anything in the building.
British officials said they expected the team to find only 'some traces' of
the documents and materials relating to Iraq's missile programme which UN
inspectors suspected to have been hidden in the agriculture ministry.
The original team of UN chemical weapons inspectors called off a vigil
outside the building last week in the face of concerted and increasingly
hostile demonstrations.
Both Iraq and the Gulf war allies yesterday claimed that the other side had
backed down.
Mr Mohammed Hamza al-Zubeidi, Iraq's prime minister, said in a statement
carried by the Iraqi news agency that the UN's agreement to send in a team
of inspectors excluding nationals from the main Gulf war protagonists was a
'brilliant victory' which 'incarnated the solid national will of the Iraqis'
around President Saddam Hussein.
President George Bush, meanwhile, claimed that Mr Saddam had climbed down
and said that further 'infringements' of the Gulf war ceasefire terms would
not be tolerated. US officials said President Bush was due to meet senior
national security advisers last night - the third such meeting in a week.
British and US officials stressed yesterday that although the crisis over
the agriculture ministry building had eased, to the extent that the
immediate threat of military action against Iraq had been deferred, there
was continued concern over other aspects of Iraq's more general defiance of
the UN and the west.
'The atmosphere will remain fairly hot for a while yet,' said a British
official.
Diplomats were unconvinced, in particular, that the stand-off over UN access
to the agriculture ministry would be the last time Mr Saddam would attempt a
provocative policy of 'cheat and retreat'.
With few other readily available options, diplomats say the Gulf war allies
will maintain pressure over not only the UN weapons inspectors' access to
Iraqi installations but also over the safety of UN guards in northern Iraq,
Baghdad's attacks on Shia Moslems in the south and other breaches of the
ceasefire resolution. These include the non-return of Kuwaiti property
snatched during the war and the alleged detention of several hundred Kuwaiti
prisoners of war.
The US yesterday also kept the threat of military action alive by preparing
to send another aircraft carrier to the Gulf region.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920728

