FT923-6445

FT  25 AUG 92 / Italy's TV channels refuse to switch off


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


A NEW drama began on Italy's television screens yesterday as hundreds of
broadcasters, outlawed earlier this month, vowed to continue transmitting in
spite of a deadline to close at midnight last Sunday.
The sword has been hanging over many of Italy's commercial broadcasters
since a 1990 law aimed at tidying up the country's crowded airwaves obliged
the government to allocate frequencies by last Sunday. Formalising the
chaotic broadcasting rules had often been promised, but never delivered as
ministers shied away from tackling such a highly-charged political issue.
In the 12 years since private stations started transmitting, the country has
developed a patchwork of broadcasters ranging from slick national channels
to tiny low-powered local stations, some of which are believed to be fronts
for organised crime.
The list of concessions agreed this month by the new government of Mr
Giuliano Amato gave the green light to the three private channels controlled
by Fininvest, the holding company of Mr Silvio Berlusconi. Other big private
broadcasters allowed to continue were Rete A, Telemontecarlo and, subject to
certain conditions, the three Tele + pay TV channels, established by Mr
Berlusconi, in which he is now only a minority shareholder.
However, almost 800 local applicants were excluded. In the Lombardy region
alone, Italy's richest, only 47 of the 181 stations which sought
authorisation were approved.
Hundreds of stations have vowed to carry on regardless, ahead of what is
likely to be a heated parliamentary debate. The local broadcasters have
dismissed the list as arbitrary and unfair. Meanwhile, members of the
Democratic party of the Left (PDS), the former communists, claim the
concessions have given too much power to Mr Berlusconi.
Dozens of local stations have already banded together into a new committee
and their campaign is set to gather momentum when others join as expected at
a meeting in Bologna later this week.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920825

