FT924-788

FT  22 DEC 92 / Panic alleges widespread fraud: Milosevic nationalists head
for victory in Serbian presidential elections


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


MR MILAN PANIC, the Yugoslav prime minister, yesterday alleged widespread
fraud in Sunday's Serbian presidential elections as early returns pointed to
a victory for the incumbent, Mr Slobodan Milosevic, and his nationalists.
Unofficial and partial results showed that Mr Milosevic had Received 56 per
cent compared with 34 per cent for Mr Panic, with about 23 per cent of the
vote counted.
Mr Ivica Dacic, spokesman for Mr Milosevic's Socialist party, said: 'We are
confident that Milosevic is convincingly ahead of Panic and that he will win
in the first round.'
Mr Panic's office claimed, on the basis of exit polls, that the
Yugoslav-born California businessman was still ahead of Mr Milosevic. But
Serbia's Socialists and the allied ultranationalist Serbian Radical party
appeared to be leading the poll for the Serbian and federal parliaments.
The Socialists last night even claimed Mr Milosevic had de-feated Mr Panic
in Belgrade, the Serbian and federal capital, an opposition stronghold.
Mr Panic said he would seek an annulment of Sunday's ballot and demand a
rerun within 90 days.
He said the election committee had counted ballots for the presidential race
in local municipalities instead of sending them to the central electoral
committee where observers were present.
A team of observers from the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe backed Mr Panic's claims of election irregularities.
Observers, opposition leaders and diplomats all reported numerous cases of
people's names being deleted from voter registers, ballot box stuffing, and
unsealed ballot boxes.
The US State Department said US and other western observers had found
'significant irregularities' in the conduct of the election in Serbia.
'However, neither we nor the CSCE election observers have been able to make
a judgment yet as to whether these problems with the electoral lists were
the result of deliberate patterns of exclusion or the result of
administrative errors,' said Mr Richard Boucher of the State Department.
Foreign observers said the race was unfair from the start because of the
bias of Television Serbia under Mr Milosevic's control.
The Serbian presidential race overshadowed parliamentary, federal and local
elections in Montenegro. The two republics together claim the mantle of
former Yugoslavia, which is not recognised internationally.
Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary, warned yesterday that time was
running out for Serbia to make 'rapid and radical' changes to end its
aggression or face total isolation in the international community.
Speaking after a meeting of European Community foreign ministers, he said he
expected the UN Security Council to pass a resolution providing for
enforcement of a no-fly zone over Bosnia.
Mr Hurd said there would be a delay in enforcement while the UN tested
whether the Serbs intended to comply.
Hardliners call the tune, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921222

