FT924-6458

FT  20 NOV 92 / N-industry angry over funding cut


   By DAVID LASCELLES and ALISON SMITH


THE UK nuclear industry reacted angrily yesterday to the government's
decision to cease funding for research and development of the European fast
reactor, the joint programme by the UK, France and Germany. Others welcomed
the decision, given the uncertain outlook for nuclear power.
Mr Tim Eggar, energy minister, told MPs that the government had concluded
that it could not justify continuing the research, because design validation
had been completed and there was 'general agreement that the commercial
deployment of the fast reactor will not be justified until well into the
next century'.
He said that about 270 jobs would be lost: about 40 of them at Dounreay,
Caithness, and about 160 of them at Risley, Cheshire. Some 40 people were
also likely to be made redundant at Winfrith, Dorset.
In a joint statement, Nuclear Electric, Scottish Nuclear, British Nuclear
Fuels and AEA Technology - all government-owned - said they 'greatly'
regretted the move. Mr John Collier, chairman of Nuclear Electric, said
there were signs of growing interest in fast reactors in Japan, the US,
Russia and Spain.
In spite of Mr Eggar's insistence that the government was following a
recommendation by the cross-party Commons energy committee in 1990, that it
should review the position after the design validation process, he came
under attack from across the Commons.
Tory and opposition MPs warned with dismay of the consequences of the UK's
giving up its lead in this field, because it was impossible 'to mothball
nuclear physics'.
Rejecting the charge that the government was not committed to the research,
Mr Eggar said that during the past 40 years more than Pounds 4bn (at 1992
prices) had been spent on the project.
Dr Brian Eyre, chief executive of AEA Technology, said he was deeply
disappointed by the decision because the EFR project 'was within reach of
building a commercial demonstration plant'.
Mr John Chesshire, of the Science Policy Research Unit at Sussex University,
said the government was correct because of what he described as 'the major
reassessment' being made about the economics of nuclear power. He estimated
that uranium would have to be 15 times as expensive before fast breeders
could come into their own financially.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921120

