FT924-6278

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (2): Hey, big spenders - please come
back / The mounting problems of the luxury goods industry, which is facing
both recession and a backlash against the conspicuous consumption of the
1980s


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


SOME people, it seems, just cannot stop spending money. The other day, a
wealthy Arab commandeered no fewer than 64 rooms at the Hotel Bristol in
Paris and set off on a shopping spree with his female friends. The bill came
to Dollars 500,000 - and that was just for Giorgio Armani.
Unfortunately for Armani and his fellow fashion designers, the shopaholic
Arab is the exception rather than the rule. The luxury goods industry is in
the doldrums.
The smart shopping streets of New York, London and Milan are scarred by
boarded-up windows. Some businesses have gone bust. Others are struggling
for survival.
The recession is the biggest problem, of course. Not only has it left
consumers with less money to spend - it has contributed to the backlash
against the conspicuous consumption of the 1980s by creating a new climate
in which splashing out on status symbols is not quite the thing to do.
But the effect of the recession has been aggravated by the internal changes
within the industry. A new breed of groups dealing in luxury goods invested
in fashion during the 1980s - Dunhill with Chloe and Karl Lagerfeld; Orcofi,
which owns Lanvin; and Bernard Arnault's interests, which include Christian
Dior, Givenchy and Christian Lacroix.
These companies have raised the cost of competing in the luxury sector,
thereby intensifying the pressure on smaller players. The problems were
apparent even before the recession and now seem set to worsen in the chilly
climate of the early 1990s.
When the new investors first appeared, their influence was almost purely
positive. They brought new capital into the industry together with the
management skills that (they hoped) would modernise the old-established
fashion houses.
These groups all adopted similar strategies, generally following the
precedent set by Alain Wertheimer, the reclusive Swiss businessman who took
over Chanel late in the 1970s. They rationalised their newly-acquired
companies by weeding out the less prestigious licencees and retail outlets.
They also brought in new, younger designers to revitalise the creative side
of the businesses.
They harnessed the publicity generated by these designers to launch new
perfumes and licenced lines. Then, they invested heavily to maintain the
high profiles of their fashion houses. There were lavish fragrance launch
parties, soaring advertising budgets and extravagant catwalk collections.
It is no coincidence that the rise of the super-models, with their fees of
up to Dollars 10,000 a show, came at the same time as the expansion of the
luxury goods groups.
All this spending made fashion seem more exciting. The new investors even
managed to allay initial fears that transforming fashion into a serious
business could compromise its creativity. This was mainly because one of the
main themes of fashion in the 1980s was the use of the collections as
publicity vehicles to generate press coverage for the scents, sunglasses and
licenced lines that really made money.
It was, thus, in the financial interest of the new investors to allow their
designers to be as wild and wacky as they wished. The signature Y-fronts
sported by the super-models at last month's Chanel show might not ammount to
much in sales terms - Chanel will be selling them this spring at Pounds 100
a pair - but they produced hundreds of thousands of pounds in free
publicity.
Moreover, the stylistic trends of the 1980s - reflecting the opulence of the
decade and the post-modernist emphasis on reinterpreting historical imagery
 -were compatible with the aims of the new investors. They wanted their
designers to create luxurious images for the fashion houses - preferably
laced with an air of European 'authenticity' to appeal to the fast-growing
Japanese market.
As a result, the new investors benefited from a happy confluence between
their own commercial needs and the creative direction of fashion design. But
all that has changed.
The new themes in fashion, the hippy nouvelle styles in the latest Paris and
Milan collections, and the 'grunge' look that surfaced in New York, are not
suited nearly as well to the needs of the luxury goods groups as the glossy
fashions of the 1980s.
Many established houses have reverted to their old roles of creating
glamorous looks for the middle-aged customers who make up the bulk of their
market. This is the strategy that Lanvin has chosen by replacing the
flamboyant Claude Montana, with the more muted Dominique Morlotti.
The hitch is that this approach is neither creatively in tune with the
times, nor is it exciting enough to produce photo opportunities for the
paparazzi.
In addition, the growth of the luxury goods groups is now posing serious
problems for the rest of the industry. The gap between the large and small
designers, who cannot afford to spend Dollars 200,000 on a catwalk show or
Dollars 50m to launch a new perfume, is wider than ever. It is now much more
costly and complex for small companies to build up their businesses,
particularly during a recession.
The new investors also are suffering. They put money into luxury goods when
the market was buoyant, and are now attempting to recoup their investments
in a very different environment.
Yves Saint-Laurent reported a sharp fall in profits recently. Lanvin had to
cut back on the renovation of its Paris shops because of problems in Japan.
Arnault has not yet recovered a penny of the Pounds 20m he spent on Lacroix,
or of the Pounds 17.5m he sank into C'est La Vie], its ill-fated fragrance.
The industry is trapped in a vicious cycle, with the big groups squeezing
out their smaller competitors without achieving any real improvement in
their own interests. This scenario shows no sign of stopping.
The recession might be making it more difficult for the luxury goods groups
to develop their existing interests, but it is also creating new
opportunities for expansion by destabilising other companies.
A stake in Yves Saint-Laurent is said to be up for sale, as is a chunk of
shares in Gucci. So far, there is no sign of a deal on either front -
although the prospect of a few more shopaholic Arabs might hurry them along.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921121

