FT922-668

FT  26 JUN 92 / International Company News: Toyota keeps to its tried and
tested formula - But there are signs of dissension over its high-volume
strategy


   By STEVEN BUTLER


DISSENSION in the boardroom is not standard Japanese management practice.
Yet subtle signs are emerging that Toyota Motor, Japan's most profitable
company as well as its biggest carmaker, is locked in debate over which
direction to turn the steering wheel.
Toyota is trying to decide what implications to draw from the current steep
downturn in the vehicle market. Is it simply a cyclical decline from which
Toyota and rest of the industry will recover in due course? Or rather, is it
the sign of changing times, which will require Toyota to lower its long-term
growth expectations, lengthen product cycles, reduce the number of models on
sale, raise prices and profits, and stop expanding so aggressively overseas?
Depending on who you talk to at Toyota these days, you could get a very
different answer.
The road that Toyota eventually chooses matters a lot to the rest of the
vehicle industry. With 41 per cent of the domestic Japanese market, and
Dollars 13bn in the bank, it is the world's richest vehicle company. This
year's expected 30 per cent decline in pre-tax profits is, by itself,
unimportant in the longer term because Toyota has the resources to carry on
with a low-margin, high-volume strategy for a very long time.
Competitors like Nissan Motor, number two in Japan, which are openly saying
they want higher profits rather than growth in sales, may have a tough time
realising this goal unless Toyota gives them some breathing space.
The prospect of a turn away from growth strategies has been discussed widely
in the Japanese media.
'Yes, there have been a lot of articles about this recently,' concedes Mr
Soichiro Toyoda, president of Toyota, with a slightly dismissive air, as
though Toyota need not overly concern itself with the latest fad
preoccupying the press.
'By now, I have more than 30 years experience in vehicles, and it is not the
case that the industry only goes up,' he says. 'It is normal for business to
be good and then to be bad. Even though it is bad now, it will improve.
Therefore, there is room for hope for the world's automobile industry.'
Translated, this sphinx-like pronouncement means that Mr Toyoda does not
believe the recession marks the end of an era of rapid growth for the
Japanese companies. It is simply one more economic cycle to be ridden out.
A more junior director at Toyota, however, sees the situation somewhat
differently, and says Toyota must adapt to longer-term expectations of lower
growth and improve the quality of its profits.
'The strategy must be to shift toward quality, to emphasise quality,' he
says. This does not mean, however, just selling more luxury cars. 'I don't
think we will be one-sidedly focusing on the upper end of the market.'
Rather, according to this director, Toyota will have to do what many critics
of the company are demanding: raise margins by cutting down on the variety
of optional equipment it offers to its customers and pulling out of
low-volume niche markets by reducing the number of models available.
'The product cycle will be getting longer,' he says. 'All the manufacturers
will be moving in this direction.'
Mr Toyoda, however, sees things somewhat differently. Because Toyota's
customers are demanding new models and because Toyota must introduce new
technology to meet safety and environmental standards, he says lengthening
the model cycle beyond the current four-year standard will be difficult.
He says: 'Because of the two factors - the wishes of customers and the hopes
of society - our technicians are unable to relax. There is a feeling that we
are too exhausted and wouldn't it be nice to lengthen the model cycle, but
it is difficult because not all of us agree on this.'
It is, of course, natural in a company the size of Toyota that its leaders
would not all see the future the same way, and there is no suggestion that
Toyota is in disarray. Mr Stephen Usher, analyst at Kleinwort Benson,
nonetheless sees evidence of indecision, and of a split in the company's
directors between an old guard that does not wish to change its ways, and
younger executives who believe that Toyota has reached a turning point.
He says: 'They are like the bully on the block who won't back down, but
doesn't want to fight any more.'
As Mr Usher sees it, the Japanese carmakers will have to spend enormous
amounts of capital in the years ahead to develop a new generation of more
efficient, environmentally-friendly cars.
The question is where that money will come from. In years past, when the
stock market was booming, Japanese companies could raise capital for next to
nothing, 1 per cent or less. Now they are having to pay 7 per cent to borrow
money (and Toyota just raised Dollars 1bn at these rates).
'Developing the next generation of vehicles will require much higher
internal cash-flow,' he says. This will have to come from higher prices and
profit margins, longer model cycles, and fewer, better-targeted product
offerings.
The logic of this argument is obvious to all of Toyota's Japanese
competitors, who are to one degree or another heavily in debt.
Only Toyota has the luxury of being able to postpone decision day by running
down the enormous pile of cash it has accumulated. For a company as
successful as Toyota, whose engineering and management practices are
imitated all over the world, it is difficult to imagine that it would
fritter away all that it has worked so hard to accumulate.
On the other hand, perhaps Mr Toyoda is right after all, for Toyota if not
for the whole industry. Baring Securities has calculated Toyota's return on
assets as averaging 10.16 per cent from 1988 to 1991, compared to 3.3 per
cent for Nissan and 7.02 per cent for Honda.
While the ratios are lower today, perhaps Toyota's higher profitability will
in the end enable it to generate the cash it needs without a change in
strategy. And if the competition has to sweat in the meantime, well, that's
capitalism.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920626

