FT921-3902

FT  12 MAR 92 / Letter: There is no 'half-way house' for eastern Europe


   From Mr RICHARD LUCAS


Sir, Eastern Europe's reforms have not been too harsh. Your article 'The
drawbacks of shock therapy' (March 2) gives the impression that better
options were not chosen. Few of the reforms could have been applied
moderately.
Price liberalisation. There is no 'half-way house'. Partial reform fails to
stabilise markets.
Budget reform. Uncontrolled budget deficits cause inflation, risk
hyperinflation, and have to be addressed. Contrary to the impression your
article creates, there has been a great industrial recession in Hungary, for
the same reasons as elsewhere.
Industrial restructuring. Politicians in eastern Europe would be very
interested in western-financed modernisation and investment to help
industry. There is no alternative in eastern Europe because governments have
no money to pay for gentler forms of industrial policy, not because
political leaders there chose austerity from a range of other policy
options.
Trade liberalisation. There are costs from surging imports, but also many
benefits, including: demonstration effects - better local enterprises are
learning to compete against the standards set by imports; modernisation -
because imports are freely available, institutions can buy world-class
technology at reasonable prices; and psychological - being able to buy
things without queueing removes the atmosphere of a defective economy as
well as the inefficiency of having to go to Berlin or Vienna simply to shop.
The lesson of Europe's post-war experience is not clearly against rapid
economic liberalisation.
Ludwig Erhard's 'bonfire of controls' in Germany in 1948 was a principal
reason for their subsequent success.
The centrally planned economies were in appalling condition - even East
Germany collapsed, despite West German resources and by the far the best
prospects for future growth. Everyone knew that the going would be tough.
It is mendacious for economists and commentators who failed to understand
the awfulness of the old system to place the responsibility for economic
catastrophe on market reformers.
Mr Gorbachev messed around with half-hearted reform for five wasted years,
and his successors now have to embark on the same road as the others.
Richard Lucas,
ul. Pawlikowskiego 14/14,
31-127 Krakow,
Poland.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920312

