FT922-4185

FT  06 JUN 92 / Arts: Timeless melancholia - Poetry in performance


   By MICHAEL GLOVER


THEY APPEARED from the back of the stage at the Hay-on-Wye Literary Festival
all of a rush, Wales' 'greatest living harpist', Elinor Bennett, and its
'greatest living poet and bird watcher', RS Thomas, as if a mighty gust of
wind had driven them forward. And that gust was strong enough to carry
Thomas, a desperately shy man now in his 80th year who, according to his
publisher, does not read newspapers, does not possess a television and, from
the evidence before our eyes, had no relish to cross swords with an audience
either, right off the edge of the stage and into the first row of the
audience.
What was happening? The harpist was playing first, of course. They would
take it in turns. Thomas had seen no good reason to stand up there and be
gawped at just for the sake of it. When he returned, magnificent brown
brogues creaking as he clomped up the steps to the stage, old canvas bag
swinging from his shoulder, he had a fixed, determined expression upon his
face, as if to say: I shall do it, having given my word.
The first poem, 'The Minister', took us back to the early 1950s when Thomas
was still a minister of the church, observing the hard-bitten life of the
local farmers in that untamed land west of the valleys. The lectern he read
at was a simple, low wooden affair of the kind that some itinerant Wesleyan
might have fulminated from; and it was quite overshadowed by Elinor's
massive, sumptuous harp, all brilliant high varnish, gold leaf dragons and
ferocious clawed feet.
Thomas's poetry has become sparer and sparer as the years have passed by,
and so has his face: gaunt, sunken cheeks and deep, vertical furrows. The
voice is a thin incantatory wail, the accent meticulously English. The
pursed lips tremble furiously. It sounds like the recording of some old poet
reading - Tennyson or Yeats perhaps - from which all the buzz and the
crackle has been miraculously removed.
And the themes themselves, thanks to that voice, take on the resonance of
distant things, fabulously out of reach of our modern consciousness - all
that anguishing over the immanence of God, for example. His occasional
comments upon the poems - they are so few as to make them all the more
memorable - bring us up short by their quaintness. 'This is an ejaculation,'
he says of a religious poem entitled 'H'm'. 'You can say it whatever way you
please. Those who don't like me say hmm . . .' It is a rare moment of humour
too. The voice and even the angle of the body seem to be set in an attitude
of almost timeless melancholia: the world of RS Thomas has been distilled to
a thin keen of religious lamentation.
The poetry of RS Thomas is published by Bloodaxe Books.

The Financial Times


London Page XXI

920606

