FT921-11795

FT  30 JAN 92 / Arts: Humperdinck's 'Konigskinder' comes to the Coliseum


   By MAX LOPPERT


A rare, risk-taking revival at the Coliseum tonight: the return to London
after eight decades' absence of Konigskinder or The Prince and the
Goosegirl. An opera first performed at the New York Metropolitan in 1910 and
at Covent Garden (among many other European theatres) soon afterwards, it
disappeared into semi-perpetual neglect after the First World War.
The title will probably not mean a lot to the average English National Opera
patron. The name of the composer - Humperdinck - should mean a lot more to
that same average patron, but as the creator of another opera entirely,
Hansel and Gretel. The story concerns a couple of fairy-tale lovers, the
Goose Girl and the King's Son, also a Witch living in a forest, and a
Broommaker, Woodcutter and lame Minstrel from a town (Hellabrunn) full of
disastrously self-important bourgeoisie; in the finale the lovers meet their
death out in the winter snow, and are then mourned by a procession of
Hellabrunn children. What on earth are ENO up to?
What they are up to, I have every confidence, is the revelation to a wider
public of a late-Romantic masterpiece both important and ravishingly
beautiful. The new production, put on in recessionary hard times and at
noble risk to box-office health, is above all the love-child of Peter Jonas,
ENO general director and a Humperdinck appassionato to whose personal
insistence we already owe the company's magnificent modern-dress Hansel and
Gretel of 1987.
In the audience for the 1986 production of Konigskinder at the Wexford
Festival - which is where many of us first fell under the work's spell  -
Jonas had been prominently visible, and talk of a proposed ENO staging
mounted by the house's A-team of Elder (conductor) and Pountney (producer)
began to circulate soon afterwards. This season, rumour hardens into fact;
whatever may be the fate of the tonight's premiere, Jonas's active devotion
to the Humperdinck cause must already have secured him a place in
opera-intendants' heaven.
Hansel was the first of Humperdinck's ten stage works. Its worldwide triumph
was for the composer a burden as well as a boon. Konigskinder took a long
while to achieve final form (in its original version of 1897 it had been a
striking experiment, a play with music accompanying notated speech);
Humperdinck only received the permission of the playwright Ernst Rosmer
(pseudonym of Elsa Bernstein-Porges) to make a fully-fledged Konigskinder
opera after years of struggle.
The general rule about neglected operas is that there is often a good,
practical reason why they got that way. The Konigskinder case is, I believe,
different. Its 'problem' was not just that the runaway success of Hansel had
still to be followed up, but that it launches itself as a work of apparently
Hansel-like nature and substance: a fairy tale of folk-ish hue and melodic
inflection that, like Hansel, opens and closes in that cradle of German
Romantic sensibility, the dark forest.
Soon, however, it develops a considerable 'differentness' - as David
Pountney sees it, Konigskinder operates on three interlinked levels, as
fairy tale, symbolist drama with social-satire overtones, and (above all in
the final act) allegory of the seasons with a powerful, ecologically-aware
undercurrent: in his words, a vision of 'eternal winter'.
Admittedly, the complications of the plot bring with them an immense number
of traps for the unwary. It is folk-tale simple - characters specified by
jobs, not names - but also, as suggested earlier, folk-tale eventful. Its
panoply of echt-Deutsch scenic and symbolic devices - geese, flower
garlands, falling stars and poisoned loaves of bread, just for a start -
provide a potentially deep chasm of embarrassment for performers and
audiences to topple into together.
As in all worthwhile operas, what holds it all together, making the mixture
not just meaningful but powerfully affecting and 'relevant', is, of course,
the music. The score allies post-Wagnerian construction and richness of
vocal and instrumental sound to a radiant freshness of sensibility entirely
personal to Humperdinck.
Pountney's word for the composer's creative stance is 'innocent'. This, his
says, has determined his treatment of the opera. The example of his
celebrated 1982 production of Dvorak's Rusalka, another late-Romantic
fairy-tale transformed on the ENO stage into a Freudian fable of sexual
awakening, is not appropriate here, since the chromatic sensuality of
Dvorak's idiom has no parallel in Konigskinder.
This is in no way to suggest that Pountney believes the opera simple-minded
or archly naive; indeed, it's hard to think he could, or imagine anyone one
coming to the opera for the first time who does not fall under the spell of
its limpid sounds, shiningly broad spans of lyrical invention, and gentle
but utterly purposeful dramatic modulation from light to tragically dark
over the course of its three acts.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920130

