FT922-7335

FT  19 MAY 92 / German pay deal high but bearable, say experts


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES and EDWARD BALLS


   BONN, LONDON


THE trend-setting pay agreement in the German engineering sector is higher
than employers wanted but low enough to be bearable this year.
The 5.8 per cent deal with IG Metall, Germany's most powerful union
representing 4m workers, suggests that average industrial pay increases this
year will settle below the 6 per cent allowed for in most economic
forecasts. In the opinion of Mr Willi Leibfritz, head of the macroeconomics
department at the Ifo economics institute in Munich, the package is 'not a
complete disaster as was feared'.
But the settlement is considerably higher than the 4 per cent recommended by
the group of economic advisers labelled the 'five wise men'.
Relatively rapid wage inflation, at least by German standards, combined with
depressed productivity growth, mean that manufacturing industry's unit
labour costs will continue to rise more quickly than in other large European
countries this year, further eroding the gains in export competitiveness of
the late 1980s.
The tensions arising from the cost of German unification will remain a
threat to west German competitiveness over the next few years, according to
Mr Leibfritz. Ordinary people, hit last year with a 7.5 per cent income tax
levy and parallel rises in duties on tobacco, petrol and heating oil, have
failed to understand the necessity for sacrifices to finance reconstruction
in the east, he said.
Intensive talks between unions, government and industry are needed to
persuade people of the fiscal costs of unification and the need to reduce
public sector borrowing. Mr Leibfritz argued.
'It will be very critical when value added tax goes up 1 per cent next
January that the lesson has been learnt that indirect taxes cannot be used
as a basis for wage negotiations. . . . the (union) leaders have recognised
the problems, but I don't see that their members have really accepted the
situation.'
Specialists at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
said the west German pay deal was less damaging than the agreements within
the metal industry to equalise wages in the east and western lander by 1996.
Last year's OECD report was strongly critical of the fast pace of wage
convergence between east and west and called for wage subsidies to close the
gap between high east German wages and low relative productivity.
Mr Reinhard Furstenberg, economist at J P Morgan in Frankfurt, argues that
the engineering industry agreement makes wage convergence process even more
difficult. 'This deal makes the 1996 target almost impossible for east
German companies to meet.'
However, the deal will ease inflationary pressures over the next few months.
Pay disputes in the construction and printing sectors are now with
arbitrators and deals there are expected soon. 'The 1992 pay round is now
all sewn up,' said Mr Juergen Pfister, senior economist at Commerzbank.
Mr Alexander Batschari, spokesman for the VDMA engineering industry
association in Frankfurt, said the 5.8 per cent could prove difficult for
some companies. 'But what was the alternative? There would have been strikes
and lock-outs and we could have ended up with an even higher deal.'
Partners pull back from brink, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920519

