FT924-6121

FT  23 NOV 92 / Monday Interview: Charmed by the simple life - Heinrich von
Pierer, chief executive of Siemens


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES and ANDREW FISHER


Heinrich von Pierer, chief executive of Siemens, Europe's biggest
electronics company, thinks the quest for perfection, one of the traditional
strengths of German industry, can go too far.
'Germans always try to do the very best that's possible. It's almost a
philosophical thing: I believe this perfectionism is not just a Siemens
characteristic; it is ingrained in every German engineer,' he says. 'It's a
very sympathetic quality . . . but I'm a businessman, and it is my job to
supply what the market wants.'
Mr von Pierer, a trim 51 with a passion for tennis and a taste for colourful
ties, is less than two months into the job. He is mulling over the
long-standing issues which exercise him in particular and which are common
throughout German manufacturing. 'We earn too little; 2.5 per cent return on
sales is too little,' he says of Siemens.
He denounces claims from some of his peers that Germany is losing its
attraction as a place to invest and manufacture. He reels off the country's
well-known educational, political and infrastructural advantages. But then
he hesitates as he considers the negative side of the picture.
Rolled together, the disadvantages lead to a single conclusion. 'Germany has
become too expensive,' he says. At Siemens, as at Daimler-Benz and
Volkswagen car groups, the result will be a tough programme of cost-cutting
and lay-offs among the company's 400,000-strong global workforce.
Mr von Pierer, formerly a leading local figure in the Christian Social Union
(CSU) conservative political party, discovered and corrected one weakness in
the group's philosophy - the perfectionist culture - when in charge of KWU,
Siemens' power plant division. There, products were sometimes
over-engineered, more sophisticated or with more features than the customers
wanted or needed, he says. Customers turned elsewhere for simpler, cheaper
products.
Similar conditions applied in Siemens' medical engineering arm and are now
being tackled. Like KWU, which does two-thirds of its business outside
Germany, 80 per cent of the division's sales are abroad. It is, therefore,
more exposed to the pressures of international competition than the group as
a whole, which still generates 46 per cent of its DM80bn (Pounds 33bn)
turnover inside Germany.
'Siemens makes excellent equipment, but the question is: has it always paid
us to do so?' Mr von Pierer asks. 'We must adapt to the market.' The
Japanese, coming in from the low-technology end of the market, have built a
successful medical equipment business with basic equipment, he says.
Naturally, Siemens' quality must not be impaired as it counters this threat,
he adds, but 'we need to learn to make things differently and more simply'.
For Mr von Pierer, this does not involve a revolution in the company. He is
no iconoclast, but he is determined to speed up the process of change. In
this respect he resembles many German chief executives. 'If you scratch just
below the top level in many companies, you will find quite a few like him,'
an associate remarks.
His training as a lawyer and economist, more than his relative youth, marks
him out in a business where the engineer has normally ruled. But he is also
a consensus-builder in the old mould (he claims his colleagues support his
perfectionism critique to a man), with real affection for the company and
undisguised respect for his mentors and predecessors.
He owes much to Mr Karl-heinz Kaske, Siemens' chief executive for 12 years
until September. Mr Kaske oversaw the acquisitions programme of the 1980s
which raised and broadened Siemens' profile in the US and other important
markets. He also opened up the group's monolithic structure, creating 17
operating divisions which encompass 300 different business activities.
It has fallen to Mr von Pierer, and others of his generation promoted under
Mr Kaske, to streamline the sprawling empire, penetrate further into foreign
markets, especially Asia, and improve the cost structure - at a time when
the international and domestic economies are barely growing.
The axe has already fallen on thousands of jobs, notably in Siemens'
loss-ridden semiconductor and computer businesses. The group, with a staff
turnover of about 10 per cent a year, is coming to the point where
non-replacement of voluntary leavers and other 'pain-free' payroll reduction
methods - early retirement, non-renewal of short-term contracts - are no
longer enough.
While some companies are hinting that they may soon resort to forced
redundancies, anathema in Germany's 'social economy', Mr von Pierer is
trying to find other ways to cut costs. 'The hire-and-fire principle does
not exist here, and I never want it to,' he says.
So he is looking at other ways to boost efficiency. Can over-engineered
products be simplified without any loss of quality? Can tortuous
manufacturing processes be shortened or replaced? Is there a greater role
for computerised machines in a business where engineering and software
account for 50 per cent of added value?
He says there is scope for more manufacturing outside Germany: not simply to
escape the high cost base at home, but also to add value in the places where
Siemens does business, collaborating with and buying components from
customers. 'It is not just a question of costs,' Mr von Pierer says. 'If we
want to continue to develop as a global player we cannot simply deal with
our customers as importers.'
At the same time, he is contending with severe problems in two of his most
important divisions: semiconductors and computers. It is no comfort that the
semiconductor industry is making losses around the world - the figure is
estimated at about DM500m for Siemens. Much the same applies to Siemens
Nixdorf (SNI), the computer business, which is also losing heavily.
Semiconductors are the common components, the thread running through every
important business activity in the group. 'What is fundamental for me is
that we should have the technology for all our products,' he says. But the
costs are huge, and Siemens, although ranked third in European semiconductor
sales, is relatively small in world terms. Collaborations to defray
development and manufacturing charges - most recently a link with IBM and
Toshiba on the new generation 256-megabit D-Ram - help. But the lack of
European partners willing to take up the group's open invitation to
co-operate obviously chafes.
'Sometimes it is difficult to get across that we are not just doing it for
our own needs,' he complains. Access to advanced memory chip technology is
crucial in markets where manufacturers increasingly seek to tailor product
precisely to customers' needs . . . and also where Japan is on the
ascendant.
Co-operation also figures in his plans for Siemens Nixdorf, the result of an
ill-timed and ill-starred marriage of Germany's great computer rivals. But
it is still too early to talk about it, he says. 'We must first bring our
house into order.'
Bad luck has undoubtedly influenced the fortunes of a company in the throes
of reorganisation just as the computer industry was diving into a severe
structural crisis. But the fact that it has taken the best part of two years
to flush out old enmities plaguing both sides in the takeover speaks volumes
about the cautious German approach to mergers.
Siemens also fumbled the assimilation of the US Rolm business, bought from
IBM in 1989, into its private communications business. 'We had one
telecommunications system in Germany and one in the US and found it took
much longer than we expected to integrate the businesses,' says Mr von
Pierer. But Rolm is now shaping up: its three divisions have been rolled
into one. 'And high time, too,' mutters the new chief. When business
confidence recovers and private communications markets start to improve,
Rolm will be in the front line with its competitors, he says.
However, no such difficulties attended the more recent absorption of Texas
Instruments' industrial control activities, and plugging in the Sylvania
lightbulb business to Siemens' Osram subsidiary promises to be profitable.
Siemens, it seems, is gradually coming to terms with cost-conscious global
markets and starting to appreciate the benefits of doing things more simply.
PERSONAL FILE
1941 Born Erlangen near Nuremberg.
1969 Siemens legal department.
1977 KWU power station unit.
1988 Commercial director, KWU.
1989 Member of main Siemens's board.
1991 Deputy chief executive.
1992 Chief executive, Siemens.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921123

