FT921-12062

FT  29 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: PM says recovery under way despite
CBI report - Business Confidence


   By IVOR OWEN, Parliamentary Correspondent


RECOVERY was already under way in many sectors of the economy Mr John Major,
the prime minister, claimed in the Commons yesterday when refusing to be
downcast by the gloomy findings of the latest Confederation of British
Industry survey.
He faced jeers from the opposition benches when Mr Paddy Ashdown, the
Liberal Democrats leader, recalled a new year's day BBC broadcast in which
the prime minister had stated: 'In retrospect we will look back and say that
economic recovery has already started.'
Mr Ashdown called for less time 'talking up false economic dawns' and more
time taking action to secure genuine economic recovery.
The prime minister retorted: 'You are becoming a professional gloom-monger.'
Mr Major insisted: 'When we look back at the present time it will be
perfectly clear that in many sectors of the economy the recovery has indeed
started.'
Later, the prime minister joined Mr Derek Conway (C Shrewsbury and Atcham)
in accusing Labour of trying to 'talk down' the economy.
He said that recent trade figures showed clearly that export volumes were at
record levels even in a worldwide economic down-turn.
Both the prime minister and Mr Norman Lamont, chancellor, were accused of
misleading the country over the extent of the recession, and of failing to
take measures essential for recovery by Mr Gordon Brown, shadow trade and
industry secretary. He called for action before the Budget on March 10 to
stimulate investment and the economy generally.
Mr Brown warned in a statement that the CBI survey showed that if no action
was taken 'hundreds of companies, thousands of jobs and millions of pounds
of investment will be lost to the economy before the summer'.
He said a Labour party survey indicated that investment had been falling
faster than at any time since 1932.
Editorial Comment, Page 18;
Personal View, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920129

