FT924-11484

FT  26 OCT 92 / Marching back in the limelight: TUC hopes for renewed
popular support


   By DAVID GOODHART


WHERE does the trade union campaign against pit closures and unemployment go
after yesterday's demonstration in London?
If there really has been a sea change in popular attitudes to economic
management, as some union officials claim, how can the unions and the
opposition parties capitalise on it, bearing in mind that this government
may have more than four years left in office?
Officials are still torn between elation that they are once again at the
centre of things and anxiety that their regained status will slip away as
suddenly as it has reappeared.
The TUC itself is encouraged. Mr John Monks, deputy general secretary, said:
'Recent events have been a potent reminder to those writing us off that if
we did not exist we would have needed to be invented.'
The TUC has certainly been able to provide a focus for organising
demonstrations and publicity.
Some union leaders complain, however, that the TUC had to be pushed to
convene the emergency general council meeting on October 17. Moreover the
vulnerability of Mr Norman Willis, TUC general secretary, over debates in
public has been underlined by recent events, rekindling private calls for
his de-parture.
One union official said: 'We will need judgment and leadership from the TUC
over the next few weeks if we are going to sustain this, and I fear it may
not be forthcoming.'
One difficulty is deciding how far the campaign can be broadened to include,
for example, opposition to rail privatisation or a public-sector wage
freeze, without losing public support.
More optimistic union officials point to the experience the TUC is gaining
as a broadly based lobbying organisation, rather than an adjunct to the
Labour party. Union leaders often talk of the importance of building
contacts in the Conservative party.
The clearest confirmation of the TUC's improved credibility - at least in
union circles - came when the executive of the non-TUC AEEU engineering and
electrical union let it be known last week that it would almost certainly
back a return to the TUC when its members voted early next year.
Bringing the Union of Democratic Mineworkers back into the TUC fold, after
its split from the National Union of Mineworkers after the 1984-85 strike,
would be even more useful - if possible.
The issue runs deeper than personalities - the UDM eventually broke away
over the NUM's centralisation of power.
The election for the leadership of the UDM next month may be a step towards
unity if Mr Roy Lynk, currently the leader, is replaced.
But the virtual absence of the UDM from Hyde Park yesterday is a reminder of
division at the heart of the pits campaign that may yet prove a fatal
weakness.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921026

