FT921-12030

FT  29 JAN 92 / US health care feud may overshadow Bush speech


A WHITE HOUSE power struggle over plans to reform the US health care system
last night cast a shadow over President George Bush's State of the Union
address, the launch-pad for his re-election campaign.
The high-level feud surfaced only hours before Mr Bush's keynote speech to
Congress, which was expected to include an economic growth package, deep
cuts in defence spending, and fresh proposals for reducing nuclear weapons
in the US and former Soviet Union.
Mr Bush was due to deliver his televised address at 9pm Eastern standard
time (2am GMT). The speech, to be followed today by the fiscal 1993 budget,
has been billed as a platform to buoy his sagging popularity.
But plans for a smooth run-up came unstuck after congressional Republicans
rebelled over provisions for health care reform put forward by Mr Richard
Darman, the president's budget director.
The revolt forced Mr Samuel Skinner, White House chief of staff, temporarily
to halt printing of the 2,000-page budget document to allow Mr Darman to
remove offending passages.
Although the White House tried to play down the row, some administration
officials said it reflected a power struggle between Mr Darman and Mr
Skinner over control of domestic policy. It was also a measure of more
profound divisions within the Republican party.
Mr Darman's proposals included a tax on employer-provided health care
benefits for Americans earning between Dollars 100,000 and Dollars 125,000
(Pounds 55,000-Pounds 70,000) a year, as well as higher premiums to be paid
by the wealthy for Medicare, the health scheme for the elderly.
These provisions were aimed at funding tax credits for the poor to buy
health insurance, and tax deductions for the middle class whose employers do
not provide adequate coverage.
Congressional Republicans led by Mr Willis Gradison of Ohio objected
strongly to the plans, arguing that the offer of specific, politically
unpopular, proposals would play into the hands of the Democratic majority in
the House and Senate.
Mr Bush, who has promised 'long-term' solutions to the economy and disavowed
'quick fixes', was expected in his speech to propose a variety of sweeteners
for middle-income voters.
These are expected to include a personal tax exemption of up to Dollars
1,000 per child, a Dollars 5,000 tax credit for first-time home-buyers,
expanded individual retirement and savings accounts, and a health tax credit
for the poor and middle class.
Mr Bush is also expected to propose cuts of up to Dollars 50bn in defence
spending over the next five years, beyond those already contemplated. This
would be matched by a call for a modification of the 1990 budget agreement
with Congress which would allow defence savings to be spent on domestic
programmes.
The State of the Union speech will offer Mr Bush a platform to speak to the
Congress and the nation, but in the coming months the Democratic majorities
in the House and Senate will determine how much of his proposals actually
pass into law.
Health care fracas leaves Darman bruised, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920129

