FT924-6404

FT  21 NOV 92 / Whitehall told to plan cuts in red tape


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR sought to give teeth yesterday to his pledge to ease the
regulatory burden on business by demanding that every government department
produce proposals by the new year to sweep away unnecessary bureaucracy.
His announcement, after a meeting with Mr Michael Heseltine, the trade and
industry secretary, and Mr Neil Hamilton, the industry minister, signals the
start of an intensive Whitehall exercise designed to strike a better balance
between costs and benefits of regulation.
Mr Major plans to chair a cabinet review of the outcome in January or
February, intensifying the pressure on each department to come up with
substantive propo-sals.
There were also signs at Westminster yesterday that the government may move
soon to meet the commitment in its election manifesto to overhaul the
present law on restrictive practices.
Ministers have been studying ways to replace the present system - based on
the restrictive practices court - with one modelled along the lines of
Article 85 of the Treaty of Rome.
Mr Hamilton, who has been given specific responsibility for deregulation,
said he planned a 'zero-based' budgeting exercise to secure the repeal or
simplification of unnecessary rules and regulations.
He also wanted a rigorous examination of the 'over-implementation' of
European Community directives.
The government was determined that all future regulation - European as well
as national - should be subject to a stringent test that calculated the
impact on business alongside the potential benefit to consumers.
The aim would be to ensure that rules were a result of rational analysis
rather than it being easier to opt for 'the 100 per cent safe solution
regardless of cost'.
Mr Hamilton added that the government was determined to apply the same
criteria to existing regulation: 'Each department will be expected to trawl
through all its regulations and come up with candidates for repeal and
simplification'.
The minister singled out environmental health, fire, food safety, and
building regulation as areas where the burden placed on business was often
disproportionate to the benefits for consumers. He also pointed out that big
food retailers had to apply for between 15 and 30 licences before opening
each new store. That might be streamlined into a single licence.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921121

