FT921-15539

FT  09 JAN 92 / Passing of an industrial symbol: In closing Ravenscraig,
British Steel hopes to rid itself once and for all of political interference


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


When Sir Robert Scholey retires this summer as British Steel's chairman,
Scotland is unlikely to be his first choice for a holiday.
Over the past two years, Sir Robert has been vilified by Scottish
industrialists, trade unionists and community leaders for presiding over
British Steel's strategic withdrawal from steelmaking in Scotland. The
retreat turned into a rout yesterday when the company announced it would
close the last two blast furnaces at its complex at Ravenscraig in Scotland
by September this year.
Two factors lie behind the Ravenscraig closure. The first is British Steel's
attempt to overcome the historic fragmentation of the UK steel industry
which has left it with smaller and less economic plants than its best
European competitors.
This fragmentation has left Ravenscraig particularly vulnerable to the
second factor: a savage decline in the steel market in the last two years
which has forced the privatised British Steel into a desperate fight to
maintain its financial performance.
For many Scots, Ravenscraig is a symbol of the nation's industrial strength.
For British Steel, the plant is a symbol of the political and managerial
obstacles which have hampered the modernisation of the industry throughout
the post-war period.
Critics of the closure argue that it spells the end of hopes of an
independent Scottish manufacturing industry. British Steel is hoping it
marks the end of an era in which commercial decisions have been undermined
by political expediency.
It was 1959 when Harold Macmillan, the then Conservative prime minister,
forced the then private-sector steel industry to establish two hot strip
rolling mills instead of the one that was required: one in Ravenscraig, near
Glasgow, and the other in Llanwern in south Wales. The plan was that each
plant would provide the hub of an area with steel tube and plate plants
supplying factories for ships, buses, cars and other products.
Ravenscraig drained the finances of Colville, its private owner, so much
that it helped to push the industry towards nationalisation in 1967. Yet
political pressures meant that British Steel had to stand by its Scottish
plant.
Doubts about the future of the Scottish industry had long been raised but
became insistent with the privatisation of British Steel in 1988; the bell
really tolled from May 1990 when the company announced plans to close the
hot strip rolling mill with the loss of 770 jobs. Then, in November that
year it announced the closure of its Clydesdale tube works with 1,200 job
losses. The future of the other big Scottish plant, the Dalzell plate mill,
has been in question since last July when the company said it planned to
invest in a new mill at Lackenby on Teesside, north-eastern England.
Bereft of a strip mill to roll and finish the steel, Ravenscraig's three
blast furnaces were increasingly forlorn, making crude slabs for British
Steel plants in south Wales and for sale on the open market. The first blast
furnace closed last year with the loss of 1,200 jobs. The final two will
close no later than September with the loss of a further 1,250 jobs.
The immediate reason for the Ravenscraig closure is the price war in the
stagnating European steel market. UK steel production, which fell by 8 per
cent last year to 16.5m tonnes, is forecast to drop to 16m tonnes this year,
according to MEPS, the Sheffield-based steel consultants.
The steep fall in steel prices has been even more troubling. Last month hot
dip galvanised steel was selling for Pounds 260 a tonne, 32.5 per cent down
from its 1989 peak, while hot rolled coil could be bought for Pounds 170 a
tonne, a cut of about 28 per cent.
With steel demand falling as a result of slower economic growth in Germany,
France and Italy, British Steel will gain no relief from the fierce
competition which drove its UK market share down from 64 per cent in 1990 to
a low of 55 per cent last year.
The deterioration of the steel market has taken a heavy toll on a company
which in the late 1980s was held up as a symbol for the resurgence of
British industry. Its pre-tax profits for the six months to last September
fell 78 per cent to just Pounds 19m. Mr Ewan Fraser, a steel analyst at
stockbroker James Capel, forecasts it will make a loss of Pounds 80m-Pounds
100m for the year, including the exceptional costs of Pounds 30m for
shutting Ravenscraig.
The closure is central to British Steel's hopes of stemming the haemorrhage.
It should cut the company's costs by at least Pounds 100m a year.
In the long run it is unlikely this is the end of British Steel's attempt to
reshape itself. It wants to concentrate production at two sites - its
Llanwern-Port Talbot complex in south Wales, and Teesside - to gain the
economies of scale it needs to match its largest continental competitors,
Usinor Sacilor in France and Thyssen in Germany.
There will be further job cuts - 5,000 went in the six months to September,
leaving 47,000 - and tight control of investment. The company disclosed
yesterday that it has postponed a planned Pounds 100m investment to install
a second continuous caster at Llanwern.
The Ravenscraig closure marks two other, potentially more significant,
developments that are reshaping the British steel industry. The first is its
shift from a national focus to a European one. Ravenscraig was built as part
of a national industrial strategy to stimulate Scottish manufacturing. It is
being closed because it cannot survive in an increasingly competitive
European market.
When the strip mill closed, only 4 per cent of Ravenscraig's steel went into
the Scottish economy. A small plant with capacity of only 2m tonnes, it is
500 miles away from the main continental markets. In contrast 50 per cent of
customers for Thyssen, the mighty German producer, are within 100km of its
main plant near Duisburg, which has a capacity of 10m tonnes a year.
The real weakness of the British steel industry is the weakness of its
customer base, British manufacturing industry. The solution can only be
further internationalisation of its markets.
The second long-term shift in the industry lies in the balance of power
between the public and the private sectors. Ravenscraig is being closed
because British Steel is now a private-sector company able to take its own
commercial decisions. But the pressures it is under come in part from
public-sector steel companies elsewhere in the European Community - some of
which, in France, Italy and Belgium for example, are cushioned from falling
prices by indirect government subsidies.
Ravenscraig has always epitomised the troubles of the British steel
industry; its demise is a symbol for the troubles besetting the industry all
over Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 16 Chart (Omitted). Photograph (Omitted).

920109

