FT921-14156

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Finnish zinc move angers Conroy


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


MR RICHARD Conroy, chairman and chief executive of Conroy Petroleum, the
Irish natural resources company, claimed yesterday that Outokumpu, the
Finnish mining group, had tried to obtain 100 per cent control over the
marketing of zinc produced from an important ore discovery in Ireland.
Mr Conroy said that Outokumpu 'had demanded that the company sign over the
marketing of 100 per cent of the ore' in return for technical assistance in
making an application for planning permission to develop the 6.2m tonne
Galmoy ore deposit, located 70 miles south-west of Dublin.
'This could not be considered to be in the best interests of the other
shareholders' he said.
Mr Graham Mascall, a senior executive of Outokumpu, confirmed yesterday that
his company's offer of assistance to Conroy had been turned down, adding
that a 'commercial price was requested for our services'.
Last month, Conroy bought out Atlantic Resources, a struggling oil and gas
exploration company in a share-exchange deal valued at IPounds 7.7m (Pounds
7.2m).
This was widely interpreted as a move to dilute stakes in Conroy held by
Outukumpu's and Dundee Bankcorp, a banking offshoot of Corona International,
the Canadian mining group.
This provoked anger from Outokumpu and Dundee, which together held just over
50 per cent of Conroy's shares before the Atlantic deal.
The two shareholders then demanded an EGM with the aim of ousting the Conroy
board.
The EGM is scheduled for February 8.
Mr Mascall, and Mr Paul Carroll, a director of Dundee, said that their
companies will 'review' their investment in Conroy, if they fail in their
attempt to oust the board.
Mr Conroy said yesterday: 'I am prepared to talk with both companies' but
claimed that they were trying 'to carry out a takeover on the cheap'.
Should they decide to pull out of Conroy 'It might be healthy for the
company' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920117

