FT924-6578

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: BASF tumbles 45% with warning of
worse to come


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


PRE-TAX profits at BASF, the German chemicals giant, tumbled 45 per cent to
just over DM1bn (Dollars 626m) in the first nine months, and the situation
is worsening, according to Mr Jurgen Strube, group chairman.
'Trends in important markets suggest that growth will become even slower,
and that this pattern will continue into next year,' he told a press
conference yesterday.
Confirming further job cuts of at least 2,000 next year, Mr Strube said that
in October the group's average selling prices were 8 per cent lower than a
year earlier. Volume sales were also starting to fall, and order books last
month were 15 per cent down on October 1991.
The effects of the international recession and the more recent downturn in
Germany showed up in a 2.5 per cent fall in group sales to DM34.2bn for the
period under review.
Pre-tax profits, down 25 per cent in the first quarter and 37 per cent at
the half-year, have now hit a 10-year low as a proportion of sales.
Problems facing the group in 1993 included the slowdown in the automotive
industry, highlighted yesterday in Daimler-Benz's fading profits.
Currency fluctuations, notably the appreciation of the D-Mark against the
dollar, were having a marked effect, and worldwide surplus capacity was
depressing prices, Mr Strube added. Government-imposed health spending cuts,
expected next year, are also likely to hit the group's drugs business which
is one of the few still showing satisfactory sales and earnings.
The company also faces the prospect of massively increased costs to meet the
requirements of environmental legislation either implemented or planned.
Mr Strube, a regular and vigorous critic of Germany's environmental
policies, claimed these would cost the group DM700m in capital spending and
add DM400m a year to operating costs at its main base in Ludwigshafen alone.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

921120

