FT924-11973

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (24):  Vehicles for
a subdued economy - Bond Funds, As charges fall, it could be worth paying
for management expertise / Survey of Unit Trusts


   By JOHN AUTHERS


BOND UNIT trusts have played the role of fund management Cinderellas in the
UK. Unit trusts have traditionally been viewed as vehicles for equities, and
equities alone.
UK companies have, in any case, had a history of using equities, rather than
bonds, to raise finance. This leaves British investors without the culture
of investing in bonds which is common in other leading economies. In the UK,
investment in bonds traditionally means investment in gilt-edged stock
issued by the government.
Then comes the tax dimension. Invest in gilts directly, and you pay no
capital gains tax (CGT). Invest in them through a gilts unit trust, and you
do. So funds are an actively tax-inefficient way to invest.
Finally, there is the issue of cost. Buying gilts is easy - you can do it by
filling in a form at the post office. But managing a gilt portfolio requires
expertise and time. It may not be as tricky a job as keeping track of
thousands of listed equities, but resistance to paying front-end and
management charges is understandable.
All this may explain why only 2 per cent of unit trust funds in the UK are
in bonds, compared with more than 80 per cent in Germany and more than 30
per cent in the US. Another problem, according to investment manager
Guinness Flight, has been the high level of inflation in the UK, which harms
real bond yields more than it does the yields from cash and equities.
But now the climate of opinion is changing. With equity markets volatile,
many analysts still predict low inflation and low growth for the rest of
this decade. The belief among some commentators is that returns on equities
will not be much higher than those on bonds.
This view has been most closely associated with Norwich Union, which last
year cut the proportion of its life fund invested in equities from 70 per
cent to 60 per cent, and switched to bonds. NU predicted that the real
annual rate of return on equities would run at 8 per cent, compared with 6
per cent for bonds. During the 1980s the return on equities was 15 per cent.
Given the lower risk profile of bonds, and the possibility for more secure
financial planning, this makes the case for bond investment that much
stronger.
The fund management industry has gone some way to make bond funds more
attractive by cutting charges. In July, Fidelity slashed initial charges
from 5.25 per cent to 3.5 per cent, with an annual management charge of 1
per cent.
Fidelity's decision was based both on price competition and on the outlook
which it perceived for bonds. Also, Fidelity is keen to broaden the UK's
unit trust industry, believing that the concentration on equities, when
equity returns are in the doldrums, could have much to do with the problems
the industry is experiencing in selling products in general.
In August, Invesco MIM more than matched Fidelity by cutting initial charges
on its international bond fund from 5.25 per cent to 1.05 per cent, and
annual charges from 1 per cent to 0.5 per cent. Invesco had found that
portfolio managers were increasingly reluctant to pay a standard front-end
fee. Keith Crowley, of Invesco, stressed that the move did not mean the
company had lost confidence in equities. He said:
'If one is in the camp that believes the next major move in interest rates
in the world is going to be downwards, it makes sense to have part of your
portfolio in an international bond fund, which gives you a yield of more
than 7 per cent, and where there are reasonably good capital growth
prospects for the next 12 or 18 months.'
Then, in September, Abtrust launched two new funds, Aberdeen Gilt Growth and
Aberdeen Gilt Income, neither of which has any front-end charge at all. This
makes 'bed and breakfasting' - selling units and re-buying them the
following day to establish a fixed gain or loss for capital gains tax
purposes - very cost-effective, and removes gilt funds' tax problem. Annual
charges are 1 per cent.
Guinness Flight also altered the charges on the existing three bond funds -
which make up its monthly income plan - Premium Fixed Interest, Emu and
Global High Income. Annual management charges are 0.5 per cent for Premium
Fixed Interest, and 0.75 per cent for the other two.
Initial charges for large investments, were also cut - sums between Pounds
1,000 and Pounds 9,999 pay 3.5 per cent, with charges of 2.5 per cent from
Pounds 10,000 to Pounds 24,999, 1.5 per cent from Pounds 25,000 to Pounds
49,999, and 1.0 per cent for investments greater than this.
With charges as low as this, it could well be worth paying for fund
management expertise. The bulk volumes in which international bonds are
traded also make DIY portfolios impracticable.
Fund managers have also noticed some of the possibilities of portfolios
including bonds. For example, CGT is payable on international bond funds,
but at least investors are allowed the standard indexation allowance. This
allows for funds to be constructed with a high yield, plus a tax-efficient
loss after indexation which can be used to offset gains elsewhere in a
portfolio.
Mercury last year altered its gilt fund to hold international bonds, so that
this was possible; and a similar structure has been adopted by Guinness
Flight.
Albert E. Sharp has launched a trust that invests both in international
bonds and in convertibles (bonds convertible into equities) which allow a
broader spread of strategic options. When the time seems right, the holding
of convertibles can be increased to give exposure to equities without
sacrificing yield. Recently, the fund has been heavily invested in bonds.
Equities' poor performance, although in many ways a statistical fluke, also
makes bond funds look better. Over the five years to September 1 this year,
15 of the top 25 of all the 871 available unit trusts came from the gilts
and fixed interest sector.

The Financial Times


London Page XXII

921023

