FT923-15748

FT  01 JUL 92 / World Trade News: 'Dango' habit brought to book


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


A CANDY-striped book landed on the desks of Japanese building executives
yesterday, instructing them in the fine arts of competition and the dangers
of dango, Robert Thomson reports from Tokyo.
Dango are the cosy cartels arranged by Japanese construction companies to
'smooth out the bumps of competition', as one executive once put it, by
awarding contracts, fixing prices and generally rigging bids. The dango
created a harmony in the Japanese industry, but angered Washington, which
has tried to prise open the market for US contractors, a point made in the
book, Questions and Answers on Anti-Monopoly Regulations in the Construction
Industry.
Publication coincides with a warning by the construction ministry to 66
companies found to have rigged bids for government projects worth Y81bn
(Pounds 344.6m) in Saitama Prefecture, part of Greater Tokyo. Ministry
officials have generally been reluctant to crack down because their
responsibilities include representing the construction industry.
The Fair Trade Commission (FTC) had earlier decided not to prosecute the 66
companies, prompting the Japanese media to conclude the commission had
buckled under the political influence of the industry, an important supplier
of funds to the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP). By publishing such a
book, the Japan Federation of Construction Contractors also hopes to show
the US the industry is serious about tackling the problem.
Subtitled The Enhancement of Fair and Free Competition, the book explains
executives are not supposed to decide the outcome of tenders; a common
method is for dango members to submit higher estimates than the chosen
company, which then wins the contract.  They are told the new responsibility
to ensure free competition is a by-product of 'globalisation' and are warned
the FTC has intensified monitoring anti-monopoly laws.
While the US has presumed Japanese companies knew their method of sharing
out contracts violated laws, the federation thought it necessary to include
the question 'What is a cartel?'. The answers include a warning that
'scientific research associations' sometimes favoured as a front for dango
violate the anti-monopoly law. Some executives may be enlightened, but the
US will remain suspicious that dango are widespread.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920701

