FT921-538

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: The Week Ahead


LUCAS Industries, one of the UK's largest engineering groups, is likely to
announce a further decline in half-yearly profits on Monday. Indeed, some
brokers are predicting only break even, although it is thought the 2.1p
dividend will be maintained.
Harassed, on the one hand, by poor demand in the automotive and aerospace
industries, but under pressure, on the other, to keep up research and
investment spending, Lucas is trapped between recession and creating a base
for its future fortunes.
Full-year figures from MB-Caradon, the building products group, on Monday
are expected to show pre-tax profits edging ahead to perhaps Pounds 104m
(Pounds 101.7m) in 1991, in spite of the recession. After a 12 per cent
profit fall at the interim stage to Pounds 47.2m, this would suggest a
better second half.
The group's quarter share in CMB Packaging, the European packaging group,
will contribute more following management changes there, but the proceeds of
the Pounds 149m rights issue launched last October will barely have arrived
by the year end.
Also on Monday, Inchcape, the international motor distributor, marketing and
business services group, is expected to report annual pre-tax profits up
from Pounds 174m to Pounds 180m, in line with the forecast made in December
when it had a Pounds 376m rights issue to fund the acquisition of Tozer
Kemsley & Millbourn (TKM).
Interest will focus on how the motor distributor and retailer is being
bedded in and what effect the Budget's halving of car tax has had on sales
by Inchcape, one of the UK's biggest car distributors.
London Weekend Television, which retained its franchise at the bargain
basement price of Pounds 7.58m, is expected to unveil a good set of results
on April Fool's Day.
Analysts are predicting pre-tax profits of between Pounds 19m and Pounds 21m
for 1991. The outcome could be at the high end of expectations and perhaps
even modestly up on last year's Pounds 20.7m. Such a result would be a
considerable achievement in a recession.
Harrisons and Crosfield, the chemicals, building supplies and feedstock
conglomerate, is expected to show a further fall in pre-tax profit to
roughly Pounds 75m, from Pounds 106m, when it announces its 1991 results on
Wednesday.
But the big question is: will it maintain an uncovered dividend, and the
betting seems to be yes, just about.
Sun Alliance, the biggest of the composite insurance groups, is set to post
a pre-tax loss of between Pounds 420m and Pounds 470m when its reports its
1991 results on Thursday.
Sun is the market leader in domestic Mortgage indemnity insurance and has
been forced to make increased provisions as a result of rising
repossessions.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920328

