FT921-14348

FT  16 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Hammond will step down in two months


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


MR ERIC HAMMOND, the controversial general secretary of the EETPU
electricians' union, announced that he is to retire in two months as he and
other leaders of the EETPU and AEU yesterday began a three-week tour of the
UK to win support for a merger.
Mr Hammond, 62, will step down as general secretary on March 13, a week
after the result of the merger ballot is due to be announced. His nine-year
leadership has been punctuated with clashes with other unions. The most
serious, over single-union deals and his union's refusal to withdraw from
two of them, led the TUC to expel the EETPU in 1988.
Assuming the merger ballot goes in favour, members of the 1m-strong merged
union will be balloted in a year on TUC affiliation. Mr Paul Gallagher, Mr
Hammond's successor, indicated that he had yet to be persuaded about TUC
affiliation. He said his union had not missed being outside the TUC and
members of the new union would have to be convinced it was worth belonging
to the organisation.
He said: 'A year from now we could be spending Pounds 1.7m to belong to the
TUC, so it is quite proper for us to ask what we would get in return.'
In the three-week tour, launched among British Airways staff at Heathrow
airport yesterday, Mr Hammond and Mr Gallagher will be joined by Mr Bill
Jordan, AEU president, and Mr Gavin Laird, the union's general secretary,
and other union leaders.
The AEU said yesterday it had identified 177,153 job loss announcements in
manufacturing last year, 22,306 of them between October 17 and December 31.
The areas worst affected were the north-west and north Wales, the west
Midlands, the north-east and the Yorkshire area.

The Financial Times


London Page 8 Photograph Just a word, Paul Gallagher (left), general
secretary-elect of the EETPU and Gavin Laird, AEU general secretary, share a
confidence as they help start a campaign among the unions' 1m members for a
vote in favour of merging (Omitted).

920116

