FT924-6158

FT  23 NOV 92 / Single City regulator proposed: Bank chief calls for fraud
tribunals in memo to SIB chairman


   By ROBERT PESTON, Banking Editor


REGULATION of the financial services industry should be the responsibility
of a single body with sweeping new powers, according to Lord Alexander,
chairman of National Westminster Bank. The present collection of
self-regulatory bodies should be abolished, he said yesterday.
The single regulatory body suggested by Lord Alexander would have two
divisions. One of these would police the market serving retail investors. It
would adopt a rigorous approach to the enforcement of detailed rules
designed to protect investors.
The other division would concentrate on the professional market and would be
more laisser faire in its regulatory methods.
In an interview with the Financial Times, Lord Alexander, a former Takeover
Panel chairman, has joined the debate on the future of financial regulation
which was triggered by the government's decision in July to review the
regulatory structure. The review is being carried out by Mr Andrew Large,
chairman of the Securities and Investments Board, the senior City regulator.
Lord Alexander is sending a memorandum to Mr Large outlining his views. But
he emphasised that he was not being dogmatic and that Mr Large's eventual
recommendations should command City and public support.
Along with many other City executives, Lord Alexander believes the burden of
rules for the professional market should be reduced, so long as there are no
detrimental effects for personal investors. The NatWest chairman's proposal
contains two other radical innovations:
He wants the new regulatory body to operate a 'system of tribunals', which
would be City courts to punish fraudsters and other financial wrongdoers.
These would, for example, deal with cases of insider trading and
manipulation of share prices.
City practitioners should have the right to consult the regulatory body for
advice on the legality of their business dealings. Lord Alexander said it
was important if sanctions against wrongdoing were increased, that City
practitioners should be able to receive reliable guidance about the legality
of their actions.
Lord Alexander said the current system of prosecuting suspected wrongdoers
was 'slow, expensive and unpredictable . . . It is unfair both to the public
and the accused'.
He stressed, however, that the new regulatory body should not acquire the
'vast bureaucracy' of the Securities and Exchange Commission in the US.
There is widespread criticism of the current system. Mr Mick Newmarch,
chairman of the Prudential Corporation, a leading insurance company,
recently said the UK self-regulatory system - regulation by financial
practitioners - had failed.
Lord Alexander believes practitioners have an important part to play. He
believes the prestige of his new body would mean high calibre practitioners
would join its council. Younger high-flying practitioners might also be keen
to be seconded to the new regulator as executives.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921123

