FT924-6196

FT  23 NOV 92 / Management: Swiss bankers share secrets - A look at a
pioneering effort to develop a new approach to data processing


   By ALAN CANE


Swiss bankers traditionally neither take risks nor are they iconoclasts,
especially where computer systems are concerned.
Yet a group of cantonal banks, based in Lausanne and Geneva, is pioneering
an approach to data processing which may presage a new era in electronic
banking.
Led by Banque Cantonale Vaudoise (BCV), a medium-sized retail bank serving
the canton of Vaud from its Lausanne headquarters, the group is pooling its
computing resources in a separate organisation owned equally by five founder
members.
The collaboration has come about principally through BCV's need to share the
estimated Pounds 100m costs of developing new and more competitive computer
systems.
The Financial Times first examined the project when it was on the drawing
board; three years on, it seems to be going well with cost reductions of up
to 30 per cent a year expected by 1995 on what would have been total running
costs for individual members of the consortium
The new company, Unicible, is now planning to recruit more members and sell
its services outside, doubling the number of accounts it is processing to 2m
within five years. Its management considers this the minimum to survive. The
Union Bank of Switzerland, one of the country's big three international
banks, is among the organisations which has already talked to Unicible about
possible co-operation.
Unicible began operations formally at the beginning of the year, causing a
stir in staid Swiss banking circles.
The development is controversial because it provides identical data
processing services to each member, operating computer hardware on behalf of
shareholders from two mainframe sites.
A bank's computer system these days contains as much of value as its vaults.
Accounting information, lending records and so on, are filed away on
batteries of capacious disc drives.
It is the kind of data which can be used to compile marketing profiles of
customers, opening the door to the cross-selling of a wide variety of
financial products. Bankers conventionally see such information as their
crown jewels and guard it jealously.
Yet the Unicible shareholders - BCV and Credit Foncier Vaudois in Lausanne,
Banque Hypothecaire du Canton de Geneve and Caisee d'Epargne de Geneve in
Geneva and Banque Cantonale du Valais in Sion - are not only sharing
processing services, but developing applications software on a common basis,
using a single software development method.
This includes software designed to give institutions a competitive edge,
again an area companies traditionally reserve for their own computing
specialists.
The Unicible initiative is a form of facilities management, or
'outsourcing', which is becoming an increasingly credible option for
companies anxious to concentrate on what they do best, leaving essential,
but non-core, activities to outside specialists.
But it is still highly unusual in the banking community. Barclays Bank in
the UK, for example, recently hived off its data processing department as a
subsidiary, Barclays Computer Operations (BCO), which sells computing
services to outside customers in addition to members of the Barclays group.
BCO is wholly owned by Barclays, and its outside customers - while in
financial services - are not competitors.
Unicible has its origin in decisions taken in the late 1980s by BCV. Then a
moderately successful cantonal bank, it was concerned about its continuing
ability to hold its own with its big Swiss competitors - Union Bank of
Switzerland, Swiss Bank Corporation and Credit Suisse - and, with the advent
of the single European market, foreign banks as well.
Like many cantonal banks, its strength lay in its local business - personal
savings and mortgages - and it lacked the business expertise and computer
systems flexible enough to exploit newer, more profitable banking products.
The bank had two iconoclasts among its senior executives: Francis Randin,
then senior vice-president for organisation and information systems, and
Pierre Pennone, head of information systems development. Randin, the
youngest-ever member of the Swiss Bankers Association, has now given up his
banking career to run Unicible. Pennone has taken charge of systems
development there.
Randin and Pennone persuaded BCV to re-engineer its business processes and
its information systems using special computer software developed by Texas
Instruments, the US-based electronics company, and new International
Business Machines' file system, DB2.
Business process re-engineering - changing the way a company does business
to focus its responsiveness to fast-changing markets - is a hackneyed term
today but, back in 1988 it was very new, as was the Texas Instruments'
software Information Engineering Facility or IEF.
BCV became its first commercial site; it still has more experience of the
technology than any other customer.
IEF is a very large and sophisticated form of computer-aided systems
engineering (Case); it uses computer power to design business processes and
automatically write the computer systems to underpin them. According to the
US technology consultancy Gartner Group, it has proved itself the most
successful Case system in a difficult market.
But the entire strategy, planned to take up to 10 years to complete, was
certain to cost more than BCV could afford alone, hence Unicible. Three
years into implementation of the transformation strategy, both Randin and
Pennone agree that IEF has proved an effective re-engineering tool.
One-third of the five banks' application programs - some 2,000 operational
procedures - have been rewritten; another third will be ready in 18 months.
That leaves what Pennone describes as 'decision-making' programs - software
for competitive advantage but in areas outside the banks' present expertise.
For these topics it is seeking outside know-how: for investment portfolio
management, for example, it has bought a Belgian product which it is
rewriting, using IEF to offer to its shareholders.
Pennone explains that Unicible works because its shareholders have the same
processing needs and the same global strategy; they are not in competition
with each other although they face the same threats from bigger banks.
And they have the same need to keep up with technology. Pennone is already
beginning to think about open systems and multimedia which he says represent
a 'tremendous opportunity'.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921123

