FT921-404

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (12):
London's special expertise - Tom Lynch explores the complexities of the
political risk market


   By TOM LYNCH


IT IS hard enough to work out the chance of a particular house being burned
down or a particular aircraft crashing. But into other kinds of risks have
to be factored the actions of governments and of terrorists and criminals.
For Lloyd's, political risks have brought about a profitable niche market
for a relatively small number of specialist underwriters.
Insurance against kidnapping and ransom (K&R) is the high-profile area of
political risk, but most of the business is older-established, less
glamorous and more complex - covering areas such as a change of government
being hostile, a bureaucracy causing delays or a central bank slowing down
its payments schedule.
Some believe a certain amount of business is still done on an old-fashioned
wing-and-a-prayer. Just as an early denizen of the Lloyd's coffee house
might back a merchantman to the Indies after supping ale with a merry fellow
who said the people had great need of woollen bonnets, so risk analysis is
still not fully understood in some areas.
The fact that good risk analysis requires a lot of expensive skilled labour
may help explain the relatively small number of significant players in the
market.
Mr Kit Brownlees, managing director of Investment Insurance International, a
division of Hogg Group, one of the leading players in commercial risks,
divides political risk into three main areas - contract frustration,
investment and personal.
Contract frustration is loss of payments to exporters, through non-payment
by governments or arising from trade embargoes or from new regimes
repudiating contracts signed by their predecessors - though not often,
apparently, on arms deals.
Some of these risks are covered by government agencies, such as the UK's
ECGD, but the private sector picks up business from countries whose
governments do not cover certain risks, and from multi-national joint
ventures with no obvious domicile.
National agencies deal in contracts paid for in cash, so one fast-growing
area for the private market is counter-trade and barter - for example, a
company selling goods in return for minerals, or financing a mine to produce
minerals.
Mr Brownlees says it is a profitable business. Countries seldom renege on
such deals, so the claims record is good, and there is a good stream of
repeat business from companies anxious to eliminate country risk from their
calculations.
Investment insurance covers confiscation or nationalisation of assets,
inability to remit profits and dividends, and conflict in its various forms,
from nuclear war to riot.
Mr Nigel Alington, a director of Hogg Insurance Brokers, says investment
risk policies are becoming more popular. Poor countries without means to buy
products encourage investors to set up factories to make them, with the
added advantage of employment, skills and technology transfer. Also, more
state-owned companies are being privatised, and foreign investors want their
assets protected.
One sideline is insuring aircraft leasing by bank consortia to Third World
airlines. A debtor country has no use for an aircraft it cannot fly abroad,
and may be able to land in only two or three places at home, so there is a
high probability of repossession in the event of default.
The ECGD stil does all UK investment insurance for major projects such as
dams and power stations. The government will also insure war risk - the
private market usually does not do war insurance on land-based assets (ships
are different, as they can be moved out of the way).
The advantage of government schemes is that capacity is, in theory,
unlimited and they can cover periods up to 25 years - whereas the private
market will usually stop at three years. But governments only cover
investors of their own nationality, and only on new projects, while a big
chunk of the private market's business comes from existing investments.
Even industries such as oil, which have long lead times, will insure
privately, renewing annually because, says Mr Alington, they can make
flexible arrangements like putting together a large portfolio of risks and
insure part of it in the normal way, with catastrophe cover for the balance.
London is the centre of the world political risk market because of Lloyd's,
which started by covering confiscation of ships and developed contract
frustration in the 1970s. It is covered as marine insurance on capacities up
to Dollars 150m-Dollars 200m per risk and uses other markets to add on.
Mr Brownlees says big contract frustration risks - over Dollars 10m or so -
need a Lloyd's lead. But capacity has shrunk along with the rest of market
and has been replaced by commercial underwriters.
For the future, Lloyd's would like to do export credit insurance, believing
that the line between that and political risk is artificial - a working
party is looking into it.
Some Lloyd's players would also like to take on the full range of war risks,
excluded in the wake of the Spanish Civil War because of the possibility of
catastrophe losses. Currently governments cover the range from nuclear war
to civil strife, while the private sector ranges from riots to terrorism.
This, says Mr Alington, leaves 'all sorts of gaps and overlaps,' with
'endless grounds for doubt on whether something is covered by a policy'.
Recent problems have concerned whether war risk insurance covered damage to
western assets in Islamic countries by rioters in sympathy with Saddam
Hussein during the Gulf war, or looting in Liberia after the civil war
there.
He and Mr Brownlees both expect increasing co-operation between the
government and private sector - the private market already reinsures some
government risks and some governments are reacting against spending a lot of
money on export credit schemes which have lost money for years.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920330

