FT923-6642

FT  22 AUG 92 / Markets: Don't discount investment trusts - Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


THOSE who bought shares in the investment trust launches of the past year or
two could be forgiven for feeling a trifle sick. There are few profits to be
had.
On Friday morning, package units in M&G Recovery, offered at 100p, were down
to 93p; those in M&G Income were 89p. Those who invested in Fidelity
European Values were worse off by around 8 per cent even after adding back
the value of the warrants. And if you bought a capital share in the
Contra-Cyclical Investment Trust at launch, your 25p investment has turned
into 11p.
Of course, these trusts are designed to be long-term investments. That means
they need to be held for at least five years, and probably 10, before their
real advantages come through.
Adding to the problems of the small investor, however, the success or
failure of these trusts is not merely a matter of whether the stock market
performs well. Even if the trust's portfolio rises in value, an investor in
a new issue can lose money because of the discount factor.
It is relatively easy to value an investment trust. You can simply take the
market value of all the shares in its portfolio, deduct the debts, and
divide by the number of shares in issue. The result is the net asset value
(nav) per share.
However, investment trust shares very rarely trade at the nav price.
Normally, they trade below that price - at a discount, as the jargon has it.
The discount is a function of the demand for the shares. If few investors
want to buy the shares (perhaps because the manager's record is poor, or
because the trust's portfolio is expected to fall in value), the discount
will be wide.
It is possible for a trust's shares to trade at a premium. Historically,
this has tended to occur with geographical specialist trusts. A Korea fund,
for example, might be the only way most investors can gain exposure to the
Korean economy; so, if prospects for that area are perceived to be good,
investors will bid the share price above the asset value.
More recently, however, premiums have tended to be associated with split
capital investment trusts. By dividing up the share capital in ways that
offer tax advantages to different sets of investors (zeroes, income shares
etc), enough demand was created to enable the trust as a whole to trade at a
premium.
There is some debate in the industry whether these premiums are 'fool's
gold.' A split capital trust still owns the same sorts of shares as a normal
trust; so, why should someone pay a premium for assets he can buy at a
discount elsewhere?
There is also a more general worry, though. The rediscovered enthusiasm of
private investors for investment trust shares has, by creating extra demand,
narrowed the sector's discount. From more than 23 per cent in 1988, the
discount reduced to just over 11 per cent in 1991.
If the discount widens again, the new shareholder recruits to the sector may
see their savings battered. They might feel as disillusioned as all those
investors who piled into unit trusts at the top of the bull market in 1987.
To date, the news has been relatively encouraging. Although stock markets
have been weak - normally a factor which widens discounts substantially -
the sector discount is only 14 per cent. According to Robbie Robertson of
County NatWest, the sector seems to bounce back when the 15 per cent
discount level is reached.
Perhaps private investors have been convinced of the merits of savings
schemes. Every time prices fall, the monthly payment buys more shares.
Indeed, if savings schemes can be kept as a stable source of demand for
shares, then historical discount levels of 25 per cent might never recur. A
virtuous circle can be created.
* * * A final thought. Most experts seem to think that bonds will be highly
attractive to private investors in the low-inflation, low-growth 1990s. That
might well be true for retired investors who depend on their savings for
income. But the story could be different for those who are saving for the
longer term.
Each investor is entitled to an annual capital gains tax allowance - which
is Pounds 5,800 in the 1992-93 financial year. In other words, your first
Pounds 5,800 of gain is tax-free.
Not only that, but the Revenue also allows investors to index their gains to
avoid the effect of inflation. This is a very useful tax break which makes
it quite hard to pay CGT - just 165,000 people paid it in 1991.
Take a top-rate taxpayer with savings of Pounds 50,000. If the funds were
placed on deposit, he might earn Pounds 5,000 in gross interest this year -
but that would translate to just Pounds 3,000 after tax. If he made Pounds
5,000 of capital gains, the return would be tax-free.
Of course, a building society investor can be reasonably certain of his
income, whereas investing for capital gains is a risky business.
Nevertheless, equities have traditionally outperformed bonds over the long
term.
And even if gross bond returns matched those for equities in the 1990s,
equities would still make the average investor better off in net terms. So,
despite the recent bad news, a broadly-spread investment trust still looks a
good long-term savings vehicle for the small investor.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920822

