FT924-11526

FT  26 OCT 92 / EC-US farm talks restarted in effort to avert trade war


   By DAVID GARDNER and NANCY DUNNE


   BRUSSELS, WASHINGTON


EUROPEAN Community and US officials restarted detailed talks at the weekend
to try to resolve the farm exports disputes that threaten a damaging trade
war.
Officials in Brussels said it was hoped the urgent contacts would pare EC-US
differences enough for Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture commissioner, and Mr
Ed Madigan, US agriculture secretary, to clinch a deal.
The contacts follow the breakdown of US-EC talks last week. The deadlock
heightened fears of a collapse in efforts to liberalise world trade under
the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. It also
spurred moves for the US to impose punitive tariffs on some EC exports.
Mr MacSharry phoned Mr Madigan at the weekend to try to set a date for
resuming talks at a political level. A spokesman for Mr Madigan said a
meeting between the two men was possible on Wednesday, but only if agreed
compromises remained intact and if the weekend talks between officials made
progress.
'They are not likely to meet if it is to renegotiate things previously
agreed to,' he said.
Mr MacSharry continued rallying support in EC capitals and within the
European Commission for his bargaining stance, which the French government
and Mr Jacques Delors, Commission president, look set to challenge as going
beyond Brussels' negotiating mandate from the 12.
When EC farm ministers meet in Luxembourg today, France is expected to make
strenuous efforts to rein in Mr MacSharry.
Mr Jean-Pierre Soisson, France's agriculture minister, yesterday met his
counterparts from six EC countries, including Britain, to try to forge a
common position on the negotiations.
French officials say the Socialist government could fall if a Gatt trade
deal puts formal restraints on wheat exports. Some 60 MPs among government
supporters are vulnerable to France's powerful farm lobby.
Detailed weekend phone talks were between Mr Guy Legras, head of the EC
commission's agriculture directorate, and Mr Joe O'Mara from the US
agriculture department. The two may meet in Brussels or Paris.
They must try to narrow differences on the level of EC oilseeds output, on
subsidised EC cereals exports and on cheap US cereal substitutes.
President George Bush, meanwhile, attacked Mr Bill Clinton, his Democratic
rival for the US presidency, over reports that Clinton campaign officials
were working to stall an EC-US accord.
'If the Clinton campaign is going over to Europe interfering with an
agreement that would benefit all American agriculture, it is a sorry,
pathetic thing to be doing a few days before the election,' Mr Bush said.
French case undermined, Page 2 Editorial Comment, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921026

