FT921-15210

FT  11 JAN 92 / Sport: Tough tests for creaking champions - Tennis


   By JOHN BARRETT


THE FIRST of the year's major championships, the ADollars 6.2m (Pounds 2.6m)
Ford Australian Open, which begins at Flinders Park, Melbourne, on Monday -
if it ever stops raining - will boast the strongest fields in its 97-year
history. Only two men, Andre Agassi and Sergi Bruguera, and two women,
Martina Navratilova and Nathalie Tauziat, are missing from the world's top
20.
The defending champions, Boris Becker and Monica Seles, each have their
problems. Becker came early to Australia to gain match practice at last
week's Hopman Cup in Perth, the mixed team event. Unfortunately, Steffi Graf
went down with a mysterious illness that affected her balance and the
top-seeded Germans lost unexpectedly to Czechoslovakia. Nor could Becker
gain a last minute entry to this week's special event in Adelaide, the Rio
International Challenge, so he will not be match tight.
Seles has been in Australia a week but, in unseasonably wet and chilly
conditions, has had little serious practice. Not only has it rained every
day in Melbourne for the last ten days, to make it the wettest January since
records began in 1855, but the Yugoslav has also been suffering from a
ricked neck - the result, she believes, of sleeping awkwardly on the flight
to Australia.
The draw for this 79th men's championship, completed yesterday, has done
Becker no favours. Seeded 3, he is in the top half and has a rejuvenated
John McEnroe as a prospective third round opponent in a section which also
includes the unseeded Pat Cash, another dangerous floater.
The top seed, Stefan Edberg, competing again after a ten-week break for
injury, has a quiet section. He starts against a qualifier and has Peter
Korda (9) cast as his fourth round opponent. In the quarter-finals Edberg is
scheduled to meet Ivan Lendl (5), who beat him last year in a semi-final
where the Swede served a double-fault on the first of two match points he
held. The loss of that match was a psychological blow that set Edberg back
for about three months.
The only apparent danger to Lendl comes from the other seed in his section,
Derrick Rostagno (12). But Rostagno will have to be at his best to beat Brad
Gilbert in the second round.
Assuming he survives, Becker's quarter-final opponent is supposed to be
Karel Novacek (8) but the big Czech looked far from convincing in Perth
where he lost badly to Rostagno and Becker. It would not surprise me if
David Wheaton (15) emerged from that section. The tall American, a Wimbledon
semi-finalist last year and the winner of the Compaq Grand Slam Cup, is one
of the shrewdest men in the business. He knows exactly how to time his
efforts for big occasions.
The lower half is the place to be drawn this year, although Jim Courier (2)
will have one awkward hurdle in the third round. Three men will fight for
the chance to play him. Jakob Hlasek, who led Switzerland to an impressive
Hopman Cup victory, meets the improving Dutchman Paul Haarhuis in one of the
best opening round matches. The winner will face tough Austrian Thomas
Muster, who has performed well in Sydney this week.
According to the seeding, Courier's opponent in the fourth quarter-final
should be fellow American Pete Sampras (6) who beat him to win the IBM/ATP
Tour championships last November. But Sampras was nursing a shoulder injury
after two Rio matches in Adelaide and is by no means certain to beat Goran
Ivanisevic (10), provided the Croatian survives. He too has a suspect arm
which he injured while winning the Australian men's hardcourt title, also in
Adelaide, last week.
In the third quarter is the German powerhouse Michael Stich (4). Like
Becker, Stich is short of match play because he lost his first match in
Sydney this week. Nevertheless, he should be capable of surviving to face
Goran Prpic (16) in the fourth round. Then he is supposed to meet either the
French left-hander Guy Forget (7), who has had the most wretched luck to
draw his Davis Cup team-mate Henri Leconte in the opening round, or Michael
Chang (14).
However, I believe all of them may fall to the powerful serving of
'Krackerjack', otherwise Richard Krajicek, who is the best young prospect in
the game. This tall 20-year-old Dutchman, born of Czech parents, denied
Lendl match practice by beating him in the first round in Sydney and may be
ready to fulfil his enormous potential which, barring accidents, will one
day take him to the topmost heights of the game.
Spare a thought this afternoon for Jeremy Bates. The British No 1 has come
through two rounds of qualifying and must beat South Africa's Byron Talbot
to earn a place in the main draw. That should not be beyond him.
The seeded women usually perform reliably in the majors. Last year in
Australia the only unseeded quarter-finalist was the German Anke Huber, who
fell to Seles. After a marvellous year which saw her climb from 34 to 14 in
the rankings this gritty baseliner, now 17, finds herself seeded 16 with the
prospect of another quarter-final clash against Seles. First, though, she
must beat last year's beaten finalist, Jana Novotna (6).
In the second quarter, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario (4), is scheduled to meet
Conchita Martinez (8) who she beat in a first career meeting in Sydney this
week, but both may be upset by Manuela Maleeva Fragniere (9) who beat
Sanchez decisively in the Hopman Cup.
In the lower half Graf (2) has been dealt a less attractive hand. Fate has
put her Hopman Cup conqueror Helena Sukova (15) in her section with Mary Joe
Fernandez (7) or Judith Weisner (14) next in the firing line - none of them
easy opponents for a player who is clearly out of sorts physically and not
yet restored to the full confidence of that Golden Grand Slam year of 1988.
Also in this half is Gabriela Sabatini (3) who must first dispose of
Katerina Maleeva (10), and then either Jennifer Capriati (5) or Zina
Garrison (11). I would not be surprised to see Capriati emerge here as the
only real threat to Seles. Her win over Navratilova at Wimbledon and her
near-miss against Seles in the US Open were, for me, the two best women's
matches of 1991. Make no mistake, Capriati is ready to explode.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII Photograph German powerhouse, Michael Stich short of match
play for the Australian Open (Omitted).

920111

