FT922-13398

FT  11 APR 92 / Arts: In debt to Russia


   By CLEMENT CRISP


THE CAUSE could not be better, more deserving of support, or nearer to the
hearts of ballet and opera lovers. The Mariinsky Theatre, that most
beautiful of lyric houses, needs help in these times of renewal. A
performance by members of the theatre's opera and ballet troupes, by its
orchestra, and by the students of the Vaganova Academy which shapes the
future dancers for the Petersburg ballet, must tell something of the debt we
owe to Russian dance and music. Hence Thursday night's gala at Covent
Garden, London, under the inelegant title 'Welcome back St. Petersburg.'
Galas, by their charitable nature - generosity from artists as from patrons
 -defy criticism. It would be idle, though, to pretend that all was quite
for the best in aid of the best of all possible theatres. As an omen, the
programme book provided a photograph that would have us believe that the
Mariinsky Theatre is externally blue, instead of that pale and mysterious
Petersburg green, and there are errors in the text which suggest hurried
editing.
The evening comprised in the main arias from operas by Tchaikovsky,
Rimsky-Korsakov, Musorgsky, Rakhmaninov, plus four larger sections (the end
of Prince Igor's first act; the Kromy forest scene from Boris; the Streltsy
scene from Khovanshchina; the Epilogue from Prokofiev's War and Peace), and
some balletic 'gems from the classics'.
The result was over-generous - and with a running time of four hours, a tax
on enthusiasm. With less, but more extended, contributions - the ballet
looked distinctly under par on the terms of fly-by-night virtuosity - the
evening would have been a truer, more flattering portrait of the lyric arts
in St. Petersburg. The Vaganova school students - very young, limbs still
delicate  - were proud upholders of their academy's traditions in the
children's polonaise and mazurka from Paquita: they showed dancing already
nuanced, elegant.
The overwhelming merit of the evening came from those elements which were
most truly themselves: the orchestra and the opera chorus. The opening
orchestral item - the Introduction and dances from Tchaikovsky's The
Sorceress - proclaimed, yet again, the magnificence of the Mariinsky
musicians, with supremely sensitive strings, and Valery Gergiev led playing
of passionate involvement.
The chorus was no less splendid. In the closing moments of the Streltsy
scene, tears must have been near many eyes as we heard the voice of Russia
plain: noble, glorious. And in the epilogue to War and Peace, the hymn of
thanksgiving for deliverance had a renewed relevance for Russia and for all
of us who love that great country, and acknowledge our profound debt to its
arts.
In an introduction to the evening, Sir Peter Ustinov recalled telling a
Moscow crowd that 'we have much to learn from each other.' What we have to
give - and benefactors please note  - is practical support, as one would to
a dear friend. We cannot do less for a theatre and its artists who so
enriched our lives.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920411

