FT922-4020

FT  08 JUN 92 / The European Market: Advertising market grows as it
fragments - As European media outlets increase, users must decide which one
is best for them


   By GARY MEAD


SOME Dollars 53bn will be spent on display advertising in 16 countries of
the European Economic Area (EC plus Efta countries) this year - fast
catching up with the Dollars 59bn US market.
But though the European display advertising market is becoming as important
as the US for big international advertisers, significant differences between
the two - the lack of a fairly homogeneous culture and common language -
mean would-be pan-European advertisers face more problems in hitting their
target audiences than in the US.
Moreover, increasing media fragmentation in Europe - a pattern well
established in the US - is giving advertisers and media buyers more
headaches. And finally, the European market has the extra frisson of an
increasing concentration of media ownership.
Four different groups tussle over the Dollars 53bn (Pounds 29bn) cash pool:
the owners of the media where the ads appear; the advertising agencies who
make the ads; the media buyers who buy the space; and the advertisers
themselves, who want better-targeted advertising space for the same, or
less, cost. In the European market, advertising expenditure is unlikely to
grow by more than 2 per cent in real terms this year. That slow growth is
putting a squeeze on everyone.
For both media owners and media buyers it is becoming more important to know
what type of consumer sees the media concerned; only through more refined
targeting can both sides continue to persuade advertisers to use them,
rather than a competitor. The piggy-in-the-middle, an advertiser -
particularly of fast-moving consumer goods - requires increasingly
sophisticated advice about where and when to place the advertising: without
careful market analysis, money could disappear down the drain.
In the last decade the European media market has witnessed a proliferation
of new outlets; in 1981 there were just 39 television channels, but by last
year that had exploded into 66 national terrestrial stations, 82 satellite
channels and another 700 regional and local channels (650 of those in Italy
alone). Across the EEA there are business plans for 40 more.
While satellite television is so far taken by only 3 per cent of European
households, cable television has reached 19 per cent of them - though in
France, Italy, Spain and the UK penetration is less than 3 per cent. The
domestic video recorder has spread to more than half (from a standing start
in 1978) and 60 per cent have remote controls; consumer viewing choice is
greater, faster, easier.
Advertisers have a glut of outlets elsewhere, too. There are now 10,000
different consumer magazine titles in the EEA, 4,200 paid-for and 4,300
free-distribution newspapers. But both magazines and newspapers have seen
their share of advertising revenue drop over the decade: from 26 to 22 per
cent for the former and from 39 to 30 per cent for the latter.
If media fragmentation is a cause for alarm for media owners anxious to keep
their share of advertising revenues, it plays into the hands of media-buying
specialists such as Carat, the largest in Europe, which this year will take
some 12 per cent of the market.
Mr Peter Scott, chief executive of Carat, says: 'Fragmentation of the media
is going to create more choice, more competition, more complexity and
therefore a greater need for research and computer techniques in order to be
able to find out where the audiences are. In the US, Warner delivers 150
different channels in some areas of New York. How do you as an advertiser
know where to go?' Carat is spending Dollars 20m this year on researching
that problem.
At the same time as a swing towards more media outlets, media ownership
across Europe is also becoming concentrated in fewer hands.
Europe's largest independent media buyer, Carat (part of the Aegis group),
has recently published research which indicates that 44 per cent of
television advertising spending - about Dollars 16bn - went to just five
European television groups in 1991; 69 per cent of all advertising was
snapped up by the top 20 individual channels.
In Italy, with a 1991 advertising market of Dollars 7bn, Mr Silvio
Berlusconi's Fininvest group is now estimated to have some 50 per cent of
all advertising revenues.
European publishing is becoming similarly concentrated. In 1991 eight of the
big publishers took 35 per cent of of all magazine advertising in the five
biggest European markets.
Moreover, Carat says that until quite recently (when Pearson sold its share
in the Dutch publisher Elsevier), the 15 top media owners in Europe were all
inter-connected in some way, through part-ownerships in more than 20
different media outlets, television, radio and publishing.
Such concentration of media ownership is also concentrating the minds - and
actions - of buyers. Last year, for the first time, more than 50 per cent of
all display advertising expenditure was channelled through specialist media
space-buyers.
Carat is convinced that, as pan-European media ownership concentrates while
the outlets become more fragmented and niche-like, buyers will have to
become more specialised.
Mr Scott is therefore confident about the future of his own and other
media-buying businesses, at the cost of European media owners: 'Overall, the
cost of advertising is coming down rather than going up. The massive media
inflation of the 1980s is now tailing off, and the inherent profitability of
media owners must be under threat; the power has shifted from media owners
to advertisers and media buyers. An advertiser and media buyer can now
achieve the same thing by going elsewhere, if media owners try to charge
outrageous rates.
'Give satellite another couple of years of penetration and you can start to
say 'no' to inflated charges from other forms of television.'

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920608

