FT923-6470

FT  24 AUG 92 / Swiss Bonds: Investors languish in the doldrums


   By IAN RODGER


IT has been another disappointing year so far in the Swiss franc bond
market, with investors still waiting for the decisive interest rate move
that could set off a rally and issuers still finding better terms in the
swap market.
The total volume of new issues in the first seven months slumped by nearly a
quarter to SFr22.4bn and would have tumbled further but for the
deterioration in public sector finances in Switzerland.
In the domestic part of the market, which is made up mainly of government
and government guaranteed issues, the volume of new issues jumped 30 per
cent to SFr12.66bn in the first seven months.
The federal government expects to run a record SFr5.6bn fund raising
programme this year, and most of the big cantons have also become big
borrowers.
By contrast, new issues in the once very active foreign sector halved in the
first seven months to SFr9.75bn. The main reasons for this decline are
fairly familiar. Foreign issuers, in particular, have been put off by the
uncharacteristic volatility and weakness of the Swiss franc.
Meanwhile, the rising trend in long-term interest rates has encouraged
investors to stay in short-term instruments where yields have been higher
anyway. The recessionary climate has made industrial companies shy to invest
and banks reluctant to lend.
A factor peculiar to the Swiss market has been the drying up of public
issues by Japanese borrowers. In the late 1980s, when the Japanese stock
market was booming, there was a huge flow of issues, most equity related, by
Japanese companies. This year there have been almost none.
Ironically, this deterioration of the market has come during a period when
several steps have been taken to improve its notorious lack of liquidity.
Typically, bonds issued in the Swiss franc market have been placed over a
period of two or three weeks and not seen again until maturity. Even now,
according to the Geneva bankers Pictet & Cie, only about five federal
government issues and a similar number of others have any significant
secondary trading.
Until last year, there were no issues large or long enough in the Swiss
franc market to serve as benchmarks. The first steps to fill this gap came
when Swiss Bank Corporation led a SFr600m issue for the World Bank and a
two-step SFr800m issue for the European Investment Bank.
This year, the federal government, which used to come to the market only
three or four times a year with relatively small issues, agreed to start a
monthly treasury auction programme, which would consist of tap issues of
varying coupon rats that could become benchmarks.
The issues, which began in May, have all been around SFr500m and coupons
have ranged from 6.5 per cent to 7 per cent. Dealers say these issues have
already improved liquidity and cut the spread between bid and offer prices.
The start-up this year of bond futures on the Soffex exchange has also
helped improve liquidity.
The next government auction is due to be announced today, and analysts are
expecting another SFr500m tranche of the 7 per cent coupon issue or perhaps
a new issue at a slightly higher coupon. 'If they try a lower coupon,
interest in it would be subdued,' says Mr Franz Ruegg of Bank Julius Baer in
Zurich.
After two years of depressed market conditions, bond analysts are reluctant
to show much optimism about the near-term outlook, but they do point to some
encouraging signs.
The franc has remained strong in recent weeks in spite of the Swiss National
Bank's refusal to follow German rate increases, and some analysts suspect
that the current turmoil in Europe over currency unification and the French
referendum on the Maastricht agreement is helping to restore the franc's
haven role.
They also point out that inflation in July at 3.8 per cent was half its
level of a year earlier, making real interest rates very attractive. And
short-term rates have come close enough to long term ones in the past few
days that investors could start to be tempted to shift some cash into bonds.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920824

