FT924-6105

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (16): Export path
through industrial recession - Profile of Hino Motors


   By STEVEN BUTLER


HINO MOTORS, Japan's leading truck maker, is earning money.
However, its net profits for the year to March 1992 fell 41.1 per cent to
Y7.35bn, and in the first half of the current year profits slipped again by
66.8 per cent to Y1.64bn.
As a 0.5 per cent return on Y307.2bn of sales, profits are dismal. Yet with
rival makers Isuzu and Nissan Diesel both in the red, Hino is in relative
terms roaring through Japan's industrial recession.
What is helping see Hino through hard times are the decades during which
Hino carefully cultivated markets throughout the rest of Asia, where unlike
Japan, North America, and Europe, most economies are still thriving. Asia
takes some 60 per cent of Hino's exports and the comparative sales figures
for Japan and the rest of the world are striking.
Hino's sales of medium- and large-scale trucks at home fell from 28,511
units in the first half of the last fiscal year to 20,030 this year, and
Hino expects a full year decline of 24 per cent. The value of sales in the
first half was off by 24 per cent to Y81.73bn.
Yet overseas was a different story. Exports of medium and large trucks rose
from 10,065 units to 13,011, with most of the increase in the more costly
heavy trucks. As a result export revenues from these products rose by 52 per
cent to Y40.69bn.
The stunning rise in export sales was in the end not enough to compensate
for the slackening of the Japanese market, and total sales were down by 2.5
per cent. Yet Hino's strong export business has provided it with an
invaluable cushion against the recession, and has allowed it to keep its
assembly plants working more or less at full capacity.
Hino has taken some steps to trim costs. It is, for example, trying in three
years to reduce by 30 per cent the 3,000 different vehicle types that it now
offers to its customers. Yet it has not been forced, like some other leading
manufacturers, to cut back drastically on part-time labour, or to cut
directors' salaries.
In the first half of the year, truck sales to Taiwan rose by 90.3 per cent
to 4,062 units both because of the buoyancy of the economy, and because the
government introduced regulations to prevent overloading vehicles, forcing
fleet operators to enlarge vehicles fleets to maintain capacity. Sales to
Thailand shot up by 42.4 per cent; to Hong Kong 85.6 per cent, while sales
to China more than doubled.
Perhaps even more important, the outlook for economic growth in the Asian
region - as opposed to most of the developed world and the former Soviet
bloc - continues to look very strong. Hino is doing business in the right
place, and can look forward to continued buoyant export sales.
At home, Japan is unlikely for a long time to provide the kind of growth
seen in the late 1980s. Yet there are some favourable signs. The government
in late August announced a Y10,700bn package of emergency economic measures
aimed at boosting the economy, and much of this money will be spent to
increase public works spending, including construction.
Hino estimates the package will increase demand for trucks by some 5,000
units this fiscal year. The impact next year could be larger.
Hino has also been holding its own domestically. Its 29.3 per cent share of
the domestic market was nearly unchanged from last year, with the share of
large trucks up 2.4 percentage points to 31.9 per cent while medium trucks
were down by 1.8 percentage points to 27.3 per cent. The rise in the market
share for large trucks was partially the result of a full model change in
May.
Hino's business is also underpinned by a close relationship to Toyota,
Japan's largest and financially strongest car maker. Toyota is Hino's
largest shareholder with an 11.2 per cent stake, and in the first half of
the year consigned production of 178,720 vehicles, worth Y122.6bn, to Hino.
Hino's production of Tercel, Corsa, and Corolla II models were down, but
production of Hilux, the small commercial vehicle, rose.
In spite of an underlying strong business, however, Hino profits have
suffered for fundamentally the same reasons that profits have fallen in
Japanese industry. For one, Hino's capital investment nearly doubled in two
years to peak at Y42.1bbn last year.
Although this year it is budgeted to drop to Y38bn, Hino is paying heavy
depreciation charges on earlier investments at a time when sales, and,
therefore, prices, are slack.
Hino is also paying sharply higher distribution costs, and wages have also
gone up significantly. Lower interest income, and sharply higher interest
payments on bonds has also undermined non-operating profits.
As a result, in spite of underlying strong business and no real financial
difficulties, Hino will have to wait to see any significant improvement in
financial performance.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921123

