FT922-558

FT  26 JUN 92 / 'Unanimity' on need for change


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


THE BP directors who confronted Robert Horton earlier this week were
'unanimous' about the need for top level changes in the way the group was
run, according to Lord Ashburton, BP's new chairman.
This shows the depth of concern among Mr Horton's 16 boardroom colleagues,
who include top names from the business and government worlds.
Lord Ashburton himself, better known by his pre-peerage name of Sir John
Baring, is a former head of Barings, the UK's oldest merchant bank, and one
of the most experienced City hands. Sir Patrick Sheehy, chairman of BAT, and
Dr Carl Hahn, chairman of Volkswagen, are members, as is Peter Sutherland,
the Irish former EC Commissioner who is now chairman of Allied Irish Banks.
BP also recently acquired its first female board member, Ms Karen Horn,
chairman and chief executive of Banc One, the banking group in Cleveland,
Ohio, where BP's US operations are based.
The non-business side is represented by Sir James Glover, the former
commander in chief of the UK land forces, and Sir Patrick Wright, permanent
under secretary at the foreign office until his retirement last year.
But though the non-executives hold a 9-8 majority on the board, the
executive directors are a powerful - and growing - force. Only four months
ago, their number was increased from seven to eight so that all the
divisional heads should have board seats.
The senior of these is Mr Hugh Norton, head of the Far East division who
rose to the board in 1989. Subsequent additions were Mr Ray Knowland, head
of BP's chemicals and nutrition divisions, Mr Rodney Chase, head of the US
operations, Mr Russell Seal, chief executive of BP Oil, John Browne, head of
BP Exploration, and Mr Stephen Ahearne, the chief financial officer.
Although the divisional chiefs were all publicly loyal to Mr Horton, many of
BP's greatest internal strains lay at their level: they faced the full force
of Mr Horton's personality, they had to bear and implement the tough cuts of
the last year to get BP's finances straight.
Mr David Simon, the former chief operating officer who now becomes chief
executive, stressed last night that there were to be no major corporate
changes. He is expected to adopt a more collegial style which should soothe
chafed sensibilities.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920626

