FT921-411

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (7): Echoes
of the City's Big Bang - Electronic dealing has revolutionised the business


   By SIMON REYNOLDS


TODAY sees the live launch of the first phase of the electronic placing
support system for the London insurance market. The system will allow
brokers and underwriters to transmit and receive, over the LIMNET network,
structured messages which contain the information needed to support the
placing of insurance.
Translation software converts those messages to and from a format
understandable by the brokers' and underwriters' in-house computer systems.
The system is being implemented under the title Joint Market Initiative
(JMI), and it represents a significant development in the methods of
insurance trading in London and especially at Lloyd's.
It is arguably Lloyd's most important step to date regarding new technology
and electronic data interchange initiatives (edi).
It is called the joint initiative because it involves the whole of the
London insurance market, embracing insurance company members of the
Institute of London Underwriters (ILU) who transact marine, aviation and
transport insurance; members of the London Insurance and Re-insurance Market
Association (LIRMA) who transact non-marine business; Lloyd's syndicates;
and brokers in the Lloyd's Insurance Brokers Committee (LIBC).
Important as it is, the JMI should not be seen in isolation from other
networking initiatives in the London market, particularly those involving
claims handling, launched since LIMNET was set up in 1987. Developments
include:
more than 850 brokers and underwriters have access to LIMNET, utilising more
than 30,000 computer terminals;
28 per cent of all non-marine, property and casualty insurance claims have
been settled over the network by members of LIRMA using ELASS (Electronic
Loss Advice and Settlement System) since the system was introduced in
November 1988. In 1991 the figure averaged 36 per cent, and it has reached
55 per cent in recent months. In 1991, 81,000 claims advices were notified
on ELASS;
20 per cent of all marine, aviation and transport insurance claims have been
settled over the network by ILU members using CLAMS (Claims Management
System) since the system was introduced in July 1990. In 1991, the figure
averaged 22 per cent and current usage rates are in excess of 25 per cent.
In 1991, 20,169 claims advices were notified on CLAMS;
both LIRMA and ILU are looking to 100 per cent use of ELASS and CLAMS using
a standard claims message system by the start of next year. Lloyd's has
streamlined its claims procedures and the whole market is moving towards a
unified electronic claims system;
regarding signing, accounting and settlement information, around 20,000
transactions per day are being received by LIRMA and ILU members; more than
half of Lloyd's syndicates receive the underwriters' signing message (USM)
amounting to 6,000 advices per day; 65 broking organisations are receiving
daily signings and settlement information from Lloyd's, LIRMA and the ILU.
An estimated 80 per cent of daily signing information is now transacted via
LIMNET.
Other initiatives allow: outward reinsurance debit and credit transactions
to be processed over LIMNET (saving ultimately up to 800,000 pieces of paper
per year at Lloyds alone); processing of year-end excess of loss
adjustments; electronic mail with links between London market participants
and abroad.
The first phase of the Joint Market Initiative will involve all members of
the ILU and LIRMA, syndicates from 19 Lloyd's managing agents (around 65
syndicates in all), and some of the larger members of the LIBC.
More participants will join in progressively during 1992 and by the end of
the year 19 brokers accounting for 85 per cent of London market business
will be on board.
The placing support system will allow the preparation on screen by the
broker of a risk package or proposal; the obtaining of quotes from leading
and supporting underwriters (the creation by the broker, and confirmation by
underwriters, of a Firm Order package); the transmission of a Signed Line
message to underwriters confirming the insurance package (a facility for
processing Endorsements to a risk package held on the system); the ability
to notify and process individual declarations off Line Slips where the
leading underwriter has the authority to accept a risk on behalf of other
underwriters.
The system allows several tiers of participation. At the lowest level, the
placing of a risk will involve face to face contact between broker and
underwriter, with the traditional paper 'slip' containing details of the
risk complemented by electronic provision of a 'common core record'
(comprising the main details of the risk in a structured format), and other
electronic support information.
The paper slip will remain the basis of the contract at this level. At a
higher level, face to face contact will utilise an electronic version of the
slip, along with electronic supporting information. The underwriter will
'write' the line on the system and the electronic information will form the
basis of the contract. At the highest level there will be no face to face
contact between broker and underwriter, all contact being made remotely over
the network. Again the electronic information will form the basis of the
contract.
Dennis Purkiss, Chief Executive of the underwriting division of Merrett
Holdings, a managing agent of Lloyd's syndicates, argues that the JMI
electronic placing support initiative is 'the key to the future of the
market'.
Terry Hayday, chief executive, insurance services, at Sturge Holdings,
another managing agent, and chairman of the Lloyd's network steering group
(NSG), argues that 'this is the way forward, the way to enable the London
insurance market to compete in the next century'.
Similar sentiments were expressed in the Rowland task force which argued
that developments such as the JMI will 'strengthen London's collective
appeal as a market and reduce the costs to brokers of bringing business to
Lloyd's and the London market companies'.
Max Taylor, managing director of reinsurance brokers Willis Faber & Dumas
(part of the Willis Corroon group) and chairman of the London network
management committee, says that the electronic placing system will support
the brokers' job which is primarily 'the negotiation of business and premium
for our clients'.
According to Mr Taylor, a considerable amount of face to face business will
be underlined by being able to put the information on the screen. However,
there is a 'whole range of the business that occurs even in a complicated
risk that will be made massively easier by the electronic system, for
example endorsements', he says.
Brokers would benefit in two ways - first, higher efficiency enabling
increased responsiveness to clients' needs; second, the commercial
opportunities to be grasped by individual participants to 'utilise the
network in ways that will enhance and increase their business'.
Terry Hayday says that there have been objections from 'Luddite' sections of
the market but that enthusiasm is now increasing. 'Support for technology in
general has been given a great big affirmation by the Rowland task force.'
Dennis Purkiss also notices growing support: 'in the last six months people
have seen the system working (at demonstrations) and there are now more open
minds', he says. This enthusiasm has been built up gradually throughout the
market since it became obvious that if the ILU, LIRMA, and Lloyd's all took
different paths chaos would ensue.
The launch of the JMI should not be seen as rerun of the 1986 'big bang' in
the London Stock Exchange. An insurance transaction is generally much more
complicated than, say, a share transaction, and the London insurance market
offers a bespoke service to clients. It is not possible to force everyone
down the same route on the same day.
Comparisons with the 'big bang' are also wide of the mark in another
respect. The City 'big bang' obviated the need for face to face contact
between jobber and broker. But direct contact between insurance brokers and
underwriters will still be vital in the London insurance market following
the JMI launch, although it will not always be ideal in every situation.
Initially, there will be benefits from a reduction in the time required to
place risks. For standard risks and simple tasks, such as agreeing an
endorsement, underwriters can be presented with the relevant information
speedily over the network. Time saved can be spent developing new business,
while increased efficiency may allow London to gain business that was
previously uneconomic to place there, particularly at the high volume, low
risk end of the market.
Underwriters will gain access to important information on risk exposure as
soon as the lines are written, rather than having to wait for closing. Also,
because the risk information is entered once, there is less scope for
mistakes.
Further ahead lies the prospect of integration of electronic placing,
claims, and accounting systems thereby providing even greater back office
efficiency.
Dennis Purkiss says that electronic placing will 'help produce business that
we wouldn't otherwise see in Lloyd's via link ups with other networks,' such
as RINET in Europe and the Brokers and Reinsurers Market Association (BRMA)
and the Reinsurers Association of America (RAA) in the US.
Terry Hayday concludes that the market 'has got the people, got the talent,
and has now got the systems' to support those attributes in the most
efficient manner.
Simon Reynolds is a specialist writer on insurance and finance

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920330

