FT922-13489

FT  11 APR 92 / UK Company News: Brierley in rescue of Europa Minerals


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


SIR RON Brierley, the New Zealand entrepreneur, emerged yesterday with a
rescue package for Europa Minerals, the UK mining finance house.
The Europa board at the same time revealed that the principal bankers would
not have been prepared to provide facilities beyond March 31 this year in
the absence of firm proposals for refinancing.
Europa has signed an agreement with two companies in Sir Ron's orbit: GPG,
the UK investment group whose shares have been suspended in London since
December 1990, and Mid-East Minerals, an investment company quoted in
Australia in which GPG has a 86 per cent interest.
Mr David Hardy, chairman of Europa, suggested this 'represents the only
satisfactory proposal for Europa and will best secure its future.'
Europa will make an open offer and placing to raise Pounds 3.1m net, on the
basis of 3-for-1 at 3p per share.
New shares not taken up will be placed with or by MEM. However, the Europa
directors are asking for a waiver of the requirement for MEM to make a full
takeover offer, as required in the UK, should its holding go above 29.9 per
cent.
After the news the Europa share price fell by 4p to 5p. The company was
floated in February 1989 at 100p a share.
Europa also reported a loss before tax of Pounds 2.99m for the year to
January 31 1992, down from Pounds 3.89m previously. Debts at the year-end
were Pounds 5.8m.
Mr Hardy said that, while the share issue would improve Europa's position,
it would remain under some financial pressure and shareholders should bear
this in mind when deciding whether to take up their rights.
Existing shareholders could retain an interest in the group via warrants to
be issued without payment on the basis of 3-for-5 ordinary shares. The
warrants could be swapped at 7p a share at specific times during the next
five years.
Europa would use the proceeds from the open offer to reduce borrowing
facilities by Pounds 1.5m, to further cut overhead costs and to implement
its future strategy.
GPG and MEM had indicated that they would provide financial support for
suitable projects and investments by Europa. Bankers were continuing to
provide finance and had agreed in principal to provide two new term loans.
Austmin Gold, which owns 14.4 per cent of Europa and recently demanded
representation on the board, said it was looking at the proposals and
considering its position.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920411

