FT923-10834

FT  28 JUL 92 / France sets sights across the Rhine: Germany is increasingly
the target for French industrial investment and exports


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


Corporate France is launching an unprecedented invasion across the Rhine,
attracted by the belated realisation that Germany is the key to its success
in the European market. The first French boarding parties have had mixed
success in a country in which resistance to foreign incursions is still a
factor, although the single European market is helping to erode such
barriers. However, the French can already claim a record number of takeovers
and some export success. French companies last year took over 70 west German
companies, more than three times as many as in 1990, says the Patronat, the
French employers' association. Since the collapse of the Berlin wall almost
three years ago and the ensuing privatisation of most east German industry,
France has emerged as the largest foreign investor in eastern Germany by
far, having spent FFr7.7bn (Pounds 770m) on buying 78 privatised companies,
covering everything from industrial gases to petrol stations. France's
nearest rival, the US, has invested the equivalent of FFr5.2bn over the same
period, according to the Treuhandanstalt privatisation agency. At the same
time, French exporters have increased their share of the German market from
11.8 per cent in 1990 to 12.2 per cent in 1991. In addition, France's trade
deficit with Germany, its largest trade partner, is slipping, to FFr7bn last
year from FFr42bn in 1990. Car makers are leading the charge, with a 54 per
cent rise in exports to Germany last year. Symbolically, Renault is now the
biggest-selling foreign marque in Germany. In the east, sales of the Renault
19 last year overtook those of that quintessentially German success, the VW
Golf, partly because of the French car's low price. On the takeover front,
French investments in Germany include: The majority state-owned oil company,
Elf Aquitaine, which has won an agreement to run the monopoly petrol station
chain in eastern Germany. The deal entails an estimated DM6bn (Pounds
2.11bn) investment by Elf and its local partners - the largest French
investment in Germany since the second world war.
L'Air Liquide, which has become the east's market leader in industrial gases
by taking over three privatised producers. 'Our first objective in Europe is
Germany,' says a L'Air Liquide executive.
In west Germany, Moulinex, the French domestic appliance maker, which last
year paid DM130m for Krups, the family-controlled maker of coffee machines
and blenders.
France's biggest state-owned bank, Banque National de Paris (BNP), which is
negotiating to exchange stakes with a leading German bank, Dresdner, which
is in turn partly controlled by Germany's largest insurer, Allianz.
All this marks a big change from a few years ago, when the French business
world shrank under the shadow of German competition. Where does this new
confidence come from?
Part of the answer lies at home. French companies are reaping the benefits
of a decade of German-style monetary and budgetary rigour. Successive Paris
governments have followed a policy of disinflation after the short and
unhappy experiment with interventionism and budgetary expansion in the early
1980s. For the first time, French business has a solid base from which to
expand across the Rhine.
Mr Pierre Beregovoy, prime minister and former finance minister, has for the
past 13 months delivered inflation rates lower than in Germany. French
inflation is now at 3 per cent annually against Germany's 4.3 per cent. This
is the key to French price competitiveness.
There is also broad political support for Mr Beregovoy's monetary and
budgetary rigour. To help matters further, France's strike record has
improved substantially, despite the disruption of the recent truckers'
strike.
Germany has been in the sights of French government economists for the past
10 years, but it has only recently become the central interest of business
strategists. Initially, the French takeovers of recent years were
concentrated in the US, rather than in Europe. But French companies have
realised that they can no longer afford to neglect Germany, which they had
previously ruled out as being all but closed to foreigners.
'It's all due to the fact that French companies have just begun to define
European strategies for themselves and this cannot be complete without a
strong German strategy. . . . But we are only catching up, after having been
delayed by the economic policies of the French government at the start of
the 1980s, which held up foreign investment,' says Mr Ernest-Antoine
Seilliere, chairman of the Patronat's economic commission.
Mr Michael Ballhausen, the executive in charge of BNP's link with Dresdner
Bank - recently cleared in principle by the French government  - explains:
'There has been a lack of BNP investment in Germany in the past. Dresdner is
in a similar position in relation to France.' Both partners realise that
they need more agencies abroad, preferably with local partners, to reflect
the growing internationalisation of their customers and competitors.
Another factor in France's new wave of German investment is the east German
privatisation programme. France was the first to benefit from the inability
of west German industry to absorb all the privatisations on offer - one
reason the Treuhandanstalt is encouraging foreign investment - and from the
concern of east Germans to reduce domination by their western compatriots.
Even so, foreign investment in eastern Germany has fallen below the Bonn
government's hopes. So far, non-German companies have bought a mere 5 per
cent of east German privatisations.
L'Air Liquide is a prime example of a French company which has seized this
chance to plug a hole in its European market strategy. For years, the French
company had a derisory share of the west German market, blocked by Linde,
the powerful domestic supplier of industrial gases. The pair had an unspoken
agreement that they would stay out of each others' national markets, an
accord which became unworkable with the European Commission's application of
competition policy.
With unification, L'Air Liquide snapped up three privatised east German
companies, against competition from Linde. The acquisitions gave L'Air
Liquide 40 per cent of the eastern market for industrial gases and 12 per
cent of the overall German market. It is investing FFr1.4bn in a bid to
increase its overall German market share to 20 per cent.
Yet resistance to French and other foreign investment can still be a factor,
even in the east. It is evident in a whole range of sectors, but it comes
from the grass roots, rather than reflecting official policy. Take the
experience of Electricite de France (EdF), the state-owned power utility
which is Europe's largest exporter of electricity. Two years ago, it had
high hopes of being the lead foreign partner in a west German consortium to
supply and distribute electricity in the east. In the event, EdF has had to
settle for a much smaller project, a joint venture with the west Germans to
build and manage new power stations in the east.
The problem was partly the fault of the French government, which held up the
deal by not letting the German partners take a stake in EdF, as they wanted.
But the final block came when east German local authorities said they wanted
to manage their own power supply, as their west German counterparts do.
Another example of the problems facing potential investors is the difficulty
experienced by Credit Lyonnais, the state-owned bank, which wants to expand
into Germany as part of its strategy of turning itself into a pan-European
bank.
Last autumn, Credit Lyonnais broke off co-operation talks with Commerzbank,
Germany's third-largest bank, after four years. The two banks could not
agree on who would take the lead in their respective domestic markets, and
Credit Lyonnais is now seeking an alternative opening in Germany.
'Because Commerzbank was there as a potential partner, we were not as
aggressive in Germany as we might have been,' admits Mr Ad Nollen, Credit
Lyonnais's European general manager. As a result, it now has fewer branches
there than in Belgium, he points out.
Credit Lyonnais has now found an alternative entry to Germany thanks to
another state-owned group, Assurances Generales de France (AGF). The pair
struck a gentlemen's agreement earlier this year to help each other get
round local opposition to two difficult investments.
AGF wanted to strike a commercial accord with an unwilling Aachener und
Munchener (AMB), Germany's third-largest insurer, in which it has a slightly
more than 25 per cent stake. To weaken the resistance of AMB's management,
the French insurer persuaded Credit Lyonnais to consider buying a stake in
the German insurer's loss-making banking subsidiary, Bank fur
Gemeinwirtschaft (BfG). The strategy appears to have worked, in so far as
AMB has recently lifted its objections to letting AGF use its full voting
rights and accepted that Credit Lyonnais should start negotiations on taking
the problems of the banking unit off its hands.
The clear lesson from the French companies that have succeeded across the
Rhine is that a local partner helps.
This, at least, is how Elf Aquitaine accounts for the ease with which it
acquired Minol, the east German petrol station chain. The French company is
acting with Thyssen, the German steel and engineering group, which will
build a refinery to supply Minol, and SB Kauf, a hypermarket chain which
will stock the filling station shops. Elf's unsuccessful rival was a group
led by British Petroleum, with French, Austrian, Norwegian and Italian
partners, but no Germans.
Where French companies have met resistance, they attribute it to cultural
and psychological factors. But they believe this will be weakened by the
Treuhandanstalt's encouragement of foreign investment and by the opening of
European markets. 'There is latent protectionism,' says Mr Claude Tagger,
AGF's director of international development. 'But it can't possibly survive
under the weight of market forces.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920728

