FT924-6283

FT  21 NOV 92 / Sport: Where I put my elephant's trunk - The delights of
designing a lawn with a hold in it / Golf


   By JOHN HOPKINS


BERNARD Darwin did for golf what William Hazlitt did for boxing. He was the
game's first essayist and he remains its best. In The Links of Eiderdown he
writes winningly about having to spend a day confined to bed.
Darwin outlines some of the expected joys of such a day before coming to a
passage in which he describes how, while lying in bed, he begins to see a
series of golf holes formed by the undulations of his eiderdown, what he
refers to as his 'links of counterpane.'
Moreover, he writes: 'by undulating himself in bed the patient can in a
moment change the contour of the course.' He conveys his pleasure at such a
discovery and of how he imagines that one such hole resembled a hole at
Formby, another the sixth at Prince's and so on.
In this I hold an edge over Darwin, for so long the unbylined golf
correspondent of The Times. To create the feel of designing a golf course I
have no need to retire to bed, as he did, and place a tray with four legs
(what he calls a bed-table) on my eiderdown to resemble trees standing in
the middle of a fairway. I have done some course design already. A humble
green it may be to you. To me, however, it was the whole cigar and to do it
required a trip to Cork in south-west Ireland.
The site in question is the Fota island golf course that Peter McEvoy is
designing, with help from Christy O'Connor Junior, for London & Edinburgh
Trust. It is built on 300 of the 800 acres on the island.
McEvoy was my guide and the man to shoulder all the blame for allowing me
near the green in question. I like him. The former Amateur champion has a
sense of adventure, an ear for gossip, a nose for a good story. As we
tramped over the course he said he had just returned from St Andrews where
he had competed in the autumn medal of his club, the Royal & Ancient.
'I met a man there who had played five off the first tee of the Old course.
He hit one drive out of bounds right, one out of bounds left. As the first
hole has the widest fairway in golf, that is quite an impressive record,
isn't it?' mused McEvoy, a grin peeping out from underneath his ginger
moustache.
Soon we reached a crest. From our feet the land sloped gently down and in
the distance, limning the course, was the sinuous estuary that led out to
the Irish Sea.
'My only regret is that we couldn't get more holes playing downhill' said
McEvoy. 'With the water in the background it would have looked terrific.
However, I walked the course from tee to green and then from green to tee.
You have to do that. Designing a golf course is an art not a science. You
have to get out there and see what it looks like and feels like under your
feet. And having done so I could not think of a way to change my original
routing.'
We turned and headed to a far corner of the property.
'This is where I need some help' said McEvoy.
He pointed at the object of his concern - the green of a par four hole, one
of 400 yards or so.
'I have in mind the 15th on the King's course at Gleneagles. I have no
objection to a green that slopes away. It is the only one that does on the
course. But I am not sure it is right. What do you think?'
I am a minimalist, in music, art and now in course design, happy to follow
the words of Alister Mackenzie, who designed Cypress Point and much of
Augusta National, which are two pretty impressive courses to be able to put
on a curriculum vitae. Mackenzie said: 'excellence of design is more felt
than fully realised.'
Unlike A W Tillinghast, the American course designer, who was known for the
shape, or lack of it, of his bunkers, I had to concentrate only on the
putting surface - and only the back half at that. Still, the moment I saw
the green I knew what to do.
This green is big, 6,000 sq ft, and slopes down from front to back by as
much as one metre by one estimate. That is too much, I thought at first.
I imagined myself, a 14 handicapper, hitting a four or five iron second shot
that pitched on the front of the putting surface and raced to the back
because I did not have the skill to put backspin on the ball, at least not
with those sort of clubs. On behalf of mid to high handicap golfers I said I
thought that it was a unfair. What should be done about it, McEvoy asked?
There are those who suggest a green is nothing more than a closely mown area
with a flagstick stuck in the middle. They would probably say they know why
the Mona Lisa is smiling and that Henry Moore's sculptures are merely pieces
of marble hacked about a bit.
To us creative types, on the other hand, a green is a thing of subtlety, a
surface of slopes and gradients, of barely visible challenges and
screamingly obvious defences.
'A good golf course is like a good piece of music,' said Mackenzie. 'It is
not necessarily a course that appeals the first time one plays it.'
The surface soil on my green was smooth but not flattened to its final
preparation and this heightened the impression of a green that was tilted
too severely.
'It needs a mound on one side that would break the speed of the ball' I
suggested. 'Or what about a tier up to the back half?'
McEvoy looked thoughtful. 'What we could have is a nose,' he said finally.
'A nose on a green is a ridge that runs in from the side. It is rather like
the trunk of an elephant underneath a blanket.'
'That would work,' I said, walking to one side of the green and pointing to
where I wanted the nose. 'If you put it here then it would give you another
pin placement behind it and help to stop balls racing through the green.'
McEvoy pondered and then called in Mick, a green shaper of international
repute.
'We think this green needs a nose just there,' he said. Mick looked with his
expert eye.
'OK,' he said. 'I will make a few passes (with his bulldozer) there after
lunch. It will be finished by tea-time.'
As we walked to the next tee, I turned and looked at the green. In my eyes
it had become a thing of beauty. McEvoy caught a glimpse of me admiring my
work. 'There you are,' he said. 'Now you are a golf course designer. We will
name it after you.'
McEvoy made another visit to Fota Island last week and that evening we spoke
on the telephone. He sounded happy.
'Your green is looking really good,' he reported. 'We are very pleased with
it. You know what we have decided to call it? Hopkins's Folly.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921121

