FT921-12016

FT  29 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Imro failed to protect public - MPs told


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


INVESTMENT Management Regulatory Organisation, which oversees pension fund
investment managers, has failed to protect the public, a group of Maxwell
company pensioners told a Parliamentary select committee yesterday.
Mr Kenneth Trench, chairman of the Maxwell Private Companies Pension Fund
Members Association told the Select Committee on Social Security that his
group would like an investigation into the activities of Imro. It had
authorised Bishopsgate Investment Management, which managed the Maxwell
companies pension funds, and related companies under the Financial Services
Act.
He cited press reports that Imro staff had reviewed the records of
Bishopsgate just weeks before Mr Maxwell's death and had found nothing
wrong. Investigators' efforts to trace missing assets have focused on funds
missing from the investment managers.
'Whether or not Imro were negligent, it is clear that the authorisation
system does not operate to protect the public,' Mr Trench said, whose
organisation has about 450 members.
'We would have been better off without the Financial Services Act,' Mr
Trench said. 'At least before the FSA, the Department of Trade and Industry
could have organised a compensation scheme.'
The FSA gave a group of self-regulatory bodies, like Imro, the role of
authorising firms to conduct financial business and overseeing their
behaviour.
As a result of the collapse of the Maxwell pension funds, pension fund
members 'are on the precipice of poverty', Mr Trench said.
The pensioners told the Select Committee that existing pensions law had
allowed Mr Maxwell to siphon off the pension fund surplus of every company
he acquired. Mr Frank Field MP, chairman of the select committee, said: 'In
some cases, Mr Maxwell took out of the pension fund surpluses more than he
actually paid for the entire company.'
Mr Trench also recounted for the committee the strenuous efforts Mr Maxwell
made to persuade pensioners to remain with the fund, rather than transfer
out to a private scheme. Members of the private company pension schemes were
treated to a video entitled 'What's the Catch?' in which four young people
discussed the merits of belonging to their employer's pension scheme.
Mr Trench said: 'The best part is one young girl saying, 'Oh you don't
understand pension funds. You think they are run by a lot of old wrinklies
who will only invest in ICI and Abbey National.' How I wish we had those
investments.'

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920129

