FT923-6444

FT  25 AUG 92 / TV looms larger for British execs


   By GARY MEAD, Marketing Correspondent


THE daily grind is given new meaning for the managerial classes of west
Europe, following publication today of research into the impact of various
forms of media on executives in Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands
and Britain.
While British executives on average appear to watch more television than
their European counterparts  - 31 per cent viewing two hours or more,
against the five-country average of 22 per cent  - they also work a shorter
average day: nine hours and 24 minutes, against a 10-hour average. The
French work longest: 10 hours and 36 minutes.
The fact that the British work shorter hours may have something to do with
the much longer time it takes them to get to the office. Those British
managers using two types of transport to reach the office generally spend an
average 106.7 minutes on the journey, according to the survey. The European
average is 53.7 minutes, and it takes the Germans only 48 minutes.
With all that time on his hands travelling to work, it might be supposed
that the average UK executive would get stuck into his newspaper. Well, up
to a point. . . . Only 30 of those 106.7 minutes spent daily on two methods
of transport are employed scanning the columns. This is the lowest figure in
any of the five countries, and compares with an average 36 minutes and a
creditable 43 notched up by the Dutch.
No prizes either for the TV-obsessed Brits in the magazine reading
department  - only eight minutes a day, against a German performance of 30.
MJP Carat International, which conducted the survey, also asked executives
which regular newspaper or magazine they would miss most if it ceased
publication. National Geographic topped the poll, with the Financial Times a
close second. The US magazine Fortune was bottom of the list.
Executives' most notorious pastime  - lunch  - is obviously coming under
pressure.
British managers were found to be the most likely to eat lunch at their
desks; the Dutch most favour in-house canteens. A third of Germans claimed
to take no lunch break at all.
'International Media in Perspective', MJP Carat International, Broadway
House, 2-6 Fulham Broadway, London SW6 1AA.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920825

