FT922-4420

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of Vehicle Manufacturing Technology (1): Competition
gets fiercer - Car manufacturers, in the struggle for advantage or survival,
in one of the most harshly competitive activities, are using virtually every
technology. This includes the development of materials, applied robotics and
new energy applications


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


THE world automotive industry of the 1990s is unique in the demands it
places on the processes of industrial design, development and production and
the technologies which make them possible.
This uniqueness stems not so much from the technological sophistication of
the product - the latest Mercedes 500 is hi-tech but hardly stands
comparison with an Airbus - as its combination with the problems and
complexities of manufacturing in large volumes.
Car plants this year will produce nearly 40m vehicles. Each vehicle
contains, on average, nearly 10,000 individual parts. In addition, the
industry will produce more than 4m commercial vehicles. It is the world's
largest manufacturing activity, and its most multi-faceted.
As part of the manufacturers' struggle for advantage, or survival, in one of
the most harshly competitive activities, the industry subsumes virtually
every technology. This includes the development of materials, applied
robotics and new energy applications.
In the past few years, competition has been added to other environmental and
legislative pressures. Cars and trucks - and there are expected to be more
than 500m on the world's roads by the early 21st century - have become an
enormous environmental problem.
In endeavouring to minimise their environmental impact, the motor industry
is exploring a broad array of actions, for example, vehicle weight-saving in
order to improve fuel economy and alternative energy sources and recycling.
Many of these will bring, or are bringing, change in the processes and
technologies to what has been mainly a steel-based metal-bashing industry.
In the area of vehicle bodies, for example, aluminium and plastic composites
are challenging traditional steels. Both are much lighter than steel.
Neither suffers from steel's propensity to rust.
Audi, Volkswagen's executive car arm, is sufficiently convinced of
aluminium's benefits to have committed its next V8 saloon to be built in
aluminium, using a spaceframe concept in which unstressed aluminium panels
are to be attached, possibly through bonding rather than welding.
If such construction were to be adopted on a wide scale - by no means a
foregone conclusion because of aluminium's high cost - there are
implications right through the manufacturing supply line, heavily impacting
foundries and the demand for traditional dies and stamping and pressing
systems.
The advent of plastic composites for body parts, similarly, is drawing in
new processes and players. Large chemical groups such as Dow and Du Pont are
anxious not to lose the impetus they have gained from projects such as
General Motors' Saturn with its 240,000 cars a year capacity, in which car
bodies are made of thermoplastics hung on a steel skeleton.
The past three or four years has seen a spurt in the manufacturing
technology for such materials. The industry has learned how to make plastics
stampable into body panels and is making rapid strides in reducing the
lengthy cycle times needed to make injection-moulded components - one of the
material's biggest drawbacks.
Such developments are stimulating those engaged in processing more
traditional materials to fight back. Fritz Winter Eisengeiberie, the German
foundries group and one of the world's biggest independent iron castings
suppliers, has introduced a process for casting iron. It was developed by
Professor Lennart Backerud and it is claimed that it reduces the weight of a
casting by 30 per cent and costs by 10 per cent, with no loss of strength.
Pressures are mounting not only to make vehicles lighter and cleaner but
also the manufacturing processes. Nowhere has this been more apparent than
in vehicle paint plants which use tens of millions of gallons annually.
The industry is switching to water-based paints rather than the aromatic
solvent-based materials which have contributed to atmospheric pollution. The
latest generations of car plants endeavour to capture, clean or even recycle
their manufacturing emissions.
Opel's Russelsheim plant captures such emissions and turns them into energy
for the plant. Volkswagen's symbol of manufacturing cleanliness has become
famous: shoals of goldfish swimming in pools of recycled water. Specific
manufacturing technology improvements such as these are being introduced
within a much broader scenario of change, brought about mainly by heightened
competition from the Japanese.
The Japanese industry can bring a model into production in three years or
less, compared with a typical five years or longer for most Western
producers. Even the Japanese have begun to conclude that this might be
overkill and that four years is a more sensible norm.
However, while reaching this conclusion, the Japanese industry has acted to
use the design and engineering abilities it has acquired to broaden its
product spread and probe into an increasing number of specialist niches.
The US industry, first in the firing line of Japanese market share
ambitions, has been enthusiastic in its adoption of simultaneous engineering
techniques to help it fight back.
General Motors, in particular, appears to be reaping significant benefit
from a system which has its origins in Japan. The concept is deceptively
simple. All operating elements of the manufacturer are involved
simultaneously with a new car from first concept through to the first
vehicle coming off the production line.
That might appear to be self-evidently the proper course - but it is not one
that has been followed by Western producers. Instead, the typical procedure
has been to undergo the sequential process of a team designing a vehicle,
then forwarding the concept to the engineering division, where compromises
are made to make driveline equipment fit.
Subsequently, the finance division usually puts pressure on for cheaper
components to be used in some areas, introducing more compromises. As the
finale, the manufacturing division is then likely to point out that the
vehicle is too difficult to make, or that additional investment will be
needed in adapting production lines.
However, none of it would be possible without the wealth of computer-driven
technology. This has allowed the creation of master databases for all a
company's divisions and even outside suppliers to work off simultaneously,
together with the computer-aided design, manufacturing and logistics systems
which lie at the heart of the industry.
As Europe braces for its own era of much-increased competition with Japanese
cars, the simultaneous engineering concept has taken swift root. Indeed, BMW
has created perhaps the largest single research engineering centre in the
European industry in pursuit of simultaneous engineering principles.
Its Fiz centre in Munich, a futuristic maze of towers and multiple
connecting walkways, houses nearly 6,000 engineers, none of whom has to walk
more than 150 metres to talk to a colleague. It allows a first-concept
designer easily to discuss with a production line engineer (the building
houses prototype production lines) the manufacturing practicalities of even
an outline design idea.
Such are the Fiz's advantages, according to Dr Wolfgang Reitzle, head of
research and development at BMW, that it is cutting two years from BMW's
development cycles. The design of the building is based on the concept that,
if physical distances between two designers or engineers are greater than
150 metres, the easy interchange of ideas or discussion of problems is
discouraged.
It represents a recognition by BMW that competitiveness is as much a
function of the proper organisation of human resources as of technology.
Similar thinking lies at the heart of the lean production concept which,
started by Toyota several decades ago, is seen by virtually every large car
maker as the only way of securing the long-term future.
Lean production, identified by a five-year study of the world car industry
by a Massachusetts Institute of Technology team, involves using teams of
multi-skilled workers at all levels of a company's organisation, in concert
with highly flexible, increasingly automated machines to produce lower
volumes of products in greater variety.
The study concluded that with this process Western producers are hoping to
close the production gap with Japan. For example, a US plant takes 25 hours
to assemble a car compared with an average of 13 hours in Japan.
It is not clear what is meant by lean production. Only last month
Mercedes-Benz, for the first time facing real pressure from Japanese
manufacturers, opened a new plant at Rastatt with the claim by Mr Werner
Niefer, chief executive, that it was the most advanced car-making facility
in the world.
He asserts that production and management at Rastatt are lean and capable of
cutting production costs by at least 25 per cent while ensuring quality and
the near-abolition of traditional post-build rectification procedures. The
lean procedures, he insists, are Mercedes' own and owe nothing to Japan.
Rastatt will be watched closely by the industry.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920605

