FT924-11266

FT  27 OCT 92 / Parliament and Politics: Pressure cooking in the Downing
Street kitchen / A look at the prime minister's main advisers


   By RALPH ATKINS


SURVEYING the increasingly troubled predicament of his colleagues at 10
Downing Street, one cabinet minister's political aide mused yesterday: 'A
kitchen cabinet? It doesn't really exist in terms of chums kicking around
Number 10.'
There is no one list of chosen few whom Mr John Major would automatically
consult at times of crises. Unlike former prime minister Mrs Margaret
Thatcher's reliance on Mr Cecil Parkinson and Mr Norman Tebbit, or Mr Harold
Wilson's chummyness with Mr Joe Haines and Lady Falkender, there is no
coterie of like-minded friends to whom he will instinctively turn.
Rather - whether dealing with the collapse of sterling, Tory revolts over
pit closures, or tactics to thwart the Euro-sceptics - there are overlapping
and constantly evolving groups of political allies, ministerial colleagues,
personal friends and supposedly experienced hands.
It is a system that gives the impression of a prime minister willing to
consult widely. Some angry right-wing MPs, protesting at the handling of
Maastricht, have not known at whom to vent their ire, while others vaguely
target 'his advisers'.
But, as the traumatic political storms of the last few weeks have proved,
communications are prone to break down, early warning signals of trouble
ahead have not been sent.
Over the summer, Mr Major has lost immediate contact with Mr Chris Patten,
who became a close friend during his chairmanship of the Conservative party
but left to become governor of Hong Kong after the election. The two still
talk regularly, but Mr Patten's own difficulties with China and the time
difference mean conversations can, at best, be limited in scope. Mr David
Mellor, a former cabinet minister and another confidant, was forced to
resign.
Inside today's cabinet, an inner circle has begun to take a higher profile.
Mr Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry
secretary, and Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, were central to decisions
over the European exchange rate mechanism. But Mr Heseltine is scarcely a
political ally and his reputation for presentational finesse has been
damaged by the pit closures.
Mr Hurd has an avuncular role. His relationship with Mr Major is warm but he
is frequently out of the country.
Within parliament, more weight has been placed on Mr Richard Ryder, the
low-profile but tough-minded chief whip, responsible for cajoling - or often
bawling out - recalcitrant Tory MPs.
The experience of Lord Wakeham, the leader of the Lords, in offering nimble
solutions to political difficulties is valued by the prime minister even if
he is associated politically with Lady Thatcher's style and politics. Sir
Norman Fowler has become a close personal friend, borne of hours together
during the election.
If Mr Major is looking for allies who will reflect his own thinking, he is
more likely to consult inside Downing Street. Mrs Sarah Hogg, a former
journalist and head of the policy unit, is a strong influence - particularly
on the ERM issue.
Mr Gus O'Donnell, the prime minister's press secretary, is expert at
enunciating Mr Major's thinking to an increasingly sceptical press.
Another personal friend who maybe cheers the prime minister at difficult
times is the novelist Lord Archer. He is close to the prime minister but
perhaps not able to offer the most expert advice. 'Perhaps he is testing out
a new plot for a novel,' quipped one Tory MP.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921027

