FT923-6617

FT  22 AUG 92 / How to Spend It: Madrid - slinky, elegant, sexy, overpriced


   By PETER BRUCE and ANNA CHRISTENSEN


Shopping or going out in Madrid is a big deal. For visitors it is an
expensive city, mainly because the peseta is overvalued. But do not be
frightened. The fish and lobsters at what must be some of Europe's best
seafood restaurants are flown in daily from the coast. Clothes are expensive
but quality has improved as foreign designers have rushed into town and the
locals have responded with new clothes, or derivatives, of their own. Apart
from two department store chains, male and female shopping in Spain are two
distinct activities. Peter Bruce, FT correspondent in Madrid, and his wife,
Anna Christensen, report.
SHE WRITES . . .
A KALEIDOSCOPE of colours tantalises the senses - shocking pink, azure blue,
emerald green, glittering gold, Carmen red, each crinkly, slithery or
sumptuously soft and designed for impact.
This was not the closing ceremony of the Barcelona Olympics. Instead, it was
a shop of Spain's hottest designer, Roberto Verino. The clothes were
dynamite, but I came out empty-handed. They were summer's left-overs and
followed the route to which Spain has stuck with touching faithfulness:
short, tight, slippery, slinky - sexy.
I was not raised for this. I was dressed in twin sets and pearls and
sensible shoes. Yet, soon I am going to be really wicked and, when I do, I
am going to a Spanish designer, probably Verino although there are others
including Jesus del Pozo, Sybilla and Pedro del Hierro to choose from.
Happily, Spanish designers have aligned themselves more closely with the
mainstream of international fashion this year. They are showing flights of
fancy juxtaposed with impeccably-styled classics.
So, if I get cold feet and do not buy Verino's turquoise parka with ostrich
feathers and balloon mini-skirt, I know I will be happy with his classic
camel suit with double-breasted jacket and ankle-revealing straight pants
and, perhaps, the long, flowing evening skirt in slate grey. Loewe, a must
for leather and suede, offers a version of the classic twin set this year.
Before embarking on a shopping spree in Madrid, remember there are two
stumbling blocks to overcome. Spending money should be pleasant, yet there
is a dearth of friendly and helpful staff. If you happen to be female, the
young women who serve you would rather bore holes through you than ask if
you need another size. If you get this treatment, leave.
Second, Madrid is expensive and, normally, there are few bargains. Recently,
I saw a Byblos dress I bought at a sale in London for Pounds 125 selling for
the equivalent of Pounds 275.
Shopping in Madrid centres around Calle Serrano where, in fine weather, I
enjoy watching well-clad Madrilenos promenade. No one pops out in a track
suit and few women even venture out in jeans. On Serrano I visit Max Mara,
Loewe, Boutique Real and Adolfo Dominguez, a designer I favour for his clean
lines and interesting fabrics.
Along the way, you will pass a dizzying array of shoe shops with reasonable
prices. They still lag behind the Italians in quality but they cannot be
beaten for fun seasonal wear. My favourites are Bravo and Los Pequenos
Suizos, both of which offer quality, a wide selection of Spanish and
imported styles, half sizes, and friendly and helpful staff.
I stay away from the antique shops in Calle Lagasca (they are overpriced and
most of the furniture is English) but it is worth looking at the Duran shops
along Serrano. For the best in Spanish furniture, antiques, lace and
ceramics, go to Artespana, which has several shops. But beware: in an
over-priced country, their prices really jar. There is one on Hermosilla,
just up from Serrano and close to the beautiful shop of Spain's premier
interior designer, Gaston y Daniela.
On Claudio Coello, parallel to Serrano, you will find Roberto Verino,
Emporio Armani and Salvador Bachiller, whose classic leather travelling
bags, handbags and shoe collection this year include fanciful zebra-stripe
inlays. I buy my household linen at Linogar or No 47, where the woman will
ask you in which of three weights you would like your white pique summer
bedspread and whether it will cover the pillows or go under them.
Several rather fun antique shops are also on this street and Anmoder is
worth looking at for its Art Noveau exterior, even though its inside is a
bit of a let-down.
As you walk, you will pass cross-streets worth wandering down. One is Calle
Jose Ortega y Gasset, which has Kenzo, Gianni Versace and a wonderful
Spanish boutique, Tres Zetas.
At the Jardin de Serrano, stop in at Abascal for another eye-dazzling
display of colours and textures. There, you may order a unique evening dress
of the type that appears regularly in Spain's glossy gossip magazines (you
need time for fittings, though). Agatha has a superb collection of (mostly
French) costume jewellery. If you want the real thing, Bulgari will give you
pause. Madrid's prestigious men's shop, Azul, is here but for real fun (of
the expensive variety) go to the main shop on Serrano.
At some point, you will want to stroll along the Castellana to savour its
grandness and splendour. You can take your pleasure outside in fine weather
or in the lovely Art Noveau restaurant, El Espejo.
For a truly Spanish break, go to one of the many Mallorca shops (I like the
one on Serrano), where you can enjoy coffee or chocolate, wine, cava and
tapas. Many successful Spanish dinner parties come from behind those glass
cases, as do gifts of ceramic or brass knick-knacks filled with sweets.
There are a few Spanish specialities I cannot live without. The gourmet
olive oils, red peppers, cured Serrano ham, an almond cake called Tarta de
Santiago, coffee Torrefacto-style, turron and Toledo-style marzipan: all
make wonderful gifts if you can bear to give them away.
HE WRITES . . .
I GREW UP up in the sticks in South Africa and, before coming to Madrid four
years ago, had lived only in London (where people wear track suits to
impress each other) and Bonn (where shops close too early for anyone to buy
things).
A pure-bred bumpkin, I mostly window-shop, but rapid improvements in my
Spanish mean I will never again ask a shop assistant for a truck with extra
long sleeves.
There is little point in buying suits in Spain - they are hideously
expensive. On the other hand, this summer's sales have been incredible and a
good man's shop, Blanco Blanco on Calle Marceliano Santamaria, next to the
Real Madrid stadium, has a great blue cotton jacket from Hugo Boss in its
window for about Pounds 30, with more tasty Boss gains inside.
Springfield, a few doors up, is more to my boring taste, though. I like
faded clothes and Springfield (a Spanish company) makes me feel like an
American adventurer every time I walk out of it with another washed denim
shirt or faded grey sweat shirt. Prices now are at rock bottom; good jackets
are going for Pounds 30 or so and sport shirts for about Pounds 15.
A much more expensive 'western' feel is at Charro on Claudio Coello, where I
bought a leather-collared cowpoke jacket for nearly Pounds 200 three years
ago. They have great stuff - yellowing leather gloves and their own jeans.
The Spanish are discovering the great outdoors. I would buy a pair of soft
leather Panama Jack boots or shoes if only they did not have Panama Jack
written all over them in big letters. Instead, I settled last year for a
21-speed Peugeot mountain bike and a beagle puppy - Pta55,000 (Pounds 305)
and Pta80,000 (Pounds 445) respectively from Calmera on Calle Atocha and
Nuestros Amigos los Animales in the La Vaguada shopping mall.
For authentic Spanish furniture, drive about 100km north of Madrid to
Pedraza, a small pueblo. The trip, and lunch at the local parador, are more
than worth it and the town has five or six good shops. A three-drawer pine
chest, about 80 years old, could cost Pounds 1,000.
As for eating and drinking (which is what Madrid was built for), beer and
tapas are best at the bars along the Plaza Santa Ana, just up from the
Palace Hotel. In summer, you can drink until sunrise at sidewalk bars along
the Castellana, but they are so full it takes hours to get service.
Madrid has hundreds of good restaurants although I confine my expeditions to
within a few minutes' walk of my office, just off the Calle Recoletos in the
centre of town. Two doors away is El Borbollon; over the road is a
magnificently-tiled El Espejo. Up the road, on the other side of Serrano, is
Alkalde, for good fish. All of these would cost around Pounds 30 a head for
lunch or dinner with wine.
Easily the very best place to eat in Madrid - and one of the cheapest in the
whole country - is the Centro Cubano on Claudio Coello, a ramshackle haunt
of Cuban exiles. Its fare is simple - lots of black beans, chicken and rice
 -but it goes down very well.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920822

