FT924-6339

FT  21 NOV 92 / Art works threatened as blaze sweeps through Windsor Castle


   By RICHARD EVANS


THE QUEEN and the Duke of York helped save hundreds of art treasures
yesterday as flames engulfed Windsor Castle.
Hundreds of firefighters battled into the night with a blaze in the castle
that houses one of the greatest privately-owned art collections.
The Queen went to Windsor from Buckingham Palace when told of the fire by
the Duke. He was carrying out research work at the castle as flames were
discovered in a private chapel near what is known as the Equerry's entrance.
The Duke said: 'Her Majesty is absolutely devastated. She is inside the
building, helping to take stuff out - works of art and other things - as a
precaution.'
He added that the fire was already 'a great deal worse' than the Pounds 10m
Hampton Court blaze six years ago.
The Prince of Wales last night spent about an hour inspecting the damage.
Fire incident commander David Harper said last night he was satisfied the
blaze was now under control.
'At certain times it seemed worse than it was. That is because the fire
voided itself through the roof and that was a deliberate ploy by ourselves
to let gases escape.'
The fire started shortly before midday in the basement of the Brunswick
Tower overlooking Windsor Great Park and swept through the north-east wing.
It spread rapidly to St George's Hall where many of the Queen's most
valuable paintings are hung below the vaulted wooden roof.
More than 200 firefighters from four counties struggled to control the blaze
but after nearly four hours the flames burst through the roof of Brunswick
Tower.
Many of the most valuable art works were saved by teams of firemen, soldiers
and castle employees, but the final cost of lost pictures and other
valuables, and of damage to the castle structure, will be considerable.
Buckingham Palace said first assessments were that 'only a handful' of works
of art had been lost. 'It is certainly too early to say how much damage has
been done, but we can say a great deal has been saved.'
Sir Roy Strong, former director of the Victoria and Albert museum, said the
Queen had one the of the world's greatest art collections, much of it held
at Windsor.
In common with most government buildings, royal palaces are not insured
because premiums would be too high. The repair bill will probably be the
responsibility of Mr Peter Brooke, national heritage secretary.
The heritage department said: 'We are responsible for financing the repair
and maintenance of occupied royal palaces. If it turns out there is a
significant repair bill the royal household will come to us and we will be
expected to pay it.'
The fire broke out in an area of the castle closed for a Pounds 2m
renovation, including rewiring.
Windsor Castle, founded by William the Conqueror, ranks sixth among historic
properties as a tourist attraction, with 630,000 visitors last year.
Fire destroys hall, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921121

