FT921-14266

FT  16 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Peruvian metals complex staves
off closure threat


   By SALLY BOWEN


   LIMA


CENTROMIN, Peru's financially-crippled state-owned mining company, has
averted a threat of temporary closure for its huge La Oroya refinery and
smelter.
In a statement issued yesterday afternoon, the company said that 'we have
not halted production at the La Oroya complex, nor do we plan to.'
The statement admitted to 'certain temporary financial restrictions which
are affecting normal operations", but said that talks were already underway
with suppliers to negotiate conditions which would 'guarantee all internal
and external commitments.'
Centromin's financial position, however, is precarious. This week's crisis
arose when the state oil company Petroperu refused to continue supplying
Centromin with fuel on credit in the face of an unpaid bill for Dollars
200,000 (Pounds 111,731). Centromin has an estimated total debt of Dollars
60m (Pounds 33.50m) to a wide variety of suppliers.
Centromin is high on the government's privatisation list and an
international tender for valuation of the company has been called. Former
mines minister Mr Sanchez Albavera estimated the company's total worth at
about Dollars 600m.
Closure of the La Oroya refinery and smelter would have a dramatic effect on
Peru's already beleaguered mining sector. Centromin is the principal
purchaser of 'dirty' concentrates from many of Peru's medium-sized mines.
Some 2,500 local companies and an estimated 100,000 families depend directly
or indirectly for their livelihood on Centromin.
On its own account, Centromin employs more than 15,000 workers and exports
metals and minerals worth Dollars 350m annually. The company accounts for
about a third of Peru's lead and zinc, a quarter of its silver, and upwards
of ten per cent of its copper.
Centromin has been technically bankrupt for many months, having posted
Dollars 105m in losses for the first half of 1991. In early January, a
government decree authorised Centromin to sell off non-essential fixed
assets.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920116

