FT924-6383

FT  21 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Sugar says offer is 'best shareholders will
get'


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO and PAUL TAYLOR


INSTITUTIONAL investors in Amstrad said yesterday they were still studying
Mr Sugar's offer to buy back their shares at 30p per share, but several said
they were unlikely to join disgruntled private shareholders who are opposing
the deal.
Meanwhile Mr Sugar vigorously defended his 30p-a-share buy-back offer saying
that it was 'the best shareholders would get.'
A group of private shareholders who are unhappy with Mr Sugar's offer has
appealed for institutional investors' support in attempting to block the
offer.
The general view among institutional investors, however, is that although
the offer by Mr Sugar was not necessarily an attractive one, few
alternatives exist and those that do, involve considerable risk that they
are unwilling to take.
One institutional investor summed up the view in saying that 'we don't like
30p but it is not at all clear to us that we can do any better.'
The consumer electronics business was not an area most of them felt they
could judge with confidence. 'If we had confidence in the business we'd do
something about it. But you've little choice as a minority shareholder in a
business you know little about,' one institutional investor said.
'If the gap between the offer and what you thought the company was worth
were large enough it may be worth trying to get more out of it,' but in
Amstrad's case the risks of doing so were probably not worth it, he said.
'Our position is one of resigned acceptance,' said another institutional
investor.
However, some institutional investors said that they were still considering
the alternatives in the light of the changing scenario.
Mr Sugar said yesterday that he felt 'very frustrated' that some
shareholders and commentators had criticised the offer and emphasised 'no
one is trying to pull the wool over anyone's eyes.'
He drew attention to the fact that if his bid succeeds he has promised to
use 'up to Pounds 50m' of his own assets to provide collateral for the
working capital a slimmed down Amstrad will need. On his bid he said 'I have
offered 30p, and if it is turned down, I feel that I have morally done my
job.' He pointed out that since he first mooted his buy-back proposal 'no
one has come along with a better offer.'
'I cannot find anybody to buy my shares because everyone says Amstrad is
Alan Sugar,' he said. But if someone offered 31p per share he said he would
sell his 205m shares, provided the offer was made to all shareholders.
He rejected suggestions that Amstrad should pay out its balance sheet cash
in the form of a special dividend. He said Amstrad's 'core' cash, excluding
seasonal fluctuations, was about Pounds 60m, equivalent to just 7.7p a share
after Advanced Corporation Tax is paid.
He warned that if his bid is not approved it would still be necessary to
drastically 'shrink' the company, and he said he was the best person to
undertake the task.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921121

