FT924-11307

FT  27 OCT 92 / Report seeks level playing field for EC single market


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


A REPORT into how to make the single European market fair, efficient and
user-friendly once it comes into force on January 1, 1993, will be presented
to the European Commission today.
It will be published tomorrow by Mr Peter Sutherland, former competition
commissioner and chairman of the committee which drew it up, and will be
considered by internal market ministers on November 10.
The success of the single market depends on the plethora of Community laws
being strictly enforced. The way in which the EC resolves disputes about
those rules is likely to be one of the first practical tests for
subsidiarity - the principle that decisions should be taken at the lowest
appropriate level - if a definition can be agreed at the Edinburgh summit in
December.
Commissioners are today also expected to approve their own long-awaited
paper on subsidiarity, which was intended for presentation to Community
leaders at the Birmingham summit earlier this month.
The Sutherland committee has tried to tread the narrow path between the
political and practical need to devolve responsibility to member states and
the danger that this might result in an anarchy of different levels of
enforcement.
For example, instead of suggesting a rigid centralised bureaucracy to
monitor the single market, the Sutherland report proposes greater informal
co-operation between national internal market officials to avoid
cross-border disputes about implementation.
But Brussels officials suggested yesterday that this might not be enough to
ensure firm and fair enforcement of EC law, and could result in
unsatisfactory trade-offs between countries. 'Those countries which have
stronger standards of implementation will lose out,' said one.
Members of the committee resolutely refused to reveal the details of the
report ahead of tomorrow's Strasbourg launch, but they are understood to
have examined how to respect subsidiarity, how to reassure consumers and
business about the internal market programme, how to remove doubts about the
enforcement of Community law, and how to enforce the rules 'through
partnership' between member states and EC institutions.
Both the Sutherland report and the Commission subsidiarity paper strongly
suggest that EC citizens should be urged to seek redress for their
complaints in national courts, rather than burdening the European Court with
legal cases.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921027

