FT924-6520

FT  20 NOV 92 / Money Markets: Euromark futures rise


   By JAMES BLITZ


SHORT-DATED Euromark futures rose sharply yesterday after the Swedish
central bank decided to float the krona against the European currency unit
(Ecu.)
This focused the attention of dealers on the continuing tension in currency
markets and the possibility that the Bundesbank might introduce a cut in
official interest rates as part of as broad currency realignment, writes
James Blitz.
Sterling money markets remained calm, although short-dated futures fell back
several basis points after the latest money supply figures reflected a sharp
rise in bank lending in October, consolidating the view that the UK
authorities might not choose to ease monetary policy again this year.
On Tuesday afternoon, short-dated Euromark futures rose sharply after cuts
in Belgian and Dutch interest rates raised speculation that the Bundesbank
might have more of an opportunity to ease monetary policy without weakening
the D-Mark.
Sweden's decision to allow the embattled krona to devalue against other
currencies consolidated that trend. As soon as Sweden announced the float,
the crown plunged by about 8 per cent against the Ecu.
This caused tensions in European currency markets, and prompted dealers to
think that the Bundesbank might be forced to cut its Discount rate sooner
than it would like. The December short sterling contract rose 8 basis points
to a close of 91.35, while the March contract rose 7 basis points to a close
of 92.36.
French franc futures also rose, but the impact there was stunted by the
sharp weakening of the French franc against a generally stronger D-Mark. The
December contract rose 5 basis points to a high of 90.82, but later fell
back to a close of 90.78.
Short sterling futures fell back after total seasonally adjusted sterling
lending to Britain's private sector rose by Pounds 5.1bn in October compared
with a fall of Pounds 1.1bn the previous month. This consolidated a growing
feeling in the market that there will be no more easing in interest rates
this year.
The December short sterling contract fell 4 basis points to a low of 93.09
and later closed at 93.10. The March contract fell 5 basis points to a low
of 93.74 and later closed at 93.76.
Conditions in the cash market were easier after the Bank of England's
shortage of Pounds 850m was fully removed. Three month money closed
unchanged at 7 3/16 per cent on the offered side, while the 1 month closed
down  1/4 per cent at 7 1/8 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

921120

