FT924-11296

FT  27 OCT 92 / Bosnian test for Spanish troops: Madrid displays a fresh
commitment to western security


   By TOM BURNS


   MADRID


THE first soldiers in a 700-strong Spanish military contingent were last
night due to join the UN protection force (Unprofor) in Bosnia, ushering in
a new era in the Madrid government's commitment to western security.
'We are seeing a changing mood on the part Spain,' says an EC diplomat.
'It is ready to make gestures now that it drew back from in the past.'
The troops are drawn from the Spanish Foreign Legion and the Parachute
Brigade. These are two of the few professional units in an overwhelmingly
conscript army. They will be deployed to protect humanitarian aid convoys on
the road between Mostar, in south-west Bosnia, and Sarajevo.
This 'obligation' marks a milestone. In the recent past Spain has stepped up
its commitment to UN peacekeeping missions in areas such as Angola and
Namibia and latterly El Salvador, where some 100 Spanish military personnel
are currently stationed.
However, the Bosnia involvement, for an initial six-month period, is of a
different order.
It is novel because of the size of the contingent, because Spain will be
paying for its estimated Pta3bn (Pounds 1.8m) in expenses and because,
unlike in other war zones, the troops are 'braced for casualties' as the
defence ministry puts it.
On a different, but crucially important, level for a society such as Spain,
the Unprofor commitment also illustrates changing perceptions about a
military that was once viewed as solely interested in domestic politics.
'The public now sees the officers as obsessed with professionalism instead
of with plotting for want of nothing else to do,' says a senior
administration official.
'The army is using the UN channel to show off its professionalism and
everyone should be pleased about the new image.'
Some western diplomats believe that Spain, which joined Nato in 1982 but
remains outside its military command chain, is testing the ground in Bosnia
for what could be a readiness in Madrid to contribute forces to a future
European rapid intervention brigade.
'Our navy works closely with Nato,' said a Spanish defence ministry
spokesman, 'and our ground troops could increasingly do so too as long as
they are under a Spanish command.'
Some Spaniards are, however, uneasy about a gesture which is likely to put
the troops, with their extremely limited international experience, under
fire.
They claim that the move has more to do with power politics in Madrid and
the UN headquarters in New York than defence burden sharing.
Today the UN is due to choose between Spain, Sweden and New Zealand in a
vote to elect two new members for a two-year term on the Security Council.
But any link between a UN seat and the Bosnia task force is rejected by Mr
Javier Solana, the foreign minister, who stresses that Spain is overdue for
a Security Council seat having last held one 11 years ago.
According to Mr Solana, the troops are being sent 'because we have an
obligation to European security'.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921027

