FT921-12081

FT  29 JAN 92 / S Africa police arrest white extremist leaders


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   CAPE TOWN


SOUTH AFRICAN police yesterday arrested 10 white extremist leaders,
including Mr Eugene Terreblanche, leader of the neo-Nazi Afrikaner
Weerstandsbeweging (AWB), in connection with violence which erupted last
year when the AWB held a protest against the government's political reforms.
The arrests could provoke further violence from the extreme right, which has
become increasingly radical as Pretoria moves ever closer to sharing power
with blacks in an interim government.
The extreme right, including the parliamentary opposition, the Conservative
party, has refused to participate in multi-party talks to draw up a
post-apartheid constitution, insisting on a return to classic apartheid.
In his speech at the opening of parliament last week, President F. W. de
Klerk tried to split the Conservatives by offering to discuss the notion of
a separate white homeland in the multi-party talks. Some fringe groups will
now enter the talks on that basis, but it seems unlikely that the
Conservatives - or any big faction of the party - will do so at this stage.
Mr Terreblanche and nine other leaders of the AWB (its name means Afrikaner
resistance movement) were picked up by police at their homes early
yesterday, and were later released on bail. They are to be charged with
causing public violence when they attempted to disrupt a public meeting
addressed by Mr de Klerk in the western Transvaal town of Ventersdorp.
Two AWB members and a black passer-by died when about 300 AWB members
clashed with police. Mr Terreblanche told a press conference last week that
he could prove that police had opened fire in Ventersdorp without
provocation. Ventersdorp is Mr Terreblanche's home town and the headquarters
of his movement.
The clash proved the loyalty of the South African police - many of whom hold
right-wing political views - to their commanders. But it also highlighted
the threat posed by the right: as there is no constitutional means of
removing Mr de Klerk from power (because of the ruling Nationalists' large
majority in parliament), white terrorism could become the only outlet for
dissent.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Photograph South African neo-Nazi leader Eugene Terreblanche
with other leaders of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement after being freed on
bail yesterday (Omitted).

920129

