FT923-15488

FT  02 JUL 92 / The Future of the European Fighter: Deutsche Aerospace
expresses relief at Ruhe proposal


   By QUENTIN PEEL


THE German aerospace industry showed itself positively relieved yesterday
that the government had not decided to abandon the EFA project altogether,
but rather to try to negotiate a slim-line derivative.
Mr Jurgen Schrempp, the chief executive of Deutsche Aerospace, the
Daimler-Benz subsidiary which has a 33 per cent stake in the project,
welcomed the explicit statement by the ruling political parties that Germany
needs a new fighter aircraft by the year 2000, and that it should be built
on the basis of European co-operation.
'We are happy that these positions, which Deutsche Aerospace has repeatedly
emphasised, have been confirmed,' he said.
'With the decision to press ahead with co-operation on the basis of the four
existing partners in the EFA consortium, and possibly to extend it, the
ruling parties have given a clear vote for the maintenance of the
technological and competitive capacity of this industry.'
Mr Edzard Reuter, the chief executive of Daimler-Benz, also declared himself
'relieved and reassured' by the decision.
Yet the industry is clear that all now depends on the negotiations with the
partner states, and the chances of success in agreeing on a slim-line
fighter based on the EFA are relatively small.
The German aerospace industry federation, BDLI, has calculated that 10,000
jobs hang directly on the future of the EFA, and the same number indirectly.
The project also depends on a huge network of some 500 suppliers amongst
small and medium-sized German companies.
Their turnover adds up to some DM10bn (Pounds 3.4bn) and their total
employment to some 30,000, a third of them likely to depend on the EFA
programme.
The BDLI has also calculated that in net terms, after allowing for all the
taxes repaid to Bonn from income and corporate turnover generated by EFA,
the project would cost significantly less to the German economy than any
imported alternative, even far cheaper aircraft such as the MiG-29 or the
Swedish Gripen.
Mr Theo Waigel, the finance minister, said yesterday that the CDU/CSU
parliamentary group - and in particular Chancellor Helmut Kohl - was clearly
opposed to any 'imported' fighter aircraft to replace the EFA.
However, the great unknown now remains whether Germany can persuade its
partners to cut back the EFA project to accommodate the German concerns, and
save the DM5.85bn in development cash which it has committed to the project
all the way to 1999.
Deutsche Aerospace concluded yesterday that it now expected Mr Volker Ruhe,
the defence minister, to reach an agreement with the governments of the EFA
partner countries, and then to report back 'a precise definition of the
specifications and the construction of the altered fighter aircraft, and how
it should develop from European co-operation.
'Then the company can investigate the industrial requirements needed to
realise the project,' it said drily.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920702

