FT921-1440

FT  24 MAR 92 / Libya offers to hand agents to Arab League


   By MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS, UN Correspondent


LIBYA has agreed to surrender the two alleged Lockerbie bombers to the Arab
League in an effort to head off United Nations sanctions. The two men would
then be put in UN custody, according to reports at the UN, although details
and timing of the handover were not clear last night.
The men are accused of masterminding the bombing of the Pan Am jet that
exploded over Lockerbie in Scotland in December 1988 with the loss of 270
lives.
Mr Diego Arria of Venezuela, the current president of the UN Security
Council, said the Libyan move was unconditional. Speaking of a two-stage
transfer, Mr Arria said the Arab League would give the men into the custody
of Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the UN secretary-general.
But Libya's ambassador to the UN, Dr Ali Elhouderi, said only: 'A decision
was taken to hand over the accused to the Arab League; I don't have the rest
of the details.'
Asked if the men would eventually be tried by a court in the US or Scotland,
he said that Libya had provided assurances of its 'full co-operation and
flexibility'. He added that Mr Boutros Ghali would have an 'essential role'.
The UN secretary-general later issued a statement, making clear that the
handover of the two men must be in conformity with the UN resolution that
demanded the men's extradition for trial in the US or Britain.
There was some doubt last night that Libya might still be attempting
delaying tactics.
The International Court is expected to take up the case at Libya's request
in a preliminary session at The Hague this week and hearings could drag on
for weeks or months. Diplomats said last night the US, Britain and France
were unlikely to allow the court proceedings to stall punitive measures
against Libya if the Libyans were slow to hand over the men.
Mr Boutros Ghali is expected to send an envoy to Tripoli to work out the
details of the handover of the two men.
In the meantime, the foreign ministers of the five Maghreb countries and of
Egypt and Syria are expected in New York shortly for talks with the Security
Council.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920324

