FT922-7346

FT  19 MAY 92 / BSkyB and BBC in Pounds 304m Premier League deal


   By RAYMOND SNODDY and JANE FULLER


LIVE coverage of the matches of English football's new Premier League will
only be available on satellite television after a record joint bid by
British Sky Broadcasting and the BBC worth Pounds 304m over five years.
BSkyB won the deal yesterday at a meeting of the chairmen of the clubs in
the new league, which kicks off in August.
It won despite an increased five-year offer worth Pounds 165m which was
delivered to the meeting by Mr Greg Dyke, chairman of the ITV Association,
which is in the last year of a four-year Pounds 44m exclusive deal.
The new agreement applies only to the 22 clubs in the Premier League. The
old arrangement also benefited Football League clubs in lower divisions.
The BSkyB bid is a gamble that live Premier League football coverage will
not only encourage many more consumers to get satellite dishes but create a
potentially vast new stream of subscription revenue and, before long,
pay-per-view.
It is also a coup for Mr Alan Sugar, chairman of Tottenham Hotspur, who
argued passionately yesterday for the satellite deal. Mr Sugar, who is also
chairman of Amstrad, the principal manufacturer of satellite dishes, did
declare his interest at the meeting.
BSkyB, a consortium in which Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, has a
significant stake, will have the right to show 60 live games a season on
Sunday afternoons and Monday evenings. This means in its first year the
Premier League will receive nearly Pounds 1m for each live game.
There are also plans to move to charging for each game watched, splitting
the additional proceeds 50-50 between BSkyB and the Premier League. The live
BSkyB matches could go on a subscription channel so that the pictures are
available only to satellite homes paying a monthly subscription.
The BBC will have the right to show the highlights of two games on Saturday
evenings and will bring back its old Match of the Day programme.
Each club will be guaranteed Pounds 1.5m a year. The exact amount will
depend on how many times each features in live coverage and on its league
position.
The deal will mean Pounds 40m going to the football league in the first
year, Pounds 42m in the second and Pounds 44m in the remaining three. In
addition, the satellite venture will pay Pounds 10m a year for sponsorship
rights and Pounds 8m a year for overseas broadcast rights. The BBC will pay
Pounds 4.5m a year for its more limited access.
The ITV bid was worth Pounds 30m in the first year, rising to Pounds 36m in
year five, excluding sponsorship and overseas rights.
'Taking live Premier League Football on to a pay satellite channel will mean
millions of viewers will never see a live Premier League game,' Mr Dyke said
yesterday.
Six clubs - Manchester United, Arsenal, Liverpool, Everton, Leeds and Aston
Villa - voted against the deal, fearing too many games would be transmitted
live and that fans could not watch without paying for satellite or cable
television.
The amount paid smaller Premier League clubs will increase dramatically. But
the difference may not be so marked for glamour sides which have
traditionally received most coverage.
ITV outgunned, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920519

