FT923-15711

FT  01 JUL 92 / Business and the Environment: Green fashion dulls edge of
German chemical industry - Paul Abrahams asks whether the big three are
crying wolf or justly grieved


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


Germany's chemicals companies have seen off legions of foreign competitors
since the Second World War. Now they are facing an internal challenge from
green politics that threatens their prime position.
The three chemicals giants BASF, Bayer and Hoechst claim that the cost of
domestic environmental legislation threatens to cripple the industry by
reducing competitiveness.
The chairmen's protests are part of a wider battle waged by German
companies. German industrialists are struggling to contain costs of all
kinds.
Dr Jurgen Strube, chairman of BASF, warns: 'Given rising costs for
environmental protection purposes, high personnel expenditure, and a
continual decrease in working hours, we run the risk of forfeiting our
position in international competition'.
Mr Strube, with his counterparts at Bayer and Hoechst, has conducted a
carefully co-ordinated protest against the German government's planned
environmental legislation. Are the chairmen crying wolf, or is the industry,
a cornerstone of the German post-war economic miracle, really under threat?
The proposed legislation includes:
A charge next year of DM200 on each tonne of hazardous waste produced. Dr
Frank Schendel, head of environmental policy at Bayer, says that preventing
its introduction is the industry's first priority.
A levy on carbon dioxide emissions which may cost the industry as much as
DM500m a year, according to Bayer. That would be much higher than the carbon
tax currently proposed by the European Commission.
A solid waste charge on non-hazardous by-products used in land fills. That
could add DM80m a year to BASF's costs and DM290m to Bayer's.
At the best of times the impact of such charges would be significant. These
are the worst of times. The German economy, burdened by the costs of
reunification, is slowing down. Chemicals companies face falling demand and
struggle to maintain prices.
All three groups reported a fall in first quarter profits this year. At
Hoechst, profits fell 24 per cent, at BASF 25 per cent. Even at Bayer,
protected by its pharmaceuticals business, profits slipped 8 per cent. For
the first time in a decade, dividends at both Hoechst and BASF were cut. The
outlook remains gloomy. Dr Strube warned that there were few indications of
a quick recovery. Hoechst's chairman, Mr Wolfgang Hilger cautioned that 1992
would be a difficult year.
Dr Jurgen Dormann, Hoechst's finance director, says 'The good results of the
last few years perhaps gave the wrong signals to the politicians who thought
we could always afford the measures they threw at us. But we can't'.
The German groups argue they have already cleaned up their act considerably.
BASF says it has reduced its effluent load into the Rhine by 95 per cent
since 1973. Air emissions are down between 80 and 85 per cent during the
same period.
Such improvements do not come cheap. BASF spent DM500m between 1988 and 1992
on capital projects to reduce pollution, according to Dr Wolfgang Jentzsch,
BASF deputy chairman. The group plans to spend DM900m between 1990 and 1994
on environmental capital projects, while between 1992 and 1996 it will spend
as much as DM1.6bn.
The cost of environmental protection does not end with the initial capital
investment, the groups argue. BASF reckons that, for each D-mark it spends
on environmental capital projects, 40 pfennigs are added to running costs.
Operating costs generated by environmental measures in Germany alone reached
DM1.07bn last year; equivalent to 5.2 per cent of sales. Pre-tax profits in
Germany during the same period were only DM1.49bn.
Bayer reckons that the cost of running environmentally related plant in
Germany has doubled in six years and is now equivalent to 8 per cent of
sales. Mr Hermann Strenger, Bayer's chairman, estimates it needs to spend
DM1.9bn on environmentally related capital projects during the next five
years.
Such expenditure on the environment is much greater than that of foreign
chemical groups, the trio insists. Imperial Chemical Industries, the British
group, spends 2.8 per cent of its turnover on environmental protection.
The groups question the motivation behind further legislation. They argue
the levies are prompted more by political considerations than by a desire to
reduce pollution. They suspect politicians have found a popular source of
raising income and easing constraints on federal government budgets.
They argue too that the levies would be ineffective. Politicians have failed
to understand the economics of pollution control, says Dr Jentzsch. 'There
comes a point when its costs DM100 to reduce pollution 90 per cent. But for
the next 5 per cent, it costs another DM100m. That is not a sensible use of
resources.'
If the proposed measures are implemented, the German chemicals companies may
have to switch more investment abroad, warns Mr Hermann Strenger, Bayer's
outgoing chairman. High environmental costs and delays caused by pressure
groups have already forced the trio to invest outside Germany.
Mr Strenger is now calling for a consolidation phase. That appeal has some
merit, according to industry analysts in Germany and overseas. German groups
do tend to spend more on the environment than their competitors.
Such a disadvantage would clearly be increased by the added burden of the
proposed environmental legislation. Claims however by group chairmen that
the German chemicals industry's trade surplus of about DM35bn could be wiped
out are exaggerated.
The German industry can minimise the impact of rising environmental costs by
cost-cutting measures; a strategy in which the German chemicals companies
lag behind their European counterparts.
When groups such as ICI and Akzo of the Netherlands recognised recession two
years ago, they launched cost-cutting programmes. The Germans reacted
sluggishly. Costs per employee at all three groups remain far higher than at
ICI, according to Mr Alasdair Nisbet, chemicals analyst at UBS Phillips &
Drew: 'If one takes two similar groups like ICI and Bayer, on every form of
analysis, the German company is less productive than the British.'
The German companies now have little choice but to grasp the nettle of
restructuring. Ironically, the end result may be to make them even more
formidable competitors on the international stage.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                 CHEMICAL GROUPS' CLEAN UP SPENDING
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1991                     Capital       Environmental       Total
                      expenditure on   running costs   environmental
                       environment                       costs as %
                                                        of turnover
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Bayer (Germany)          DM 368m         DM 1,400m          9.7%
BASF (Germany)           DM 368m         DM 1,065m          7.0%
Hoechst (Germany)        DM 343m         DM 1,558m         11.9%
ICI (Worldwide)      pounds 120m     pounds 230m            2.8%
Rhone-Poulenc (France)  FFr 864m        FFr 589m            1.7%
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920701

