FT921-1202

FT  25 MAR 92 / Russia likely to miss most budget targets


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE Russian government looks as though it will fail to meet nearly all its
budgetary targets for the first quarter.
Reports yesterday pointed to a budget deficit in the first quarter of this
year of Rbs84bn, or around 25 per cent of the total planned budget
expenditure of Rbs420.5bn for the period.
The government had originally planned a balanced budget, but in January
revised this to a deficit of about 2.5 per cent of planned expenditure.
The targets have fallen victim to the spiralling decline in production, the
inability or refusal to pay taxes on the part of enterprises and regions,
and the government's own tendency to exempt autonomous areas in Russia from
legislation and regulations governing payment to the centre.
According to figures supplied by the finance ministry and printed in the
daily Izvestia, the government received Rbs190bn, a shortfall of Rbs230.5bn
on the revenue expected for the first quarter. Taxes have been widely
evaded, with value added tax, which was introduced at the start of the year
and expected to raise more than Rbs130bn, yielding only a third of this at
Rbs44bn.
At the same time, a confidential memorandum prepared for President Boris
Yeltsin, and leaked to the Nezavisimaya Gazeta newspaper, claimed that many
of the regions and autonomous republics had negotiated special arrangements
to avoid paying tax and other duties, with the result that 'a hundred
billion roubles' were being lost in state revenues.
The leaked report says huge pressure has been brought to bear on the
government by regional authorities to grant them ad hoc exemptions in order
to quieten their fears that enterprises will collapse.
The government is having to endure increasing attacks on its programme in
the run-up to the crucial Congress of Russian Peoples' deputies on April 6.
A new opinion poll in Izvestia shows trust in the government and its reforms
falling rapidly, with only one third of Muscovites questioned believing that
Mr Yeltsin would pursue reforms which would improve living standards. Only
25 per cent of industrial workers believe that reforms would benefit them.
Mr Yegor Gaidar, the deputy prime minister in charge of economic reform, and
some of his ministers yesterday had to listen to two hours of savage
battering at a meeting in the Russian parliament from a galaxy of former
presidential advisers, led by Mr Nikolai Petrakov, economic adviser to
President Mikhail Gorbachev in 1990. All showed a sharp hostility to the
International Monetary Fund, now completing negotiations with the Russian
government on its membership and its economic programme. Mr Petrakov said
that the IMF advice was designed principally for the benefit of westerners
who were able to pick up bargains of all kinds because of the low rouble
exchange rate.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920325

