FT922-7292

FT  19 MAY 92 / Arts: 'Don Carlo' in Genoa - Opera


   By WILLIAM WEAVER


Genoa's lovely neo-classical opera house, the Teatro Carlo Felice, was to a
large extent destroyed by bombs in 1943. In 1946 the ensnarled discussion of
its reconstruction began: competitions were announced, projects submitted,
rejected, revised, bitterly debated. Bureaucratic and political - as well as
aesthetic - dissension blocked all work until March of 1987. Meanwhile, the
handsome ruins dominated the city's main square, a funereal, useless
monument, while opera performances of varying merit were heard in a
converted cinema.
Last year, perhaps spurred in part by the approaching Columbian
celebrations, the work was finally completed; and this season, the Carlo
Felice opens again. The new house was designed by a trio of architects
headed by the brilliant Aldo Rossi. Incorporating some of the remaining
exterior of the old house, it is once more a focal point of Genoa. During
the day, people stroll or meet under the elegant arcade. In the evening, if
there is an opera or a concert, the theatre attracts the leading citizens of
the Ligurian capital.
The season is fully subscribed, houses are regularly sold out. The interior
(capacity 2,000) has been much criticised; to emphasise the civic nature of
the theatre, Rossi, in a sense, brought the outdoors into the hall, where
doors and windows are to be seen in the walls, and a wooden railing runs
along the gallery; but even Rossi's enemies have to admit that the acoustics
are excellent, the sightlines perfect, and the seats comfortable. A
between-acts drink at the bar does not involve much waiting. On fine
evenings, the terraces overlooking the square receive a refreshing breeze
from the nearby, but invisible sea. It is, in sum, a happy house, and people
enjoy just being in it.
But what about the music? Arriving late on the scene, the general manager
Francesco Ernani - imported from La Scala - had to use his wits to cobble up
a programme; and, considering the lack of time and the tightness of his
budget, he has served his public well: a Freni Boheme, a Barber, a Carmen,
some visiting ballet troupes, foreign orchestras (including the Philadelphia
with Muti, who appropriately conducted the Wagner 'Columbus' Overture), and
 -currently - an interesting new production of Verdi's Don Carlo. A
co-production, actually, conceived in conjunction with the Maryinsky Theater
of St. Petersburg and the Tblisi Opera (responsible for the sets).
This was the four-act, Italian version of the opera, which Verdi prepared
for La Scala in the early 1880's, at the time when he was first brooding
over the suggested Otello. Verdi himself said that this redaction had 'more
sinew' than the original five-act French opera. Some things are lost in the
revision - the love duet, Filippo's lament over the dead Rodrigo - but much
is gained. The Don Carlo, as heard in Genoa, though far from brief still,
has a unique urgency and tight coherence.
It is a dark opera, and the staging by Teimouraz Chaidze, along with the
sets of Teimouraz Mourvanidze, accentuated the gloom. Basic structures,
delicate black columns with gilt ornamentation, suggested Spanish baroque as
if revisited by Viollet-le-Duc. Though they were easily moved, the sets
still maintained a prison-like air, even when, beyond the bars, a fountain
purled in the garden scene.
Sometimes Chaidze was over-inventive: a roving spotlight at the act's
beginning seemed to be searching for a singer to illuminate (too much like
what really happens in some of our opera houses); even more restless, a
super dressed as Charles V was too often in evidence. He actually entered
Filippo's cabinet and confronted him at the beginning of the great
monologue.
For the rest, the direction was sober and inoffensive. The music was allowed
to speak for itself. Originally, the conductor was to have been Valeri
Gergeiev; but in the event, he was unable to reach Genoa, and the work was
left in the hands of his colleague Alexander Anissimov, who had prepared the
singers and conducted the rehearsals. Anissimov proved to be an excellent
musician, supporting the singers without indulging them, setting the
orchestra's pace, unhurried but fluent, from the tormented beginning to the
mysterious finale. The Carlo Felice orchestra played well, promising even
better in the future, as it settles into the hall.
Alberto Cupido was cast in the title role. An uneven singer at best, on
opening night he was also indisposed and, after a rocky first act, was
replaced by the veteran Carlo Cossuta. The voice no longer has the ring and
authority of former days, but Cossuta turned in a sturdy, acceptable
performance. The young Roberto Frontali, a baritone obviously on the way to
a notable career, was an appealing Rodrigo, of soldierly bearing and lyrical
voice.
The bass Roberto Scandiuzzi is known to the London audience; he, too, is
young, and his undisguisable youthfulness sometimes worked against his
characterisation of Filippo, but vocally he was ever convincing and, in his
monologue, deeply moving. Elizabeth Connell sang Elisabetta with warmth and
authority; she moved regally, her gestures were expressive. Giovanna
Casolla's Eboli had plenty of dash and allure. The Veil Song seemed to try
her voice, but she brought it off with panache, and was impressive in the
later trio and in the scene with Elisabetta.
All in all, this was a worthy Don Carlo, an occasion of interest, pleasure,
and good omen.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920519

