FT921-677

FT  27 MAR 92 / ICL leads in computer services


   By ALAN CANE


ICL, the UK-based computer manufacturer in which Fujitsu of Japan has an 80
per cent stake, has emerged as the largest supplier of computing services in
Britain.
It now leads the market after a decade-long shakeout which has seen UK-owned
companies routed in an industrial sector they once dominated.
ICL's annual UK revenues from services, estimated at nearly Pounds 250m, are
bigger than those of US competitors, including Electronic Data Systems and
International Business Machines. BT Customer Services, a newcomer to the
computer manufacturing sector with annual sales of Pounds 200m, represents
the only serious UK challenge.
In the 1980s, seven of the top 10 suppliers to the market were UK-owned, led
by Thorn EMI Software and Hoskyns. Today, apart from BT Customer Systems,
only two British companies remain in the list: Logica and Data Sciences.
Those two companies are vulnerable to takeover, Mr Richard Holway, a leading
industry analyst, said yesterday. He said he expected the large computer
manufacturers and telecommunications suppliers, including AT&T of the US and
BT, to step up plans to acquire leading computing services companies to
compensate for falling hardware prices.
Mr Holway was speaking at the annual conference of the Computing Services
Association, the trade organisation for companies specialising in computer
software, data communications and facilities management and other data
services.
He said that computing services companies were not, on the whole, affected
by the recession last year. Average revenues had risen by 4 per cent, about
the rate of inflation. Nevertheless, profits had declined for the second
year running.
'I would expect profits to stop falling in 1992 and to show quite high
growth from the second half of 1992 onwards as the effects of cost
restructuring flow through to the bottom line,' he said.
Mr Holway attributed much of the industry's difficulty to the spate of
'ill-advised and badly executed' acquisitions in 1988 and 1989. 'Our problem
is that we have precious few managers who had any experience of acquisitions
prior to 1988,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920327

