FT923-15472

FT  02 JUL 92 / Arts: Family emotions pared to the bone - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


THE BEST INTENTIONS (12) Lumiere, Gate Notting Hill
THE RAPTURE (18) MGMs West End
THE INNER CIRCLE (15) Odeon Haymarket
CASABLANCA (U) Empire
It is Cannes Film festival delivery fortnight. A week after the film that by
wide consent should have won the 1992 Golden Palm, Robert Altman's The
Player, we welcome to Britain the film that did win the Golden Palm, Bille
August's The Best Intentions.
In the auteurist shorthand used and abused today, we say 'Altman's' and
'August's' films. But The Player owed much of its crackle to Michael
Tolkin's script from his own novel. (For more about Mr T read on in this
column.) And The Best Intentions boasts a script by Ingmar Bergman based on
the lives of his own parents. Who is to call it an August film rather than a
Bergman film?
It is certainly a long film. Three hours, and even that a digest of the
six-hour serial version simultaneously prepared for TV. If pressed against a
wall by a man with a gun, I would say that in some respects The Best
Intentions is not a film at all: more a roman fleuve in pictures about the
love between a rich girl with a possessive family, played by Pernilla August
 -the director's wife, who won the Cannes best actress prize - and a young
pastor with a blond moustache and a live-in guilt complex (Samuel Frohler).
Yet 20 minutes into this story, we scarcely care what aesthetic category we
put it into. Film or mini-series, family album or novel-with-pictures, it
surges majestically through the century's early years as Bergman recreates
the bitter-sweet romance of his mother Anna and father Henrik. Henrik is a
cold-eyed Lutheran priest, Anna a walking nervous breakdown. Between them,
in snowscapes and lakelands that dazzle the eye, they create the conditions
of elegiac dementia in which young Ingmar could be born.
This is a prequel to Fanny And Alexander. Some of the same gusty relatives
tack and billow across the screen, as turbulent variations are played on the
theme of family life. Anna's folk are wealth-encrusted Swedish bourgeoisie,
from raspy old Papa (Max Von Sydow) who watches the distant trains from his
mound of rugs by the window, to melting-eyed Mama, a pudgy former beauty who
hides reserves of malice in the folds of her outward kindness. Meanwhile
Henrik's Mama is a dotty old peasant woman living in the wilds and his
departed father has been replaced by an invisible, implacable,
incomprehensible God.
The defects of the parents are visited on the children and children's
children. As Henrik and Anna quarrel in their snowbound parish, which looks
as if it is a sermon's throw from the North Pole, their little son (Ingmar's
older brother) is nearly murdered by the surly ragamuffin they adopt out of
Christian kindness. He is a cousin to all those haunted, stark-eyed urchins
who have prowled through Bergman's films from The Seventh Seal to The
Silence.
Wonderfully elliptical even at its sprawling length, the film never
'explains' unhappiness or inhumanity. It merely exposes it vividly,
impassively, surgically on the snow-white sheet of the story's scenic
operating table.
Bergman the writer has lost none of his skill at paring emotion to the bone
and then beyond to the marrow. Quarrel scenes have a lacerating force;
reconciliations a melting poignancy; silences a terrifying ambiguity. If The
Best Intentions is less than the best of Bergman as a film - less than Hour
Of The Wolf or Persona or Fanny And Alexander - it is because August is more
skilled at shaping performances than shaping screen pictures. Bergman would
have let the madness of human hope and despair spill out into the lighting
and camerawork. August merely records that madness in the performances, but
the performances at best, especially from Mrs August, are richness enough.
If God is a supporting villain in The Best Intentions, he is the
arch-villain in Michael Tolkin's The Rapture. The writer of The Player wrote
and directed this electrifying fable about the evils of Christian
fundamentalism. Made on a mini-budget, it is part satire, part melodrama,
part visionary B-movie. One can imagine the moguls licking their lips. 'She
was only a switchboard operator,' the advertising copyline might run, 'but
she found a hot line to Heaven.'
The film's crazed primitivism is its strength. Mimi Rogers, who is fast
turning into today's Barbara Stanwyck, plays the telephone employee who
gives up her life as a daytime drudge and night-time debauchee - attending
swinger orgies with her suavely greying boyfriend Patrick Bauchau - when God
calls her 'collect'.
Will she pay for the call? Yes indeed. A bright light, a vision, a death;
then the poignant pleadings of her little daughter. Soon Miss R is out in
the desert waiting for God to snatch up her and the little one in a
pre-Judgment Day 'rapture.' But God moves in mysterious ways, especially
when He is the God of America's born-again fundamentalists. Even when
Gabriel's horn sounds in the film's astonishing finale, mystical
triumphalism is nowhere in sight. And the horsemen of the apocalypse pound
unfeeling through the mires of human grief and disenchantment.
If I spell out more of the plot, your own astonishment will be ruined. The
Rapture has a few first-time film-maker's faults: the over-urgent piling on
of saleable ingredients (sex, drugs, sudden death), too many
plonk-the-camera-down dialogue scenes. But it also has a first-time
film-maker's miraculous innocence. Scenes that a veteran would claim you
'could not do' are carried off here with a sublime insouciance.
The message of the film is that miracles do not happen: or not the useful,
daily miracles we pray for as distinct from the global magic act we all
await on Judgment Day. But this film is a miracle of its kind: a story that
pierces the veil between here and the beyond with a rough magic far more
powerful than the whimsical mysticism we have grown used to with Ghost and
company.
The Inner Circle is set in a city where everyone speaks English with a
strenuous Russian accent. It is Moscow in the 1940s, where according to
writer-director Andrei Konchalovsky (Maria's Lovers, Runaway Train) a young
man in the likeness of Tom Hulce served as film projectionist to a man with
a walrus moustache and Oriental eye make-up called Joseph Stalin (Alexandre
Zbruev).
While our hero falls under the tyrant's evil spell, his wife (Lolita
Davidovich) busies herself swinging between liberal goodheartedness - she
pays forbidden visits to a sickly-sentimental Jewish orphan (Bess Meyer) -
and cynical despair. In the latter mode, she lends her body to Bob Hoskins,
alias KGB chief Beria. They make love in his private train compartment as
the rolling-stock of history rattles towards Stalin's final days.
The first film ever shot in the corridors of the KGB, let alone Beria's
train compartment, The Inner Circle is also the umpteenth film to turn
truth-based political tragedy into dial-a-cliche melodrama. Overacted by
almost everyone in sight and scripted for stark risibility - 'F---off' says
Stalin to a VIP petitioner early on and the dialogue does not improve - it
comes to life only when raiding history direct. The climactic scenes of
people literally trampled to death in the crowds jostling towards Uncle
Joe's coffin shows the grim punishment that awaits a nation that misjudges
its leader during his life and turns misjudgment into deification after his
death.
Casablanca is 50 years old and has also undergone deification. But no
misjudgment here: the film is still a classic. Re-opening in a new 35-mm
print, it reanimates Bogart, Bergman and company and sets them dancing
through Rick's Cafe Americain as the dialogue crackles, the romance revs and
Dooley Wilson at the piano keeps telling us we must remember this. Who on
earth could forget?

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920702

