FT922-535

FT  27 JUN 92 / Bush calls crisis meeting over aid airlift for Bosnia:
Possibility of military action played down


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER, PATRICK BLUM and LAURA SILBER


   LONDON, LISBON, BELGRADE


US PRESIDENT George Bush yesterday called an emergency meeting of his top
security advisers to discuss the rapidly worsening situation in Bosnia and
the implementation of an international aid airlift to the region's
beleaguered population.
The meeting, attended by Mr James Baker, secretary of state, Mr Dick Cheney,
defence secretary, and Mr Brent Scowcroft, national security adviser, was
convened amid harrowing reports of the plight of 300,000 starving people,
blockaded by Serbian forces in the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo.
But US officials played down speculation that Washington and its allies were
contemplating military action to end the fighting, mainly between the
region's Serbs and Moslems.
Before the meeting, Mr Baker said he did not believe the international
community had the authority under current United Nations resolutions to use
force to ensure humanitarian aid reached its destination.
Nor, inspite of regular continuous consultations between members of the
Security Council, were there were no any plans to pass a new UN resolution
authorising the use of force at this stage, a senior State Department
official said.
The Pentagon confirmed that US forces in Europe were on alert transport food
and medical supplies to the population of Sarajevo but stressed that the
go-ahead would be given only when a ceasefire was in place.
EC government leaders meeting in Lisbon yesterday were divided over what to
do about the Bosnian crisis and generally cautious over suggestions that
force could be used to open Sarajevo airport.
French president Francois Mitterrand called for tough measures, but did not
spell these out. However, his spokesman was cool about proposals for
military intervention and emphasised that 'Europe had neither the vocation
nor the means to be a policeman in Yugoslavia'. Britain, too, remained
sceptical about military intervention. Officials suggested it would take up
to 100,000 troops to secure Sarajevo and Serbian-controlled hills around the
city. It is clear, however, that Washington's European allies are seriously
considering their participation in a US-led humanitarian airlift for Bosnia
if there is an effective ceasefire.
'If there is an effective ceasefire that lasts long enough to allow a
multilateral operation safely, we would be ready to play our part,' a senior
British official said. He stressed that such an operation should not involve
the use of ground forces.
Western European Union officials meeting in London concluded that it was
feasible, in principle, for member countries clamp a to put into effect a
naval embargo on of Serbia and agreed to examine ways in which the nine
member countries could participate in the proposed airlift.
On the ground General Ratko Mladic, the commander of Serb forces in
Bosnia-Hercegovina, lashed out at western countries and warned that Serbs
were ready to continue their fight. His speech contrasted with yesterday's
call by Mr Radovan Karadzic, Bosnia's nationalist Serb leader, for 'an
immediate halt to all artillery attacks on Sarajevo' and the withdrawal of
anti-aircraft guns from the Serb-held city airport. Shelling continued
yesterday in parts of the city in defiance of Mr Karadzic's order.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920627

