FT924-12006

FT  22 OCT 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Sharpening the image
 -Gillette and Avon are launching multi-million pound promotional campaigns
to re-establish their brand names


   By GARY MEAD


Tinkering with a brand image is a dangerous game. But when competitive
pressure reaches critical mass, there is little choice.
Two of the oldest brand names in mass-market personal care products have
decided that now is the time for a rethink. The experience of both Avon
(founded in 1886) and Gillette (1903) shows that even leading brands can be
vulnerable.
Both companies lost sight of their core strategies in the late 1970s and
early 1980s, diversifying and thereby losing ground to competitors. Gillette
followed the pack into disposable razors; Avon took its eye off its main
market, cosmetics.
Companies with successful brand name longevity appear to concentrate on
doing one thing supremely well and keeping a single brand name firmly at the
forefront of consumer awareness.
Thus Gillette has now decided that the future for its personal care division
 -one of three divisions - is to attempt to replicate the success of its
non-disposable razor, Sensor, which is heavily branded with the Gillette
name. Gillette's new male toiletries range - launched in London recently
with more dry ice and flashing lights than a Christmas panto - is called
Gillette Series. The 13-product range results from Dollars 75m (Pounds
43.6m) spent on research and development.
The new line is backed by a Dollars 75m marketing budget in its first year
in three launch markets, the US, Canada and the UK. The company's UK
marketing budget of Pounds 15m for Gillette Series is 12 per cent of its
turnover in the British shaving business.
Bruce Cleverly, Gillette's general manager for northern Europe, says the
company is trying to develop a 'mega-brand strategy. In 1988 we said we
really needed to do something about the Gillette business, it's becoming a
commodity market, we have a lot of well-known sub-brands but our biggest
strength is the name Gillette and we really haven't treated that brand name
with the importance it deserves.'
Thus when Sensor was launched in 1990, it was accompanied by a global
advertising campaign which hinged on emphasising the Gillette brand name,
with the slogan, 'Gillette, the best a man can get.'
Sensor revived the company's fortunes which had been flagging under pressure
from the plastic disposable razor, bought on price, not brand name. But the
premium-priced Sensor launch was not just about new product development. It
coincided with restored marketing budgets, which (measured in 1987 terms)
had in the US fallen from Dollars 61m in 1975 to Dollars 15m in 1987.
Gillette is minimising risk of failure for its new range by taking a leaf
out of the successful Sensor campaign and piggy-backing on a reinvigorated
brand name.
Avon, the US cosmetics company, had a different set of problems which
largely flowed from the changing nature of industrialised society. For a
company which depended on direct selling, one big social change - women
increasingly leaving the home in the 1970s and 1980s to go to work - was a
serious problem.
Avon's US sales rep force fell by 10 per cent between 1980-84, to 400,000.
Americans are annually working an average 158 hours more than 20 years ago;
fewer people are interested in part-time selling and there are fewer at home
to buy.
Avon diversified into speciality chemicals and healthcare, moving from being
in 1982 almost debt-free to having debts of Dollars 1.13bn in 1989. That, in
turn, attracted four unwelcome takeover bids in three years.
Jim Preston, the current chief executive, took over in mid-1988 with a brief
to return the company to its core cosmetic business and reverse the tide. He
sold off peripheral companies. Sales increased from Dollars 3bn in 1988 to
Dollars 3.6bn in 1991; debt has been reduced to Dollars 352m at the end of
1991.
In the process, Preston has carved Avon's globe in two, with different
marketing strategies for industrial and emerging economies. With the latter,
he anticipates sales growth of 10-12 per cent annually, largely using the
tested method of direct sale reps.
But it is in already highly developed markets where Avon faces stiffest
competition, and where Preston hopes the company's revamped image will make
the most difference: 'Our key challenges in these developed markets are
image and access.'
Preston acknowledges that Avon has had a very dowdy image. To counter that,
Avon is quadrupling its advertising budgets, taking it to 2-3 per cent of
sales over the next two years, and turning towards images more in tune with
contemporary women.
The new advertising campaigns hope to make a virtue out of the declining
numbers of house-bound women in developed economies, by making it possible
to purchase Avon products via fax, telephone and mail, as well as the
traditional sale rep.
Now using the generic slogan 'It's never been so simple to look so great',
Avon's new global advertising campaigns try to combine its old strength -
ease of purchase - with a new appeal to sophisticated lifestyle. But Avon
faces serious competition in the estimated Dollars 45bn global personal
products market. The market is relatively fragmented with 70 per cent in the
hands of some 15 companies.
However, four of the big five - Procter & Gamble (US), L'Oreal (France),
Unilever (Anglo-Dutch) and Shiseido (Japan) - spent the late 1980s making
acquisitions which, unlike Avon's, meshed into their existing core
businesses. Avon's recent expansions into China, east Europe and other
emerging economies make sense; but closer to home its greatest need is for
its own current facelift.
 ----------------------------------------------------------
                   DURABLE BRAND NAMES
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Category             Leading brand            Current
                       in 1923                 rank
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Cameras                 KODAK                  No. 1
Canned fruit            DEL MONTE              No. 1
Chewing gum             WRIGLEY'S              No. 1
Crackers                NABISCO                No. 1
Razors                  GILLETTE               No. 1
Soft drinks             COCA-COLA              No. 1
Soap                    IVORY                  No. 1
Soup                    CAMPBELL               No. 1
Toothpaste              COLGATE                No. 2
 ----------------------------------------------------------
Sources: Business Week/Boston Consulting Group, July 1991.
 ----------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921022

