FT921-11788

FT  30 JAN 92 / Perrier alerts competition body as part of bid defence


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN


   PARIS


PERRIER, France's leading mineral water company, yesterday fired a salvo in
its defence against the FFr13.42bn (Pounds 1.37bn) hostile bid from Nestle
and Banque Indosuez.
Mr Jacques Vincent, president of Perrier and Exor, the French property group
that controls 35 per cent of the mineral water company and is itself the
subject of a FFr5.6bn friendly bid from Italy's Agnelli family, said Perrier
was determined to 'say no to this strange adventure'.
He was particularly critical of Indosuez, the banking subsidiary of France's
Suez Group which owns 10 per cent of Exor. Mr Vincent, who is a board member
of Suez, said he was 'confused and even a little bitter' about its
participation in the bid.
The fight for Perrier, which began 10 days ago when Nestle, the Swiss food
group, and Indosuez unveiled their bid, threatens to involve some of the
leading figures in the European industrial establishment and French
financial circles.
Perrier's defence against Nestle is based on the claim that its mineral
water interests should remain intact. Nestle has already agreed to sell
Volvic, one of Perrier's waters, to BSN, the French food group which, until
this bid, had been regarded as an ally of the Agnellis.
Perrier has taken legal action to try to nullify the agreement between
Nestle and BSN by filing a complaint with the Conseil de la Concurrence, the
French competition authority.
If Nestle's plan to sell Volvic to BSN was blocked, its bid might face
monopoly problems. Nestle has mounted a legal case of its own against the
recent FFr1.5bn sale of 13.8 per cent of Perrier to Saint Louis, the French
food and packaging group.
Mr Vincent yesterday defended the decision to introduce Saint Louis as an
investor saying it formed part of Perrier's diversification strategy. Mr
Bernard Dumon, president of Saint Louis, said his company had agreed to take
an initial 13.8 per cent of Perrier with the aim of raising its holding to
20 per cent.
Societe Generale, the French bank, pledged its support to Perrier, of which
it owns 0.5 per cent. Mr Marc Vienot, president, said the bank believed
Perrier should remain independent and criticised the 'low price' of Nestle's
offer.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920130

