FT924-6118

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (1): Squeeze tightens as
sales plummet - In 17 years the number of truck makers in Europe has shrunk
from 25 to 10 last year. As losses mount remorselessly, a further wave of
restructuring appears to be unavoidable. Kevin Done examines an industry
which, throughout the world, faces spiralling development costs and rising
expenditure to meet tougher environmental regulations


   By KEVIN DONE


THE vice is tightening inexorably on truck makers in western Europe as sales
fall for the third year in succession, with little prospect of relief next
year.
As several leading producers face mounting losses, the industry is again
cutting jobs, and a further wave of restructuring appears unavoidable in a
sector where the number of truck makers has already shrunk from 25 in 1975
to 10 last year.
In North America, demand for heavy trucks (above 15 tonnes) has begun to
rise after three years of declining sales, but margins remain tightly
squeezed, and most producers are still losing money. The heavy truck
industry in the US has been deep in loss for five of the past 11 years. It
has made net losses over the past decade, and the industry was working at
only 55 per cent of capacity last year.
The Japanese truck market has also weakened in the past two years. Sales of
trucks fell by 6.9 per cent to 179,000 in the 12 months to the end of March
this year, and Hino, a leading Japanese heavy truck maker, has recently cut
its 1992/93 forecast of overall domestic truck demand to 142,500 from an
earlier forecast of 155,000, a 20 per cent fall from the previous year.
Nissan Diesel, one of Hino's main domestic rivals, fell into loss in the six
months to the end of September and is not paying an interim dividend, while
Hino itself recently announced a 59 per cent fall in pre-tax profits in the
same period.
In all three regions truck makers are facing spiralling product development
costs and rising expenditure to meet tougher environmental regulations, a
burden which is increased by the lack of harmonisation of regulations and
testing procedures between Europe, Japan and North America.
In the European Community truck makers are also confronting the advent of
the single market, which is expected to prove a mixed blessing for the
commercial vehicle industry.
According to Werner Niefer, president of Mercedes-Benz, the automotive
subsidiary of Daimler-Benz of Germany and the world's biggest truck maker,
the volume of transport in Europe is expected to grow by 40 per cent during
the next 10 years. (Roads account for more than 65 per cent of goods
transport in Europe).
The promised growth in transport volumes in the single market should be
accompanied, however, by a far-reaching deregulation of transport markets,
which is expected to intensify competition drastically in the transport
industry, with a considerable increase in the productivity of haulage
operators rather than in the number of trucks in use. As more power is
concentrated in the hands of larger transport groups, they could succeed in
driving down prices.
The European truck industry has watched with trepidation the impact of
deregulation in the US which over the past decade has pared truck producers'
margins to the bone.
The commercial vehicle industry - and in particular the truck sector - is
notorious for its exaggerated trade cycles, and while North America appears
to be finally emerging this year from the trough of its latest recession -
heavy duty truck sales dropped by 36 per cent from 169,000 in 1988 to
108,000 in 1991 - the west European market is still on the downward slope
with an uncertain braking distance.
The alarm signals of recent weeks show how the squeeze is tightening.
Mercedes-Benz, the overwhelming leader of the western European truck market
with a 31 per cent market share last year, announced earlier this month that
it was postponing indefinitely its plan to build a new 40,000-a-year truck
plant in eastern Germany.
It blamed the decision on three main factors: the structural problems facing
the European commercial vehicle industry, which had become 'visible in all
clarity' as a result of the economic downturn; the changed medium-term
outlook with falling demand for light and heavy trucks; and the clearly
reduced prospects for the development of eastern European markets.
Last year, Mercedes-Benz commercial vehicle production reached a record
level at 296,000, but now its German plants are already facing extended
short-time working in the first half of next year.
Volvo Truck, one of the world's leading heavy truck makers, has announced
this month another package of emergency measures aimed at cutting costs by
SKr2.5bn (Dollars 425m) a year by 1995, and including the loss of another
1,980 jobs, of which 1,410 will be in Sweden.
Volvo's truck operations have slumped into loss this year in the face of
lower capacity utilisation in Europe, substantially higher product
development costs and inadequate margins in North America.
It is in loss in spite of an earlier crisis package announced in 1990 aimed
at cutting annual costs by SKr1.5bn by the end of this year.
It closed one of its US plants at Ogden, Utah, last year and cut its
workforce worldwide during 1991 by 1,150 to 18,100. French trade unions
warned this month that Renault Vehicules Industriels, the French truck
maker, was preparing to announce shortly up to 2,500 job losses, amounting
to nearly 15 per cent of the workforce. RVI has plunged into a big loss this
year from the minimal net profit of FFr23m made in 1991. The results are a
far cry from the net profits of FFr1bn and FFr930m achieved in 1988 and
1989. It has introduced temporary lay-offs, averaging seven days a month.
Scania, the Swedish heavy truck maker and hitherto the most profitable
European producer, is cutting 875 jobs at its Swedish and Dutch plants by
early next year, after already cutting the workforce at its European
production plants by 1,500 since 1989.
The loudest distress signals have come from Daf, the Dutch commercial
vehicle maker, which is now in its third year of heavy losses in the face of
the deep recession in the UK, its largest single market, where truck sales
have more than halved since 1989.
Daf is the most likely next victim of the inexorable restructuring in the
European truck industry. For more than three months it has been negotiating
with Mercedes-Benz over a potential strategic alliance.
Daf is seeking a partner to provide fresh equity to bolster its battered
balance sheet, as well as collaboration to allow it to share products, new
product development costs and plant capacities.
Mercedes-Benz has made no secret of the fact that it expects the process of
concentration in the European truck industry to proceed apace to the end of
the decade.
'By the end of the 1990s we will have three supranational strategic
alliances in Europe, each with one major company at its core,' said Helmut
Werner, chief executive-elect of Mercedes-Benz, in an earlier speech.
Much larger producers than DAF had already concluded that times were
becoming too tough to go it alone.
In the most significant realignment of forces to date Volvo of Sweden and
Renault of France have embarked on a far-reaching alliance which includes 45
per cent cross-shareholdings in each other's truck operations.
Iveco, the commercial vehicles subsidiary of Fiat of Italy which was
originally formed from the merger of smaller Italian, French and German
truck makers, added management control of Ford's UK-based truck operations
in the second half of the 1980s. Itself in loss, it is now trying to
rationalise Spain's loss-making Enasa, the formerly state-owned maker of
Pegaso trucks, acquired at the beginning of 1991.
While the big groups consolidate, the minnows continue to disappear.
The latest casualty is AWD, the small privately-owned UK truck maker, which
was forced to call in the receiver this summer after failing to make a go of
General Motors' former heavily loss-making Bedford truck operations.

The Financial Times


London Page I

921123

