FT923-15721

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: UK will fight to hold free
market line on industry


   By ANDREW HILL


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
WHEN Mr Michael Heseltine, president of the UK Board of Trade, and Mr Martin
Bangemann, the EC industry commissioner, met last weekend to discuss
Community industry policy they may have found they were closer
philosophically than they expected to be.
'There aren't significant disagreements between us and the UK,' said a
Brussels industry official. 'But when it comes to political discussion and
rhetoric we tend to be far apart and that makes things much more difficult.'
The official Brussels line is that the Commission should promote a generally
applicable 'horizontal' policy - such as funding for research and training -
rather than sectoral measures aimed at, say, the motor or electronics
industry. Britain would clearly like the Commission to hold that line.
But over the next six months the fight between free-market and
interventionist governments is likely to intensify. The main battlefields
will be the Commission's budget plans for 1993-97 and Brussels' centralised
competition powers.
Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission president, would like his budget package
to be approved as written - complete with plans to enhance industrial
competitiveness through improved research and training programmes. Community
liberals worry that such plans could be hijacked by ailing industrial
sectors. But faced with opposition to the whole budget, Mr Delors has hinted
that research and training funds may have to be scaled back to ensure more
aid for the EC's poorer regions.
Meanwhile, the Commission is under pressure from some countries, notably
France, to hand some of its competition powers back to national authorities.
The UK will be counting on Sir Leon Brittan, the commissioner responsible,
to fight his corner.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920701

