FT922-13292

FT  13 APR 92 / Personal View: Markets and community


   By DAVID WILLETTS


It is not only the pollsters who got the election wrong. Equally mistaken
were those commentators who argued there was no sharp difference of
principle between the two main parties. They did not grasp the nature of
modern Conservatism, nor how it differs even from the air-brushed,
deodorised socialism of Neil Kinnock's Labour party.
Both parties did, of course, try to reach out to the floating voters who
finally determined the result. Ever since his first speech at the
Conservative party conference as chancellor, John Major has repeatedly said
that he wants the party to reach out to all. Neil Kinnock wanted the Labour
party to escape from its shrinking unionised base to take in the prosperous,
including those working in the service industries. Mr Major succeeded, and
Mr Kinnock failed. That is because of a fundamental difference in the
Conservative and Labour understanding of how a nation is held together.
For Labour, the task of integration is, above all, for the state. Even after
all its policy reviews, it remained the party of high spending, high taxes
and more regulation, that is, big government.
The first objection to these beliefs is that they undermine the operation of
the free market, which had to be fought for in the 1980s. But there is
another deeper objection. Big government does not bring the nation together;
it divides it. Interest groups are engaged in a struggle for taxpayers'
money and special favours - with the state as the battlefield. John Smith's
shadow budget was a classic example of the perils of such an approach. He
doubtless thought he was being politically ingenious by hitting one-sixth of
the working population with the biggest post-war tax increase to finance
small electoral bribes for the rest. But, if a highwayman robs your
neighbour, you may fear it will be your turn next. Many electors were afraid
a future Labour government would raise their taxes too.
Instead, the prime minister has a very different and authentically Tory view
of what holds the community together - culture. This is not simply high
culture, but, as T S Eliot observed: 'It includes all the characteristic
activities and interests of a people: Derby Day, Henley Regatta, Cowes, the
12th of August, a cup final, the dog races, the pin table, the dartboard,
Wensleydale cheese, boiled cabbage cut into sections, beetroot in vinegar,
19th-century Gothic churches, and the music of Elgar.' The prominence given
to David Mellor's new ministry, bringing together everything from
Manchester's Olympic bid to the Royal Opera House and the BBC, recognises
the power of culture in its broadest sense, in sustaining national identity.
The constitution is also part of this shared culture. Only the most absurd
reactionary would suggest it is so perfect as never to require further
change. But, equally, the Labour and Liberal Democrat parties seemed
afflicted with an itch to intervene everywhere. Having lost the intellectual
battle on detailed intervention in the economy, their restless spirits
wanted to fiddle with the constitution instead. Regional government,
devolution, new quangos and commissions, a new bill of rights together would
have meant years of constitutional turmoil, with little practical gain.
Conservatives fought the election as the only party prepared to speak out
for the traditional strengths of the British constitution.
Another striking feature of the election campaign was how the public sector
unions from Nupe to the Inland Revenue staff federation devoted their funds
to advertising against the Conservatives. They may have thought they were
helping Labour, but in practice they aroused suspicions that Labour's
much-vaunted commitment to the welfare state was really just to the unions
within it. By contrast, the reforms of health and education and the
Citizen's Charter all aligned the Conservatives with the vast majority, who
are users of the public services and have a shared interest in higher
standards and consumer responsiveness.
While one threat to the sense of community comes from interventionism and
egalitarianism, another comes from snobs who believe that British culture
does not belong to all, but to a narrow elite. The destruction of
traditional education in the 1960s and 1970s was only possible because
people in power believed that Dickens or Shakespeare or the Tudors and
Stuarts or the rules of English grammar were only for the privileged few.
The snobs thus played into the hands of the progressives. We can only
protect what we value by trying to make it the birthright of everyone. That
is perhaps the reason for the fervour with which the prime minister and
education secretary have fought for good quality traditional education to be
available to all.
The task now for Conservatives is to set this belief in community alongside
a commitment to the free market. Together they form the bedrock of
Conservatism for the 1990s, as they have done throughout its history.
The author is the newly-elected MP for Havant. His book Modern Conservatism
was published last month by Penguin.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920413

