FT921-399

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (16):
'Biggest' insurer steps on the gas - The private motor business is returning
to favour


   By TIM DICKSON


THE Lloyd's market, with a 13 per cent share of total motor premiums written
in 1990, claims to be the largest private car insurer in the UK.
Excluding fleet business, Lloyd's syndicates probably insure one private UK
motorist in five.
Lloyd's pre-eminence has been greater - its market share peaked at 16 per
cent in the mid 1980s - and one question now is whether the Lime Street
market will retrieve any of the lost ground.
Certainly there should be no shortage of capacity in the next few years,
with clear signs already that Names are anxious to increase their exposure
to a sector which has produced consistent, if not necessarily exciting,
profits.
'Names have tended to devote about 10 to 15 per cent of their premium
capacity to motor in the past', says Mr George Johnstone, chairman of the
Lloyd's Motor Underwriters Association (LMUA). 'I would expect this to rise
to 20-25 per cent in the future.'
To a large extent extra capacity is likely to be absorbed by premium rate
increases, which have typically run at 25-30 per cent for motor over the
last 12 months. Nevertheless, although direct writers pose a fresh threat,
the worsening solvency ratios of the UK composite insurers provide an
interesting opportunity for Lloyds to boost volume growth.
The 1991 results of both Guardian Royal Exchange and General Accident -
which showed a substantial drop in the company's motor premiums last year -
highlight the point. Lloyd's market, constituted in 1909, is perhaps best
known for its wide variety of tailor-made policies, which appeal to groups
as diverse as motor cyclists, kitcar and classic car owners, and young
drivers.
The operation of Lloyd's motor syndicates is also fundamentally different
from syndicates elsewhere: they issue their own policies, endorsements,
debit/credit notes and accounts; they investigate, negotiate and pay their
own claims; and they normally write 100 per cent of any risk. Nearly all
motor syndicates have set up service companies, wholly owned by syndicates'
managing agents, to process business which is not economic for brokers to
handle.
Volume growth at Lloyd's was particularly rapid throughout the 1970s,
following the well publicised failures of companies such as Vehicle and
General and Mr Emil Savundra's Fire Auto Marine. The number of syndicates
also increased in this period, but has recently shrunk due to cost
pressures, mergers and poor performance. Today there are 28 specialist motor
syndicates, which write about Pounds 800m in annual premiums.
Lloyd's syndicates have not escaped the downturn in the underwriting cycle
of the last two years. Mr Johnstone of the LMUA maintains, though, that they
have fared better than the composites. 'The company sector has had a very
rough time, but our emphasis on distribution channels, the more personal
relationships we tend to develop with high street brokers, has made for a
more tailored risk.'
Names on Syndicate 866, for example - Shead Motor Policies at Lloyd's - will
make profits on the 1989 account, though according to Mr Peter Routledge,
its motor underwriter, they will not be as good as in 1987 and 1988. 'It is
too early to say what will happen in 1990 and 1991, though I believe that we
will make a profit in 1990,' he adds.
Shead, which does a lot of specialist fleet business and numbers the Stock
Exchange and Bank of England among its customers, says there has been no
difficulty attracting Names: capacity for the current year is well up on
last year at Pounds 47m.
The smaller Holdsure Group, which has capacity to write Pounds 26.5m of
premiums this year, is expecting 1990 to be more difficult than 1991. 'Even
though it didn't happen until the 1991 budget the increase in the VAT rate
from 15 to 17.5 per cent inflated the cost of 1990 claims,' explains
Holdsure's underwriter Mr David Poll. 'Nineteen ninety-one will be better
because rates started to increase from the middle of the year.'
Mr Poll agrees that it is the specialist nature of the Lloyd's market which
differentiates it from the composites, and which shows up in the results.
'The composites have tended in the past to write motor policies for market
share, using it as a loss leader for other types of business,' he claims.
Lloyd's practitioners, meanwhile, firmly refute the idea that Lloyd's
undoubted competitiveness on rates is matched by an unhealthy disregard for
service. 'This may have been true a few years ago when one or two
syndicates, which have now disappeared, gave the whole place a bad name. But
it is not true today,' insists Mr Routledge. 'We couldn't survive with poor
service.'
Adds Mr Poll: 'At one point, about 10 years ago, the market was taking on
more business than it could cope with. There were one or two maverick
syndicates in those days which cut rates to win business, and then tried to
use the small print to avoid paying out on claims. I believe that the level
of service given by the Lloyd's market today is actually better than the
composites. Most syndicates have developed sophisticated software, and are
highly efficient.'
While the composites are having their difficulties the direct writers, who
use TV and national newspaper advertising to bypass brokers, have emerged as
a source of new competition for the business of private motorists.
The LMUA has obtained permission from the Council of Lloyds for syndicates
to deal direct with the public in addition to the traditional broker based
network, an opportunity which has recently been addressed by the Lloyd's
agency group Hayter Brockbank. Hayter says it will be investing Pounds 1.8m
this year in a new direct response company for motor and other personal
lines of insurance, and aims to have 50,000 policyholders by May 1994 and
100,000 by January 1995.
Notwithstanding suggestions in the Task Force report that their superior
cost structures may enable the direct writers to eat into Lloyd's share of
the motor market, the LMUA's Mr Johnstone plays down the threat. 'If you
look at the Department of Trade and Industry returns for 1990 they are very,
very small,' he maintains.
'I don't believe they are the success story that everyone seems to say they
are. They only appeal to a certain section of the population, and will end
up fighting among themselves for those clients who are persuaded by an
advertising approach. Most people prefer to trust the advice of the friendly
insurance broker who they meet in the pub.'

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920330

