FT921-11800

FT  30 JAN 92 / Technology: Light at the end of the tunnel - Newly
privatised UK utilities are expecting IT to give them a competitive edge


   By DAVE MADDEN


Thames Water's customer information system is one of its biggest capital
investments - second only to the London Ring Main, the three-metre diameter
tunnel surrounding the capital.
Although the project is one of the more ambitious information technology
developments undertaken by a UK utility, it is not unique. Rather it
illustrates the vast scale of IT investment in the newly privatised water
and electricity industries - and the pivotal role that investment is playing
in creating a competing, and competitive, utilities sector.
The water industry has some Pounds 25bn to spend on capital projects in the
decade to 1999 - of which around 10 per cent will go on support systems.
The Water Services Association, which represents the 10 big water and sewage
companies in England and Wales, says that Pounds 275m of the industry's
Pounds 2.29bn capital expenditure last year went on 'miscellaneous
projects', of which IT constitutes the bulk.
It is tempting to view this as some sort of 'privatisation dividend', a
reaction to years of public sector starvation. But money is not just being
spent for the sake of it.
First, individual systems face rigorous cost-benefit analysis. 'There is no
question in my mind - the National Power board takes a highly commercial
view of return on investment,' says John Handby, IT director.
Second, some of these projects are driven by pre-privatisation IT
strategies: Thames Water set its agenda in 1986; Welsh Water is building on
its integrated business information system, conceived in 1985.
There is no doubt, however, that privatisation accelerated programmes and
changed priorities. 'Privatisation was not the catalyst but it fuelled the
process,' says Jeff Maynard, Welsh Water's IT manager.
But what is happening now says Declan Good, managing associate of
consultants CSC Index, is that these companies are shifting emphasis from
mandatory projects to more glamorous competitive initiatives. This
transition is nowhere more evident than at National Power, the biggest
electricity generator.
National Power inherited a fragmented IT infrastructure. It had lost IT and
telecommunications assets, including its central mainframe, to Nuclear
Electric in the dismantling of the Central Electricity Generating Board. Its
remaining technology was complex, often incompatible and, says Handby, its
core business systems were incapable of meeting the demands of its new
commercial environment.
After a 'survival phase', in which it secured short-term solutions to keep
the business running, National Power committed itself to a substantial
investment in a radical IT infrastructure to underpin the new company. The
programme is one of the largest computing and telecommunications projects
ever undertaken by a company in Europe.
It comprises core hardware and systems software - Amdahl mainframe and
Digital Equipment Vax machines, a new company-wide network, applications,
tools and procedures. When it is completed 70 Vax machines will be
distributed across the company linked to 3,000 networked Compaq personal
computers.
Handby's priority has been to devolve computing to the remotest parts of an
unusually dispersed organisation. In technological terms that has meant
single-screen access to an integrated network.
But its effect is farther reaching. 'We are building a true networked
organisation,' says Handby, replacing the formal hierarchical culture of a
public utility with a 'flatter, highly responsive' structure, which has
shifted power from corporate headquarters to the power stations themselves.
Distributing technology 'is as clear a signal of intent', Handby says, 'as
getting rid of the executive loos'.
National Power's IT strategy was developed in just three months. It is now
18 months into an aggressive three-year programme. This has seen it:
Implement a company-wide communications network, called Unity;
Install new hardware and systems software in new data centres;
Design, build and roll out a series of applications: office systems,
procurement, work management, financial reporting - and an innovative
operational information system which gives the business access to a
reservoir of operational power plant data.
National Power's experience is exceptional but its conviction that IT will
prove an agent of cultural change is shared.
Maynard expects IT to 'empower Welsh Water workers' - but that does not
translate into a uniform approach. Good says the scope and ambition of IT
initiatives across these utilities is conditioned largely by the management
style they inherited, and their relative sophistication when they 'hit'
privatisation.
But there are clear priorities emerging. The first is customer service
systems.
At first sight this is hard to fathom. Water companies retain a monopoly, as
do the electricity suppliers in the domestic market, until full deregulation
in 1998. So is their interest in customer service systems more than just a
fashionable import from the US?
'We simply would not survive very long under the new regime if we didn't
take this seriously,' says Maynard.
Customer service initiatives address three interrelated issues: inflexible
billing systems; scattered, and often incompatible customer databases; and
inferior customer service organisations.
Of these there is no doubt that privatisation has concentrated minds on the
inadequacy of existing billing arrangements in both industries. As Maynard
says, Welsh Water's customer accounting system 'handles our most important
customer contact'.
Yet, says Good, these same systems are elsewhere 'bogging companies down' to
the extent that they can only introduce creative service products or complex
tariffs with great difficulty, because they cannot bill for them. But while
the motivation is the same, the approach varies greatly.
Severn Trent Water turned to IBM imaging technology as the basis of its
customer service effort. Ian Hislop, director of computer systems, says the
systems were built to deliver immediate improvements in the speed and
quality of its response to customers.
Thames Water, on the other hand, is building a 'one-stop customer contact
point' at its customer centre in Swindon - from the bottom up.
This strategy, says project manager Peter Ratcliffe, is dependent on a
complex computing and telecommunications infrastructure which will integrate
all Thames's customer service contacts.
A second priority is for 'work and asset' management systems. Asset
management in both the water and electricity industries demands not just
proper job or workflow administration but geographical information systems
(GISs) to keep track of the network.
Thames Water is three years into its own IBM mainframe-based GIS project (it
has 20,000 maps loaded so far). But, says Ratcliffe, it will take another
five years to digitise Thames's own water and sewer network on top. The
ultimate trick, he says, will be to give its customer and job management
centres direct access to that integrated model.
In part these GIS initiatives are driven by legislation: the Street Work Act
and respective customer charters oblige utilities to take better control of
their physical infrastructure as well as their field workforce.
In the longer term, the emergence of an IT-based customer service culture
among UK utilities raises the prospect that, ultimately, providing the
service could be decoupled from owning and running the physical
infrastructure.
In the mean time, says Good, 'having the utilities around the place has
certainly kept the wolf from the (IT consultants') door'.
 -------------------------------------------------------------
IT BUDGET INCREASES
 -------------------------------------------------------------
by sector, 1990 over 1989
(UK average = 30%)
 -------------------------------------------------------------
ABOVE AVERAGE                  BELOW AVERAGE
Utilities         147%         Finance                 26%
Education          83%         Retail/Distribution     10%
Process            63%         Other industry           0%
Engineering        48%         Public administration   12%
                               Computer services       24%
 -------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Price Waterhouse/Computing Opinion Surveys
 -------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 12 Photograph (Omitted).

920130

