FT921-659

FT  27 MAR 92 / Ukraine may retain N-arms


   By CHRYSTIA FREELAND


   KIEV


A PROPOSAL for Ukraine to retain nuclear weapons as a bargaining chip so
that reductions in the arsenals of other ex-Soviet republics could be
achieved, is among confidential proposals drawn up by the Ukrainian
parliament's defence committee.
The proposals, which are expected to provoke a fierce debate in parliament
next week, suggest Ukraine should rethink its pledge to remove all strategic
weapons by the end of 1994.
Following Ukraine's decision to halt shipments of tactical nuclear weapons
to Russia for dismantling, the suggestion is likely to cause misgivings in
the west and to exacerbate strains between Kiev and Moscow.
All tactical nuclear weapons were to have been shipped to Russia by July 1.
Ukraine has between 2,000 and 4,000 tactical weapons and 176 long-range
strategic missiles. Of these, 130 are scheduled for destruction during seven
years under last year's US-Soviet Start treaty.
Belarus and Kazakhstan are the other non-Russian republics with nuclear
weapons on their territory.
One deputy closely involved in the debate said that the committee was
proposing that Ukraine 'retain the right to reconsider the time-frame for
the shipment of nuclear weapons out of Ukraine depending on developments in
the Commonwealth of Independent States'.
Mr Mykola Porovsky, a member of the defence committee, outlined the three
main elements of the proposed nuclear policy.
First, rather than making unilateral cuts in the force on its territory, Mr
Porovsky said Ukraine should negotiate with other republics on disarmament.
Second, he said that Ukraine would insist on having the technical means to
prevent the use of nuclear weapons on its territory, rather than simply
being consulted by Russia.
Third, Ukraine would reinforce this control by assuming jurisdiction over
the personnel assigned to the strategic forces stationed in Ukraine.
The question of an oath of allegiance to the republic is likely to develop
throughout Ukraine, notably regarding the Black Sea fleet.
Some western observers accepted that western policy was partly to blame for
Ukraine's misgivings about removing the weapons. 'The west must reward
Ukraine, at least politically, for its non-nuclear stance,' a senior
diplomat said.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920327

