FT921-15218

FT  11 JAN 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Solving other people's problems -
A company that was built with a screwdriver and a pair of pliers


   By DAVID SPARK


AFTER the oil price crashed in 1986, Richard Gibson was home from the Far
East, kicking his heels on stand-by for his oil company. Keith Anderson, who
had been a fellow student of electronics at Newcastle Polytechnic, had
become a senior lecturer there.
The two got together and in 1987 set up their own company, Integrated Design
Techniques, (IDT), with, says Gibson, a screwdriver and a pair of pliers.
Anderson had heard of a couple of possible jobs, and the idea was that they
would work on their customers' premises.
The company's first task was to design a microprocessor-controlled safety
system for offshore oil. Then it got a job for Electrolux cookers.
The problem of demonstrating cookers in showrooms is that they need more
than the normal 13-amp supply. Electrolux cookers' halogen rings could
operate safely inside 13 amps but the oven, grill and ceramic hobs could
not. IDT produced an easily-reset box which cut the power supply if anything
but a halogen ring was turned on. It did this by looking at the wave-form of
the current being drawn.
IDT took a workshop in the Mountjoy centre in Durham and was joined last
year by Robin Jefferson, who had completed a doctorate at Newcastle
University. Meanwhile, Anderson keeps up his lecturing. 'I'm working about
20 hours a day,' he says.
IDT made a big step forward when it persuaded two leading electronic
manufacturers to authorise the use of their ready-assembled boards. These
save the detailed work of assembling individual components and protect the
system against interference.
The boards proved their value when IDT won a contract to design and install
a system for testing lawnmowers made by Flymo at Newton Aycliffe. A factory
is a harsh environment for computerised equipment. Flymo used to suffer
breaks in production when dust and electrical interference caused computers
to crash. The system IDT installed enabled Flymo to beat production records.
Each completed lawnmower goes into a Perspex box where test probes check it
for speed of rotation and electrical characteristics. Each production line
has a test box and test results are displayed instantly in the production
engineer's office. He can see at once if anything is going wrong.
The results of each machine are recorded. If a Flymo is returned by a
customer, the causes of its failure can be checked against the test results.
One Flymo manager said: 'IDT had the confidence to tackle the job and we
felt we would not be able to write the software ourselves. We have been most
impressed by what they did and the support we have had from them since.'
IDT has won a Department of Trade and Industry Smart award for work on
technology which identifies people, animals and goods. Texas Instruments
produces radio transponders in thin tubes about an inch long with an aerial
at one end and an integrated circuit at the other. If one passes a reader,
it gives a signal which can be identified. So a transponder incorporated in
a badge can show where the wearer is on, say, a factory site. The
transponders can also identify valuable goods such as beer kegs or
industrial overalls.
However, readers can be confused if confronted by several transponders at
the same time and IDT is seeking to overcome the problem of identifying
several transponders at once.
Richard Gibson, who once designed a conference control system for a Gulf
States summit meeting and worked as a diver on an Operation Raleigh
expedition, says IDT's turnover in the first year (1988) was Pounds 13,000
and it has at least trebled each year since. They have paid for their Pounds
20,000 investment without borrowing.
Working for themselves, he says, 'we have independent control of our own
destiny and we get to see the whole picture. The Mountjoy centre is
expensive but prestigious. We have a good deal of synergy with other
organisations here: we have worked with High Force Research.'
Integrated Design Techniques Ltd, Unit 1Q, Mountjoy Research Centre,
Stockton Road, Durham DH1 3SW 091-384-0058.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920111

