FT924-1062

FT  19 DEC 92 / Arts: Traditionally male - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


THE RADIO counter-feminism I detected last week takes a gentler line in
Radio 4's new series, This Happy Breed, in which Jennifer Holden explores
communities traditionally male. Her first probe was a week's trip on board
HMS York, on an exercise that included a simulated action. From captain to
ordinary-seamen, she found a general contentment. With female company
confined usually to a distant home or to current ports of call, with
disciplinary standards those of a boarding school, the ratings think of
themselves as little boys. Only one confessed to discontent.
It is hard to think that fundamentally masculine assemblies will behave in
their normal way when visited by inquisitive ladies. The best we can hope
for is a rough description of what they see. Holden's visit next Wednesday
is to a Benedictine monastery in north Scotland - not all that different,
but safer, and not so much leave.
There are few better judges of this happy breed than Robert Louis Stevenson,
though as we saw in the Saturday Classic Serials on Radio 4, currently short
stories, he did not rate them all notably high. Last week's The Wrong Box
gave us Finlay Welsh, fine as mean, crooked Morris Finsbury. This week, in
The Suicide Club, that canny essay in delayed revelation, Crawford Logan and
James MacPherson as Florizel and Geraldine cunningly, and not quite
ethically, deprived the President (Robin Thomson) of his lethal club. Both
plays used an effective consciously dramatic style under Patrick Rayner's
direction.
An even less admirable hero was Ben in Radio 4's Monday play, Guy Slater's
At Sea on Inya Lake. He was 18 in 1962, son of the British Council's rep in
Burma, and in love with Sally Win Maung. Thirty years later he revisits
Burma to interview the Nobel Peace Prize winner, Daw Aung San Suu Kit.
Sally, now married to a Burmese, matters more to him, and he seduces her in
her married home. It was good to be reminded of the Burmese situation, but
really this was only a sentimental love tale. Slater is a TV producer, so he
likes short, undeveloped scenes and alternates them between periods - not a
good idea for radio, no matter what director Sue Wilson can do.
Who are the heroes in Tom Stoppard's The Real Thing? We have the choice
between a married couple, lovers, characters in good plays, characters in
bad plays or the bad play's author, who is serving time in gaol as the
result of trying to burn the wreath on the Cenotaph. At the centre of events
are dramatist Henry (Clive Francis) and his actress wife Annie (Emily
Richard). They survive a modest marital problem, but retain opposing
attitudes to the leftist wreath-burner.
Such results are actually less important than the argument so sharply set
out in the sympathetic dialogue, in episodes allowed to develop besides
setting the scene. Stoppard's exchanges can convey their meaning at one
remove; we are not really concerned with Swiss holidays, or crudites, or
sixtyish pop music, but we are think we are until we realise we are dealing
with something else. High marks to Gordon House, for both adaptation and
direction of a co-production with the World Service.
Also on Radio 3, on Saturday, we had John Allen's The Last Viking - not
about the Danes joining the EEC but about a Norseman in Greenland, in 1492,
a year as telling as 1962. Ingolf, the last Viking in their colony, is
hammered by the voices of dead Norsemen who had tried to live in the region,
unsympathetic except to the 'little brown buggers', as Ingolf calls the
Inuits. We had a superficial view of the tales of Eirick the Red and the
first sight of Vinland (hence the date's importance), but not much of a
story.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

921219

