FT924-6029

FT  24 NOV 92 / Hussein defends his stance on Gulf war


   By JAMES WHITTINGTON and MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS, UN Correspondent


   AMMAN, NEW YORK


KING HUSSEIN of Jordan yesterday made a blistering attack on the Gulf
states, quashing prospects for a reconciliation between Amman and its
southern Arab neighbours.
In his second speech to the nation in three weeks, the king said he would
never apologise for Jordan's pro-Iraqi sympathies during the Gulf war.
Riyadh, in particular, has sought an overt apology as a condition of
resuming pre-Gulf war relations, which were frozen after Jordan's pro-Iraqi
tilt during the crisis.
Without naming any Gulf states, he said he would seek to defend Arab unity
despite states he described as 'motivated by tribal affiliation and a
high-handed mentality. . . who expect others to come in obeisance,
proclaiming their fealty in praise and gratitude.'
Earlier in the speech the king called for an Arab order 'far removed from
the stains of oil, consumerism and tyranny' of the Gulf states. He also
denounced Kuwait for evicting 300,000 Palestinians after the Gulf war
'although they had spent their entire lives in (Kuwaiti) service.'
In the speech, broadcast to the country from a graduation ceremony of the
Royal Staff and Command College near Amman, the king defended his position
in the Gulf war and, in a direct reference to Iraq, called for 'a national
reconciliation and democracy which would help it to overcome all obstacles'.
He recently dissociated himself in the strongest terms yet from the regime
in Iraq, which he said risked leading the country towards disintegration.
The king - who acknowledged this month he was suffering from cancer -
yesterday reaffirmed his commitment to the peace process despite a year of
limited progress and criticised Arab factions calling for an end to the
talks.
In an indirect reference to the Moslem Brotherhood and Palestinian groups in
Jordan which recently petitioned the king to abandon the talks, he warned
against 'hollow rejectionism.'
The UN Security Council yesterday pre-empted a personal appeal by Mr Tariq
Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister, for a relaxation of sanctions by
reiterating that Baghdad had not yet complied with its obligations under the
Gulf ceasefire, writes Michael Littlejohns, UN Correspondent, in New York.
Mr Andre Erdos of Hungary, council president, read out a litany of lapses by
the Iraqi authorities. His statement, approved by members in prior
consultations, concluded that Iraq 'has up to now only selectively and then
partially complied with the obligations placed upon it by the Council'.
However, the UN body voiced hope that the new meeting attended by a
high-level Iraqi delegation would impress once again on Baghdad 'the
imperative need for full compliance'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921124

