FT924-1048

FT  19 DEC 92 / Bid for fifth national TV channel fails


   By:BY RAYMOND SNODDY


THE PROSPECT of a fifth national television channel for the UK looked remote
last night after the Independent Television Commission rejected the only bid
for the venture from Channel Five Holdings.
The bid - led by Thames Television and backed by several prominent
international media groups - was turned down because of ITC concerns over
projected costs, audience share and revenue projections in the consortium's
business plan, and dissatisfaction over 'the level of investor commitment'.
Mr Richard Dunn, chairman of Channel Five Holdings and chief executive of
Thames Television, said last night: 'I am shocked and dismayed.' He was told
the news at his London office by Mr Kenneth Blythe, secretary of the ITC.
The Thames executive saw his lawyers yesterday. A decision will be taken
next week whether to seek a judicial review.
Among companies expressing interest in investing in the venture were Thames
and its parent Thorn EMI; Time Warner, the world's largest media group;
Capital Cities/ABC, the US network company; Cox, the large US media concern;
Pearson, owner of the Financial Times, and Associated Newspapers, publisher
of the Daily Mail.
The ITC said yesterday that evidence of board commitment covering 'the great
majority' of the Pounds 175m investment had not been received by the
deadline. Thames ceases to be an ITV company at the end of this month after
losing its franchise to Carlton Television.
The consortium surmounted two prime obstacles. The ITC accepted its
proposals for retuning millions of video recorders to eliminate interference
expected from the Channel 5 signal, and approved its programme plans, in
spite of concern they might be too London-oriented.
Thames had a 35 per cent stake in the venture authorised by its own board
and that of its majority shareholder, Thorn EMI.
Time Warner International, a division of the US media company, committed
itself to just 10 per cent because of a divisional investment limit of
Dollars 25m (Pounds 16m). A further 25 per cent stake was to have been
considered by the Time Warner board in the new year.
Pearson said it needed to gain acceptance for its stake from its partners in
British Sky Broadcasting because of an understanding that shareholders would
not invest in competing media ventures.
SG Warburg, the merchant bank, wrote a letter to the ITC saying it had no
doubt the project could be 100 per cent funded.
The commission appears to have disregarded the interest from Pearson, Cox,
Capital Cities/ABC and Associated and the 25 per cent of possible Time
Warner investment.
The ITC decision not to award a licence to the consortium disrupts the
government's hopes embodied in the 1990 Broadcasting Act that a fifth
channel would offer more choice to both viewers and advertisers and provide
more competition for ITV and Channel 4.
The fifth channel would have been able to reach at least 70 per cent of the
UK population.
Channel Five Holdings planned to launch a service in London late next year.
A Manchester service was to have followed. The channel planned to specialise
in local news programmes, popular music and films.
Sir George Russell, chairman of the ITC, said yesterday that Channel 5 was
not dead. There would be a review of options including the readvertising of
the licence.
Another option would be to offer a number of separate city television
licences for truly local television services, although such a step would
require legislation.
The ITC's decision was welcomed by the Consumers' Association last night
which said it was a clear case where 'nothing is actually better than
something'. There was now an opportunity to start a proper debate about what
viewers wanted from Channel 5.
Mr David Elstein, director of programmes at Thames Television, is to become
director of programmes at British Sky Broadcasting, a new post at the
satellite television company.
Lex, Page 22

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921219

