FT921-11944

FT  29 JAN 92 / Palestinians snub Moscow Mideast talks


   By ROGER MATTHEWS and TONY WALKER


   MOSCOW


EFFORTS continued in Moscow last night to draw the Palestinians back into
Middle East peace talks after they boycotted the opening of the third and
multinational stage of the forum.
The Palestinians refused to attend following an argument with the US-Russian
co-sponsors over the representatives nominated by the Palestine Liberation
Organisation.
Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, regretted that the Palestinians had
stayed away but later hinted at a possible compromise that might enable
wider Palestinian participation.
The leader of the Palestinian delegation, Mr Faisal Husseini, announced the
boycott decision just moments before Mr Baker opened the conference. 'We
decided not to go because the Americans did not accept our formula,' Mr
Husseini said after meeting US and Russian officials.
Mr Baker did not mention the Palestinian boycott in his opening remarks. The
US official told delegates the meeting would send a powerful signal that
Arabs and Israelis were unequivocally committed to peace and reconciliation
and he proposed a number of confidence building measures aimed at reducing
regional tensions.
These included assistance with disarmament programmes and the establishment
of 'early warning' mechanisms to prevent conflict. He also mentioned
international assistance for refugees. Some 2m Palestinians are classified
as refugees.
The Moscow Forum has brought together 26 delegations, including those
representing the European Community, China, Turkey, Japan and Gulf and North
African Arab states, for discussions on wider Middle East issues such as
disarmament, economic development, water and the environment.
Syria and Lebanon have boycotted the Moscow talks, saying Israel has not
shown any willingness to negotiate 'land for peace' issues at the bilateral
sessions. The Palestinian withdrawal means that only Jordan and Egypt among
Israel's close neighbours are participating in Moscow.
Holding out the prospect of wider Palestinian participation in the
multilateral talks, Mr Baker said: 'We told the Palestinians we'd be
supportive of representation by diaspora Palestinians in working groups
where that representation was appropriate.'
Mr Yassir Abed Rabbo, a member of the PLO executive committee, said in
Moscow last night that Palestinians were anxious to participate but would
not compromise on the representation issues.
The PLO had insisted that Palestinians from Arab East Jerusalem and the
Palestinian diaspora be included in a joint Jordanian-Palestinian
delegation, but the US-Russian co-sponsors insisted the 'Madrid formula'
should apply to Palestinian representation in Moscow. In Middle East peace
talks in Madrid last October, representation was restricted to Palestinians
from the West Bank and Gaza Strip - Arab land occupied by Israel in the 1967
war.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920129

