FT921-3662

FT  13 MAR 92 / Letter: 'Catch-all' concept of fraud is recipe for long
trials


   From Mr DAVID SELLAR


Sir, In his article 'Catch-all crime to be avoided' (Justinian, March 9), Mr
Blom-Cooper QC made a very valuable contribution to the debate on the
difficulties of prosecuting allegations of complicated financial fraud. In
particular, he warned of the dangers of the introduction into English Law of
a general and therefore imprecise offence of fraud. Might I make certain
comments on his article, as I have practical experience of Company Law in
Scotland and the City and some experience of Scottish Criminal Law.
The fact that there is a general concept of fraud in Scots criminal law has
not avoided some very long trials and, if a trial involving sophisticated
financial practices occurred in a Scottish Court, that court would face the
same difficulties which the English courts have faced. A further point is
that Section 47(2) of the Financial Services 1986 Act, which applies to both
Scotland and England, already creates a general offence of fraud in relation
to 'investments'.
That provision is potentially wider than the English common law concept of
conspiracy to defraud, which was the basis of the Blue Arrow prosecution.
The provision is particularly unfortunate as it provides an offence of
strict liability (punishable by a maximum of seven years' imprisonment)
where a person engages 'in any course of conduct which creates a false or
misleading impression as to the market in, or price or value of, any
investments'.
Section 47(3) provides that it is for the accused to establish not merely
that he was honest, which would be a defence to a common law charge under
either Scots or English Law, but also that he reasonably believed that his
conduct would not create an impression which was false or misleading. The
use of a concept as vague as that of 'value' to create potentially strict
criminal liability seems in principle quite inappropriate and causes
considerable difficulties to practitioners of Company Law in advising
clients as to what conduct is outside Section 47(2).
It is therefore to be hoped that the appropriate criminal authorities in
both jurisdictions, and in particular the Serious Fraud Office in England,
would in applying Section 47(2) show the discretion to which the Court of
Appeal in Jersey referred in the case discussed by Mr Blom-Cooper.
David Sellar,
Dorman Jeffrey & Co,
Madeleine Smith House,
6/7 Blythswood Square,
Glasgow G2 4AD

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920313

