FT922-7336

FT  19 MAY 92 / Swiss cabinet forces pace on EC membership


   By IAN RODGER


   ZURICH


THE SWISS government yesterday confronted the country's traditional
isolationist tendencies head on, deciding to submit shortly a formal
application to join the European Community.
Public opposition to the decision is likely to be widespread and passionate
once the full implications of membership become clear.
The decision has been taken sooner than expected, spurred partly by last
Sunday's referendum which showed a majority in favour of Switzerland joining
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. However, the government
could have difficulty persuading a majority to vote for EC membership. Just
six years ago three-quarters of Swiss voters rejected a proposal to join the
United Nations.
Recent opinion polls have indicated that a slim majority in favour of EC
entry, but about a third are undecided.
Membership would mean sharply reduced subsidies for farmers, open
competition for small merchants and professionals, and an unrestricted flow
of workers and property purchasers from other EC countries.
Subsidy levels on Swiss meat and dairy products are now two to three times
EC levels, and the country's farmers demonstrate frequently to make clear
their opposition to joining the EC or accepting any reduction in aid.
The decision to apply for EC membership reflects the eagerness of a majority
in the federal cabinet that Switzerland should negotiate entry alongside the
other western European applicants - Austria, Sweden, Norway and Finland.
The EC's position on member countries retaining a neutral foreign policy
will be worked out during these negotiations, and the Swiss government wants
to be a participant rather than be forced later to accept the result.
The decision has also been influenced by cabinet concerns about a plebiscite
in the next few months on the European Economic Area. The EEA would bring
together the seven countries of the European Free Trade Association,
including Switzerland, and those of the EC. The cabinet fears that if the
EEA treaty is rejected, Switzerland could not then immediately apply for EC
membership. However, if it applies before the referendum, it can claim the
two were unrelated and simply carry on with EC entry negotiations.
Maastricht's minor role, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920519

