FT923-15413

FT  02 JUL 92 / French troops pave way for Sarajevo aid: Three aircraft land
125 commandos - 1,200 Canadians are on the way


   By JUDY DEMPSEY, LAURA SILBER


   LONDON


FRENCH troops flew in to the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo yesterday to
enhance security at the airport ahead of a big international relief
operation.
Three aircraft carrying a total of 125 battle-hardened commandos landed at
the airport and more French troops will arrive there later this week.
A small United Nations force has had a tenuous hold over the airport since
last Monday, when Serb irregular forces and Serbia's proxy Bosnian army
agreed to end a blockade.
About 1,200 Canadian UN troops with 80 armoured personnel carriers are on
the way to Sarajevo by road from Croatia to assert control over the airport.
But they have been slowed by minefields and skirmishing between local ethnic
militias.
The UN will need to bring in other troops to replace the Canadians, who are
based in Croatia as part of the UN peace-keeping operations in sector west,
a UN-protected region in central Croatia.
A UN spokesman said Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the secretary general, had
asked Egypt and former Soviet republics in the Commonwealth of Independent
States to send forces under UN auspices to help guard the airport,
presumably taking over from the Canadians.
The Egyptians and CIS troops, with the French, would form a three-nation
force of about 1,000. 'The French are certain, but the others have still to
be confirmed,' the UN spokesman said.
The first humanitarian aid has already been distributed in Sarajevo, which
has been under siege by Serb forces for 86 days.
Local inhabitants yesterday had their first taste of fresh water for many
weeks after UN troops delivered 27 tonnes of supplies to three charities
representing Moslems, Serbs and Croats, Bosnia's main ethnic groups.
The aid was delivered by risky visit by President Francois Mitterrand of
France to Sarajevo last Sunday.
But UN officials and locals warned that any upsurge in the fighting could
jeopardise the entire relief operation.
Mr Radovan Karadzic, one of the leaders of the Serb irregulars, promised to
court-martial anyone who broke the ceasefire.
A western diplomat dismissed the statement, issued only to international
newsagencies and not to the Serbian media, as 'a public relations exercise
and not done in good faith'.
The besieged suburb of Dobrinja was yesterday again attacked by Serb
irregulars.
In Belgrade, the Serbian capital, the federal Yugoslav presidency yesterday
named a Californian businessman, Mr Milan Panic, as the new prime minister
of the remnants of the country, which consists just of Serbia and Montenegro
now that other republics have declared independence.
Mr Panic is president of the Los Angeles-based international pharmaceutical
company ICN.
He is expected to try to smooth relations with Washington, which has been a
fierce critic of Serbia.
But US diplomats said it was unlikely Mr Panic could retain his US
citizenship.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920702

