FT924-8016

FT  13 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Trial in Berlin


THE FORMER state of East Germany was a sham. In 1990 this apparent bulwark
of Euro-Stalinism collapsed, as its people discovered they could have
democracy (and D-Marks) without Soviet intervention. Yet it was a sham in
which West Germany, and the western community, acquiesced. Mr Erich
Honecker, the former East German leader, believed that Germany would have to
remain divided, at least for a couple of generations, in the interest of
European and world security. This was not a particularly edifying view. But
it was, in a curious sense, a comforting one - to many Germans, as well as
to the world outside.
Mr Honecker, though rigid, was a man with whom one could do business.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl demonstrated this when he welcomed the communist
leader to Bonn in 1987. Transcripts released since show that, after
lecturing Mr Honecker about the shooting of Germans killed attempting to
flee westwards, Mr Kohl discussed with his guest improvements in tourism and
town twinning.
Mr Honecker is now an 80-year-old pensioner dying of cancer. His trial, on
charges of ordering the manslaughter of some of these unfortunate would-be
escapees, started yesterday in Berlin. The proceedings serve several
different purposes. As Germany struggles to heal the wounds of the past and
meet the challenges of the future, it is necessary that desire for justice
should not become entangled with a search for scapegoats and revenge.
The outcome of the trial will presumably not be influenced by political
pressures. Yet the circumstances under which it is held can hardly be
divorced from current politics. Following the conviction of guards found
guilty of border killings, Mr Honecker is being brought to book partly to
correct the popular conception that the 'small fish' in the former hierarchy
are being punished, while those giving the orders go free. His trial aims to
show that the Germans can deal humanely and properly with a difficult
legacy. It may, in a laudable way, throw fresh light on that history. But it
may also give Mr Honecker the opportunity - the last he will get, before
being summoned to a still worthier celestial tribunal - to deliver his own
version of events. Mr Honecker's defence is not simply that he himself was
carrying out orders (in this case, from Moscow). Rather it is that, by
'defending' - albeit in an unpleasant way - the borders of the late German
Democratic Republic, he was also defending a postwar order which most of the
world found convenient, if not palatable.
To prove his guilt, the prosecutors will have to show that Mr Honecker
specifically broke laws then on the East German statute book by infringing
the wider judicial standards of a civilised society. It will be a demanding
task. The intention is to apportion guilt and responsibility for the past.
The danger is that, if too many uncomfortable questions are left hanging,
the process could poison rather than cleanse the air over reunified Germany.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921113

