FT924-6097

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (9): A flexible workforce - The
transformation of Peugeot at Mulhouse


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


DRAMATIC changes have taken place over the past three years at the Mulhouse
assembly plant of Peugeot, the car maker which is the biggest employer in
Alsace, writes William Dawkins.
In the autumn of 1989, the sprawling suburban plant, which occupies more
than 350 hectares - nearly the same size as the centre of Mulhouse itself -
saw the start of one of the most damaging pay strikes in Peugeot's history.
The dispute spread to Sochaux - Peugeot's other main centre in neighbouring
Franche Comte - inflicting a serious blow on Alsace's traditional reputation
for stable labour relations. Since then, the Mulhouse plant and its 12,500
staff have overcome that trauma to become an industrial success story.
Mulhouse has been among the leaders in the Peugeot group in adapting
Japanese-style production efficiencies, team management and just-in-time
stock control, under its new production director Mr Alain Baldeyrou, who
joined just after the strike.
In recognition of this, Peugeot chose Mulhouse last year for the assembly of
the 106, its latest hatchback, currently rolling off the production lines at
1,400 vehicles per day, the highest output in the plant's 30-year history.
Over the past 10 years, Mulhouse has reduced the period from order to
delivery at the factory gate from more than 10 days to around seven and a
half, and slashed its costs.
Suppliers now deliver at least daily, as a result of which nine component
producers have moved to Alsace to be able to keep to Peugeot's rigorous
delivery schedules.
Inside the plant, says Mr Baldeyrou, 'we've tried to create motivation among
the operating personnel by making office staff understand that they are at
the service of the operators.'
This strategy means that Mulhouse only allows machine or car design changes
to go ahead after consulting machinery operators, a previously unusual
practice in the French car industry. By the same token, its workforce are
encourage to come up with ideas for improvements in car components and
design. The coach-building shop alone has proposed 7,000 improvements over
the past year, says Mr Baldeyrou with satisfaction.
The transformation of Peugeot at Mulhouse is a testament to the flexibility
and dependability of the local workforce, believes Mr Baldeyrou. More than
15 per cent of the workers there are foreign, equally divided between the
European Community and North Africa, with the rest mainly from Alsace.
However, any local employer also has to be wary of competition from more
generous employers across the German frontier, only 10km away, where
salaries are significantly higher, he warns.
Peugeot used to suffer from workers leaving to earn more in Germany, though
Mr Baldeyrou says that problem has receded over the past year as the German
economy runs into difficulties.

The Financial Times


London Page III

921123

