FT923-6513

FT  24 AUG 92 / Leading Article: For richer, for poorer


IN THE three weeks since Imperial Chemical Industries announced its proposal
to divide itself in two, outside opinion has divided itself with equal
neatness. For its admirers, the plan is a radical example of long-term
industrial strategy. For its critics, it is a transparent piece of financial
engineering. Doubtless, the plan contains elements of both. On balance, ICI
perhaps deserves the benefit of the doubt.
The critics' case is simply put. Historically, ICI has lived within its
means, rather than seeking cash from its shareholders. For whatever reason,
this has now changed. The company proposes to raise new equity, reputedly in
excess of Pounds 1bn. But ICI has for decades been bedevilled by a low stock
market rating, chiefly because of the cyclical nature of its bulk chemicals
business. Raising equity capital is thus expensive and inefficient. Drug
companies, on the other hand, enjoy high stock market ratings. The answer is
to split off ICI's drug business, load it with all the group's debt and use
its higher stock market rating to repay the debt cheaply.
Conservative culture
While this doubtless adds to the plan's appeal, it is unlikely to be the
main motive. To begin with, it would be out of character. ICI is a company
which commands respect in many ways. Few of them are financial. The
company's culture is characteristic of its industry: conservative,
inward-looking and preoccupied by technology and markets rather than
short-run financial advantage.
It is in this context that the radical nature of the demerger must be
understood. ICI, like many of its US and European rivals, represents the
classic model of the giant chemical concern. Starting a century ago, the
model progressed from basic alkalis and dyestuffs to absorb successive
technologies such as plastics, agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals. Some of
ICI's rivals have lately shed related businesses - Union Carbide, its
industrial gases; Monsanto, its process controls. None has taken the basic
model and carved it down the middle.
One obvious question is why not. Other chemical companies might reply that
the various parts of their business employ common research and technology.
ICI would reply that this is only partly true. Various biological and
genetic techniques apply across the fields of pharmaceuticals, seeds and
agrochemicals. They will be duly grouped together. There are links between
inorganic chemicals and polymers and between paints and explosives, which
will form the other group. Between the two groups there is little in common.
The same argument could be reversed: that no single individual in ICI fully
understands the business as a whole, from the genetic engineering of plant
seeds at one extreme, to the operation of giant ethylene crackers at the
other. ICI is in that sense a diversified conglomerate. Hanson or BTR could
doubtless run it after a fashion. ICI's own managers may lack the necessary
skills. If so, the burden of proof lies the other way: if ICI is too big to
handle, why should it stay in one piece?
Exposure to the cycle
One traditional answer would be that the different parts of the business
provide stability through the economic cycle. Bulk chemicals go from boom to
bust and back again. Agrochemicals work on a cycle of their own.
Pharmaceuticals have no perceptible cycle at all. Although this is in fact a
fair description of what has happened within ICI over the past 20 years, it
may not be relevant. Other industries - paper and pulp, for instance -
expose themselves fully to the vagaries of the cycle. The element of
stability is provided by the capital markets and the banking system.
It may not be a coincidence that the two clearest examples of outright
demerger in the UK over the past decade - Bowater and Courtaulds - have
proved successful. Bowater US remains a large paper company, while Bowater
UK is a significant force in packaging. Courtaulds Textiles has held its
own, while the remainder is a successful chemicals company. Perhaps there
really is something liberating about allowing managers to concentrate on a
business which they can comprehend. In ICI's case, it at least seems worth a
try.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920824

