FT923-6634

FT  22 AUG 92 / Finance & the Family: Rough ride for employee share plans


   By BARBARA ELLIS


EMPLOYEE share schemes have hit one of the most turbulent patches in their
12-year history, with high drop-out rates as recession and company
restructurings sap investor confidence or force withdrawals. But the schemes
continue to offer some of the highest interest rates available as well as
one of the safer ways of gambling on stock market recovery.
More than 1,900 companies run share/save schemes in association with
building societies or National Savings. Employees agree to save between
Pounds 30 and Pounds 250 a month via a five- or seven-year save-as-you-earn
(SAYE) contract. At the end of the term, a tax-free bonus is added to the
amount saved and employees can either take the cash or use it to buy shares
in the company at a price fixed when the SAYE contract began - up to 20 per
cent below the market price at the time.
The tax-free bonus rates are adjusted periodically by the Treasury. In
October, the five-year bonus drops to 12 1/2 months' payments while the
seven-year bonus goes down to 25 months. This will give a tax-free return
equivalent to 7.49 per cent over five years or 7.83 per cent over seven.
But savers in schemes started within the past two years have locked-in rates
as high as 9.2 per cent over seven years or 8.9 per cent over five.
In some cases, the savings side of the scheme is all that remains after
share price movements destroy the value of the fixed-price options. For
instance, a BICC scheme maturing this month after five years has a
fixed-price option of 284.8p against the market price of 239p.
'Those 1,500 people are under water - they will all be taking the money,'
said Bob Birkhead, manager of corporate business administration at the
Halifax building society, which operates schemes for 350 companies. He added
that the society recently had increased the drop-out rate in its share/saver
computer model from 5 per cent to 7 per cent annually. But he noted that
average savings also were rising, from between Pounds 30 and Pounds 35 a
month to almost Pounds 40.
One of the most dramatic slides in share price has been at Asda, where
employees with share/save contracts hold options priced at 133p, 108p, 84p
and 65p against the recent market price of 24 1/2 p.
The Yorkshire building society, which operates schemes for 182 companies,
has noticed a 40 per cent drop-out rate over the past year. 'If people want
the money, saving is the first thing to go,' said corporate business manager
Maggie Whitmore. Savers who quit during the first year of a scheme receive a
refund of contributions only but interest of 5 per cent, tax-free, is added
in years two to five.
On taking a random sample of schemes maturing soon, Whitmore said she was
surprised by the number still in profit. Silentnight company schemes
maturing this month allow employees to buy shares, now 198p, at 104p and 27p
but only 68 people completed the savings terms out of 301 who started.
How share/save participants fare in mergers depends largely on the rules of
the scheme and the companies involved. Option-holders may have the
frustration of seeing the share price propelled to great heights by takeover
talk, yet still miss out. Like people leaving the company, they may be
forced to exercise their options early, within six months of the merger or
not at all, using only the savings already built-up. If this happens during
the first three years of the a scheme, there may also be an income tax bill.
On the bright side, transfers to a predator company's share/save scheme are
sometimes possible without penalty.
In demergers, which are less common, treatment of employees can be subject
to the company's negotiating skills and, perhaps, generosity. ICI is to meet
the building societies operating its share/save scheme in the next few weeks
to discuss terms for the 20,000 employees holding contracts if the company's
proposed demerger goes ahead. Options on ICI shares are fixed at prices of
Pounds 13.81, Pounds 8.91, Pounds 8.14 and Pounds 11.83 compared with the
recent market price of Pounds 11.05.
Employees in recent demergers have had contrasting experiences. BAT
employees belonging to the demerged Argos and Wiggins Teape Appleton
divisions were 'hard done by' according to Mark Chamberlain, head of
personnel services at BAT Industries, who explained that they had been hit
three ways: losing out by having to exercise their options early on a
reduced number of shares; missing compensation for the lower intrinsic value
of the BAT share caused by the demerger; and then paying extra income tax.
People who stayed with BAT Industries were also 'very disappointed indeed,'
Chamberlain added. Barred from exercising their options early, they saw the
market price of the shares drop to reflect the demerger without any
corresponding adjustment to the option price. The BAT price dropped from
816p in September 1989 to 738p after the Argos demerger in April 1990, and
to 650p after the Wiggins Teape demerger. The BAT share/save option prices
had been fixed at 647p, 393p 631p and 405p in the years back to 1986.
Despite the disappointment, Chamberlain said there had been no mass
defections from the scheme. A further 7,000 employees had joined schemes
launched since the demerger with options at 430p, 524p and 532p.
He explained that the company had wished to adjust the pre-1990 option
prices to take account of the demerger but had failed to win over the Inland
Revenue and John Major, then the chancellor of the exchequer. Officials also
refused to allow BAT employees demerging to Argos and Wiggins Teape to
switch their savings into the schemes to be launched by those companies.
Employees of Racal were more fortunate in last year's demerger of Vodafone.
About 8,000 of them, holding options at prices ranging from 80p to 176p,
were given the right to exercise them early. This meant they were able to
buy Racal Electronics, then worth 229p, in time to qualify for free shares
in Vodafone (57 for 100).
Racal helped to arrange loans for employees so that they could buy the
amount of shares they would have received if the savings contract had run
its full term. The company also compensated employees for any extra income
tax charged as a result.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920822

