FT921-14103

FT  17 JAN 92 / World Stock Markets: European leisure sector's high-profile
trio - Share price prospects


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER, Leisure Industries Correspondent


A GROUP of 16 disgruntled French building contractors alleged this week that
Euro Disney, the theme park operator, owed them FFr850m (Dollars 155m) in
unpaid bills.
Euro Disney shares shrugged off the allegation to close last night at
FFr147.5, within squeaking distance of their all-time high of FFr153 on
January 3. Over the past five months Euro Disney has outperformed the French
market by about 20 per cent.
Analysts disagree on the commercial prospects for the theme park, which is
due to open on a 5,000-acre complex east of Paris on April 12. There is
agreement on one point, however: the time to take profits is fast
approaching.
Analysts think the hype leading up to the opening of Euro Disney could lift
the shares still further, but Ms Anita Hibbert of Smith New Court points out
that the stock is on a prospective price-earnings ratio of close to 100.
Some analysts worry that if there are early organisational or teething
problems, this could set the park back. They also fret about the effects of
the cold Parisian winter and unreliable summer.
Ms Hibbert is among the Euro Disney optimists, in spite of having visited
the site in December when visibility was only 20 yards. She argues that the
novelty factor will boost winter attendances, if only in the first year.
Investors interested in a more established profits record might want to look
at PolyGram, the London-based music company whose shares are traded in
Amsterdam and New York.
Only 20 per cent of the shares are publicly traded, the rest being owned by
Philips, the Dutch electronics giant. There has been speculation that
Philips might want to reduce its holding, but given that PolyGram is one of
the troubled group's star performers, analysts do not expect that to happen
soon.
PolyGram - whose artists include Luciano Pavarotti, Sting, Dire Straits and
U2 - reported a 24.6 per cent rise in net income to Fl 147m in the first
half of last year, in spite of the economic downturn in the UK and the US.
The company has benefited from the popularity of high-margin compact discs,
which accounted for 48 per cent of unit sales in 1990, compared to 37 per
cent for the industry.
In spite of vigorous criticism from consumer organisations, music companies
have been able to keep European CD prices well above those for vinyl records
and cassette tapes. Worldwide unit sales of CDs rose 28 per cent to 770m in
1990. In the same year, worldwide sales of cassettes fell for the first time
since their introduction in 1965, dropping 6 per cent in unit terms to
1.45bn.
Following the recent decision of retailers, such as W H Smith in the UK, to
stop selling records, the relentless rise of CDs appears to be good news for
companies like PolyGram. Mr Bert Jansen of Paribas Capital Markets cautions,
however, that the rate of growth of CDs will probably slow with increasing
market penetration in the developed countries.
PolyGram is heavily involved in the development of Digital Compact Cassette
(DCC), a Philips invention which looks like an ordinary cassette but has a
sound quality equivalent to CD. Prospects for DCC look reasonably good, but
they are unlikely to grow at the same rate as CDs. On a prospective multiple
of 15, the shares are trading at a premium to the Dutch market average of 9,
Mr Jansen says, and he would only recommend buying them below Fl 38. The
shares closed yesterday at Fl40.10.
Turning back to France, and its hotel group, Accor, Ms Dominique Carrel of
Paribas says that the acquisition of Wagons-Lits, the Belgian tourism and
travel group, will lead to short-term weakness, since the early days will
probably require substantial restructuring. However, there is scope for
management improvement at Wagon-Lits and the longer-term outlook is seen as
good.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

920117

