FT923-10682

FT  29 JUL 92 / UN's harsh dilemma in Somalia: Millions may die unless the
UN deploys guards to protect relief convoys


   By JULIAN OZANNE


THE United Nations Security Council has approved an emergency relief airlift
for millions of starving Somalis cut off by civil war from food and
medicine.
The Security Council resolution, passed late on Monday, suggests that the UN
might have to deploy at least 500 UN guards in Somalia without the agreement
of the country's dissolute and obstructive warring factions in order to
ensure the success of a long-term relief effort.
Both measures are vital to saving 4.5m hungry people and trying to bring
some order to a country which has descended into a desperate spiral of
anarchy, looting, famine and self-destruction. Aid workers in Mogadishu, the
shell-blasted Somali capital, say at least a third of those in need of help
are badly malnourished.
The UN resolution marks a turning point in a disaster which has so far
received little attention from an international community obsessed by
Yugoslavia. Efforts by the UN, Red Cross and other agencies to distribute
food have become bogged down in the nightmare of Somalia's civil war.
Lengthy negotiations between rival Somali warlords have to be undertaken
before food shipments are distributed to the various fiefdoms they control.
Each shipment has to be accompanied by scores of ragtag gunmen in macabre
'Mad-Max' vehicles employed by aid agencies. But, in a starving country
where almost everybody, even six year-olds, carry machine guns, bazookas and
rocket-propelled grenades, food convoys are often diverted or ransacked.
Aid workers say they are in a Catch-22 situation. It is impossible to ease
the security situation without much greater distribution of food. However it
is difficult to distribute food in the trigger-happy situation. Two weeks
ago a UN food convoy was machine-gunned outside UN headquarters in
Mogadishu, and a guard was killed.
In such an appalling security situation UN officials in Mogadishu say it
will be impossible to distribute sufficient food without the 500 UN guards.
Gen Mohamed Farrar Aideed, the intransigent, power-hungry warlord who
controls south Mogadishu, including the international airport and port, has
thus far refused to allow the 500 UN guards into the rubble-strewn city. But
talks were taking place yesterday between UN officials and Gen Aideed on the
possible deployment of an international guard force.
A team of 50 blue-bereted military observers who arrived last week to
monitor the shaky ceasefire have also yet to be deployed due to logistical
problems and obstruction from Gen Aideed and Mr Ali Mahdi Mohamed who
controls the north of the city.
Furthermore, support for the UN military force from the world community has
so far been negligible. Even limited military intervention, to secure
Mogadishu's international airport for relief flights, has failed to
materialise. The UN is using a private dirt airstrip 50kms south of the
city.
The UN resolution is a victory for Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary
general, and his special representative in Somalia, Ambassador Mohamed
Sahnoun. They pressed the Security Council for urgent action and implied
that the world's failure to respond to Somalia's plight was rooted in
racism.
Western support for UN military intervention now appears to be developing.
On Monday the White House urged the UN to move quickly to deploy guards and
offered to contribute generously to fund these efforts.
US Senator Nancy Kassenbaum has also called for the UN force to be deployed
urgently without waiting for Gen Aideed's approval.
However, according to Mr David Bassiouni, UN co-ordinator for humanitarian
assistance to Somalia, military intervention without agreement between the
two sides could be dangerous. 'We might find ourselves trying to take over
the country and fight our way through and then the humanitarian operation
would become secondary,' he said.
The UN thus faces a dilemma. Easing the situation is Mogadishu is critical
to the humanitarian effort because the city must become the base for food
distribution by road, the only really viable long-term means of getting
food, medicine, seeds and tools across the country. Mogadishu has also
become the home to hundreds of thousands of displaced people arriving in the
city searching for food.
Furthermore, resolving the war between Ali Mahdi and Gen Aideed and the two
sub-clans fighting in the city is a necessary first step to nationwide
political reconciliation between the numerous armed factions and clans which
control other parts of the country.
However, negotiations between the two sides in Mogadishu are not making any
headway in the face of entrenched positions, caused not by politics,
religion or ethnicity but by hunger for power and mutual mistrust. The
current ceasefire between the two sides is observed more in the breach.
Although Mogadishu is quieter than it has been in the past 20 months,
sporadic gunfire continues to echo throughout the city.
After months of inaction when medical and food relief to Somalia depended on
valiant efforts by agencies such as the Red Cross, the UN has now
established a substantial, if precarious, operation in Somalia. Its presence
has helped to ease both the humanitarian and the security situation.
However, the UN operation remains fragile and without the UN guards talk of
evacuation is common. Rumours continue to sweep Mogadishu that the warring
factions are stockpiling fuel, food and ammunition in preparation for
another round of full-scale fighting. A fresh eruption would almost
certainly force the UN to leave Mogadishu and that would spell disaster for
millions.
Editorial comment, Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920729

