FT923-10830

FT  28 JUL 92 / Time runs out for the patience principle: Yesterday's
interest rate cut in Japan has failed to dispel the gloom surrounding its
economy


   By ROBERT THOMSON


The reduction in the Bank of Japan's official discount rate on Monday fits
into a well established, but unfortunate, pattern. The central bank has cut
the official discount rate five times since last July. Each time the cut has
convinced investors that the Japanese economy has a serious ailment; but has
not done enough to convince them that the authorities know a remedy.
Once again, a cut combined this time with a convincing election win by the
ruling Liberal Democratic Party, has failed to inspire the Tokyo stock
market, which closed at a six-year low yesterday and looks ready to plumb
new depths.
Meanwhile, the LDP, having called an emergency meeting on Friday to discuss
the ailing market, has begun to ask what more can be done to stimulate the
economy and the stock market. Koichi Kato, the chief cabinet secretary,
merely explained yesterday that Japanese 'must have patience'.
Japanese economic policy over the past two years has been based on the
patience principle. There was a general recognition that the speculative
financial bubble of the late 1980s should be punctured, but a vague hope
among industrial companies and financial institutions that the adjustment
would be swift and its effects on the real economy minor. Neither assumption
looks plausible.
Recovery was to have come this summer, according to government officials,
and then it was the autumn. But Japanese industry and, more significantly,
the Bank of Japan, are conceding that an upturn may not arrive until early
next year. Of more concern to the stock market is the growing fear that a
true recession may be starting.
Japanese companies had presumed that profits this year would increase after
a tough 1991. While some companies, such as Brother Industries, the office
equipment maker, have announced plans to cut product lines, and securities
houses are reducing their staff intake, most companies expected they could
avoid sacking staff and scaling down their businesses.
Behind the new-found weakness in the stock market - and the Bank of Japan's
recent response - is the realisation by companies that they will have to
downgrade profit forecasts. There is also a sense within Japanese industry
that profits next year may also be weak, a feeling that prompted the Japan
Employers Federation to demand yesterday that the central bank cut the ODR
again, and quickly.
In addition to belated recognition of the weakness of the corporate sector,
the Bank of Japan has also taken time to recognise the nature of the
timebomb left by the the excesses of the 1980s. The banking system is
carrying problem loans unofficially estimated to be between Y42,000bn
(Pounds 173bn) and Y56,000bn, while bankruptcies doubled last year.
These figures do not convey the scale of the problem faced by banks forced
to support leading clients who invested unwisely in property development or
played and lost on the stock market. Banks have propped up clients in the
hope that they would soon benefit from economic recovery and be able to
trade themselves out of trouble.
However, the recovery has not yet arrived. Several large companies are
straining the banks' patience. Tobishima Corporation, for example, the
contractor turned developer, which owes about Dollars 7bn, has negotiated a
restructuring packaged with its main bank, Fuji Bank.
But each time the stock market falls a notch lower, Japanese banks' reserves
of unrealised gains, an important cushion against bad debts, are eroded. Mr
Yasushi Mieno, governor of the central bank, has now said that financial
institutions must assess on a 'case-by-case basis' whether a company should
be assisted, implying for the first time that large failures would be
tolerated.
The central bank also quietly admitted last week that it had made a second
miscalculation. Japanese consumers were to have provided an engine to revive
the economy, by generating increased demand.
But in a quarterly report released last week, the bank noted that the 'tempo
of personal consumption growth is decelerating'. The result of this
unexpected trend is that 'it is difficult to find any strong leading sector
which could boost the economy'.
As if to emphasise this point, the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry yesterday released figures showing sales at large retail stores in
June were down 4.3 per cent on the same month last year.
The net result is that Japan's economic growth will not meet the target of
3.5 per cent for the year to the end of March 1993 and, if most private
forcasts are correct, will grow by only 2 per cent this year and not much
more next year. Meanwhile, Japanese companies, facing slow domestic sales,
are increasingly under pressure to increase exports, a trend that will add
to the record Dollars 49bn trade surplus in the first half this year.
These ever gloomier prospects mean that stock market prices are likely to
remain under pressure. Mrs Mineko Sasaki-Smith, chief economist at Credit
Suisse Japan, said that, bearing in mind the downward revisions, the market
'could overshoot' to 14,000 and recover to 14,500: 'People who believe in
international convergence of price to earnings ratios say it will fall to
12,000 or even 9,000, but I don't think this is the case.'
The likelihood of a continuing drop in stock prices, and the certainty of a
decline in corporate earnings mean that the Bank of Japan's work is far from
done. Mr Mieno suggested yet again yesterday that the ODR had been cut for
the last time, but before the end of the year the bank may be forced to move
again.
Lingering faith in a recovery of stock prices has itself slowed the
government and corporate response to the market's continuing decline. Albeit
belatedly, the government is now front-loading public works spending this
fiscal year and, in the next month, will finalise a supplementary budget
that will increase public works spending by between an estimated Y5,000bn
and Y8,000bn.
The precise size of the package will be determined by austerity-minded
bureaucrats at the finance ministry, who are leaning towards a Y5,000bn
package, while the LDP wants Y8,000bn. Having comfortably won an election in
the upper house of the Diet, the LDP has an opportunity to convince the
finance ministry to finalise quickly the supplementary budget soon.
Apart from the budget, however, the LDP is at a loss. At an emergency
meeting on Friday night, party and government leaders suggested that
insurance companies increase their stock purchases or that the government
establish a new stock purchase fund. Neither option looks particularly
effective.
Japan's economy is adrift. Policy-makers seem unable to reverse the tide of
pessimism. For this their previous mistakes bear most of the blame. The
financial markets' reaction to the latest monetary manoeuvre not only
confirms the depth of the pessimism, but will also tend to increase it.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920728

