FT921-15196

FT  11 JAN 92 / Books: An accidental man - From Nabokov to Tolkien, the FT
critics review the most interesting of the recently published volumes of
biography and memoir


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


PATRICK GORDON WALKER: POLITICAL DIARIES 1932-1971 edited by Robert Pearce
The Historians' Press Pounds 20, 335 pages
'I DON'T yet know how I'll set about things in Parliament. But clearly
there's no point in going into Parliament unless you have the intention of
becoming Prime Minister. Clearly this is what I must go for. I think I'll
lie low for 5 years or so and get myself well in with the Party.'
So wrote Patrick Gordon Walker in his diary on August 8, 1945. Gordon Walker
had already been lucky and unlucky with by-elections. He was the official
Labour candidate in the famous Oxford by-election in October 1938, but was
forced to withdraw when the Party switched to a popular front candidate, AD
Lindsay, the Master of Balliol. Lindsay lost to the Conservative, Quintin
Hogg.
A former Oxford don, Gordon Walker spent the war working for the German
service of the BBC. He did not contest the general election of July 1945,
but shortly after the result was announced the Labour Member for Smethwick
was killed in a car crash. Gordon Walker stood in the by-election and sailed
in. In just over a year he was parliamentary private secretary to Herbert
Morrison, the deputy prime minister. Within five years he was Commonwealth
Secretary. So much for lying low.
GW, as he calls himself in these diaries, went on to become Foreign
Secretary in Harold Wilson's first government. But there were accidents
along the way, most of them to do with the Commonwealth and by-elections. He
had been instrumental in devising the formula which kept India in the
Commonwealth, but was perhaps best known for his unavoidable involvement in
the Seretse Khama affair.
As a junior minister in the Attlee government, Gordon Walker had ruled that
Seretse should not become chief of his tribe in Bechuanaland once he married
a white woman. It was a horrendously difficult decision. Allowing a mixed
marriage at that level could have upset the entire balance of power in
southern Africa; not allowing it made Gordon Walker look illiberal and
opposed to the multi-racial Commonwealth he was trying to promote.
GW got the worst of both worlds. The Labour left condemned him; much of the
rest of the electorate thought that he was too pro-black in his advocacy of
the Commonwealth and relatively permissive attitude towards immigration. He
records that he told Hugh Gaitskell as early as September 1962 that he might
lose his Smethwick seat as a result. In October 1964 he duly did, just as he
was being appointed Foreign Secretary.
Prime Minister Wilson kept him on and secured an apparently safe by-election
for him in Leyton; Gordon Walker lost that as well, though he won the seat
in the subsequent general election. That was the effective end of his
political career.
His diaries are spasmodic and only occasionally illuminating, but this book
contains an excellent 50 page introductory biographical sketch by Robert
Pearce - a model of its kind. Gordon Walker died in 1980. As Pearce notes,
that was just too early for him to have joined the Social Democratic Party.
GW had already written a critical obituary of Harold Wilson for the Daily
Telegraph in 1969.
At least one diary entry is worth cherishing to show how little Britain has
changed. 'June 20, 1934: The British Government voted in a minority of 4
govts in the International Labour Organisation against the draft convention
of a 40-hour week. And in a minority of one against the amendments against
night work for women.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920111

