FT923-11051

FT  27 JUL 92 / Treasury defends its reputation in a hostile environment


   By PETER MARSH


THE TREASURY, the govern-ment's most powerful department, is facing growing
criticism from outsiders who link it with Britain's economic problems.
As the arm of government in charge of economic policy and public spending,
the Treasury has always had enemies. But as the recession has dragged on,
its popularity has sunk because of complaints that it has made policy
mistakes which have exacerbated the economic decline.
A senior Treasury official said: 'The environment is very hostile. Everyone
is saying we've messed up forecasts, messed up public spending and messed up
interest-rate decisions.'
But no one can complain that Treasury officials are failing to earn their
keep. They have been key figures in efforts to ease the strains on sterling
through methods such as intervention on currency markets to support the
pound by the Bank of England. They are working hard on efforts to keep down
public spending and so stop public borrowing from soaring.
But in the absence of convincing signs that the recession is over, such
intellectual efforts have won the department few new friends. Professor
Patrick Minford, a monetarist economist at Liverpool University, complains
that the Treasury 'has lost its grasp' of economic principles, while Mr
Christopher Haskins, chairman of food manufacturer Northern Foods, says it
is out of touch with the real world.
Treasury officials have an instant defence. Since they merely advise
ministers, politicians must carry the can for mistakes, just as they take
credit when things go well. 'We reflect back to politicians what they want
to hear,' says one. 'If I was to die tomorrow, someone else would replace me
and do just as good a job.'
Partly because of the weight of criticisms, Treasury officials, supported by
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, have instituted some modest changes. For
example, the Treasury has invited economists from leading UK companies to
share their thoughts on the way out of the recession, a step intended to
improve on the Treasury's poor forecasting record. As part of the broad
effort to bring in more ideas from the outside world, Mr Alan Budd, the
Treasury's thoughtful chief economic adviser, is increasing the amount of
time he puts into making contact with leading City economists.
In some ways, Treasury officials do not have it easy. They work very long
hours and are not well paid by private-sector standards. Since few have
expense accounts, they can rarely offer outsiders a lunch which is anything
more lavish than sandwiches. In after-work drinking sessions on overseas
trips, Treasury men normally rely on their colleagues from the Bank of
England, who have more generous expenses, to pick up the bar bills.
But being a Treasury official also has its advantages. Treasury mandarins
are at the centre of a power structure about which, because of Whitehall's
secretive ways, little is known. One insider says: 'You can imagine how
great it feels. They are doing all these important things that hardly anyone
knows about. And because the outside world has no way of checking, they can
pretend their work is even more important than it is.'
Last week week - amid the efforts to tackle the ailing economy - two of the
Treasury's top officials had their efforts rewarded by being promoted. Mr
Nick Monck, the public-spending chief, was told he will be the next
permanent secretary at the Department of Employment. He will be replaced by
Mr Andrew Turnbull, a rising star who is currently in charge of monetary
policy.
More than anything, officials are praying for a respite from the poor
economic news. Not only would this get the critics off their backs, it would
give them more time for serious policymaking, such as dreaming up new tax
structures.
'The past couple of years have been firefighting,' said one. 'I'll be glad
when the recession is over.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920727

