FT923-11062

FT  27 JUL 92 / Arab states maintain low profile over confrontation


   By TONY WALKER


ARAB states have kept relatively quiet over the drama being played out
between Iraq, the United Nations and the western powers, with Egypt
virtually alone in commenting on the crisis.
In Damascus on Friday, Mr Amr Moussa, Egypt's foreign minister, expressed
the hope that the issue could be resolved peacefully and that 'we shall not
be in need of any escalation'.
With the Arab world deeply divided following Iraq's 1990 seizure of Kuwait,
it was most unlikely that a common front would have emerged in any case to
oppose western military action.
But there is also little doubt that such states as Egypt and Syria, which
contributed ground forces to the removal of Iraq from Kuwait, had little
enthusiasm for further conflict.
In March this year, when a similar crisis arose over Iraq's tardiness in
complying with the Gulf war ceasefire resolution, both Egypt and Syria came
out against the use of force.
Not much has changed since then, except that the moderate Arabs, including
the Gulf states, will have been discomfited by signs that the Iraqi
president is again flexing his muscles, and heaping scorn on pro-western
Arab leaders.
Gulf rulers, namely those of Kuwait and perhaps Saudi Arabia, are unlikely
to have been as squeamish, however, about some form of military strike
against Iraq as their Egyptian and Syrian brethren.
But they wanted to be sure that if action had been taken it would have
amounted to something more than a slap on the wrist for Mr Saddam. The
spectacle of the Iraqi leader grinning in his Baghdad citadel having
survived another allied strike would not have brought much comfort to
jittery Gulf rulers.
For the future, the Saudis, for one, would probably prefer the US and its
allies to step up their efforts to destabilise the Iraqi regime rather than
continue planning high-profile bombing raids that would yield little
dividend.
The renewed criticism over the weekend of Saudi oil policy by Mr Abdel Razak
al-Hiti, Iraq's oil minister, will have added to the irritation.
He charged that the kingdom was squandering millions of dollars a day by
over-producing.
The Iraqi official claimed that Saudi Arabia was losing Dollars 3m a day by
'deliberately de-stabilising the international oil market.' Kuwaiti
overproduction and its depressing effects on oil prices was one of the
pretexts cited by Iraq for the August 1990 invasion.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920727

