FT921-15266

FT  11 JAN 92 / UK Company News: MCC's 'Noddy' publisher placed into
administration


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MACDONALD Publishing, the Maxwell Communication Corporation's loss-making UK
publishing operation, was yesterday placed into administration by the High
Court.
The company, which publishes the novels of Catherine Cookson and the Noddy
books of Enid Blyton, owed its parent company MCC, itself in administration,
Pounds 33m.
The flow of financial support from MCC has been drying up and there were
fears that third party creditors would seek petitions to wind up the
company.
A considerable number of significant publishing groups are interested in
buying Macdonald.
Mr Anthony Lomas, an administrator from Price Waterhouse said yesterday: 'I
have got a lot of interest from big players. There is real interest being
expressed either for the whole of the business or parts of the business.'
Mr Lomas said the potential purchasers included Simon & Schuster, Headline
and Orion Books. Orion is the new company set up by Mr Anthony Cheetham who
was forced out of Random House in November. The company has already taken
over Weidenfeld.
The administrator began talking to possible buyers last night and will be
seeking competitive bids either for the whole business or the constituent
parts.
For the time being Macdonald will continue operating as normally as
possible, although it is unlikely that authors would be interested in
signing new contracts at the moment.
'I have some money to oil the wheels and there is enough to fund the company
at least until the end of the month,' said Mr Lomas before going off to
address both the Macdonald staff and directors.
The publishing company is estimated to have been making losses of more than
Pounds 1m on sales of more than Pounds 20m. Macdonald publishes across a
wide range of hardback and paperback books everything from literary
biographies to mass-market thrillers. Its imprints include Sphere, Abacus,
Cardinal and Futura. The company employs 283 staff but jobs are believed to
be secure at least for the time being.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920111

