FT921-548

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: The city that lost its way - But is
Britain's capital facing a crisis? Ian Hargreaves finds strong disagreement
on what should be done


   By IAN HARGREAVES


LONDON IS in crisis. That is what it says on the cover of a new book by
architect Sir Richard Rogers and Mark Fisher, the Labour Party's spokesman
on the arts. They are not alone in their view.
'The quality of life is improving for the majority of people, but there's a
minority for whom it's going the other way. You have two Londons, side by
side. It breeds discontent.' So says Sir Peter Imbert, commissioner of the
Metropolitan Police, whose officers patrol the cardboard cities of Waterloo,
Charing Cross, Lincoln's Inn Fields and a score of other spots where
London's homeless shelter.
Or, as the London Evening Standard's planning correspondent put it the other
day, Londoners must endure 'transport crumbling and squalid; dereliction and
destitution stare them in the face.' A London Weekend Television survey
conducted in the autumn of 1990 - before the recession set in - found that
59 per cent of Londoners thought the quality of life had got worse in the
past 10 years. Almost half said that, given the chance, they would live
somewhere else.
Perhaps it was always so. London has inspired elation, frustration and
despair in broadly equal quantities. On Westminster Bridge, Wordsworth's
spirits soared. As TS Eliot watched commuters flow over London Bridge, he
wondered that death had undone so many. William Blake, driven by poverty and
visions, walked 'where the chartered Thames doth flow' to 'mark in every
human face, marks of weakness marks of woe.' Today, his words are inscribed
on a concrete paving slab on the south bank of the river, opposite the
Strand, where the poet made his last London home.
But when James Boswell romanced about his country seat in Scotland, Dr
Samuel Johnson instructed him, famously, that the man tired of London is
tired of life. Nomadic Henry James detested the stench and the fogs but
experienced in London 'the most possible form of life.'
Perhaps it is just that Londoners always have required their city to
accommodate the spectrum of their emotional life and political
sensibilities. And yet, as London entered the 1990s there was a pervasive
anxiety, reflected in a renewed outbreak of schism about the way it is
governed and not helped by the longest recession since the war, the fruits
of which have included a spectacular property crash and a series of
financial scandals which have damaged the engine of the city's prosperity.
The most famous London novel of the past decade, Martin Amis's London
Fields, is set in a wasteland of gridlocked traffic, mechanical sex and
barbarian moral values. If Amis is Tom Wolfe without the compensating
exuberance, so London sometimes seems to have New York's problems without
its zest for life.
When statisticians try to plot these anxieties, they come up with items like
these: reported crime up 11 per cent last year, with mugging up a fifth;
registered homeless more than doubled in a decade; 250,000 properties
'difficult to let' because they are in such poor condition; a clogged road
system, cutting central London traffic speeds by 15 per cent in little more
than a decade; and public transport underperforming on every measure.
There are those who think the problems can be blamed on Margaret Thatcher's
heroic anti-planning, anti-interventionist political culture, the monument
to which is east London's Docklands, developed luxuriantly in a boom but now
mauled by recession and blighted by elementary failures of infrastructure
provision. It was also Thatcher who, in 1986, abolished the Greater London
Council, a bragging citadel of town hall socialism; not even the Labour
Party campaigns for its return.
The Rogers-Fisher book calls for a strong planning regime for the capital,
along Parisian lines. Everyone, it seems, prefers Paris. Europe, Rogers
argues, is again becoming a continent of city states and London, the only
capital without a metropolitan government, is mired in mediocrity.
But it is not only from the left that a torrent of tracts has poured. From
the London Chamber of Commerce has come a series of thick, buff books
worrying about the collapse of the capital's manufacturing base, its patchy
record on training and its shell-shocked public education system.
'People haven't thought enough about the challenge to London from other
European cities,' says Jacqueline Ginnane, the chamber's chief economist,
'but there is no doubt that the lack of government is weakening London's
identity.'
Probably the most ambitious attempt to gauge the capital's difficulties is
the London: World City report published last year by the London Planning
Advisory Committee, a rump agency with just 22 staff based in Romford - a
dowdy borough on the city's eastern fringe. The committee is all that
remains of the GLC planning juggernaut and is run on a tight leash by
London's 33 borough councils, Its report seeks to rank London's performance
against Paris, New York, Tokyo, Frankfurt and Berlin.
Although the study notes the capital's formidable strength in financial
services, telecommunications and air transport, as well as its sometimes
under-re - only Berlin has more parkland - it concludes gingerly that
'somewhere along the line, London appears to have lost direction and a sense
of its worth.'
The committee's 'agenda for action' includes better links between business
and education; dramatically-improved transport; more co-ordinated training;
more housing for the lower paid; and a promotional agency for London,
designed, no doubt, to avoid revisiting the sort of debacle which made
Manchester Britain's bidder to host the Olympics. But the proposal that dare
not quite speak its name is concealed in this sentence: 'Current
institutional arrangements are unsatisfactory and the world city initiatives
of other cities all indicate that a serious review of, and some changes to,
current arrangements are desirable.'
This is a masterpiece of draftsmanship from a body with members including
high-Tory Westminster, still-loony-after-all-these-years Lambeth, the rich
but archaic City of London Corporation, sensible Labour boroughs, and
resolutely suburban Tory strongholds like Croydon.
Behind the report lies the fact that the capital's political, business and
cultural establishment agrees, very largely, on what needs to be done -
better transport, housing and 'a voice for London.' But it disagrees
violently about the best form of government to achieve these things.
Rogers, whose vision includes burying miles of London roads inside tunnels
in order to open up new squares and parks at the city's heart, says: 'I
would like to see a new partnership between business, politics and citizens.
Market forces aren't sufficient - our big slabs of glass are a direct
response to market forces.' To which shopkeeper and restaurateur Sir Terence
Conran adds, gazing from the balcony of his Thames-side offices at Butler's
Wharf: 'The concept of an organisation on this scale without a board of
management is ridiculous, But I would love it to be non-political.'
A similar thought seems to have motivated the Confederation of British
Industry, which has proposed that London be overseen by a giant development
agency made up of business leaders and others appointed by the Environment
Secretary.
This debate has now taken its place in the general election campaign. Labour
has made the running by proposing a directly-elected Greater London
Authority, with only supervisory responsibility for transport, planning,
economic development, policing, fire services, environment, promotion, arts
and culture. The GLA, it is promised, would be much nimbler than the GLC; it
could have proportional representation and professional councillors. Labour
also wants to strip the Corporation of London of its local government
powers. The corporation's crime appears to be that it is too rich, too
obscure in its democratic procedures, and an impediment to the broader
reforming purpose.
The City's defenders say it provides the best services in London, essential
to nurturing the international financial community. Critics say the only
reason it can remove rubbish from Cheapside, a main commercial thoroughfare,
five times a day, when other parts of London can scarcely remember when last
they saw a cleaning truck, is because it is privileged financially.
The Conservative prescription is to formalise existing arrangements whereby,
in effect, central government is London's strategic governing body. In
future, there would be a cabinet sub-committee for London, with the
Environment Secretary in the chair and a junior minister for London public
transport at his right hand. A promotional agency also is proposed.
Londoners will know soon which of these two approaches they are to
experience. The polling evidence suggests they desire 'a voice for London'
strongly, but Labour's poor electoral record in London in the past 10 years
also makes them fear a revival in the animal spirits of the Labour municipal
left.
It is not easy to explain why London has found it so difficult to secure a
settled form of government. Some think it goes back a millenium - to
embattled monarchs in the Tower of London to the east, the rising political
class in Westminster to the west, and the merchants in between, all pursuing
their interests jealously. Others repeat the cliche that London is a
collection of villages. It is true that no consensus exists on either the
internal or external boundaries of the city.
To some extent, London's problems are essentially those of Britain,
magnified. The crisis in education and training, and a centralising
government's assault on the fiscal autonomy of local government, are by no
means exclusive to the capital. But London is special, if only in size and
international connection.
'Major change requires huge sums of money, which will always be controlled
by government. It is naive to believe otherwise,' says Sir Peter Bowness,
Tory leader of Croydon Council.
Sir Ralf Dahrendorf, warden of St Antony's College, Oxford, and a prime
mover in the better London debate, thinks none of the political parties has
thought the matter through. He and a small, private group of other London
notables are busy drawing up their own blueprint for the capital's
government. He sees a flexible supervisory body with 'a directly-elected
element' and is 'radical without being abolitionist' about the Corporation
of London. He declines to answer the critical question about funding, but
must know that any body depending for cash upon either the boroughs or
central government will be as fatally weak as the GLC.
History, alas, suggests that none of these bright new ideas will last. As a
study by the London School of Economics study for the Joseph Rowntree
Foundation concluded glumly last year: 'No system of London government has
yet been capable of providing a robust and long-lasting solution. It is
possible that such a thing does not exist.'
Tony Travers, one of the authors of the LSE-Rowntree report, thinks
Londoners might do best to think practical thoughts rather than pursuing
unreachable ideals of government structure. 'If the tube worked as well as
in Paris, a large proportion of the problem would go away,' he claims. David
Bayliss, London Transport's chief planner, says that is exactly what
Londoners can expect by the end of the decade. With an investment programme
heading for Pounds 750m a year, London is in the middle of its biggest tube
investment boom since before the Second World War. Bayliss, an old GLC man,
says: 'it's relatively easy to lay down good policy; the lesson of the GLC
is the difficulty of implementation.' That, unfortunately, is not an
observation with much political sex appeal.
It does not do, however, to be too gloomy. Unless you are part of that
minority condemned to live in stained concrete tower blocks, London has a
great deal going for it. The biggest, most diverse arts scene anywhere. An
absence of no-go areas, even in its most ill-treated parts. The view from
Primrose Hill at dusk. Even London's behaviour towards the homeless at least
stops short of water cannon, which cannot be said of some other European
cities.
In the end, cities get the politics - and, indeed, the buildings - they
deserve. VS Pritchett, in his 1962 essay London Perceived, wrote: 'London is
before anything else the world's market . . . This no doubt explains why
London is the least splendid, the least ostentatious, of capitals.'
A couple of weeks ago, I was talking about this article over lunch. We were
vigorously debating the potential democratic dimensions of the new London
when the waitress came to take our order. 'The great thing about
government,' she said, 'is that we never get as much as we pay for. Mark
Twain said that.'
She told us she came from Pennsylvania. A true Londoner.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920328

