FT924-1067

FT  19 DEC 92 / Books: Silver screen success


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


FRANK CAPRA: THE CATASTROPHE OF SUCCESS by Joseph McBride Faber Pounds 25,
734 pages
WHAT'S IT ALL ABOUT? by Michael Caine Century Pounds 16.99, 475 pages
THESE TWO books, both about rags-to-riches film careers, carry on a dialogue
with each other even in their titles. 'What price glory in the movies?' they
ask, though in only one of the books does the subject himself raise the
question.
There are different approaches to deprecating success. While Michael Caine
goes for the I'm-still-a-fish-porter's-son and-never-mind-the-Ferrari
approach, Capra's chronicler Joseph McBride sees the director of It Happened
One Night, Lost Horizon and It's A Wonderful Life as a man who carried a
ten-ton chip on his shoulder. Caine glories in his background; Capra spent
60 years trying to hide it.
Indeed the Sicilian-born film-maker is famous for writing the most
untrustworthy autobiography in Hollywood history, The Name Above The Title.
Much of McBride's perceptive, well-researched book is devoted to replacing
Capra's self-mythologising factoids with the real, unpleasanter truth. He
was clearly a racist. He was clearly a social climber who despised his own
family. (Read the opening chapter of his disastrous visit home to Sicily in
1977.) And beneath the populist filibustering of films like Mr Deeds Goes To
Town and Mr Smith Goes To Washington lurks an intolerant snob who in real
life used shows of emotion mainly to manipulate the emotions of others.
In his very first job, newsboy Capra made sure he sold his pile each day by
arranging fake fights with his brother and then bursting into tears,
complaining to passers-by that he was being beaten up for not selling all
his newspapers. 'Right then and there he got rid of them all,' recalls that
brother.
Later, Capra turned his talent for plangency to profitable use as the great
sentmentalist of New Deal cinema. He was the inventor of 'Capracorn': the
man who with screenwriter Robert Riskin created the hayseed hero who could
conquer bureaucracy and corruption. Incarnated on screen by Jimmy Stewart,
he would later be emulated in real life by Jimmy Carter.
If success became the catastrophe of McBride's title, it was because Capra
himself failed all the tests his heroes passed. Carrying resentment of his
birth and background through every phase of life, he horded magnanimity like
a miser. Mean of praise to his collaborators (especially Riskin), he was
also mean of courage when the McCarthy era came. Though the witch-hunting
Senator from Wisconsin would seem a real-life ringer for one of Capra's own
movie villains - those who used the letter of the law to beat the spirit of
the poor - Capra self-protectively became McCarthy's propagandist.
For the Capra fan, the anguishes mount up. He was a bad husband, a so-so
father, a fair-weather friend. (Riskin's widow never forgave him for not
visiting the ailing screenwriter on his deathbed). Can we still see those
starry-eyed comedies with the innocent delight we did before? Or should we
just grit our teeth and minds, insisting that the song is what counts not
the singer.
Michael Caine has all the charm that Capra appeared to lack. But then he has
to: he goes in front of the camera. What's It All About? is a 470 pages of
anecdotal extemporising, some of which we have heard before on chat shows
and 'Evenings with Michael Caine'. But the book helps to define why we like
this actor on screen. We sense a busy, funny, retentive mind behind that
runic face with the hooded eyes.
Solely excepting Sean Connery, who was Bonded into stardom by a
world-beating spy saga, Caine has proved the most durable and exportable
British film star since the 1960s. He has the star's perfect equipment. He
is always the same, but that 'same' is elusive and absorbent enough to
attract different roles. He has been a drawling British officer (Zulu), a
poker-faced cockney spy (The Ipcress File), a cross-dressing homicidal
psychiatrist (Dressed To Kill), a con man in multiple disguise (Sleuth) and
a hapless mid-life adulterer (Hannah And Her Sisters).
After reading What's It All About you begin to know the secret to this
changeless versatility. Caine lies back and lets back life happen; then he
gets up and gleefully annotates the text.
Do not be fooled by the comatose look. Those halfmast eyelids are due to an
incurable disease called Blefora. Not a lot of people know this, but we take
Caine's word for it: as for the funny story of Cliff Robertson's
Filippino-carved Oscar (p264), of Shelley Winters and her nose-impaling
corset (p184), of Caine going to bed with Mia Farrow while Woody Allen and
Andre Previn looked on (p431), of Caine trying to cheer up Mrs Thatcher
after her fall (p467) and of Caine falling in love with his future wife on
the strength of a TV coffee commercial (p286). Just stories, perhaps. But
with Caine, unlike Capra, we like the teller as much as the tales.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921219

