FT924-12221

FT  22 OCT 92 / Growth in German M3 accelerates: Rate cut hopes recede


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES and DAVID WALLER


   FRANKFURT


GROWTH in Germany's broad money supply accelerated again last month, but the
9.1 per cent annualised rate of expansion in the M3 measure was well below
the range of 10 to 12 per cent forecast by economists.
Provisional figures, published yesterday by the Bundesbank, also included
some encouraging signs that demand for domestic credit is falling
appreciably.
The bank noted that growth in M3 - which includes cash, current accounts and
short-term deposits - in the first half of the month had been relatively
weak, picking up speed in the latter half, when it was strongly influenced
by the Bundesbank's heavy intervention during the European exchange rate
mechanism crisis.
Despite these indications, the independent central bank, which has recently
reduced the importance it places on money supply as a factor in
policy-making, moved yesterday to damp hopes of an early reduction in
interest rates.
A variable rate securities repurchase tender, through which the bank
supplies funds to the domestic money market, resulted in a minimum rate of
8.75 per cent, compared with the previous fixed rate of 8.90 per cent.
Even though this continued the downward trend in short-term money market
rates, which is still expected to lead eventually to cuts in the Lombard and
discount rates, the market was disappointed by the scale of the reduction.
Observers were also confused by the money supply figures. According to Mr
Thomas Mayer, an economist at Goldman Sachs in Frankfurt, the fall in the
expansion rate of domestic credit to 9.5 per cent compared with 11-12 per
cent over the past six months was 'marginally encouraging'.
But he warned that the full effects of the bank's money market interventions
were not clear and could take some time to filter through.
He agreed with other German market watchers who claimed international
optimism about early moves on Germany's main interest rates was over-blown.
The underlying growth in money supply is still well above the bank's range
of 3.5 per cent to 5.5 per cent and inflation is still not under control.
Optimism was further dampened by a reminder from Mr Reimut Jochimsen, a
member of the bank's policy making central council, that German rates might
even rise.
German savers have deposited DM30bn (Pounds 12bn) in Luxembourg savings
accounts in the first nine months of the year - all but DM4bn out of the
total DM34bn saved in investment funds over that time, the BVI association
of investment companies reported yesterday, David Waller writes from
Frankfurt.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921022

