FT924-6293

FT  21 NOV 92 / Travel: Earth watchers start here - David Pilling considers
holidays that help to improve the environment / Practical Traveller


   By DAVID PILLING


   FOR SOME, the concept of an eco-tourist


someone whose globe-trottings have a positive environmental impact - is a
contradiction in terms.
Tourism, they argue, is by its nature destructive, leaving in its wake a
trail of aircraft fuel, polluted beaches, devastated fishing villages and
western habits of doubtful morality. The only true eco-traveller stays at
home.
Not so, others say. At its best, tourism promotes understanding, spreads
wealth and can contribute to the environment. For those wishing to give
eco-travel a go, here are a few ideas:
Earthwatch (tel: 0865-311-600) is a non-profit-making organisation that
matches scientists and archaeologists with volunteers keen to work on
research and conservation projects. The Earthwatch magazine, which comes six
times a year to members paying a Pounds 22 subscription, is bursting with
140 projects in 40 countries.
Members can count orang-utans in Indonesia, delve into volcanology in
Russia, observe insect behaviour in Peru or honey possum habits in
Australia, translate sea lion language in California, or dig for stone tools
in Ireland's County Kerry. One project, for example, seeks to discover
whether Carpathian wolves in south-east Poland kill the weakest or strongest
members of red deer herds. Volunteers, paying Pounds 795 for two weeks,
monitor deer and wolf populations and record the scars and antler
measurements of wolf-killed deer. Earthwatch trips, not including flights,
range from Pounds 400 to Pounds 1,500.
Discover the World (tel: 06977-48356) organises wildlife and wilderness
holidays in conjunction with the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Whale
and Dolphin Conservation Society. A significant portion of the booking fee
is donated to the conservation group concerned. Groups are kept small 'to
reduce the environmental impact' and holidays are designed to benefit local
economies.
A highlight is the chance to track pandas in a Chinese reserve at Wolong,
the first time UK citizens have been allowed to do so. There are also trips
to watch lemurs in Madagascar, polar bears in Spitsbergen and minke whales
off the coast of Scotland. Holidays start at Pounds 295 (weekend breaks)
soaring to more than Pounds 3,000 for whale watching in Japan.
Cox and Kings (tel: 071-931-9106) also organises one-off wildlife tours in
conjunction with charities and puts out a brochure called Environmental
Journeys. Holidays are planned with the help of naturalists and Cox and
Kings buys an acre of rain forest in Belize for each booking made.
David Bellamy is guest lecturer on one tour to the Solomon Islands, due to
depart in May 1993 (cost: Pounds 3,450). Defending the concept of
eco-travel, Bellamy says: 'Tourism is not going to go away, so it's got to
be brought into line. Tourism of the right sort shows people what a
wonderful place the world is, but how delicate and fragile it can be. It's a
way of winning friends for the environmental movement.'
Those who are in deadly earnest about eco-travel may consider signing up for
Nols, a US-based, non-profit-making group which teaches outdoor skills,
'low-impact wilderness living' and respect for the environment.
Nols' expeditions - to the Rocky Mountains, Pacific north-west America,
Alaska, Mexico, Chile and Kenya - encourage participants to become
self-sufficient in the wilderness. The idea is to leave no trace of your
presence behind; toilet paper is banned while picnic and camp sites are
scuffed over. This is not just an adventure holiday, the brochure stresses.
'Nols is a school where pencils and notebooks are as necessary as backpacks,
ropes and tents. Our classroom is the wilderness.'
Those thinking of signing up need to be pretty fit, or be prepared to become
so. Nols caters for people from 14 to 75, though many of its customers are
of student age. However, the brochure contains a special section for those
over 25, mainly trips of two and three weeks. Expeditions start at
reasonable prices and rise to Pounds 4,000 for three months in Patagonia.
Contact: Nols, 288 Main Street, Lander, Wyoming 82520-0579, tel (from UK):
0101-307-332-6973.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921121

