FT921-3983

FT  11 MAR 92 / International Bonds: Norway introduces Y50bn offering


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


ACTIVITY in the Eurobond market was spread across a broad range of sectors
yesterday.
Following the success of the World Bank's first global offering in the
Euroyen market, lead manager IBJ brought a five-year deal for the Kingdom of
Norway. The Y50bn deal, fungible with an outstanding Y100bn deal, met some
pent up demand for the 10-year World Bank deal, but was mainly sold to a
different base, due to the difference in maturity.
The World Bank deal, which met strong demand particularly from European
investors, was priced yesterday at the tighter end of the indicated range,
at a spread of 19 basis points below the yield on the No 129 Japanese
government bond. The deal was already largely placed and tightened a little
further yesterday to around 20 basis points below the JGB yield.
In the French franc sector, the Republic of Finland issued a large FFr5bn
deal, via Banque Nationale de Paris. Finland is spreading its fund raising
activities across a broad range of markets in an effort to meet its heavy
borrowing schedule without deterring investors, given that the borrower is
considered a declining credit and faces serious economic problems. However,
the deal was considered quite generously priced at 35 basis points above the
comparable French government bond yield. Finland completed a successful deal
in the sterling market last week, which has somewhat blunted the memory of a
difficult Ecu transaction.
In the dollar sector, Credit Suisse First Boston launched a Dollars 300m
five-year deal for General Electric, the triple-A rated US company, which
was considered reasonably priced at 30 basis points above the five-year US
Treasury. Last week, CSFB launched several corporate deals in the dollar
sector which were considered very aggressively priced and suffered when the
market fell on data suggesting the economy was pulling out of recession.
Although prices have since rallied, the dollar market remains rather
difficult, with some uncertainty over the direction of interest rates.
However, there is still a broadly positive view on the dollar, which is
helping to support European demand.
The GE deal was bid at 99.85 at the end of trading, a little below its fixed
reoffer level of 99.91.
Elsewhere, the French government took the unusual step of adding to an
outstanding Ecu OAT issue through a block trade. An Ecu125m tranche was
added to the 8 1/2 per cent OAT due 1997, bringing the deal to a total close
to Ecu1bn. The deal had become rather illiquid and the French government was
keen to improve trading in the paper. However, the add-on was too small to
justify an auction, the usual method used by the French government to sell
OATs.
The block trade, arranged by Caisse des Depots, Societe Generale, Union Bank
of Switzerland and Warburg, was priced to yield 8.24 per cent, the level at
which the outstanding OAT was trading.

The Financial Times


London Page 48

920311

