FT921-1296

FT  25 MAR 92 / Lloyds names new chairman: Top appointments at the clearing
bank


   By ROBERT PESTON


LLOYDS Bank, the UK's most profitable clearing bank, yesterday announced
that Sir Robin Ibbs, former head of the prime minister's think tank, will be
its next chairman and that Sir David Walker, the outgoing chairman of the
Securities and Investments Board, will become a deputy chairman.
Bankers said Sir David would be groomed to succeed Sir Robin, who is likely
to be chairman for a comparatively short period, possibly no longer than two
years.
Lloyds felt it could not appoint Sir David, a former director of the Bank of
England, to the top job immediately because he has no experience of
commercial banking. Sir Robin, who became a deputy chairman of Lloyds in
October 1988, will take over from current chairman, Sir Jeremy Morse, at the
beginning of next year.
Sir David will become a deputy chairman on July 1. Sir Robin said he
expected Sir David would work for Lloyds 'full time' but refused to say
whether Sir David would succeed him.
'It was necessary for me to do the job for a spell,' Sir Robin said.
A senior executive of Lloyds said Sir Robin was 'well-liked and
well-respected in the bank'. Sir Robin said he has been spending three days
a week in the bank, concentrating on 'strategic issues'.
Some bankers thought Mr Brian Pitman, Lloyds chief executive, might be
disappointed not to get the chairmanship, but Lloyds has a tradition of
choosing outsiders for the chairman's post, so it is unlikely that Mr Pitman
considered himself a serious contender.
'Brian is a hands-on chief executive,' said a banker. 'I am sure he would
find it very difficult to play a non-executive chairman's role.'
However, Lloyds said that Mr Pitman, who at 60 is the normal normal retiring
age for Lloyds' executives, will stay as chief executive until 1995. It also
said that Mr John Davies, his deputy, will become deputy chief executive.
Sir Robin spent most of his career at Imperial Chemical Industries, one of
the UK's two biggest manufacturing companies, where he became an executive
director in 1976.
From 1980 to 1982 he was seconded to the Cabinet Office, where he was head
of the Central Policy Review Staff, or think tank.
From 1983 to 1988, he advised Mrs Thatcher, the prime minister, on
'efficiency and effectiveness in government'.
Lex, Page 20, Observer, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920325

