FT922-410

FT  27 JUN 92 / The Lisbon Summit: Denmark's strategy to rejoin the team -
More democracy and openness will tempt Copenhagen back onto EC playing field


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LISBON


ONLY more open and accountable decision-making will enable the Community to
continue moving forward as 12, Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the Danish foreign
minister, said yesterday.
Denmark would wait to the end of the year before deciding whether to put new
proposals to its voters, who narrowly rejected the Maastricht treaty on June
2, triggering a crisis in the EC.
'What we need is more democracy in the institutions, more open
decision-making,' Mr Ellemann-Jensen said. 'We hope that this will lead to a
new landscape, where new decisions can be taken.'
He said there would have to be 'a much clearer situation' on how EC
decisions are taken before Denmark could 'make concrete suggestions' about
how to resolve the crisis.
He would not be drawn on whether his government would hold a new referendum,
but said 'political leaders should have the courage to propose changes to
their electors.'
In saying this he appeared to be hinting at the possibility of renegotiating
aspects of Maastricht, a possibility so far firmly ruled out by all 12
governments, including Denmark.
Mr Ellemann-Jensen was in ebullient form, arriving at the summit with a
Danish football team scarf and portable television before last night's
European championship final against Germany. 'If you can't join them, beat
them,' he said, predicting a 2-1 victory over Denmark's powerful neighbour.
Denmark won 2-0.
Afterwards Mr Ellemann-Jensen said: 'It shows small states can win. And
Europe needs small states.'
Fear of being smothered by Germany is said to have been one reason why
Danish voters turned against the Maastricht treaty, opposition to which has
grown with the Danish football team's surprising run of victories.
Back on the EC playing field, Mr Ellemann-Jensen said: 'The 11 are playing
and we are sitting on the bench right now, but I hope we'll soon be back on
the field.'
Meanwhile Mr Poul Schluter, the Danish prime minister, told his colleagues
there needed to be more democratic control over decisions by the Council of
Ministers as well as the Commission.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920627

