FT922-3931

FT  09 JUN 92 / The Week In Luxembourg: Member states must be consulted
about social fund grant reductions - European Law


The European Court of Justice last week overturned European Commission
decisions to reduce European social fund grants for employment training
projects in three cases involving Portugal.
In one case concerning the retraining of unemployed people over 25,
especially from the small business sector, the Commission failed to give
Portugal the opportunity to comment on the proposed reduction in the grant.
Under social fund rules, the Commission may reduce the final financial
contribution when conditions attached to the initial grant are not
satisfied. But the member state concerned must have an opportunity to
comment beforehand.
In the other two cases concerning training projects for people under 25, the
ECJ said the Commission's decision infringed the Treaty of Rome's
requirements to state adequate reasons.
Although the decision referred in general terms to certain expenditure being
outside the grant as one reason, the Portuguese applicants had not been
informed of the method used for calculating their individual reduction.
The Commission explained that its standard practice was to issue short pro
forma decisions under European social fund powers. The Court said this
practice was inadequate to meet the standards of reasoning it required when
decisions have financial effects.
Following these cases, Community countries should be able to insist on
greater participation and respect for their rights under social policy
measures administered by the Commission.
Cases C-157/90, C-181/90 and C-189/90, Infortec, Consorgan and Cipeke v
Commission, ECJ 2CH 4 June 1992.
Equal Pay and Social Security in Germany
The ECJ also ruled last week that a German law discriminating between
part-time and full-time employees is prohibited by Treaty of Rome sex
discrimination rules, when the part-time employees are mostly women.
The Court said, in particular, that a national law will infringe EC equal
pay law if it allows employers to pay part-time workers on the basis of
their part-time hours, when they undergo full-time training in connection
with worker representation, and full-time workers in the same situation are
paid on the basis of their full-time commitment.
Case C-360/90, Arbeiterwohlfahrt der Stadt Berlin v Monika Botel, ECJ 6CH 4
June 1992.
The court also interpreted the EC social security rules in favour of an
Italian worker who was in dispute with his German employer.
The Italian wanted six weeks' pay under German law on the basis of evidence
of his incapacity to work arising from illness on holiday.
The Court said that the employer could be held liable to pay the money even
though it was not a social security institution.
Case C-45/90, Paletta v Brennet AG, ECJ FC 3 June 1992.
Free movement, public procurement and VAT in Italy
An Italian law restricting beer imports with quantities of sulphur dioxide
above 20 mg per litre has been condemned by the ECJ under the Treaty of
Rome's free movement of goods rules.
The question arose in criminal proceedings against imports of French beer
lawfully made and sold in France by Brasserie Fischer with 36.8 mg of
sulphur dioxide per litre.
Following the approach adopted in previous cases to available national and
international scientific evidence, the Court held that Italy could not
justify such a low permitted quantity of the additive on public health
grounds. For example, twice the quantity was permitted in wine.
Cases C-13/91 and C-113/91, Debus, ECJ 5CH 4 June 1992.
The Court also condemned Italy's law intended to implement a 1971 EC public
procurement directive in the field of public works.
Two provisions of the law infringe the Treaty prohibition of discrimination
on the ground of nationality against providers of cross-border services.
First, the law reserves 15-30 per cent of works to companies with their
registered office in the Italian region concerned. This is also contrary to
the provisions of the directive itself.
Second, preference is given under the law to temporary associations or
consortia established in the region. Whether or not this amounted to overt
nationality discrimination, it still amounted to discrimination against
companies from other member states.
Cases C-360/89, Commission v Italy, ECJ FC, 3 June 1992.
Italy has also been found by the Court to infringe its obligations under the
EC Eighth VAT Directive by systematically ignoring the six-month period for
refunding VAT to non-resident tax payers.
Case C-287/91, Commission v Italy, ECJ FC, 3 June 1992.
Customs Classification,
Valuation and Imports
In a series of cases last week, the ECJ clarified the customs tariff heading
for non-sterilised blood serum of veal foetuses (Case C-318/90) and the
definition of 'Morello cherries in syrup' for the purposes of EC import and
minimum price rules (Case C-246/90).
Of more general interest, the ECJ has confirmed that the cost of credit,
agreed separately to the price of goods, in consideration of delayed payment
is not to be included in the customs value of the goods. (Case C-21/91).
Mars Ice Cream Suspense
Court of First Instance President, Cruz Vilaca, has given interlocutory
orders in the EC competition law dispute over the distribution of Mars
ice cream products in Germany.
Two German ice cream distributors who had refused to sell Mars ice cream
products appealed against a Commission interim decision requiring them to
sell the Mars products through their outlets. Simultaneously, they requested
the CFI to suspend the Commission's decision until their appeal had been
decided.
The president's order postpones full consideration of the interim suspension
application until the parties have supplied further relevant trading
information. Until then, the Commission's decision is suspended.
The order also allowed Mars to intervene in support of the Commission and
accepted confidential treatment claims by Langanese, one of the German
distributors, for parts of its submissions containing business secrets.
Cases T-24/92R and T-28/92R, Langanese and Scholler v Commission, CFI Order
of the President 8 May 1992.
Sunday Trading
Last week was unusually busy for the ECJ. As well as delivering 11
judgments, the Court held oral hearings in the UK Sunday trading cases
referred to the ECJ from the House of Lords and other UK courts in an
attempt to resolve the Sunday trading conundrum caused by Treaty of Rome
rules on the free movement of goods.
BRICK COURT CHAMBERS, BRUSSELS.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920609

