FT921-15516

FT  09 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Rescuers of The European stay away from
relaunch


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR CHARLES Garside, the new editor and general manager of The European, made
an important forecast yesterday. There will be no pictures of the Barclay
brothers, his new proprietors, in this week's issue.
'Did you ever work for Bob (Maxwell)? It's so refreshing to have someone who
doesn't want their pictures in the paper,' said Mr Garside.
Neither Mr David nor Mr Frederick Barclay, the owners of hotels and ships
and now a weekly newspaper, turned up yesterday at the press conference to
announce formally that The European was back in business.
But Mr Alan Chamberlain, the new managing director, promised that the
pan-European newspaper, the first large chunk to float free from the
wreckage of the Maxwell empire, would be highly successful.
Mr Chamberlain said he would be producing business plans for the first three
weeks, three months and three years.
For the first three weeks the aim would be to get a two-section paper out
using journalists on a freelance basis. Then the hiring of staff on proper
contracts would begin and Elan, the paper's third section,
The Barclay brothers, readers of The European who spend most of their time
in Monte Carlo, have taken on none of the newspaper's debt and have bought
just the title and the equipment needed to produce it.
'We are going to run it like a business. The problem was that it was run as
a paper with 20 times the revenue it actually had,' said Mr Garside. He also
thanked collectively what he said were the thousands of readers who had
written in expressing support. 'We didn't have the money to pay for the
stamps to write to them.'
Mr Kevin Maxwell, son of Mr Robert Maxwell, has agreed to comply with a
parliamentary order to appear, next Monday, before the Social Security
Committee, to answer questions about the disappearance of pension funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 21 Photograph Meer Charles Garside (left) and Alan Chamberlain,
aiming to be highly successful by running the paper as a business (Omitted).

920109

