FT923-15529

FT  01 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC farm ministers finally
approve CAP reforms


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LUXEMBOURG


EUROPEAN Community farm ministers late last night approved enabling
regulations for the radical reform of the common agricultural policy which
were agreed on May 21.
Final accord was reached just before midnight when the UK was scheduled to
take over the EC presidency.
Thus at the eleventh-hour, Portugal, which had held the presidency, was
allowed to take credit for the reform which had been painstakingly
negotiated.
Formal adoption of the package, which will cut farm prices and take land out
of use in a bid to cut the EC's food mountain, was delayed at the 11th hour
by French and Italian demands that a law protecting foodstuffs originating
in a particular place from imitation be adopted at the same time.
In the end a decision on the law, which was opposed by the UK, Denmark, the
Netherlands and Belgium, was deferred until a later ministerial meeting.
France and Italy agreed to the package only after assurances that the
European Commission, the EC executive, would submit proposals dealing with
particular problems their farmers face.
France had demanded a shopping list of concessions to pacify its farmers who
have gone on a rampage against the reforms. Italy wanted to be able to
produce more milk.
The accord is seen as a key card for the EC in efforts to conclude the GATT
(General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) Uruguay Round of world trade talks,
which are stalled over a dispute between the Community and the United States
over farm subsidies.
The immediate cost of pushing through the reform now - to give farmers a
target at the beginning of the agricultural year in key areas such as
cereals - seems likely to involve concessions to Italian dairy producers and
is also likely to include more sweeteners for French cereals and beef
farmers.
Italy was given short shrift in May when it held up the reform package in an
attempt to get retrospective validation of its illicit overproduction of
milk from its partners. Italy has a milk quota of 9m tonnes a year but in
fact produces 11.5m tonnes. It had sought to get more than half the excess
approved in May.
Italian officials say their farmers will have to slaughter 430,000 dairy
cows unless it obtains a compromise.
France, which unlike Italy backed the reform in May, faced even greater
political constraints, dramatised by the escalating farmers' protests
against the revamped CAP ahead of its autumn referendum on Maastricht.
The reform cuts support prices to near world market levels while
compensating farmers through the provision of direct income payments,
contingent on larger farms taking 15 per cent of their land out of
production.
Since Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht treaty on June 2, both the 12
and the European Commission have been busily soft-pedalling on any issue
which might upset anyone's national susceptibilities, within a strategy
which requires 11 member states to steam ahead with ratification in the hope
of pulling Denmark back on board.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920701

