FT921-11705

FT  30 JAN 92 / Irish budget ushers in sweeping tax changes


   By TIM COONE


   DUBLIN


A TAX-CUTTING Irish budget was presented yesterday as Mr Charles Haughey,
still under opposition pressure over his alleged role in a phone-tapping
scandal, spent what many expect to be his last full day as prime minister.
Fending off renewed questioning in parliament, he said only that he expected
the Progressive Democrats (PD), minority partners in his coalition
government, to support the budget when it went to a vote late last night.
The PD issued an ultimatum last week, calling on him to resign after the
budget.
The budget was presented by Mr Bertie Ahern, the finance minister, whose
next announcement is widely expected to be whether he intends to enter the
leadership race.
Mr Ahern introduced sweeping tax reforms in the budget, involving a
significant shift from direct to indirect taxes, elimination of many tax
reliefs and loopholes, and simplification of the tax structure.
Calling it a 'pro-jobs tax reform,' he announced a reduction in the basic
rate of income tax from 29p to 27p in the punt, and the elimination of the
upper 52 per cent rate, leaving only a single higher rate of 48 per cent.
Thresholds are also to be raised, amounting altogether to some IPounds 168m
(Pounds 156m) in income tax relief.
Social welfare spending is to be increased by 4 per cent, marginally above a
forecast 3.75 per cent inflation rate for 1992. Mr Des O'Malley, the PD
leader, said last night he was 'extremely pleased' with the budget, calling
it 'a watershed in equity. Income taxes are down and social welfare is up'.
To balance this, revenue is to be increased by, among other measures,
raising the lower 12.5 per cent VAT rate to 16 per cent on a wide range of
goods and services, and increasing excise duties on cigarettes by 16p a
packet.
Overall, government current spending will rise by 6 per cent this year,
necessitating an exchequer borrowing requirement (EBR) of 2.4 per cent of
gross national product, or IPounds 592m, compared to IPounds 501m in 1991.
The rise is within the 2.5 per cent of GNP target set by Mr Ahern last year
and is likely to be well received by the financial and business community.
Tax revenue will also rise by 6 per cent under the new reforms. GNP is
forecast to grow by 2 per cent this year, as are real disposable incomes.
The EBR target slipped last year from 1.9 per cent of GNP as the recession
cut tax and excise revenues and increased social welfare spending. Mr Ahern
now hopes to achieve a target of 1.5 per cent next year.
The public sector pay bill will increase by 9 per cent this year thanks to
awards agreed with civil service unions under the 1990 programme of economic
and social progress.
The motor industry has been given special attention with a 1.7 per cent cut
in car excise duties and a 9p a gallon reduction in petrol taxes. Vehicle
road taxes, however, are to be increased by 20 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 2 Photograph Finance minister Bertie Ahern brandishes his budget
case on his way to the Dail yesterday (Omitted).

920130

