FT922-491

FT  27 JUN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Leading equities trim early losses


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


THE DRAMATIC developments overnight at British Petroleum faced an immediate
and brutal reckoning on the London stock market yesterday. Nearly Pounds
1.9bn was wiped off the market capitalisation of BP as institutional
investors shied away from the danger that one of Britain's largest companies
might cut its dividend payout, and many leading shares fell heavily as
analysts spotlighted other companies where the dividend could be at risk.
But the initial setback across the stock market was trimmed later, and the
day's loss on the FT-SE Index was held to under 24 points. Government bonds
gained half a point in good trading, with Index-linked issues standing out
well.
'The BP story is not over yet,' was the general view in London. A statement
from the BP board on dividend prospects is regarded as inevitable next week,
perhaps at a meeting with UK analysts which was arranged some time ago.
Particularly worrying is the outlook for BP shares in New York, where US
investors are likely to be highly sensitive to the perceived threat to the
dividend.
However, the reaction across the broad range of the market was better than
feared. After plunging by 32 points in early trading and failing to hold a
rally at mid-session, the FT-SE Index ended the session 23.2 down at
2,534.1. The stock market was helped by a strong performance from the
futures sector where the September contract on the FT-SE Index held a good
premium.
About 11 points of the fall represented the drop of 34p in BP and the Index
was also hit by hefty setbacks in a handful of other Footsie constituents.
Wellcome tumbled as the prospects for next week's share sale were clouded by
the new threat to the market. And the search for dividend-sensitive stocks
brought losses for, among others, Fisons, Barclays Bank and British Steel.
At last night's close, the Footsie Index showed a loss of 27.5 points over
the week and of 46.4 points or 1.8 per cent over the two week trading
account. The setback has reflected concern over weakness in the Tokyo
market, which again provided a nervous backcloth for London yesterday
morning, and also over sluggishness in the UK economy. But many analysts
argue that the UK equity market offers good value at current levels.
Seaq volume, boosted by heavy trade in BP, rose to 637.5m shares yesterday.
After initial uncertainty, customer business in equities has risen sharply
this week as the institutions have reshaped portfolios in a falling market.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920627

