FT924-6204

FT  23 NOV 92 / Skoda to expand import business


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


SKODA, THE Czech carmaker now under the management control of Volkswagen, is
setting up a replacement importer to quadruple UK sales to 40,000 a year by
1996.
The new company will be a wholly owned subsidiary of Skoda Automobilova, in
which Volkswagen is building a 70 per cent stake. VW already holds 31 per
cent, with the balance in the hands of the Czech government.
Skoda Automobile UK will take over on January 1 from London-based Skoda
(Great Britain). The latter was set up many years ago by the Czech state
foreign trade corporation.
Skoda says the management structure and location of the new company will be
made known 'in the near future'. Its managing director will be Mr Robin
Woolcock, a former managing director of MAN Volkswagen Truck and Bus, the UK
importer of Volkswagen and MAN commercial vehicles. Mr Woolcock has been
managing the negotiations with Skoda GB and the creation of the new company.
He is expected to oversee an expansion of Skoda's presence in the UK as new
models come on stream. They are being developed under a planned DM8bn
(Pounds 3.3bn) investment programme designed to more than double Skoda's
capacity to 460,000 cars a year by the mid 1990s.
Skoda is adopting a more aggressive export marketing stance to reflect the
expansion.
The switch of importer comes as no surprise either to Skoda (GB) or its
network of 250 dealers. Mr Peter Titterton, director of car sales operations
for Skoda (GB), said negotiations had been going on for 13 months and
dealers had been assured that there would be no disruption to vehicle and
parts supplies or to warranty arrangements.
Cars are shipped from Hamburg and imported through Kings Lynn, Norfolk.
Some Skoda (GB) staff are likely to transfer to the new company.
With the Czech economy still in transition, Skoda (GB) will continue to
handle imports of Jawa and CZ motorcycles, Zetar tractors, Desta fork-lift
truck, Varum tyres and other agricultural equipment.
The expansion of Skoda sales in Europe is a main part of a determined effort
by Volkswagen to become Europe's car-market leader. The group includes Audi
and Seat.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921123

