FT924-6264

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: Snuffed out - Radio


   By BA YOUNG


THIS has been European Drug Prevention Week, and naturally most attention to
it has been paid by the channels with most young listeners, Radio 1 and
Radio 5. Radio 1 has the sensible idea in its social programmes of taking
its listeners by surprise. Solvent-sniffers may find their programmes
unexpectedly interrupted by voices talking about their problem. What follows
is not instant advice but a helpline number. Calls are not only free, but
not shown in the telephone account.
Radio 5 took a different line, and offered on Thursday a continuous,
dramatic programme called Who Dares? Against a faint background of pop, came
a stream of admissions by young people of what they had done, how it made
them feel, where they did it. About one school child in 10 is reckoned to
try a sniff. Mums and dads spoke of their trouble in spotting anything,
experts told which solvents were used, where they were likely to be found,
and what they did to you. The same helpline number was given.
Marin Sorescu's Vlad the Impaler (Radio 3, Sunday) shows the author as a
sort of mini-Brecht. Impaling is already en vogue when the piece begins, and
the action is largely seen, or anyway discussed, by two of Prince Vlad's
victims, a Romanian and a Turk, on neighbouring stakes. Quasi-historic
events are a revolt by the pretender Dan, and the conquest of Romania by the
Turks, who sell Vlad to the Hungarians. He escapes and returns to Romania,
where the two impalees reckon from their stakes that everything is the same
only different.
Within this pattern, Vlad, sharply played by John Hurt, displays his
politics, clearly suggesting Ceausescu's. Impaling is for the people's
benefit. Tradesmen all want something for nothing, and the land is full of
beggars; what better than to lock them all in a church and burn them? In the
end, Vlad, back in charge, is thought to be 'the prince of darkness'; or
else as 'the light of Romania'. Perplexed by his inability to work things
out, he impales himself, significantly between the two thieves - but 'I'll
be back,' he says.
Richard Crane's translation includes some awful jokes, like confusing
'stakes' and 'steaks'. Sorescu's own jokes are fair - a portrait of Vlad
fades to nothing because the paints are made from Romanian soil. The date
runs from 1429 to 1476, but the language and behaviour are of today. The
impaled pair are done by Stephen McCann and Andrew Sachs, and Vlad's police
chief Papuc is Roy Hanlon. Faynia Williams is the director.
Better political satire in Bulgakov's The Master and Margarita, which on
Saturday played the second of the four parts of Brian Wright's Classic
Serial adaptation for Radio 4. The story is complex. The Devil has come to
earth in Moscow, with three assistants, one of them a giant cat, who call
him 'Messiah'. He poses as a professor of necromancy, and he is after 'the
Master', author of a book about the trial of Jesus, condemned by the
authorities. The Master is in a mental home, but his friend Margarita has a
copy of the book.
Some events seem less than relevant - the death under a tram of the
president of the Writers' Union, the proposed pantomime by some of Woland's
gang. It would make a marvellous comic strip, and I don't mean this
adversely. Daniel Massey is Woland, with no theatrical diablerie; the
Master, who has done little so far, is Michael Maloney; and Geraldine James
is a sturdy Margarita. David Hutchinson directs.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

921121

