FT924-12228

FT  22 OCT 92 / Investment consortium puts Wilkinson Sword up for sale


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Consumer Industries Editor


WILKINSON SWORD has been put up for sale by Eemland Holdings, the consortium
of international investors which three years ago bought the shaving products
and toiletries manufacturer from Stora Kopparberg of Sweden.
Mr Mike Dowdall, Eemland chairman, said the decision had been taken because
the Swedish financial institutions which own half the company were unwilling
to fund further investment in Wilkinson's business.
Gillette, Wilkinson's biggest competitor in shaving equipment, owns 22 per
cent of Eemland, a Dutch registered company. Mr Dowdall denied that the
planned sale of Wilkinson was influenced by pressure from competition
authorities in several countries on Gillette to dispose of its stake in
Eemland.
Last year, Gillette was ordered by the British government to sell its stake
in Eemland after a Monopolies and Mergers Commission investigation concluded
that the investment was anti-competitive.
Since then, German competition authorities have issued a similar order.
Gillette was also compelled by the US Justice Department in 1989 to reverse
its purchase of Wilkinson's US operations.
Gillette said yesterday that it expected the planned sale of Wilkinson to
resolve its outstanding problems with competition authorities.
Wilkinson earned operating profits of DM46.8m (Pounds 19.5m) on sales of
DM316.3m last year, of which about 85 per cent were in shaving products. It
is the second largest producer of blades in western Europe, after Gillette.
The company, which is more than 200 years old, has a manufacturing plant in
Britain and another in Germany, where it sells about half its shaving
products. It also has sales and distribution operations in the US.
Eemland, whose only asset is Wilkinson, said it had appointed Enskilda and
Goldman Sachs International to advise on the planned disposal. It expected
formal approaches to potential purchasers to be made in the near future.
Although discussions are understood to have been held with several possible
acquirers recently, they have reached no conclusion. Companies which could
be interested in Wilkinson include Bic of France and Colgate-Palmolive and
Warner-Lambert of the US.
Gillette sharpens its image Page 15
Lex Page 20
Facing up to the costs of a close shave Page 21

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921022

