FT922-4222

FT  06 JUN 92 / Briefcase, Q&A: Mixed mortgages


I HAVE moved home as a result of changing my job and am renting out my main
residence. I am considering purchasing a second property for investment
purposes and renting that out as well.
1. Can the excess interest on the loan for the second property, over and
above rental income, be used to offset tax on the income from letting my
original home?
2. Does it matter, for tax purposes, on which house the loan for the second
property is secured?
3. Can qualifying expenses incurred in the tax year immediately prior to
letting these properties, and solely related to preparation for letting, be
used as an allowance for tax purposes against rental income in the current
tax year?
4. Can you recommend a thorough text which covers residential lettings in
detail?
The solicitors who act for you in the purchase will, of course, be able to
guide you through the income tax and capital gains tax maze. (Before
formally appointing a firm to act for you, however, it would be prudent to
check that it has someone who is competent in the tax aspects of domestic
property transactions.)
1. Yes; subject to the conditions set out in section 355(l) (b) of the
Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 by virtue of section 355(4).
2. No; it is the use of the borrowed money which matters - not the security
for the loan by virtue of section 354(l).
3. No. However, such expenditure may be deductible in calculating the
chargeable gain when the house is sold, by virtue of Inland Revenue
statement of practice D24:
'Expenditure on initial repairs to a property (including expenditure on
decorations) undertaken in order to put it into a fit state for letting, and
not allowable for the purposes of Schedule A, is regarded as allowable
expenditure for capital gains tax purposes under section 38(1) of the
Taxation of Chargeable Gains Act 1992.'
4. You are probably better off talking to your chosen solicitor.
The following free pamphlets from your tax office may be helpful, but they
tend to oversimplify the intricate and arbitrary rules laid down by
Parliament:
CGT4 - Capital gains tax: owner-occupied houses
IR87 - Rooms to let
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920606

