FT924-11467

FT  26 OCT 92 / Arts: Solti's expert, unmoving 'Otello' - Opera


   By MAX LOPPERT


THE most affecting moments came after final curtain. Georg Solti, having
conducted the latest Royal Opera Otello revival two days after his 80th
birthday, was feted onstage, and then presented with tokens of the house's
esteem: the post of Music Director Laureate, a silver rose (Der
Rosenkavalier was the first opera he conducted in the house), the ring from
his first Covent Garden Ring and the goblet from the 1971 Tristan which
brought his decade as Music Director to a close.
Two operatic veterans closely associated with Solti and much loved in
London, Hans Hotter and Birgit Nilsson, were there as (respectively) ring-
and cup-bearer. Nilsson's speaking voice, ringing bronze-toned through the
auditorium, provided the evening's great moment of vocal thrill.
What preceded the ceremony was a highly polished, powerfully worked Verdi
reading which left me largely unstirred and untouched. Not entirely. Kiri Te
Kanawa, a gracious but pale-toned and pallid-spirited heroine for most of
the evening (with even an unfamiliar slight flutter of unsteadiness at its
start), delivered the Willow Song in a stream of exquisitely moulded sound
and in the death scene began to phrase with eloquence and emotional
vivacity. Placido Domingo cried out 'Desdemona] Desdemona] Ah, morta]' in
exactly the tones of grandest tragedy - varied in colour and jagged with
passion - that earlier one had so much missed in his solidly routined
singing and acting.
These were reminders of the impact the roles of hero and heroine can have:
welcome but late, and insufficient.
Solti conducted my first Otello (at Covent Garden not quite 25 years ago,
with McCracken, Carlyle and Gobbi). Then, he was a hard-driving Verdian,
urging fierce excitements out of the music, prone to open the orchestral
floodgates at climaxes (in which all but the most penetrative voices were
likely to drown).
Now, the approach is much more light-fingered. Rhythms have a spring, not a
whiplash. Textures are ventilated. (Only some ill-tuned choral singing
caused any clogging.) Singers are lovingly supported. The work is viewed
whole, not in sections.
On this level of executive achievement any expressions of critical
reservation must be a confession of personal taste. I missed a haze of
string warmth in the love duet, a broadening of the tempo (and a concomitant
increase of emotional expansiveness) at key moments.
I missed the traditional Otello spaciousness in the ensembles, the feeling
in the hero's Act 3 monologue of after-the-storm hush reverberant with
grief. Solti still seems to me to keep at arm's length the 'inner life' of
Verdi's music: for all the technical marvels of Friday's performance, I
continue to find him an unmoving Otello conductor.
The one untried element on the cast-list is Sergey Leiferkus, here
undertaking his first Iago. He produces a precise, finely channelled, darkly
glowing baritone that, while not conventionally Verdian, suits the music
excellently. He holds a balance between the smiling face and the scheming
mind which owes nothing to Iago cliche (apart from the peals of laughter at
the close of the Credo, which should be abandoned).
He floats and colours the Dream while keeping its narrative coolly
unfolding. He will develop much further in the role; already, on a stage
mainly given over to the expertly predictable, he provides the genuine
dramatic and musical interest.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921026

