FT924-6013

FT  24 NOV 92 / Engineers criticise DTI in blueprint for recovery


   By ANDREW BAXTER


THE Engineering Employers' Federation urged the prime minister yesterday to
support its campaign for a long-term industrial strategy to bring about a
sustained recovery.
'We'd like a direct response from the prime minister,' said Mr Neil Johnson,
the federation's director-general, announcing a 'twin-track' industrial
strategy that combines immediate action to rectify the balance of payments
and continuous long-term development of technology and industry.
The federation's document reflects the industry's disappointment with the
performance of the Department of Trade and Industry in the seven months
since the election.
'We're still looking for tangible action and visible effects rather than
words and promises,' Mr Johnson said.
'In recent weeks, industry itself has been doing the job of the DTI,
fighting for a voice and for action within government. I believe we have a
right to expect a more effective and more committed champion.'
Mr Johnson was in no doubt that the recent change of heart at the Treasury,
as illustrated by some of the Autumn Statement proposals, had been forced by
pressure from industry rather than the DTI. But the federation is now taking
the battle a stage further. A senior, effective and forceful department of
state is needed to develop a long-term strategic view of industry, Mr
Johnson said.
'If the DTI lacks the vision, the competence or the determination - or if it
is simply too busy with short-term issues - to deal with long-term strategy,
then perhaps we should look to the creation of a specialist Treasury section
to do this vital work.'
The federation canvassed its 5,000 member companies and other organisations
to produce its industrial strategy. It argues that a long-term strategy is
needed to give some meaning to short-term measures such as changes to
capital allowances.
Behind its plea lies concern about two long-term trends - rising consumption
and falling investment - that, in combination, highlight the critical need
to regenerate the UK's industrial and manufacturing base.
The federation's proposals for immediate action by the government include
encouragement for internationally mobile investment to locate in and remain
in the UK; 'effective, timely and internationally competitive' export
finance; and the permanent extension of capital allowances for plant and
machinery to 100 per cent.
In the long term the government should take a lead in developing a vision of
how industry and technology can be developed to national advantage. But
industry itself should also be thinking strategically.
The federation wants the City to look for achievable future rates of return,
not illusory expectations of unsustainably high profitability. The 1980s had
left a legacy of excessive expectations on rates of return of investment, Mr
Johnson said.
Industrial Strategy - Proposals for Recovery and Sustained Growth. Despatch
Department, EEF, Broadway House, Tothill Street, London SW1H 9NQ. Pounds 15
(free to EEF members).

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921124

