FT922-4236

FT  06 JUN 92 / Markets: Homes that fail to hold their value - Serious Money


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


THE OLD adage 'safe as houses' has taken on an altogether different meaning
in the present property recession. And 'negative equity' is entering the
vocabulary of home-owners to whom it once probably meant nothing.
The persistence of the recession has meant that both owners and lenders are
facing a situation in which the value of a home is less than the amount
borrowed to pay for it. For the first time in decades, some owners are - as
well as seeing their equity disappear - facing a net liability because of
the decline in prices since autumn 1988.
How many are affected? The Council of Mortgage Lenders estimates there are
278,000 'negative loans' taken out by first-time borrowers. These are
concentrated heavily in the south-east, where prices rose faster and higher
than in other part of the country at the peak of the market - only to fall
almost as spectacularly during its downswing. But a report by broker UBS
Phillips and Drew regards this figure as an under-estimate and calculates
that the number of owners affected is just over 1.8m, if second-time buyers
and those who have re-mortgaged their homes are included.
Most owners regard their homes as an investment as well as a place to live.
And property was a particularly good investment for a generation of them
during the three periods of high inflation, in 1972-73, 1978-80 and 1986-88.
They gained tax relief on mortgage interest payments while the real value of
their debt was being eroded by inflation, which outstripped mortgage rates
(real interest rates were negative).
Some people seek reassurance in the view that property values will recover
as they have done in previous economic cycles. But Britain's entry into the
European exchange rate mechanism has cast serious doubts on such
conventional wisdom. The UK is entering a new era in which the old
assumptions may no longer hold good but - as Tuesday's referendum in Denmark
showed - a new conventional wisdom has yet to be established.
The two house price booms at the beginning and end of the 1970s were
followed by periods of high inflation and low or negative real interest
rates which eroded debt and sustained property values. The surge in the
residential property market in 1988 was helped by a drop in mortgage rates
from 14 per cent in 1985 to 9.8 per cent in June 1988 plus the willingness
of some lenders to extend loans for 100 per cent of a home's value.
By contrast, the discipline of the ERM is expected widely to herald a period
of lower rates of inflation. But interest rates are still high in real terms
and may need to remain firm to combat the remaining inflationary pressures
in the UK or to reflect those elsewhere in Europe. Such a combination of low
inflation rates and firm real interest rates would continue to depress the
housing market.
More immediately, repossessions and negative equity, as well as lack of
confidence by potential first-time buyers, have stalled a recovery. The
government's statement this week that it would re-introduce stamp duty after
August 19 has been a further blow.
Mortgage-to-rent schemes, which were part of the same package assembled
hastily in December in an attempt to shore-up the market, have helped so few
families that lenders were called in by the government this week to explain
why.
Nevertheless, few analysts expect the market to remain weak. Steven Bell at
Morgan Grenfell, the merchant bank, which is producing a study of the
housing market, believes there will be a gradual recovery and that when
prices do take off, they will do so rapidly. But he doubts if housing bought
for investment will be able to outperform the returns available on such
deposits as tax-exempt special savings accounts (Tessas), now and in the
near future, because of high real interest rates.
Those who have the luxury of choosing property only as an investment will
have to weigh the odds carefully. This is not a choice available to those
whose houses are worth less than they paid for them. Yet, even they can take
comfort from John Wriglesworth, author of the UBS report.
He manages to see negative equity in positive terms and argues that owners'
inability to sell is just as well since the market needs buyers, not
sellers. Once the 600,000 people who would have been first-time buyers over
the past three years overcome their lack of confidence and enter the market,
prices will rise gradually. Then, he says, negative equity will make a
welcome departure from the owner's vocabularly.
None of this will console those who are struggling to keep up repayments
they can barely afford, or who need a larger home as their families increase
in size. But, for the time being, sit tight is still the best advice.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920606

