FT921-14329

FT  16 JAN 92 / The Lloyd's Report - Analysis: Task force calls for
abolition of rule on divestment - Accounting, management and the rights and
duties of names and agents


THE TASK FORCE calls for abolition of the rule obliging Lloyd's brokers sell
any majority interests in managing agents. That proposal is one of several
put forward by the task force which would require an amendment to the
Lloyd's Act 1982.
'We believe that the regulatory regime at Lloyd's is now strong enough to
provide assurance in the areas that led to the imposition of divestment,'
the task force comments.
It adds that the ownership restriction is an unnecessary curb on the
commercial freedom of Lloyd's. 'At the time it was being implemented, the
provisions of the Lloyd's Act 1982 contrasted sharply with the opposite
action in the Stock Exchange,' the task force comments.
Expectations of a call to move from a three-year to a one-year accounting
system at Lloyd's have been dashed by the task force, even though more than
two thirds of submissions to it from operators in the market favoured the
change.
The task force maintains that a one-year basis would lead to inaccuracy and
would be inconsistent with the need to preserve equity between Names on
successive years of account.
It says also that many competitors to Lloyd's in the company market in
specialised insurance sectors - such as marine, aviation, transport and
treaty reinsurance - use a two-year or three-year accounting system.
The task force says more information is needed about the development of an
account. It recommends publication of a global profit forecast after 24
months of the account, and publication of a syndicate's solvency position in
the annual accounts.
One Lloyd's handicap in the past has been its inability to respond rapidly
to rises in insurance rates. The report suggests that Names should be
allowed to increase the amount of insurance they underwrite in mid year
rather than only at the end of the year.
The report says syndicates should be allowed to increase the business they
write by making more use of reinsurance from outside the market. Lloyd's
syndicates make extensive use of reinsurance. In 1988, they ceded 37 per
cent of gross premiums to reinsurers.
The proposal would in effect allow syndicates to co-operate with outside
reinsurers to do more business without increasing their capital base. The
report adds that consortium arrangements - where Lloyd's syndicates and
companies co-insure certain risks - should be encouraged.
Other recommendations:
Improved accessibility of Names' capital.
Close monitoring of market liquidity.
Individuals to be allowed to apply to become Names at any point during the
year.
Managing agents to be able to state in mid year that they do not foresee a
syndicate utilising total capacity for that year and to reduce each Name's
line pro rata.
Encouraging consortium arrangements between syndicates and companies, with
Names benefiting from any fees or commissions received from the consortium.
Global profit forecasts for the market as a whole should be published by the
corporation after 24 months of the account.
The council, with professional advisers, to consider proposals to permit
explicit discounting of old-year liabilities.
More centralised management of old-year claims, and a working party to
develop a detailed proposal for an old-year claims centre of excellence.
Investigations by the council into any mergers that would result in a
managing or member's agent controlling more than 25 per cent of capacity,
with a view to preventing any merger not in the interests of Lloyd's.
Endorsement of profit commission 'clawback' in the event of prior-year
deterioration.
A working party to develop detailed 'best practice' guidelines to establish
tighter budgetary discipline, more openly negotiated fees and expenses, and
greater disclosure.
An independent chairman for the agent review body.
Guidelines for competence in the agency system, similar to those for new
active underwriters, to be developed by the Lloyd's Underwriting Agencies
Association and the corporation.
Names should be given rights akin to those enjoyed by shareholders,
including the right to continuing participation in a syndicate, the right to
ask the council to replace the managing agent, the right to approve major
syndicate transactions, the right of access to syndicate information and the
right to regular meetings of Names on a syndicate.
Reinsurance to close - the reinsurance premium paid by the Names on one year
to close their syndicate into its following year - should be calculated more
cautiously, leading to bigger reinsurance-to-close premiums, reducing
syndicates' tax bills but increasing the security of members of the
syndicate in the subsequent year.
Specific qualifications for managing and members agents.
Mandatory non-executive board members for all agents.
A review process of involvement of non-executive directors in approving
remuneration levels within the agency.
The council to endorse target expense ratios and report progress towards
reaching them.
A project to evaluate options for minimising run-off costs.
Market associations and the Lloyd's Insurance Brokers' Committee to develop
proposals to refine the broker remuneration structure to create 'a clearer
match' between broker incentives and Names' interests.
A joint initiative to assess profitability along the total
underwriter-broker chain in selected areas of business.
An investigation into the feasibility and cost of initiating a quality
management programme across key processes within the market-services area.
The council should work towards a future in which market infrastructure is
identical across the bureaux of the entire London market.
Publication of the percentage of business placed by Lloyd's brokers into the
Lloyd's market.

The Financial Times


London Page 10 Illustration (Omitted).

920116

