FT921-3935

FT  12 MAR 92 / Japanese see February trade surplus double


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S trade surplus for February doubled from a year earlier to Dollars
10.2bn (Pounds 5.7bn), a record total for a single month and a sign that the
country is likely to face a sharp increase in trade friction this year.
Ministry of Finance customs-cleared figures showed a 12.4 per cent increase
in exports to Dollars 28.1bn and a 10.3 per cent fall in imports to Dollars
17.9bn, reflecting the effects of slowing domestic demand, which has
encouraged Japanese companies to increase their exports.
The Japanese government has been nervous in recent days that the yen's
weakness will also encourage exports, while the declining demand for imports
has prompted politicians to intensify their calls for an economic package to
stimulate domestic growth.
Seasonally adjusted, the surplus rose from Dollars 8.4bn in January to
Dollars 10.4bn, with exports rising 1.1 per cent, but imports falling by an
unexpectedly large 8.4 per cent.
A Finance Ministry official said the record figure was a 'headache', and
admitted that the shift to higher-valued added exports, such as luxury cars,
would have a long-term influence on the trade balance.
Exports to most of Japan's leading trade partners rose sharply, with a 7 per
cent increase to the US, 8.1 per cent to the EC, 16.8 per cent to the UK,
and a massive 59.8 per cent to China, reflecting the rapid expansion of that
country's economy in recent months. Japanese trade officials expect that
China will also be the final destination for a large share of the 36.1 per
cent increase in exports to Hong Kong.
However, imports from the US fell 6.8 per cent and Japan recorded a
bilateral surplus of Dollars 3.7bn, while imports from the EC fell 13.4 per
cent, and Japan had surplus of Dollars 3.4bn. Imports from the UK fell 22
per cent, from France 31.5 per cent, and from Italy 15.1 per cent,
indicating that demand for luxury European goods remains sluggish.
Japanese electronics companies, which will report sharply lower profits in
the year to end March and have been particularly hit by weak demand on the
home market, increased their exports of semiconductors (up 23.4 per cent)
and televisions (up 21.6 per cent). And the car makers, whose profits are
also under pressure, increased their exports by 18.7 per cent, including a
25.4 per cent lift in truck and bus exports.
A Japanese foreign exchange dealer said that the record surplus would
probably prompt Tokyo to intensify its efforts to drive down the dollar,
although Japanese sales of the dollar yesterday had little impact. The
Finance Ministry said that the yen's current weakness 'cannot continue for
long', and hinted that other leading industrial nations could intervene in
the market in coming days.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920312

