FT922-13364

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Consumers expected to give fillip to high
street spending


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, DAVID BARCHARD, PEGGY HOLLINGER, GARY MEAD, PHILIP
RAWSTORNE and MICHAEL SKAPINKER


THE election result sent a wave of qualified elation through Britain's high
streets yesterday as retailers, building societies, travel agents and other
consumer businesses forecast that it would add impetus to a recent tentative
revival in spending.
However, views differed sharply over the likely speed and strength of a
recovery. It was not always clear how far attitudes were influenced by
relief that a long period of political uncertainty had ended or how far they
reflected positive confidence in the economic outlook under a new Tory
administration.
Many businessmen expected an immediate burst of consumer spending -
particularly in the south-east - and a few said that it had already started.
Texas Homecare said takings at its chain of DIY stores shot up yesterday to
double the level of recent Fridays.
But many companies also doubted whether a recovery could be sustained
without additional measures to stimulate the economy - above all, a cut in
interest rates.
One of the most optimistic prognoses came from Mr Geoffrey Miller, managing
director of Barclays Banking Divisions, who said: 'We are pretty confident
that a consumer-led recovery will now get under way and the housing market
will be the first sector that benefits.'
Mr Stanley Kalms, chairman of Dixons, the electrical and electronics
retailer, said: 'I am quite sure the result is going to give a very
important fillip to the high street. At last consumers know what the name of
the game is and can make spending assessments.'
Mr Kalms, who threatened before the election to freeze planned investments
worth as much as Pounds 50m if Labour won, said the programme would now go
ahead and would be pitched 'at the upper end of the range'.
In the travel industry, which had viewed a hung parliament as the biggest
threat to business, the mood was also jubilant. 'The election is brilliant
news. A decisive result was fundamentally important,' said Mr Roger Allard,
managing director of Owners Abroad, the second-largest UK travel company.
There were forecasts of a pick-up in advertising. 'Much to do with
advertising and marketing budgets depends on a 'feel-good' factor. One
result of the election is that people in charge of advertising and marketing
budgets are bound to have much greater confidence,' said Mr Mike Walsh,
chairman of Ogilvy & Mather in London.
However, other businesses dependent on consumer spending were more cautious.
Kingfisher, which owns the Woolworth, Comet, B&Q and Superdrug chains,
agreed that the election had removed a cloud over confidence but it added:
'Recoveries are not created by elections.'
Laura Ashley, the fashion and furnishings group, also struck a cautious
note. 'There will be a lot of euphoria around in the next two weeks, but I
think it will be misplaced. Recovery will come, but it won't be very rapid,'
said Mr David Oliver, corporate affairs director.
Mr Michael Jackaman, chairman of Allied-Lyons, the drinks, food and
retailing group, was even more downbeat: 'We were not looking for fireworks
from UK consumer spending before the election and our view hasn't changed.'
The optimists claim the main obstacle to a consumer-led recovery has not
been a lack of money, but of confidence. They argue that political
uncertainty and Labour's tax proposals have delayed purchases by consumers -
particularly those in higher income brackets, who account for a
disproportionate amount of spending. The clearer political outlook should
thus unleash a wave of pent up demand.
More cautious observers do not dispute this but point out that the election
has not resolved deep-seated economic worries, notably fear of unemployment
and high interest rates. They doubt that confidence will remain buoyant for
long while these concerns persist.
Views on interest rates differ widely. Although many banks expect a decline,
Mr Michael Shaw, chief executive of Britannia Building Society, warned
yesterday that it could be slowed by increased competition for savings.
Lower mortgage rates could take several months to work through to the
housing market. 'I think the market will pick up slowly, but buying a house
will never be as easy or cheap again as it is now,' said Mr John Bayliss,
managing director of Abbey National.
In the words of Mr Tim Park, a corporate finance director of Williams
Holdings, which owns conservatory maker Amdega and kitchen supplier
Smallbone: 'It is early days. The economic situation has not changed in the
last 24 hours.'
Reports by Guy de Jonquieres, David Barchard, Peggy Hollinger, Gary Mead,
Philip Rawstorne and Michael Skapinker.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920411

