FT921-11910

FT  29 JAN 92 / Business and the Environment: Worldwide water supply drying
up


   By TIM COONE


Is there a worldwide water crisis? Five hundred specialists from 100 nations
meeting in Dublin this week for the UN International Conference on Water and
the Environment (ICWE) believe so.
The assembled body of statistics and working papers gathered for the
conference makes convincing and sombre reading. Among the more notable and
alarming points are:
Eighty per cent of diseases and more than 33% of deaths in developing
countries involve inadequate water quantity and quality.
The world population will exceed 6bn by 2000, and reach 8.5bn by 2025 of
which 7.2bn will be in the developing world. Urban populations, have
increased from 1bn to 3.5bn during the past 30 years.
In some cities such as Sao Paolo in Brazil, effluent discharges are as great
as the natural riverflow through them.
Less than 2 per cent of the 2m tonnes of human excrement produced daily in
cities around the world is treated. The rest is discharged into
watercourses.
World water demand by the end of the decade, including requirements for
waste dilution, may reach 18,700 cubic kilometres annually. This is almost
half of the total global runoff water annually available.
The 1991 cholera outbreak in Peru cost an estimated Dollars 460m in lost
exports and tourism 'which would have more than paid for the water and
sanitation systems needed to prevent such an outbreak occurring'.
The polluting load from industry and domestic consumers 'long ago passed the
threshold of nature's recovery processes - with alarming consequences for
the natural environment and for the health of urban residents'.
The world trend of an accelerating growth in demand, rising to meet a
limited global freshwater supply, carries a warning of Malthusian doom.
Disease and war threatens if, as a family of nations, we do not act soon to
change the way we think about water.
Economists rather than engineers are now being looked to for solutions. 'One
of the fundamental changes required is a shift from preoccupation with
development of water resources by major construction programmes to more
efficient use of available supplies using water conservation and demand
management,' akeynote paper observes.
It is pointed out that badly maintained distribution systems frequently
waste as much as 50 per cent of the available water supply. Heavy subsidies
to agriculture and industry also result in inefficient water use. Typically,
one tonne of cereal can require 2,500 tonnes of irrigation water to produce;
one tonne of steel requires 90 tonnes of water, while one tonne of synthetic
fibre can require up to 5,000 tonnes of water.
Globally, agriculture uses 73 per cent of the world's water supplies.
Irrigated farmland has increased from 94m hectares in 1950 to 260m in 1990.
Even sacred cows such as food security policies should be reconsidered.
Arcot Ramachandran, the executive director of the ICWE, asks: 'In conditions
of scarcity, it is surely not unreasonable to raise the question whether
food security is best provided by transporting water over huge distances at
enormous cost in order to supply it at massively subsidised prices or
whether purchasing and stockpiling food may not, at least in some cases, be
a more sensible solution.'
The underlying theme of the Dublin conference is that mankind's historical
view of water as a cheap and abundant resource requires an urgent updating.
Abuse and overuse has made it into a 'fragile, economic good' which needs to
be rationally priced. For many countries, a failure to do so will result in
economic slow-down and even stagnation.
More rational water pricing policies worldwide would help conserve existing
water supplies and improve their efficiency, and would provide the
additional financial resources for future developments.
According to Ramachandran: 'One of the most important messages to reach
world leaders from this conference must be that they should put a realistic
economic value on their freshwater resources.'

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920129

