FT922-13441

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Beware - loan sharks about]


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


AS BANKS and building societies become increasingly tight-fisted in the
recession, some people may be tempted to look elsewhere to borrow.
Advertisements - sometimes promising 'fast, sympathetic service'  - are
likely to catch the eye of those up to their neck in debt. But these are
companies preying on the weak, according to the latest issue of Which?, the
Consumers' Association magazine.
Which? found some brokers charging as much as Pounds 1,000 to arrange a
Pounds 5,000 loan. One company charged Pounds 499 on a Pounds 2,000 loan,
leaving the borrower with only Pounds 1,500 in cash. Commissions paid by
lenders and brokers varied from 2 per cent to more than 10 per cent of the
loan amount. According to Which?, the greater the debt problems of the
borrower, the more commission the broker gets.
It found many interest rates were double those offered by high street
lenders - and some were extortionate. One couple with mortgage arrears
thought they had agreed to a re-mortgage but had, in fact, been given a
four-month bridging loan of Pounds 18,000 at an APR of 51.1 per cent. The
loan included fees and interest of Pounds 5,520, leaving the couple with
only Pounds 12,480. Another company offering a loan of Pounds 2,500 charged
an APR of 40 per cent, compared with around 16 per cent from high street
lenders.
The association says one reason for the existence of the loan sharks is the
ease with which operating licences can be obtained from the Office of Fair
Trading. A Which? researcher acquired a licence as a credit broker after
sending Pounds 70 and filling an application form which required neither his
employment history nor references.
The Consumer Credit Act contains 'extortionate credit' provisions which
allow consumers to take lenders to court over allegedly unfair credit terms.
But only 15 cases have been decided so far - and only four have been won by
the consumer.
The OFT says this is because the courts have tended to concentrate on the
credit charges without addressing abuses in the way such loans are sold. It
has proposed several changes to the law, including replacing 'extortionate
credit' by 'unjust credit' to cover unfair business activity. Another change
is to empower the OFT to initiate legal action on behalf of the borrower.
The association welcomes the proposals but calls on the OFT to be tougher
when licencing and policing credit brokers.
It advises those who are worried about their financial situation to contact
their local Citizens' Advice Bureau or to telephone the National Debtline
(021-359-8501) for confidential advice.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920411

