FT921-657

FT  27 MAR 92 / Redland wins battle for Steetley: Takeover will create
Europe's leading building materials group


   By BRONWEN MADDOX


REDLAND yesterday won its four-month battle to take over Steetley, its
building materials rival, with 60 per cent of Steetley's shareholders
accepting its offer.
The takeover, which values Steetley at Pounds 613m at yesterday's closing
prices, will create Europe's leading building materials group with a
turnover of slightly in excess of Pounds 2bn. It will be the UK's second
largest company in bricks, Europe's second largest in aggregates, and the
world's largest in roofing tiles.
Redland also announced acceptances from 78 per cent of Steetley preference
shareholders. The offer of 87 Redland shares for 100 Steetley shares had a
cash alternative of 365p.
A spokesman for Steetley said yesterday: 'The board is clearly disappointed,
but a construction company in the trough of a recession is a fairly easy
target.'
He added that the UK's competition policy, which forced it to abandon a
proposed joint venture in bricks and tiles with Tarmac, the UK building
materials group, had been 'no aid either'. The proposed venture, announced
last year, was referred first to Brussels under EC competition rules, and
then back to the UK. It collapsed after referral to the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission.
Redland, which planned to bid for Steetley in 1992, then accelerated its
plans after giving the MMC assurances that it would sell certain businesses.
Mr Robert Napier, chief executive, said yesterday: 'We have now put together
two fine companies and we have a lot of work ahead to get the benefits.'
Redland expects the merger to bring Pounds 30m pre-tax cost savings in 1993.
Steetley will also bring the group around Pounds 30m of unused advance
corporation tax provisions.
Redland has undertaken to sell within 18 months two UK brick works and one
clay tile business with combined turnover of almost Pounds 30m, around 5 per
cent of Steetley's turnover, leaving UK turnover at just under a third of
the merged group.
The Steetley board yesterday advised shareholders to take no further action
until a statement after a board meeting tomorrow.
A spokesman for the company said it hoped there would be 'an orderly and
professional handover . . . the directors aren't going to just put on their
coats and walk out'. Mr Napier declined to comment on whether there would be
a continuing role for Steetley directors.
The past two months has seen a debate between the two boards about the value
of European aggregates, in which Redland accused Steetley of overvaluing its
French and Spanish assets.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920327

