FT924-6456

FT  20 NOV 92 / Arts: Hawks and Doves - Theatre


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Without having had a premiere in the West End, or at the National or RSC,
Louise Page has become one of our best known younger playwrights. She is
author of Salonika, Golden Girls, Real Estate and more; last year, her Adam
Was a Gardener premiered at Chichester; in recent months, Radio 4 has
broadcast two of her plays. According to her programme biography, her work
has been performed in 21 countries. And it is usually intelligent,
sensitive, touching, adult and absorbing.
Last year's Adam Was a Gardener was subtitled 'an evocative love affair
between the past and present'; Hawks and Doves, her new play now at
Southampton's Nuffield Theatre, is subtitled 'a love story for the '90s.' In
both plays, love commences between a man and woman from different
backgrounds, a love based on shared values, not least on affection for the
English countryside. But here the love is between an upper-class Southerner
and a lower-class Northerner; and it goes wrong.
So, unfortunately, does the play. It begins promisingly, like some law court
near-plotless modern version of the attraction between Jane Eyre and
Rochester. But it becomes increasingly like a North/South adaptation of
Howard's End - a too-simple-by-half depiction of heartless toffs (ie. hawks)
exploiting honest working or unemployed folk (ie. doves) and a
skeleton-in-the-cupboard melodrama to boot. The toffs breed peregrine
falcons, whereas one of the working-class Northerners fancies pigeons.
Both classes admire open countryside, wild birds and Mozart. These shared
sympathies are enough to get Otto out of his upper-class marriage to Julia
and into a new one with working-class Marie - but that isn't far enough.
When it comes to croquet, Julia and Otto insist 'You can only learn the
rules as you go along,' as they win. Marie, refusing to play any more,
replies 'Some people are born knowing them.'
Well, croquet is enough to wreck any marriage, but worse is the fact that
Otto is hiding from Marie his complicity in - well, in the plot;
professional discretion forbids me to say more. Suffice it to say that Marie
finds out, and the play ends - fatuously - on her reaction (vengeful) and
his (terrified).
Earlier, there have been a few other scenes more intensely dramatic than
Page or the play's director, Patrick Sandford, knows how to handle  - not
least when Marie rounds on her ex-husband Ken with the carving-knife.
Gillian Bevan, playing Marie, has a charming housewife-Cinderella manner,
but also has an unbecoming hairdo and too many dropped syllables. Michael
Simkins carries off Otto's mixture of wimpish sensitivity and lordly
authority well, but he can't stop the final moment of terror from seeming
risible. But everybody is wrestling with a poorly-paced script and weak
direction.
Remarkably, only young Alex Scott, as Marie's son Paul, creates a full
three-dimensional character. He is as first-rate as he was last year in Adam
Was a Gardener: spontaneous and vivid.
In addition to her other achievements, Louise Page is also one of the
scriptwriters for Radio 4's The Archers. But for which bits? The scenes
between Robin and Caroline in recent weeks seem to have been written for -
remember Round The Horne? - those ageing juveniles Binky Huckerback and Dame
Celia Molestrangler, forever playing Charles and Fiona. If Page is
responsible for their episodes, then I take back any kind word I've ever
said about her.
Nuffield Theatre, Southampton

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921120

