FT924-12145

FT  22 OCT 92 / Arts: The Brubeck beat falters - Jazz


   By GARRY BOOTH


The knowledge that Dave Brubeck was probably defying medical opinion to
appear at the Festival Hall earlier this week lent an unwelcome edge to his
performance. The quartet is a favourite and well tested format for the
pianist who almost single handedly commercialised jazz in the 1950s with
'Take Five'. He has a new album of old show tunes in the shops, Once when I
was very young, (Verve 844298-2) and a four CD retrospective, Time
Signatures, which reaches back to 1946, being made ready by Columbia.
It ought to have been the best possible time to be reminded of the 71 year
old's tidily overlaid arrangements and almost perverse way with the beat.
Instead, a fragile looking Brubeck, just out of hospital following heart
trouble, put a brave face on it and reluctantly let his sidemen take the
strain. Not that listening to the mature sound of long time collaborator
Bill Smith's clarinet and the redoubtable bass of Jack Six, cracked along by
Randy Jones's drums, is any great hardship. But it would have been
interesting to discover whether Brubeck was still resisting the conventional
swing thing and if he yet worked slowly and deliberately to his own
compositional conclusions.
In the circumstances the quartet, done up to the nines in djs, were obliged
to swing away from Brubeck with numbers old ('Shine on Harvest Moon'),
unusual (an unrealised opera excerpt, 'Softly William Softly') and the
familiar ('Take Five'). Bill Smith, who has accompanied Brubeck on and off
since the late 1940s, carried his faltering boss gracefully. A solo stint
which used reverb on the clarinet gave his sound an almost underwater
quality. Jack Six climbed energetically around the double bass and British
drummer Randy Jones worked harder than he probably has in a long time.
Yet in spite of his obvious frailty (he had cancelled Glasgow earlier in the
tour) and unease in accomplishing some of his ideas, Brubeck's curiously
interlocking interplay with the clarinet rose to the surface intermittently.
Later, with the appearance of cellist Matthew Brubeck, one of a large and
talented brood, on leave from the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra, Brubeck
demonstrated that his cautiously structured technique can and does tap feet,
even in this temporarily careworn atmosphere.
The Dave Brubeck Quartet, Royal Festival Hall. Sponsor: Fiat Tipo

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921022

