FT923-15747

FT  01 JUL 92 / NZ central bank warnson budget financing


   By TERRY HALL


   WELLINGTON


THE New Zealand Reserve Bank, the country's central bank, yesterday warned
the government that any structural deterioration in the financial deficit in
tomorrow's budget could force it to tighten monetary policy.
In April, Ms Ruth Richardson, finance minister, warned that the deficit was
likely to double this year to NZDollars 3.4bn (Pounds 997m) from a forecast
NZDollars 1.7bn. Financial markets have been expecting a deficit of between
NZDollars 2.7bn and NZDollars 3bn to be announced for the coming year in the
budget.
The Reserve Bank, which has been given an independent role in setting
monetary policy to secure low inflation, said in yesterday's six-monthly
statement that it was comfortable with the present fiscal position, but any
structural deterioration would pose a significant risk to the inflation
outlook.
Mr Don Brash, the governor, said that the bank's key concern was that the
fiscal outlook remained sustainable over the medium term, and that this was
how it was seen by financial markets.
In its statement, which is seen as important in forecasting the bank's
response to economic developments, the bank said it expected actual
inflation would rise from 0.8 per cent in the year ended March 1992 to 1.8
per cent by the end of the current year.
However, this increase was still well within the bank's target range for
inflation of zero to 2 per cent. It forecast that inflation would fall to
0.9 per cent by the end of next year, before rising slightly to 1 per cent
at the end of 1994.
Mr Brash said that the bank was shifting its emphasis on reducing inflation
to ensuring that low inflation was maintained in a growing economy.
'We believe the economy is entering a period of sustainable growth and feel
reasonably optimistic this recovery will not reignite inflation.'
He said people now accepted that the bank would act to suppress inflation,
leading to a drop in inflationary expectations.
However, there was still some uncertainty over how effective the employment
contracts act, which has drastically weakened trade union power, would be in
a period of economic growth, Mr Brash said.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

