FT924-6318

FT  21 NOV 92 / Finance & the Family: An ethical question - Scheherazade
Daneshkhu asks if ethical funds are a good thing


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


ETHICAL and environmental funds, which restrict their investments to
companies that meet their strict criteria, are growing steadily although
they remain a 'niche' market. Most are unit trusts but there are also
ethical investment trusts, insurance and pension funds.
The amount invested in ethical and environmental funds has been rising -
reaching Pounds 321.1m in July from Pounds 273.9m a year earlier - according
to figures from the Ethical Investment Research Service (Eiris), which
researches companies to see if they meet the criteria. By contrast, the
amount invested in unit trusts in general grew by only 3 per cent over the
same period.
Increased demand for ethical funds has prompted one banking group, Mercury
Provident, to launch two occupational pension schemes aimed at the ethical
market, and it will be introducing an ethical private pension scheme in the
new year. Mercury Provident's Christian Nunhofer said the schemes were
launched because of the many enquiries made by depositors.
The cash holdings of the pension funds - amounting to about 10 per cent of
the total - will be held by Mercury Provident, which lends to projects
involved in ethical or environmental issues. Borrowers include charities,
businesses run for the benefit of the community, and environmental projects
such as organic agriculture or re-usable energy schemes.
Sun Life this month launched an ecological fund within its Luxembourg-based
Global Portfolio range, but with an eye to attracting funds from Germany
rather than the UK.
Ian Sampson, managing director of Sun Life portfolio counselling services,
said it was an international portfolio of companies which would allow
investors to satisfy their consciences without damaging their wealth. He
added, however, that while the British regarded environmental funds as a
good thing, Germans were more likely to provide the funds.
One concern for interested investors is the performance of ethical and
environmental funds. Buckmaster, a subsidiary of Credit Suisse Asset
Management, has turned in a consistently poor performance from its
Fellowship trust.
Recently it widened its ethical criteria to try to improve performance. A
spokesman said: 'We had excluded Sainsbury and Tesco because they sold
alcohol. We now say that if alcohol forms only a small proportion of total
sales, the company can qualify.'
The fund had been restricted to 35 per cent of the companies in the FT-SE
100 index, but now it can invest in about 60 per cent of them.
The table shows the performance of ethical and environmental funds to
November 1. Most have been launched only within the past three years, which
makes a judgment about long-term performance impossible (although the
largest ethical fund, Friends Provident's Stewardship, launched in 1984 is
also the oldest).
Of the eight funds listed in the UK Growth sector, half matched or
outperformed the average UK Growth unit trust in the year to November 1 and
more than half did better than the average in the two, three and five years
to November 1.
Results are more mixed for those in the international growth sector. Half
showed better performance than the average international growth unit trust
in the year to November 1, but only two of seven funds did so over two
years. Three of five beat the average over three years; over five years,
performance is polarised starkly between the poor performance of Buckmaster
Fellowship and Framlington Health, which came top of its sector and owed
much of its success to growth in the US biotechnology sector.
On balance, therefore, ethical and environmental funds have matched or
bettered the performance of other unit trusts. It is important for them to
maintain this performance edge, as ethical investors are unlikely to accept
their investments going down the drain in order to support their ideals.
Another area of concern is the ethical criteria used to select companies.
British Telecom has been dropped from the companies in which Friends
Provident invests because it supplies equipment to the Royal Air Force, and
has other defence links. But NM's Conscience fund is still investing in BT
because it has decided the defence supplies account for only a small
proportion of the overall business.
Nunhofer added: 'We've had objections from vegetarians with our lending to
organic farms because the farms have animals on them.'
NM met unitholders in its Conscience fund this month and found many were
upset about investing in retailers who break Sunday trading laws. A vote
ensured that, until the laws are clarified, NM will not disinvest and will
lobby retailers instead.
Ethical investors are, therefore, limited to the criteria applied by fund
managers (unless they want to build and manage their own portfolio).
About half the collective funds use research provided by Eiris, which
categorises stock according to the level of involvement a company has in
such areas as alcohol, tobacco, gambling, pollution, oppressive regimes,
armaments and animal testing. It also produces Choosing an Ethical Fund for
independent financial advisers. This analyses the ethical and environmental
criteria used by the funds.

The Financial Times


London Page V

921121

