FT921-14352

FT  16 JAN 92 / World Trade News: France rejects Dunkel plan for Uruguay
Round


   By IAN DAVIDSON


   PARIS


FRANCE yesterday rejected the Dunkel plan for the conclusion of the Uruguay
Round of international trade liberalising negotiations, which it described
as unfair to French interests and unacceptable.
President Francois Mitterrand told the government, meeting in cabinet, that
'France is not ready to bow to American demands, nor to submit to the
interests of any other country, and will not give way'.
The French government's objections are directed primarily at the
agricultural provisions of the Dunkel plan, which would call for sharp
restraints on European farming, including limits on exports.
'Our country rejects the Dunkel report in its present form', said Mr Roland
Dumas, the foreign minister, 'because of its partiality and its disregard
for the interests of French and European agriculture'.
Mr Dumas said that France would insist on sticking to the negotiating
mandate given by the 12 member states to the European Commission, and 'would
refuse any submission to non-European interests'.
Mr Louis Mermaz, the agriculture minister, described the Dunkel report as
unacceptable on many points and 'totally unacceptable' in the agricultural
area.
For Europe to accept the proposed reduction in exports, without any
off-setting concessions, would have 'dramatic' results, he added.
The US also came under attack in Brussels, in a statement issued yesterday
by Mr Frans Andriessen, the European Community's Trade and External
Relations Commissioner.
He said he was 'unpleasantly surprised' by the remarks of US President
George Bush this week that the EC was hiding behind an 'iron curtain' of
protectionism.
A Commission official yesterday described as discriminatory Japan's pledge
last week to import more US-made cars, and said the agreement would be
opposed.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Photograph Mitterrand, not ready to bow to American demands
(Omitted).

920116

