FT921-15459

FT  10 JAN 92 / Arts: Drawn to conclusion - The cream of the Courtauld
collection


   By SUSAN MOORE


According to the gospel that the best art is spontaneous and inspirational,
drawings should reveal artists at their most creative and the more swiftly
executed they are the better. Any subsequent polishing represents a watering
down and loss of the initial divine spark.
Drawing may indeed be the automatic writing of art, yet the first draft is
not invariably the last word. The sequence of 80 sheets on show at Somerset
House which represents the cream of the Courtauld collections, serves as a
reminder that drawings were also conceived as stepping stones in a process
leading to the creation of a fresco, panel, canvas or print. On occasion
they were deemed finished works of art in their own right. Here is abundant
evidence that drawings may be finished without being dry, polished but not
pedantic.
The sheets on view veer towards the highly finished and reflect the tastes -
as well as the generosity - of the Courtauld Institute's great benefactors.
All the early Netherlandish and Italian drawings - like the ethereal Hugo
van der Goes, the minimalist, almost Rembrandtesque Fra Bartolommeo
landscapes in pen and ink, Durer's Wise Virgin and an extraordinary Giovanni
Bellini - were bequeathed in 1978 by Count Antoine Seilern, along with the
Rubenses, Parmigianinos, the Tiepolos and Watteau.
Sir Robert Witt spent the more modest means at his disposal acquiring then
unfashionable Guercinos, and highly decorative 16th and 17th century
Northern landscapes. The short but spectacular run of English watercolours -
including JR Cozens's infinitely subtle view of the Castel Sant' Angelo -
came from William Wycliffe Spooner. Anthony Blunt gave Bernini's
unacceptably Baroque project for the east facade of the Louvre.
The Courtauld drawings, far less well known than their painted cousins, are
remarkable by any standard. This celebratory show was originally planned to
coincide with the opening of the new galleries in 1990, and to inaugurate
the Institute's first proper drawings gallery. That proved impossible, and
the show was postponed until this winter. Sadly the event seems to be
slipping by almost unnoticed; the gallery was forlorn and silent. It will
probably be another decade before these or any comparable selection of
masterpieces are shown again.
Immediately striking is how many artists are seen at their best.
Parmigianino's 'Conversion of St Paul' is exceptionally large and
elaborately wrought but also thrilling. The chaos and terror of the moment
as Saul falls from his horse blinded by heavenly light, is captured in
quick, nervous lines, and the drama heightened by the contrasts of brilliant
white bodycolour and sepia washes.
Guercino is represented by a study from everyday life of two girls drying
their hair by the fire; Piazzetta by characteristic large black chalk heads.
Tiepolo illustrates his inimitable verve and vitality in pen and ink and
wash; Turner his virtuoso watercolour technique with two grand English
landscapes.
These artists are justly admired but prolific. The collection is remarkable
for its rarities, the sheets from an earlier period when drawings were not
valued or collected and tended not to survive. Giovanni Bellini's Nativity
of the 1470s, carefully built up with a web of hatched strokes, for
instance, is one of only three or four pen and ink drawings by the artist.
He has endowed his Bethlehem with a skyline reminiscent of his native
Venice. Ox and ass kneel to worship the Christ Child and warm him with their
breath. Another handsome rarity is a compelling Holbeinesque portrait
drawing by Lorenzo Lotto.
Most celebrated of all the Courtauld drawings, however, is Michelangelo's
challenging allegory of 'The Dream of Human Life' which, like so many of his
presentation drawings, may have been given to his beloved Tommaso de'
Cavalieri. It has been described as one of the finest drawings in the world,
and as a technical miracle.
Such is Michelangelo's mastery that the sculptural central male nude seems
less to have been created out of black chalk than confected out of thin air.
Michelangelo chooses to bring to the fore and fully model Man, who leans
against a trumpeting angel. In the surrounding arc the ethereal vices seem
distant and dreamlike and as if carved in low relief. This is evidently not
a first draught, but it is the last word.
Master Drawings from the Courtauld Collections, sponsored by Toray
Industries, continues at Somerset House until January 19.

The Financial Times


London Page 11 Picture 'Seated Woman' by Cornelis Bega (Omitted).

920110

