FT921-596

FT  28 MAR 92 / Trials and tribulations: Large-scale clinical drugs testing


   By CLIVE COOKSON


In 1987, the Wall Street Journal ran an editorial entitled 'Human
Sacrifice', which suggested that no American doctor should take part in
clinical comparisons between a new 'clot-buster' drug and a 30-year-old
treatment for heart attack patients.
The article echoed the opinion of many US cardiologists that it would be
wrong to give patients streptokinase, which had been introduced in the
1950s, because tPA, heralded as the first blockbuster drug to emerge from
biotechnology, was more efficient at dissolving the blood clots that cause
heart attacks.
But Oxford University went ahead anyway with a clinical trial, known as
Isis-3, which compared the effect of streptokinase, tPA and Apsac (another
new clot-buster drug) on 46,000 patients in 20 countries.
The results of Isis-3, said to be the largest clinical trial in medical
history, were published this week. They confounded the sceptics who had said
the comparison was unnecessary, or even unethical, because the new drugs
would be bound to work better.
Streptokinase turned out to save just as many lives as tPA and Apsac and it
was safer than them because it caused fewer strokes as a side-effect. Yet
tPA and Apsac cost five to 10 times as much as streptokinase, which lost its
patent protection decades ago.
The results are a blow for Genentech and SmithKline Beecham, the
manufacturers of tPA and Apsac respectively. But they vindicate researchers
who believe that the pharmaceutical industry and public health authorities
should support more clinical 'mega-trials'.
The clinical trials which manufacturers are required to carry out before
launching a new drug - typically involving 2,000 or 3,000 patients - are too
small to distinguish important differences between competing treatments for
common diseases. Statisticians say these need to be followed up by trials
involving tens of thousands of patients who are divided at random into
groups receiving different treatments.
Even before Isis-3, mega-trials had transformed the treatment of heart
attacks. Gissi-1 and Isis-2, co-ordinated from Milan and Oxford
respectively, proved in the 1980s - to the surprise of many doctors - that a
combination of two old drugs, aspirin and streptokinase, halved the death
rate of patients brought into hospital after a heart attack. Dr Rory
Collins, Isis co-ordinator, estimates that this treatment is now saving
4,000 lives a year in Britain.
The Gissi team in Italy was first to move on to compare tPA with
streptokinase. Its Gissi-2 trial with 20,000 patients came to a very similar
conclusion in 1990 as the larger Isis-3 this week: in clinical practice tPA
does not live up to its theoretical advantages as a more efficient
clot-buster.
The main market for tPA is the US, where Genentech sold Dollars 195m worth
last year - representing 38 per cent of the California biotechnology
company's total revenues. (In Europe, heart attack patients are normally
given streptokinase; tPA is reserved for people who suffer a second heart
attack within a year and may be allergic to streptokinase.) Half of all US
patients treated with clot-dissolving drugs receive tPA.
'If US physicians began to use streptokinase routinely instead of tPA, this
might avoid hundreds of strokes each year - and it would save more than
Dollars 100m each year in US drug costs,' says Dr Collins.
Prof Desmond Julian, medical director of the British Heart Foundation, the
leading heart charity, praises Isis-3. 'We feel that the size of the trial
is of immense importance and so is its independence from specific drug
companies,' he says. 'Isis-3 is likely to have a very substantial effect on
the choice of drug' for heart attack patients.
But Genentech is fighting to prevent that happening. Mr Kirk Raab, chief
executive, insists that 'the Isis-3 findings are irrelevant to our product
and to standard prescribing patterns for thrombolytic therapy in the US'.
Genentech and SmithKline Beecham both maintain that certain technical flaws
in Isis-3 prevented their products showing their superiority to
streptokinase. For example, they say the trial did not administer heparin,
another blood-thinning drug, in the best way.
In addition, Genentech points out that Isis-3 did not use its tPA (trade
name Activase) but a version made by Wellcome of the UK and abandoned in
1990 after a court ruled that it infringed Genentech's patent. The Isis
researchers argue that the two are equivalent in their clinical effects but
the US company disagrees.
As the streptokinase suppliers, Kabi Pharmacia and Astra of Sweden and
Hoechst of Germany, gear up new sales campaigns based on Isis-3, Genentech
is advising cardiologists to wait for the results of yet another mega-trial
now under way: Gusto.
Gusto will compare the effectiveness of Activase and streptokinase
treatments on 40,000 patients under US conditions. Its costs - estimated at
Dollars 55m - are being met mainly by Genentech, though Gusto, like Isis and
Gissi, is in the hands of a co-ordinating group independent of the drug
industry. Gusto's results are due next year.
Meanwhile, medical researchers are planning more mega-trials. At Oxford, Mr
Richard Peto, the Isis statistician, has designed a Pounds 10m study to
answer one of the most vexed questions in medicine today: 'does really
effective lowering of blood cholesterol in middle age save lives?'
Some experts, including Mr Peto, believe passionately that the answer is
yes: 'Cholesterol is a cause of nearly all heart attack deaths and there are
no proven hazards of lowering it.' Others point to the fact that
smaller-scale trials of cholesterol reduction have shown no net benefits.
The only way to resolve the argument would be a trial with 20,000 people at
high risk of a heart attack, divided at random into two groups. For five
years, one half would take a strong cholesterol-lowering drug and the other
would take inactive pills - mega-trials do require participants to make a
certain sacrifice for the sake of medical knowledge.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920328

