FT921-14139

FT  17 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Irksome sting on the body corporate -
Richard Waters on a kind of greenmail by preference shareholders


   By RICHARD WATERS


IN A quiet backwater of the investment world, there are occasional windfall
gains of more than 50 per cent to be made. Yet that has not stopped some
investors holding out for more - as Bass, the brewer, is the latest UK
company to discover. For opportunists, the returns could be substantial.
The brewery group is seeking to repay preference share capital with a
nominal value of about Pounds 6.5m - insignificant in the context of its
Pounds 570m rights issue last year. Its two long-standing preference share
issues, each with more than 3m shares outstanding, are small and troublesome
to administer: like several other UK companies in recent months, Bass has
decided these historical issues are no longer worth the effort.
Next Thursday, at its annual meeting in the Queen Elizabeth Conference
Centre in Westminster, holders of the preference shares will be asked to
agree.
Step forward the opportunists. Bass's effort to tidy up its balance sheet
relies on the agreement of preference stock holders. By withholding that
agreement, there is always a chance that Bass, or any other company in the
same position, would choose to pay an extra premium to resolve the issue,
rather than continue as before. It is a sophisticated, and occasionally
effective, form of greenmail.
Even without the additional premium, holding such preference shares can be
an attractive proposition. Generally, preference stock trades on a yield of
about 10 per cent. When repaid, companies are usually prepared to pay
investors a gross redemption (or 'exit') yield of between 6 and 6.5 per cent
 -a level long considered the norm by corporate financiers. It is also one
which has proved acceptable to the investment protection committees of
investor trade associations like the Association of British Insurers (ABI)
and the National Association of Pension Funds.
The sharp reduction in yield (and hence uplift in price of the particular
stock) represents a substantial capital gain. Bass' offer is no exception:
holders of its 4 per cent cumulative preference shares, for instance, are
being offered 57.5p per share - equivalent to an exit yield of 6.5 per cent.
The shares were trading at 38p for most of the last half of 1991, according
to a circular sent to shareholders.
But is that enough? Bass' articles of association - as with many other
companies - require it to repay capital at par (ie, 100p). Some shareholders
argue that it should honour that commitment - or at least offer something
closer to par than 57.5p.
Mr Richard Male, a small holder of the shares, says that Bass has failed to
alert its preference share holders to their rights under its articles of
association. It is not enough to offer less than par, and to justify this as
fair simply by reference to the opinion of a merchant bank.
Mr Stephen Cockburn is a specialist in preference shares. He runs three
investment trusts within the Aberdeen Trust group and is adamant that Bass
is short-changing its preference holders.
Mr Cockburn argues that, where the coupon on a preference issue is low,
companies try to repay at a discount to par to keep in the generally
accepted 6.5 per cent exit yield range. But where coupons are higher,
companies never offer to repay at a premium over par, and so exit yields
rise correspondingly above 6.5 per cent. The calculation never works in an
investor's favour, always the company's, he says.
The 100,000 shares held by Mr Cockburn's Danae Investment Trust are unlikely
to prevent Bass getting shareholder approval to repay the shares at less
than par. The ABI, whose members account for the bulk of holders, has
already given its approval. But others have experienced problems in the past
 -and may do so in future.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920117

