FT924-6266

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: Venice celebrates Rossini / Review of 'Semiramide' at
the Fenice


   By WILLIAM WEAVER


WHEN Rossini arrived in Venice in December of 1822, the city's lovely opera
house, the Teatro La Fenice was 30 years old and so was Rossini. This year,
while theatres all over the world are celebrating the bicentenary of the
composer, Venice has been enjoying a double festivity, commemorating its own
200 years of musical life.
The Fenice has chosen to recall its illustrious past by presenting works
that were commissioned by the house or that had their world premieres there:
Rigoletto and The Turn of the Screw were heard earlier this year, La
traviata is coming in March. Now, as the two celebrations merge, Rossini's
Semiramide, completed in Venice and given at the Fenice on February 3, 1823,
is enjoying a successful run.
After that first Semiramide Rossini and his wife Isabella Colbran - who
created the title role - left for Paris, and the composer never wrote for an
Italian theatre again. The present revival was delayed by strikes, the
opera's production suffered some anticipatory attacks, and one of the
results of the discontent was the resignation of the artistic director John
Fisher. Finally, however, this Semiramide has opened, to a capacity house;
and the performance - four hours including one interval - was greeted by
enthusiastic applause.
As visitors to Pesaro last summer learned, an uncut performance of the opera
can be so gripping that the time passes unheeded. For his, surely
unconscious, farewell to Italian theatre, Rossini produced one of his
richest, most generous scores, an irresistible torrent of musical invention,
with golden opportunities for the singers and for the orchestra. Producer
and designer was Pier Luigi Pizzi; the production was not new, but about a
dozen years old. Pizzi, however, came to Venice to re-stage and revise it;
and, in the event, it did not seem worn or tired. It seemed, however,
perhaps dated. Its chilly, ice-cream white neo-classicism, in many respects
handsome and monumental (including a pyramid tomb echoing Canova), warred
with the empassioned intensity of the music. The kabuki-like anti-reality of
the staging - singers' faces chalky, arias aimed straight at the audience
from the purposely extended apron of the stage or even from two runways
bridging the orchestra pit. Some of the chorus, in 19th century dress, were
seated in armchairs at either side of the apron, others arrayed in stiff
costumes like chessmen.
It was a completely coherent view of the opera and, on its own terms,
successful; but the music kept contradicting it. Mariella Devia, who sang
the title role, has sometimes been criticised for being more of a singer
than an actress. Her Semiramide was a convincing contradiction of this
received opinion. Despite an unbecoming coiffure, she looked both regal and
human; the singing - even in the most complex coloratura - was never
uncharacterised. In the two grand scenes with Arsace she was, first, tender
and womanly and, finally, tragic. As would have been expected, she performed
the opera's most famous aria, 'Bel raggio', with impeccable technique and
appealing tone.
Her Arsace was to have been Marilyn Horne, whose indisposition led to her
being replaced, for the first two performances, by the Polish contralto Ewa
Podles (later the Irish mezzo Patricia Bardon will take over). Physically,
the veteran Podles suggests the late Ebe Stignani; but vocally she has very
much a personality of her own. The lower voice is big and resonant, and she
can move up to the head voice virtually seamlessly; and coloratura obviously
represents no problem for her. She was an excellent partner for Devia, and
also a strong interpreter on her own. Despite her matronly figure, she made
a convincing warrior, moving with ease and purpose, and acting - above all -
with her flexible, multicoloured voice.
The tenor Luca Canonici was miscast as Idreno; as Assur, the young bass
Carlo Colombara also had only a shaky grasp of Rossinian style, and in the
higher passages, the voice sounded strained. But it is an attractive voice,
and as the evening progressed, Colombara seemed to gain confidence. The
smaller parts were acceptably filled. Henry Lewis, the conductor, offered a
patchy reading of the overture. When it came to accompanying the singers, he
was more at home. The chorus and orchestra were not always perfectly
synchronised, but, all in all, the performance moved readily, comfortably,
never sagging.
The production could hardly have been more different from the Pesaro
Festival's, so dark and Eastern and spectacular, or from the traditional
Sequi staging for Joan Sutherland in the late 1960's, but it won the
audience and even for the hardened opera-goer, it provided not just
pleasure, but abundant food for thought.

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII

921121

