FT921-368

FT  30 MAR 92 / Election 1992: True colours will take time to show through -
Proposed legislation


   By DAVID OWEN


THEY MAINLY fear the worst. But the first offerings of a Labour government
may be less alarming for Britain's business leaders than they commonly
suppose.
The measures outlined in the shadow Budget aside, the new masters would
probably be so busy creating their promised raft of trusts, agencies and
commissions that they would have little time for anything more radical - at
least in the early days.
The true colours of this new apparatus of government - including technology
trusts, consumer and environmental protection commissions, a defence
diversification agency and others - would in time emerge. But building
quangoes is hardly the stuff of socialism red in tooth and claw.
A few more radical and controversial initiatives are among the party's
priorities for the first full parliamentary session.
These would include implementation of a minimum wage, creation of a national
investment bank, forcing companies which invest less than 0.5 per cent of
their payroll in training to pay the difference between what they do spend
and this level into an in-work training fund, and tougher regulation of
utilities. The party would also opt into the social chapter of the European
treaty as quickly as possible.
But much watering-down has gone on since these measures were first proposed:
The minimum wage would be unlikely to come into effect until next year, with
the original policy formula of half of median male earnings having for the
moment been shelved.
The national investment bank would not engage in direct investment, as
originally suggested, but instead channel private finance into public
projects.
The training contributions from companies failing to invest the stipulated
minimum in their own workforce would not be raised above 0.5 per cent
without extensive consultation with industry.
Revamped regulation of utilities is generally seen as a more acceptable and
cheaper way of asserting public control in the interest of consumers than a
return to majority public ownership.
Even the water industry, described as 'a priority for return to the public
sector' in last year's Opportunity Britain policy document, is an unlikely
candidate for repurchase in the short term.
Other measures that officials would like to cram into a first full
parliamentary session include the following:
Introduction of a 'public interest' test for bids, which would seek to take
into account the impact of any deal on research and development, employment
and regional location. The test would be adjudicated by the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission. The share-ownership threshold - currently 30 per cent -
above which a bid has to be launched would be reduced to an unspecified
level no lower than 15 per cent.
Reorganisation of the Department of Trade and Industry along unspecified
lines but with particular attention to small companies and consumer affairs.
Another high priority would be to beef up the Office of Fair Trading,
strengthening its investigative powers and empowering it to pursue a more
proactive competition policy.
Reforms to industrial relations law and practice, including setting up a new
industrial court, restoring a limited right to take sympathetic industrial
action, and banning employee blacklisting on the basis of trade union
membership. Legislation is planned to prevent the total sequestration of a
trade union's income and assets in a way which paralysed it in its lawful
business. Courts would be stopped from issuing ex parte injunctions to an
employer without the union being able to put its case.
An employees' charter, dovetailing neatly with the rights enshrined in the
EC social chapter, would be implemented.
This would cover equal status for all employees including part-timers, the
minimum wage, health and safety at work, protection against unfair
dismissal, and maternity and paternity leave. Not all of the associated
legislation would necessarily be enacted in one go.
Reform of the motor vehicle taxation system in a fiscally neutral way to
promote efficiency and fewer harmful emissions.
The process of linking arms exports to recipients' human-rights records will
begin with the setting up of a human-rights department within the foreign
office.
Implementation of legislation passed in 1990 which would give creditor
rights to members of wound-up pension funds.
As a first stage of reform, the law would be changed so that pension funds
belonged to their members and not to employers. Employees would make up half
of pension trustees.
The party is keen to push consumer-protection measures on to the EC agenda
during the UK's six-month Community presidency, which starts on July 1.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920330

