FT924-6439

FT  21 NOV 92 / Good news for UK's exporters


   By MICHAEL CASSELL, Business Correspondent


IF THE cost to British business of a Gatt failure is incalculable, the
benefits to be derived from a speedy and successful conclusion to the
Uruguay Round should be substantial.
Unofficial government estimates, now being dusted off in Whitehall in spite
of France's immediate reaction, suggest that British exporters could be a
major beneficiary of a new global trade deal.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has suggested
that agreement would boost world gross domestic product by nearly Dollars
200bn (Pounds 132bn) a year and increase GDP within EC countries by at least
1 per cent.
If the Uruguay Round target of a 30 per cent reduction in tariffs is
implemented, Britain's visible exports - which account for more than
one-quarter of the nation's GDP - could rise by more than Pounds 700m a
year.
The benefits for invisible exports could be even more substantial. The
inclusion of services in Gatt talks could lead to a 10 per cent expansion in
world trade in areas such as banking, insurance and tourism.
EC exports in services could quadruple as a result of liberalisation
measures and Britain's prospects for additional trade - it already has about
8 per cent of the market in services - should be considerably enhanced.
The inclusion of improved protection for intellectual property will also
help many British innovators. The recording industry, for example, is
thought to lose about Pounds 1bn a year through counterfeiting or piracy.
Despite last night's response from France, UK industry welcomed the news
with a mixture of relief and hope that a deal could help restore domestic
confidence and end the recession.
Mr Howard Davies, director general of the Confederation of British Industry,
said the agreement was 'excellent news'. He was confident that remaining
obstacles could be overcome and that a new Gatt deal would emerge soon.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921121

