FT924-8173

FT  12 NOV 92 / People: Alexander White joins Invesco MIM as a non-executive


Alexander White, formerly a senior investment banker with New York-based
James D Wolf-ensohn, has been made a non-executive director of Invesco MIM,
in a move that further underscores the investment group's American
orientation.
'From their (Invesco MIM's) point of view, the majority of the funds under
management come from the US and there had not been an American on the board,
so it seemed appropriate to restore the balance,' says White. Invesco MIM
manages around Pounds 34bn worldwide, but about two thirds of that is
managed from the US.
The latest recruit to the board knows Invesco MIM and its new chief
executive Charles Brady well, having been involved in an advisory role when
Britannia Arrow purchased the US fund manager in two stages in 1986 and
1988. He had been proposed as a director well before Hong Kong securities
house Peregrine Investments recently lifted its stake in Invesco to 24 per
cent. Peregrine has not yet appointed any representatives to the board.
Because of Invesco MIM's well-publicised problems in the UK, including the
Drayton Consolidated debacle as a result of which the group agreed to pay
investors Pounds 9.5m in compensation, there has been speculation that the
group might wish to spin off its European and possibly Far Eastern business.
However, White, who says he has only attended 'one meeting', says it would
be 'premature' to comment on a possible reorganisation.
Brady, who works from Atlanta, Georgia, took over from Lord Stevens as group
chief executive in August, and is deploying a notably different, more
risk-averse strategy.
Much of the rest of the board reflects Invesco's past connections rather
than its current business, and White is not expected to be the last of the
new faces appointed to the boardroom.
Living in New York and involving himself in a variety of not-for-profit
endeavours together with some 'private' consultancy, White, 59, who had
previously worked for Merrill Lynch, retired from Wolfensohn two years ago.
*****
Steve Lent (above) has been promoted to corporate director in the The ROYAL
BANK OF SCOTLAND's corporate and institutional banking division.
*****
Iain Dale is appointed deputy chairman of TR PACIFIC INVESTMENT TRUST; The
Earl of Limerick has resigned.
*****
Trevor Falle has been appointed marketing director of ANZ GRINDLAYS BANK
(JERSEY).
*****
Bob McInnes, formerly director, Scotland and director, network, has been
appointed deputy md of The ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND; Alf Moon, formerly
director, securities services, corporate and institutional banking division,
has been appointed director, Scotland, branch banking division.
*****
Kim Taylor, formerly group financial controller, has been appointed finance
director of EXCO INTERNATIONAL, following the resignation of Geoffrey Dunn.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921112

