FT924-11898

FT  23 OCT 92 / Management: All change for a successful corporate revolution
 -Christopher Lorenz argues that companies must be more radical in
regenerating themselves


   By CHRISTOPHER LORENZ


To most business people, the word 'transformation' is a synonym for
'change'. They would certainly apply it to corporate reshaping of the scale
achieved at British Airways under Sir Colin Marshall, at Grand Metropolitan
under Sir Allen Sheppard, or at SmithKline Beecham under Robert Bauman.
But to many academics and consultants, the word stands for nothing short of
a revolution. Which is why quite a number of them are muttering that none of
the three contrasting cases really justifies the use of such a dramatic
word.
Under Sir Colin BA has been transmogrified from operations-minded laggard to
marketing star, while Sir Allen has led Grand Met away from messy British
conglomeracy to focused global leadership - albeit also with a new
dedication to the customer. Bob Bauman has masterminded Beecham's unusually
successful drugs merger with SmithKline.
In this sense, complaint about 'transformation' falls into the same category
as many people's growing dislike of the loose and ubiquitous term 'change
management' to describe anything from the introduction of a 'total quality'
programme to a complete revolution in the way a company is organised, or
behaves.
But the trouble with 'transformation' goes further than that. To use the
well-trodden language of leadership research, Sir Colin, Sir Allen and
Bauman are all undoubtedly 'transformational' leaders whose achievements are
very considerable indeed. But with the greatest possible respect to all
three, none has had to accomplish quite the sort of transformation (in the
sense of revolution) which now faces, say, John Akers at IBM. Not only are
Akers and his senior colleagues having to stage-manage an internal
revolution in organisational structure, market-orientation and managerial
behaviour, they are trying to do so at a time when the company's competitive
environment is in turmoil and its strategy in virtual tatters.
The shadow of IBM hung very clearly over the annual three-day conference
last week of the international Strategic Management Society, on 'strategic
renaissance - the transformation of economic enterprise'. Held in London
this year, it was attended by more than 500 managers, academics and
consultants from around the world. Its speakers included not only Sir Allen,
Bauman and BA's Sir Colin, (on 'From Bloody Awful to Bloody Awesome'), but
also senior executives from ABB, Shell, Unilever and elsewhere, plus a host
of top business academics.
The talking point of the event was a speech by Richard Pascale, whose
consulting, book-writing and teaching at Stanford University have made him
one of the most sought-after American advisers on how to accomplish radical
change.
To him, transformation involves not only 'a discontinuous shift in an
organisation's capability', but also 'the ability to sustain that shift',
which can be far harder. 'Part of it is to do with altering the future,' he
declared last week.
As Pascale pointed out, the difficulty of detecting the need for a
transformation even in the midst of success ('or excess') was illustrated
starkly in the mid-1980s. Only five years after the 1982 best seller, In
Search of Excellence, was published, all but 14 of its 43 'excellent'
companies had either grown weaker or were really on the slide, in spite of
the best efforts of their bosses to improve things.
In a memorable accusation at the audience around him, Pascale declared:
'This shows we don't know what we're doing.' In 50 years' time, today's
business academics and consultants might be judged to be as foolish as the
doctors of the middle ages, he said. The latter examined their patients and
then, in all sincerity but whatever the malady, applied leeches. And, of
course, gathered fat fees.
Faced with the need for change, companies come to a fork in the road, argued
Pascale. About 80 per cent take the easy route, stripping themselves 'back
to basics', searching for the doctor's latest tools and techniques - and
going on to risk stagnation or decline.
Only a fifth of companies take the much tougher, alternative route. This
involves three big steps: what Pascale called 'inquiring into their
underlying paradigm' (that is, questioning the way they do everything -
including think); attacking the problems systematically on all fronts,
notably strategy, operations, organisation and culture; and 'reinventing'
themselves in such a way that the transformation becomes self-sustaining.
This is deep stuff. So deep that it embraces not just 'doing' new things but
also what Pascale called 'being' (or 'living') them. In other words, the
heart must be transformed, as well as the head. Or, in the jargon of
academic 'learning' theory, intellectual learning must be matched by
emotional learning if any kind of transformation is to become really
'embedded'.
All of which is far easier said than done, as can be attested by Grand Met,
SmithKline Beecham and other companies which have accomplished deep but not
quite 'transformational' change. Though Pascale puts BA in the
transformation category, the conference mutterers would not. But they would
concur on beleaguered IBM.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921023

