FT922-4215

FT  06 JUN 92 / Travel: Cairo - laying the ghosts of an ancient past -
Nicholas Woodsworth abandons his Blue Guide and looks beyond the trappings
of history to find a vibrant city bursting with life


   By NICHOLAS WOODSWORTH


I HAD done what visitors to Cairo do. I had made a camel circuit of Cheop's
pyramid at Giza, trudged the gloomy halls of the Egyptian Museum, and bought
a Nefertiti bust in a pavement bazaar. I had even visited Dr Raghab's
Floating Papyrus Museum on the banks of the Nile and seen paper being made
as it was 3,000 years ago. But still I was not happy.
The problem was that everything I was seeing and doing revolved around the
ancient past. In my Blue Guide to Egypt, there were over 700 pages crammed
with facts and speculation about the past, but barely two words about life
in our own times. The attitude that what is very dead and very old is worth
a visit is fine for the Valley of the Kings, where residents were
eviscerated and embalmed several thousand years ago. But the residents of
today's Cairo are very much alive and kicking.
Stand on any street corner in the city and you can hardly doubt it. The
crowds are overwhelming, the traffic appalling, the din ferocious. Equipped
to handle a population a fifth of its size, Cairo is bursting at the seams.
Its telephones are crotchety, its power supply whimsical, its plumbing
capricious. Like the donkeys that pull its battered rubbish carts, it
hobbles along looking barely capable of fulfilling its duties.
Nonetheless, it does just that. It remains one of the world's great cities,
a vibrant, vital place. Burying my Blue Guide at the bottom of my suitcase,
I set out to meet some Caireans who could put the more recent past, present
and even the future into some sort of perspective.
* * * VICTOR Simaika may be old, but he is at some remove from the mummy's
tomb. On the morning I met him, a delightful and dapper 87-year-old
gentleman in elegant attire, he apologised for being a few minutes late. He
had, he said, been dancing until 3am, and felt a lie-in not amiss.
On the balcony of his Garden City flat we had tea and spooned thick-cut
English marmalade on to buttered toast. Which, I asked him, looking across
the Nile, was the liveliest part of the city? 'As far as I am concerned,' he
replied, 'it is on my walls.'
And so it was. In the lounge inside, amid mounted antelope heads, riding
trophies, polo match cups, rhino horns and paintings of favourite horses,
were framed photos of a life of social privilege and ease in Cairo that has
ceased to exist. Born into the Egyptian upper classes, educated in Paris and
London when he was not too busy dancing, Victor has pursued the life of a
sportsman, playboy and aristocrat with limitless style and energy.
Pointing to a photo of King Farouk presenting him with a trophy while the
Shah of Iran looks admiringly on, Victor told me of the great love of his
life, polo. He began playing in the 1920s, when British cavalry regiments
were still stationed in Egypt under the occupation. Victor remembers
afternoons at the Gezira Sporting Club when 300 polo ponies would be
gathered round the thundering fields, their Nubian grooms, in regimental
colours, sporting turbans with tails that hung to the ground. Few could
resist such a spectacle, least of all young, moneyed modern Egyptians like
himself looking for change.
He found it, perhaps too much of it. Until then the vast majority of
Egyptians lived on the land, Cairo was a city of less than 1m, and the
dislocations of Nasser's socialist revolution were undreamed of. Not even
tourism resembled today's mass affair. Only wealthy foreigners came to
Egypt, and they did so with an entourage of servants for the winter season.
On one occasion Victor accompanied a party in dinner jackets and evening
dresses across the desert, on donkeyback, to dine at the camp where the
British Egyptologist, Howard Carter, had recently discovered Tutankamun's
tomb. On another, he spent two months cruising the Nile on a private yacht
with Barbara Hutton, an experience he is not yet entirely over. How, he
asked me, could anyone today hope to sample the pleasures of Egypt on
three-day Nile excursions run by games hostesses? Some things, quite
evidently, can never be improved on.
* * * IF VICTOR is a voice from a Cairo that has disappeared, Adel Sabeth
is, in his own eccentric fashion, very much of the present. I met him in his
home, a crumbling, chaotically-kept 19th century pile surrounded by swirling
traffic. Sitting among a great shambles of books, crumpled sheets of paper
and unwashed coffee cups, he was covered in glue, the result of editing and
pasting television scripts.
For even its humblest inhabitant, Cairo is a political town. Politics
occupies roughly the same niche as football and the weather do in English
conversation. Adel has made a profession out of political debate. An
intellectual and writer, he has ridden out the wildest storms of Egyptian
politics close to their centre, writing books defending King Farouk - a
family relative - and condemning 30 years of state economic control. It has
not made him popular in all circles.
Today he is both enthusiastic and critical. Cairo for him is more than ever
the capital of the Arab world, a dynamic centre of commerce, culture,
politics and diplomacy whose influence spreads across the entire Middle
East. But while Cairo's role is pivotal, its civic competence is often
marginal; management, over-bureaucratisation and lack of incentive, all
hangovers from the Nasser era, prevent the development of a political
culture willing to seek solutions to Egypt's formidable problems.
And Egypt's problems are Cairo's problems. With only 4 per cent of its
territory arable, and the national population growing by 1m every eight
months, the capital is a target for large-scale rural migration. Over a
third of Egypt's 51m people are now estimated to be living in Cairo. With
them they have brought all the problems of supplying a largely illiterate
and unskilled population with food, education, housing and jobs. Most remain
unsolved.
Why, I asked Adel as he wiped a gluey knife on the kitchen tablecloth, were
Caireans not then rushing to the barricades? 'We are generally a tolerant,
moderate, and good-humoured people,' he replied. In addition, he reminded
me, Egyptians have for millennia lived in a paternalistic system. From the
start they were administered by a vast bureaucracy that controlled the
essential element of life, Nile irrigation. They were ruled by a living
deity, the pharaoh. In such a state, obsequiousness towards superiors and
fatalism towards life became daily habits. Even after 5,000 years, even
after the collapse of Nasser's revolution of state rule, these habits still
haunt Egypt.
'But we are a clever, enterprising people, despite everything,' said Adel as
I bid him farewell and shook his sticky hand. 'Go out into the streets and
you will see.'
* * * ADEL WAS right. In the narrow, tourist-packed warren of alleyways that
make up the vast Khan al-Khalili market, artisans and merchants were making
and selling everything imaginable at a furious pace. Worked brass, ivory,
wood, silver, cloth or copper, it was all being exchanged in great
quantities for thin bits of plastic - for those who accept all major credit
cards, the future holds some promise.
But it is not a future that appeals to those unlikely to get a slice of the
cake. In Fishawi's, a sidewalk cafe in the heart of the market, I met Ali
Darwish, bearded poet, short story writer and Sufi mystic. Here, at crowded
tables where foreign tourists blithely video-film other foreign tourists,
darker concerns bubble under the surface.
Beside Ali sat a co-religionist and healer, an old woman heavily wrapped in
cloth and turban. From time to time a Sufi adept would approach from the
passing crowd and with great ceremony receive from her a laying on of hands
and a blessing.
'Nasira can cure headaches, rheumatism, colds,' said Ali. 'She is a walking
pharmacy.' But Ali was not talking miracles today. Hunched over sweet tea
and glass water pipes, he and his friends were discussing a threat to
Egypt's future, Islamic fundamentalism.
'As a Sufi,' he told me, 'I belive in democratic rule through co-operation
and charity of the heart. I do not believe in rule by clergy. Fundamentalism
is an insecurity, brought on by the failures of the system to provide the
normal things of life. Its grasp is powerful, and growing every day in
Cairo. It makes us all afraid.'
For hours Ali talked in this vein, his hubble-bubble fragrant in air that
turned cool as the night drew on. I, too, was full of reflection. Kings and
shahs and turbans that touched the ground . . . dinner jackets and
Tutankamun . . . fatalism, sycophancy and pharaonic bureaucracies . . . Sufi
healing and rule-by-clergy . . . No matter where one turned in Cairo, all
paths led back to the past, and those things that seemed very old and very
dead lay just under a patina of modernism. Caught in a very modern Cairo
traffic jam on my way home a few minutes later, I began pining for my Blue
Guide once again.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920606

