FT923-9520

FT  05 AUG 92 / Take 'em out to the ball game: Patrick Harverson reports on
Baltimore's baseball strike for growth


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


LIKE MANY cities across the US, Baltimore is impatiently waiting for the
nationwide recovery to breathe new life into a local economy still hung over
from the recession of 1990-1991.
Yet unlike any other city in the US, Baltimore is looking to an unusual
source to help it out of the economic doldrums - a baseball stadium.
Oriole Park at Camden Yards, the new home for the Baltimore Orioles, was
completed earlier this year at a cost of Dollars 105m (Pounds 55m), and city
planners hope the stadium will serve as an economic catalyst for the entire
downtown area. It is already proving a magnet for local developers. Some
hope it will become the focal point of a billion-dollar urban redevelopment
programme.
When Oriole Park was opened in April, Maryland governor Mr William Schaefer
announced that construction of the stadium had fuelled the local economy
with Dollars 140m in gross sales and Dollars 48m in direct payroll. He also
forecast, quoting from a study by state economists, that the net impact of
the baseball season would inject another Dollars 274m in sales and income
and Dollars 14m in taxes into the economy.
Today, those projections are beginning to look on the low side. Before the
season started, it was hoped that attendance at Oriole Park this year would
be 20 per cent higher than at the old Memorial stadium.
People, however, have flocked to the new ballpark in huge numbers.
Attendance is averaging near capacity at 43,000 a game, compared with the
28,000 the old stadium drew last year. Total attendance for the season is
expected to top 3.5m, not 2.5m as first forecast.
It has helped that the team has been successful. Last season the Orioles
finished near the basement of the baseball leagues. So far this year, it has
the second-best record in its division and is attracting fans from Baltimore
and nearby Washington DC.
The stadium itself is also popular. Two golden rules of sports stadium
development were broken with Oriole Park. First, it is a baseball-only
stadium, and not the usual multi-use monstrosity built to host a range of
sports and entertainment to maximise revenues.
In sticking to baseball, the architects designed an intimate, old-fashioned
ballpark with traditional features such as red brick arch facades and a
sunken, asymmetrical field. One critic hailed the result an 'anthem to the
national pastime', and Oriole Park has quickly become a tourist attraction
in its own right.
The second gamble was to locate the stadium within minutes of the city's
downtown area. Since the 1960s most sports stadiums built in the US have
been put in the suburbs or on vacant space outside metropolitan areas, where
construction is cheaper, access easier, and disruption to local
neighbourhoods avoided.
Baltimore, however, has put the stadium virtually in the heart of the city,
on the site of the old railway yards just a few blocks west of the inner
harbour area. The idea was to make Oriole Park part of the downtown
'experience'. Since its re-development in the early 1980s, the harbour has
become the heart of Baltimore. Shops, restaurants, hotels, a conference
centre and tourist attractions draw millions of Baltimore natives and
visitors to the harbour area every year.
At the start of the season, city managers hoped that when people came to see
the Orioles, many would stay downtown to enjoy the harbour's shops and
restaurants.
Those hopes are being realised. On game days crowds in the area are larger
than normal. A study is about to be launched that is expected to show a
significant boost to retail and restaurant sales since the stadium opened.
Several projects for the area immediately surrounding the stadium are
already in the pipeline, including a Dollars 600m life sciences trade and
medical conference centre, a Dollars 130m expansion of the current
convention centre and a Dollars 500m extension to the nearby University of
Maryland. If Oriole Park had not been built on its present site, it is
unlikely these projects would have been slated for the central city area.
For all its successes, Oriole Park cannot bring Baltimore out of recession
on its own. Future prosperity lies in the hands of the two main employment
providers, white-collar services businesses and the construction industry,
both of which remain depressed and dependent on the national economy for
growth.
Redeveloping the downtown area and building a baseball stadium has also not
addressed the problems of crime and poverty that plague Baltimore, as they
do other US cities. While parts of downtown are popular during the day and
night, Baltimore's politicians have been accused of neglecting important
social problems in favour of sprucing up a small section of the city.
The city's managers argue that a thriving downtown area benefits everyone in
the region by attracting new businesses, and with them new jobs, to
Baltimore.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920805

