FT921-11911

FT  29 JAN 92 / Management: Working to force disability on to the agenda -
Today's initiatives to find employment for handicapped people


   By FIONA THOMPSON


Bryn Owen is 31 years old, has Down's Syndrome and works five days a week at
the Rhyl branch of McDonald's in North Wales. He loves his job - 'best of
all the tidying up, because I'm a tidy person.'
Bryn is responsible for making sure the tables, chairs and floor in the
central lobby are clean and tidy for customers, with whom he always has time
for a chat. He washes the windows and floor and empties the bins.
The company was initially approached by People Recruitment, part of Clwyd
county council, which finds jobs for people with learning difficulties. Bryn
started part-time in 1989 but was promoted to full-time work in 1990. His
supervisor, David Padmore, was conscious of Owen being there during his
first week's work. 'But now he's so much part of the furniture.
'The most important thing from everybody's point of view was that Bryn was
going to be treated normally. While he may be capable of doing only certain
things, he has fitted into the role that he's been given very well.'
And Alan Kay, branch manager, has no hesitation in describing what started
as an experiment as a great success. 'I think Bryn is absolutely brilliant
out there. He's very organised and keeps the place looking good.' At
Christmas there was proof positive that, in return, he is held in affection
by staff and customers alike. Many regulars brought him cards and presents.
'They really enjoy working with him. Everybody likes him,' said Kay.
John Major, the prime minister, will tonight address a reception launching
an Employers Agenda on Disability - aimed at making disabled employees less
of the exception and more of the rule. The initiative is being launched by
the Employers' Forum on Disability - itself an unusual entity. It is
strictly an organisation of employers which has as its aim improving the job
prospects of people with disabilities by making it easier for companies to
recruit and develop them. Employers are normally encouraged by charities or
government to hire the disabled; they are not exactly known for promoting
such recruitment themselves.
And no-one is pretending it is an easy task. According to the latest
government statistics, there are 6m adults with disabilities in Britain,
representing 14.2 per cent of the population. Of these, 2.4m are of working
age. But only 36 per cent of disabled men and 31 per cent of disabled women
work.
The law requires that organisations with more than 20 staff must employ
registered disabled people at the level of 3 per cent of their workforce.
Only 22 per cent of employers, in fact, meet that quota.
Twenty-one top-rank, blue chip companies will today announce that they have
agreed to adopt the 10-point agenda calculated to promote the recognition,
recruitment and career development of people with disabilities. A drop in
the ocean? More, perhaps, a wave. The effect of placing one person in one
job is not to be dismissed.
Rena Zdaniewicz, a paraplegic since a car accident 11 years ago, bucked the
trend at London Weekend Television by becoming a video editor - not only as
a disabled person, but as the first woman in that department.
'LWT had just started its equal opportunities policy when I joined, and, as
I became a success, it was very good for them and excellent for me because I
never thought I would be given the chance to edit because of being in a
wheelchair.
'In fact, it's been a great success. When you edit, you're sitting down all
day in a chair on wheels. As a wheelchair user, it's pretty ideal for me.'
LWT is involved with several associations that train disabled people for
employment and each year takes on people for work experience. But there is
still more to be done, says Zdaniewicz. 'LWT has three or four people who
are disabled out of about 600 employees. However, there were none.'
Chris Van-Hilton, aged 38, suffers from an acute form of arthritis which
severely restricts his mobility. It came out of the blue when he was 29 and
driving a lorry for a living.
He retrained, taking computer studies courses and is now a computer analyst.
Helped by Workable, which specialises in the employment of people with
disabilities, Van-Hilton was taken on for a one-year placement by Arco, the
chemical manufacturer, as an end-user computer analyst. The placement
finishes at the end of this week and Van-Hilton is keen to find a permanent
position.
'I think it has proved to Arco that to take someone with a disability does
not mean it will be a problem. I hope this would encourage other companies
not to be afraid to employ people with disabilities.'
Susan Weaver, Arco's personnel officer, said the placement was a success,
because it both provided Van-Hilton with a year's work experience and
increased the company's disability awareness.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920129

