FT922-7226

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (4): Carriers
struggle for profits - The express market in the UK has long been
oversubscribed


   By PHILLIP HASTINGS


FORMAL withdrawal of the US parcels carrier Federal Express from the UK
domestic market provides further evidence of the continuation of fierce
competition in the sector.
According to management consultants Rickard Johnson, who have been involved
in courier and express parcel services for a number of years, combined
figures for the 10 largest carriers in the UK actually show a loss.
'The economics of delivery services are highly volume- dependent. Thus, many
operators have focused on volume growth as a way of reducing unit costs -
yet they remain unprofitable,' says Mr Andrew Johnson, a director of Rickard
Johnson.
However, while many of the leading carriers are struggling to achieve
profitability in the UK Mr Johnson points out that some of the smaller
players are still reporting attractive levels of profitability.
'Our research shows that many of the major express operators dissipate their
economies of scale in delivery in other areas while some smaller operators
achieve economies without the scale,' he adds.
Similar observations about the viability of smaller express companies are
made by senior executives from the UK's largest parcels carrier, the Royal
Mail's Parcelforce, which claims to handle more than 30 per cent of domestic
parcels traffic.
Mr Peter Child, Parcelforce marketing director, observes: 'Small carriers -
and by that I mean companies handling less than 1 per cent of the market -
now account for around 55 per cent of the urgent parcels market and 45 per
cent of the non-urgent sector. And there is now almost a pattern of the
smaller companies doing better than the big integrators.'
He made that comment in the light of the decision by Federal Express to pull
out of the UK market and other European sectors.
Predictably, competing carriers have welcomed the reduction in capacity
resulting from that move. Typical is the reaction of Mr Robin Davies,
general manager commercial and marketing for the Mayne Nickless group's
domestic parcels carrier Parceline.
'The express market in the UK has been oversubscribed for some time due to
the presence of major international operators and the low barriers of entry.
Therefore, the elimination of one particular major operator is to be
welcomed,' he comments.
Federal Express is the second of the world's four leading global integrators
to pull out of the UK domestic express market. Last autumn, DHL effectively
did the same by disposing of its UK overnight delivery company Elan through
a management buy-out.
That leaves TNT Express as the sole global 'big four' player on the domestic
British scene, although rumours persist that the industry giant United
Parcel Service (UPS) may be about to make its long-awaited move into the
market.
Whether or not UPS does,few industry observers believe the rationalisation
of the UK domestic parcels market will have finished. Mr Johnson of Rickard
Johnson believes that 'as the recession, the willingness of operators to set
prices in the next-day segment closer to those in the two-three day segment,
and the negotiating strength of buyers continue to drive down prices, there
will be more casualties.'
Mr Peter Howarth, managing director of Parcelforce, agrees there could be
more rationalisation to come as many operators remain under pressure. He
points out that recession caused the next-day sector of the UK parcels
market to contract by some 20 per cent in the 1990-91 period and the
non-urgent sector, where recession began to be felt earlier, by 40 per cent
in the 1989-91 period.
'That left a lot of spare capacity. The withdrawal of Federal Express has
helped that situation a bit but there is still a lot of excess capacity
around,' he adds.
Meanwhile, established carriers in the UK parcels market are scrambling to
capture Federal Express's share.
The most immediate beneficiary is the market's second largest carrier,
Securicor Omega Express (SOE), which bought the US company's UK domestic
parcels business. The deal involves SOE paying Pounds 2.6m in cash for
goodwill and a further Pounds 4.5m in cash for other assets, including
dispatch and labelling systems.
SOE formally took over the running of the Federal Express old operations
from May 5 and has also become sole contractor for handling its
international traffic, except for an area roughly within the M25 London
orbital motorway area which will continue to be serviced directly by the US
parcels company.
Prior to its decision to pull out, the Federal Express domestic parcels
business turnover in the UK was running at something over Pounds 40m a year,
about 2.5 per cent of the market. SOE's turnover is around Pounds 208m,
representing 12 per cent of the market, some 2 per cent ahead of the third
largest operator, TNT Express.
Mr Pat Howes, SOE chief executive, says his company is expecting to pick up
as many as 40,000 additional parcels a day following the Federal Express
deal, a 10 per cent increase on its present figure of around 400,000.
Rival companies have launched a fierce marketing drive to capture a share.
Parcelforce claims to have picked up some Pounds 2m worth of extra business
in the first few weeks after the Federal Express pull-out was announced and
is negotiating for more.
'Customers don't make instant decisions on whether to change their carrier
so it will take a few months before we see who have been the real
beneficiaries of the FedEx withdrawal - but we definitely expect to be one
of them,' says Mr Child.
In the meantime, Parcelforce is moving to complete its operational
separation from Royal Mail. It plans to take over the full end-to-end
collection and delivery of its domestic premium next-day service Datapost by
March 1993. Hitherto, much of that work has been sub-contracted to Royal
Mail.
Parcelforce is also looking to take over direct control of some 80 per cent
of its standard three to five day parcels collection and delivery activities
by the same date. But it will continue to sub-contract some rural area
operations to Royal Mail.
A new five-year strategic development plan just announced by Parcelforce
includes planned investment of Pounds 250m. Part of that expenditure will
include the acquisition of some 1,500 new vehicles.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920520

