FT923-10885

FT  28 JUL 92 / Japanese rate cut fails to impress


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


THE Japanese government signalled its disappointment last night that a cut
in official interests had not helped the ailing stock market.
The Nikkei average surged soon after the rate cut yesterday morning but
later closed 124.45 lower at 15,373.34, a six-year low. In initial trading
early today, the Nikkei was down a further 150 points.
Mr Tsutomu Hata, the finance minister, was quick to welcome the cut, made
just before the markets opened, as 'a timely and appropriate step'.
Mr Koichi Kato, the chief cabinet secretary, said the government had hoped
that the Bank of Japan's reduction in the official discount rate (ODR) from
3.75 per cent to 3.25 per cent would encourage the market.
However, he said a recovery in share prices may only come in the
'longer-term'.
After announcing the cut, Mr Yasushi Mieno, central bank governor, said the
reduction was necessary to stimulate capital investment and consumer
spending which have weakened in recent months.
He emphasised that the cut was not intended to support the stock market but
was timed to precede a supplementary budget.
While Mr Mieno said the bank would be unable to reduce the ODR much below
the present 3.25 per cent, the lowest level since October 1987, Mr Takeshi
Nagano, president of the Japan Employers' Federation, said the rate must be
cut again. He said the central bank and government had been too slow to
respond to the economic downturn, and that another rate cut should come
quickly. Mr Keizo Saji, chairman of the Osaka Chamber of Commerce, urged the
government to consider a cut in income taxes to stimulate the economy.
The Japanese government plans to hold a special session of parliament early
next month to finalise the supplementary budget, which it hopes will
rekindle the economy. The supplementary budget is likely to be between
Y5,000bn and Y8,000bn.
Another sign of the weakening of consumer demand came yesterday when the
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Miti) released statistics for
large retail stores showing that national sales in June were 4.3 per cent
down on the same month last year.
The ministry said demand for furniture and clothing was unexpectedly weak.
The central bank had hoped personal consumption would be the 'engine' for
recovery.
Time runs out, Page 15; Currencies, Page 25; World Stock Markets, Page 31

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920728

