FT924-5991

FT  24 NOV 92 / Parliament and Politics: Brooke defends pledge of cash


   By IVOR OWEN and RICHARD EVANS


MR Peter Brooke, national heritage secretary, strongly defended the decision
to use taxpayers' money to meet the multi-million-pound bill for repairing
fire damaged Windsor castle in the Commons yesterday.
He stressed: 'Windsor Castle is the property of the state, and it is the
government's responsibility to ensure that resources are provided to
maintain it in a manner commensurate with its status, and its role on
occasions of state'.
Ms Ann Clwyd, the shadow heritage secretary, said there was 'legitimate
public concern that the total cost of repair should not be paid exclusively
by the taxpayer'.
In more aggressive tones, and to cheers from some of his Labour colleagues,
Mr Bill Michie, MP for the Heeley division of Sheffield, contrasted the
government's readiness to find up to Pounds 60m to meet the cost of
repairing Windsor Castle with its attitude to the homeless sleeping in
'cardboard cities'.
Mr Brooke refused to 'lend credence' to the Pounds 60m figure in advance of
properly prepared estimates, but acknowledged that whatever the total
finally proved to be it was unlikely to be 'absorbable' within his
department's budget.
He envisaged that the cost would be spread over a number of years, and that
he would be involved in negotiations with Mr Michael Portillo, the chief
secretary to the Treasury.
Mr Brooke joined with Sir Anthony Grant (C Cambridgeshire South West) in
condemning the attitude of Labour critics of the cost as 'mean and
Pecksniffian'.
Mr Alex Salmond (SNP Banff and Buchan) argued that if the taxpayer had to
meet the bill it strengthened the case for requiring the Royal family to pay
taxes in the same way as everyone else.
Mr Brooke answered that taxation was a matter for Mr Normam Lamont, the
chancellor of the exchequer.
The minister emphasised that responsibility for the fabric of Windsor Castle
had rested with the government since 1831, while the contents, including the
royal collection, were the responsibility of the Queen.
Meanwhile, local fire chiefs said the cause of the fire was not yet known,
despite claims it had been started by a halogen lamp igniting inflammable
fluid.
Royal Berkshire Fire and Rescue Service said: 'The brigade does not yet know
what the cause is. The investigation is continuing.'
The halogen lamp theory has puzzled some picture experts, who claim that if
only the most basic safety rules were being followed, there should have been
no prospect of the fire beginning in such a way.
Other possible causes being investigated include an electrical fault - the
part of the castle where the fire started was being rewired - a discarded
cigarette, or hot bitumen dropped on the chapel roof.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921124

