FT922-13395

FT  11 APR 92 / Arts: Passionate Giovanni


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


WITH ABOUT half its nationwide tour behind it, Opera 80 is well into its
stride. There are two operas on offer this spring, and on Thursday the
company gave the audience at Brighton's Theatre Royal a Don Giovanni full of
vigour and passion which should fairly completely have taken everybody's
mind off the political drama unfolding during the course of that evening.
It might not have been so. There has been a tendency, in recent years, for
productions of this opera to make great play of the political issues raised
by this many-faceted masterpiece, at the expense of the rest.
We saw one side of that in the recent Royal Opera production. Don Giovanni -
it told us in no uncertain fashion  - is a serious affair. The action took
place in sets of unremitting gloom, as the lights went out on many of the
opera's sensual attractions and all its comedy.
In this production (well designed for touring, by Lez Brotherston) there is
still a lot of low-lit activity; but it is a nocturnal drama shot through
with many shafts of lighter wit and warmer human feelings. Stephen Medcalf,
Opera 80's director of productions, has done the company proud in delivering
a staging which is true to traditional ideas about the opera, while having
an energy that is entirely fresh and invigorating.
No apology is made for the fact that sexual drive is at the heart of what
Don Giovanni is all about. And rightly so, when Mozart's perceptions on that
subject are not at all old-fashioned even in the 20th century.
It is one of those evenings when everybody knows his or her place in the
drama, even if vocal standards are up and down at times. Michael John
Pearson is a Leporello who has learned plenty, from watching his master at
work, about how to be a charmer. Lisa Tyrrell sings an attractive Zerlina.
The soprano Fiona Cameron, strong and steady of voice, makes a dignified
Donna Anna.
An innovation on Thursday (to be followed at three other venues on the tour)
was the provision of a running commentary in sign language for the hard of
hearing. At the speed at which a lot of this performance went, under Paul
McGrath, it was a heroic job for the interpreter just to keep up. Plenty of
life, then, all round - more, arguably, than in the Royal Opera's staging;
far more than in Opera Factory's recent lacklustre showing. London audiences
could do worse than to catch this Don Giovanni when it comes to Sadler's
Wells in May.
The other opera on tour is Albert Herring, which also has a generally
commendable cast. Richard Edgar-Wilson is the nervy Albert, still hanging on
mum's apron strings. Susan Gorton gives a remarkable impression of Peggy
Mount trying to outdo Margaret Rutherford in the role of Miss Pike. Penelope
Chalmers is suitably dragon-like as the manic, bald Lady Billows, who lives
inside a perspex cage.
But wait a moment. Bald? Living in a perspex cage? Yes: unfortunately this
is one of those productions which got impossibly carried away with its own
ingenuity, and has ended up turning people who are caricatures anyway into
grotesque Spitting Image-like puppet versions of their real selves. The
comedy has turned into farce. The satire has become vicious hyperbole.
Benjamin Britten, the composer, would certainly not have been amused, and I
fear that not many in the audience were either, to judge from the
disappointingly low laughter level.
But there was one delightful coincidence. Brighton was lucky enough to see
this Albert Herring on April 10, the very day when Lady Billows and her
fellow village worthies meet to elect a Queen of the May: a satirical
observation, perhaps, on election week.
Opera 80 is on tour in England. It will play two weeks at Sadler's Wells
Theatre, London, from May 19 to 30 (Box Office 071-278-8916)

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920411

