FT924-6476

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment (2): A single box of tricks -
Multimedia


   By PAUL TAYLOR


For years the gurus of high technology have been forecasting the arrival of
multimedia - the bringing together of text, sound, still images, full motion
video and computer graphics in one box of user-friendly electronic tricks.
Finally it seems, the waiting may be almost over.
The concept of multimedia has excited those in both the consumer electronics
and computer industries, and led some to predict that the next wave of high
technology products will boast interactive multimedia features.
By integrating some of the features of the personal computer, compact disc
(CD) player and television, multimedia's advocates argue that a new
generation of easy-to-use digital consumer electronics equipment will
emerge, capable of delivering high quality information, entertainment and
education.
Already a handful of new products have been launched which could help define
the shape of the home entertainment market into the next century. Most of
them are built around variants of the CD and appear to offer some, if not
all, of the promised features of multimedia.
The audio CD, developed jointly by Philips and Sony in the early 1980s,
revolutionised the pre-recorded music business. Since then it has been
followed by numerous spin-offs including digital video Laser Discs and
several variants of CD-Rom - a disc-based system for storing large volumes
of data and other information which can then be used and manipulated, for
example, by a personal computer.
But CD-Rom applications do not have to be big and bulky. Among the latest
CD-Rom developments is the Data Discman, a portable 'electronic book'
launched by Sony which gives the user instant access to a vast quantity of
visual information stored on an 8cm compact disc. Each disc can contain up
to 100,000 of A4 text and/or 32,000 images, or a combination of both. One CD
electronic book therefore contains the same amount of information as about
200 London telephone directories.
The Data Discman was launched in the UK in July with a Pounds 350 price tag
along with a selection of 'titles' including the 'Time Out' London guide, a
comprehensive English-French dictionary, and an electronic speech writer's
kit providing about 10,000 quotations and jokes classified to specific
topics 'for easy searching.'
Since then, new titles are being added at the rate of at least four a month
and have been designed to cater for reference and educational needs,
business use and general leisure.
In Japan, where the Discman was launched in 1990, more than 70,000 players
were sold in the first five months.
Certainly, with several million PC-based standard 12cm CD-Rom drives already
in use worldwide there seems little doubt that electronic publishing,
particularly of reference material for use with home computers or in schools
and libraries, is likely to grow.
An estimated 2,000 CD-Rom titles including telephone directories, medical
databases, service manuals, newspapers and other reference works are already
available. However, growth could be limited by the lack of comprehensive
standards.
A relatively new standard, CD-Rom XA, was launched in 1988 in an attempt to
bridge the gap between CD-Rom and CD-I or Interactive CD discs which can
store a fully digital multimedia mix of sound, video, text and graphics.
CD-I, backed by Philips, Sony and Matsushita, has been developed in
competition with several other multimedia standards including digital video
interactive (DVI) backed by Intel, the US chip maker, and others.
However it was the introduction in Europe earlier this year of the first
consumer electronics CD-I players by Philips which has really helped fuel
the growing public awareness of multimedia.
According to Philips, CD-I is 'the de facto multimedia standard' and since
CD-I players went on sale in the UK in May the company says 'sales are now
equalling CD-audio in terms of take-up at the same stage of introduction.'
The CD-I player, which hooks up to the TV and hi-fi system and costs Pounds
499 in the UK, allows users to manipulate material on screen. It is a
mixture of sophisticated video games machine, standard audio CD player and
information system aimed squarely at a family audience.
Without moving from an armchair using CD-I discs and a remote control
pointer, it is possible to 'tour' a museum, 'play' a round of golf on some
of the world's greatest courses or control the characters from 'Sesame
Street' - the popular children's programme.
Philips has learnt the painful marketing lesson of some of its earlier new
product launches and tried to ensure that there is sufficient software
available to tempt the first hardware buyers.
The availability of high quality CD-I 'software' is probably the single most
important factor in determining whether CD-I is a commercial success. About
50 CD-I discs costing from Pounds 14.95 and covering four main categories -
children's topics, games, music and special interest - are available in the
UK with between four and eight new discs being introduced each month.
The new CD-I players also support the pioneering Photo-CD standard jointly
developed by Kodak and Philips. Photo CD enables consumers to take an
undeveloped, or developed, roll of 35mm film into a designated high street
Photo-CD centre, typically the usual place used for getting films developed,
which then transfers up to 100 photographs onto a CD-style disc.
The high quality images can then be viewed on a conventional TV using a CD-I
player, a dedicated, and somewhat cheaper, Photo-CD machine which
nevertheless can also play audio CDs, or even a personal computer using a
CD-Rom XA drive.
Another option, called Photo CD Portfolio, will allow customers to combine
their photographs with text, voice commentary and sound effects on another
higher capacity disc, while pre-mastered discs are planned which will
provide a sort of 'talking book' with a narrative sound track accompanying
each frame.
According to Kodak, the world's 250m 35mm photographers produce a staggering
50bn colour exposures each year.
Mr Ravi Khanna, Kodak's Photo CD product manager in the UK, said: 'Kodak's
market research has identified that whilst many consumers enjoyed
photography they were often unable to find the time to put their photos in
albums or any other form of archiving system. . . the Photo CD system
overcomes this problem as well as offering a completely new way for the
consumer to view and enjoy their photographs.'
While Photo CD provides the CD-I player with still image capabilities, full
motion video is promised with a Pounds 130 upgrade cartridge due to be
available by the end of the year. This final multimedia element will enable
CD-I players to show up to 72 minutes of video using the latest video
compression techniques.
However if the highest quality video is required consumers should perhaps
take another look at the digital Laser Disc.
In Europe, and the UK in particular where video cassette recorder sales have
been particularly strong, the market for Laser Discs has lagged that in
Japan where 1m or one household in 10 has a LD player. Even in the US, LD
penetration has reached one in 100 homes.
In the UK, Pioneer, which has doggedly sold digital LD players since the
mid-1980s, has now been joined by Sony and Philips which have both
introduced new dual-standard PAL-NTSC players in the past few months, which
like Pioneer's three models are also capable of playing ordinary music CDs.
Recently, the UK Laser Disc Association has been formed to help promote the
benefits and availability of LDs, and there is a steadily increasing
catalogue of music and film titles available on LD, boosted by the entry of
Sony's Columbia Tristar Home Video subsidiary into the UK market.
About 550 laser disc titles are available in the UK and Mr John Bamford,
product information manager for Pioneer, says LD player sales are growing
rapidly for the first time, albeit from a low base. The number of players
installed in the UK is expected to top 15,000 by the end of the year.
This resurgence of interest in a new generation of LD players comes 10 years
after Philips introduced the original LaserVision analogue laser disc
player.
In the intervening decade, technology has moved rapidly, increasing the
power and complexity of silicon chips and enabling an embryonic multimedia
electronics industry to emerge.
Multimedia products destined for the home entertainment market will continue
to evolve, whether or not CD-I itself is a commercial success. Now the
electronics industry is awaiting the customer's verdict.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921120

