FT921-11904

FT  29 JAN 92 / French pick IBM to take minority stake in Bull


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


THE FRENCH government yesterday chose IBM, the world's leading computer
maker, for a wide ranging technology, research and commercial alliance with
Bull, the loss-making state-owned computer group.
IBM is expected to pay an estimated Dollars 100m (Pounds 55.2m) for a 5.7
per cent stake in Bull.
This is the main part of a series of accords announced yesterday, also
embracing SGS-Thomson, the Franco-Italian semiconductor company, and Apple,
the US microcomputer group.
The selection of IBM, the preferred choice of Bull's own management and
French president Francois Mitterrand, brings to an end six months of hectic
behind the scenes competition between IBM and Hewlett Packard, the rival
suitor.
This is the second phase of the reorganisation of France's state-owned
high-technology companies, following the proposal announced last month to
merge the state's civil electronics and nuclear energy businesses. IBM is
the second foreign investor in Bull since last year's controversial purchase
of a 4.7 per cent stake by NEC, the Japanese electronics company. This
cemented their accord under which Bull distributes NEC mainframes in Europe.
HP, which yesterday said it was 'disappointed for Bull', has agreed to
continue separate talks with SGS-Thomson for a possible chip purchasing
agreement but denied any suggestion that it might take an equity stake.
IBM is to supply Bull with its microprocessors and computers based on
'reduced instruction set computing' technology, which allows quicker
response times.
The French group will make available to IBM its own open-standards
technology, which enables different makes of computer to interconnect.
Mr John Akers, IBM's chairman, said: 'It is another step in the development
of a strong information technology industry in Europe and represents further
progress in the acceptance of open standards.'
The US computer group has agreed to purchase 150,000 notebook computers
annually from Zenith Data Systems - Bull's microcomputer subsidiary - over
the next four years for sale under the IBM label, say government officials.
Bull is to join a Texas-based centre for research into the next generation
of microcomputers, run by Apple with IBM and Motorola, the US electronics
group.
In a related accord, Apple is to form a task force over the next few weeks
with Thomson Consumer Electronics, the French state-owned maker of
audiovisual equipment, and France Telecom, the telecommunications operator.
It will research 'multimedia' terminals for the simultaneous processing of
video, graphics, voice and text.
French computer industry thrown a lifeline, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920129

