FT922-3925

FT  09 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Housing tenders


THE MANAGEMENT of council housing is the latest public service put out to
compulsory competitive tendering. This will be a welcome step for many of
the 9m people living in council homes.
For while some local authorities have a good record of managing their
estates, others have failed dismally. Rent arrears have mounted to Pounds
430m, over 10 per cent of revenue in 29 authorities. The proportion of empty
homes ranges from 0.1 per cent to 9.7 per cent. Too many estates suffer
neglect which would be unacceptable in the private sector.
Compulsory competitive tendering is now the tried and tested way of dealing
with such service failures by exposing them to market competition. Where the
council is operating an efficient and high-quality service, the workforce
has little to fear. In a minority of cases - if other local services are a
precedent - outside firms will take over the management of badly-run
estates. Elsewhere, competitive tendering galvanises poor management and
forces the in-house team to improve its performance.
Contracting-out housing management is, however, more complex than tendering
for services such as street-cleaning. Particular skills are required to
manage badly-built and poorly-maintained estates within the tight financial
constraints councils work under. The allocation of costs between housing
management and other services such as housing the homeless is not always
clear. And dealing sensitively with low-income tenants who are strapped for
cash requires skill and tact.
For these reasons and others, the government is wise to proceed gradually.
It will take time to create a market of competing contractors with the
skills and resources to make a success of managing council estates. One
source of such managers could be councils with a successful track record of
tenant management. The unnecessary bar on councils competing for out-of-area
contracts where it is financially prudent for them to do so should be
lifted.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920609

