FT921-15323

FT  10 JAN 92 / Letter: Training fails if there is no strategy to determine
its aims


   From Mr DAVID JENKINS


Sir, You reviewed the recent report of the Chemical Industries Association
('Success of flexible working questioned', January 3).
We believe there are wider problems than the report would seem to suggest
concerning efforts to increase flexibility of staff by extending their range
of skills through training.
The report indicates that a big problem has come to light in the discovery
that tradesmen were deficient in their existing (or 'core') skills: and that
this shortfall delayed the implementation of policies designed to extend
their skills.
From our experience, working with some 40-odd firms across a range of
process industries (including chemicals), we have found that many large
firms have been prepared to spend money on the training of tradesmen (Pounds
500,000 is nothing unusual) but that they have secured only a marginal
return on their investment.
The reasons for failure are common to most of these companies:
First, they have sent tradesmen on training courses without having
determined what additional tasks they wanted their staff to be able to do on
completion of their training.
Second, they have made inadequate provision for their staff to practise at
the workplace those new skills they learned during their training away from
the plant. Without this, newly learned skills are lost.
Finally, few firms make sufficient provision for the practical assessment of
the standard reached by staff in the new skills they have learned. Without
this no employer can be sure that a tradesman is competent to apply these
skills safely: he is unable to judge whether he has got value for money
spent on training: and (here our findings mirror those of the CIA) it is
unwise for him to offer extra pay for additional skills unless he has a
system to ensure that each person has first reached the required standard.
In short, our experience suggests that for companies to benefit from greater
flexibility from staff who have received training, they must first devise a
practical strategy that addresses the issues of aims, skill practice and
assessment.
David Jenkins,
TEK Associates,
Chantrey House,
Landford Road,
London SW15

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920110

