FT924-6126

FT  23 NOV 92 / International Capital Markets: Floating krona leads to rapid
readjustment in Sweden


   By CHRISTOPHER BROWN-HUMES


SWEDEN'S bond market has entered a period of rapid readjustment following
the government's decision on Thursday to let the krona float. For the first
time in four years, the country ended the week with a positive yield curve,
and the expectation is that it will steepen, at least in the short term.
Yields responded immediately to the flotation news, falling sharply on
Thursday and continuing their decline at the short-end on Friday.
On Friday night, the yield for benchmark five-year government bonds stood at
9.90 per cent, compared with 10.20 per cent on Thursday and 11.85 per cent
before the krona was set free, while the bond due 2003 closed at 10.29 per
cent.
At these levels the market is already discounting cuts in short-term
interest rates. Those hoping for an early move by the Riksbank, the central
bank, on Friday may have been disappointed, as the overnight rate was held
at 12.5 per cent, but rates are expected to come down to 10 - 11 per cent in
the near future.
Further ahead, the betting is that Sweden will follow Finland by bringing
rates down cautiously, rather than relaxing monetary policy substantially as
the UK has done since it left the ERM.
Mr Bengt Dennis, Riksbank governor, made it clear late last week that
keeping inflation under control remained a top priority. Not only that, but
the government would be anxious to re-establish some credibility by not
allowing the currency to weaken unduly.
No doubt a firm statement on future monetary and fiscal policy will emerge
in due course. Meanwhile, Sweden's spiralling budget deficit, aggravated by
the domestic recession and the bail-out of the banking system, will be a key
influence on market sentiment.
The budget deficit will reach SKr166bn (Dollars 24.75bn) in 1992-93,
according to the latest government calculation, but others put the figure
much higher. Some suggest the public sector borrowing requirement in the
coming year might be as much as 18 per cent of GDP.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the government has decided to widen
its funding possibilities, using the occasion of last week's crisis to
announce plans to scrap an eight-year-old restriction which had previously
prevented it from borrowing abroad to finance its debts.
This proposal could be positive for the domestic market, if it results in a
significant switch in the government's funding strategy.
Mr Lars Boman, deputy director of the National Debt Office's international
market department, said: 'The major part of the budget deficit will still be
financed in the Swedish market.' If so, domestic players will predominate.
Local dealers do not expect much foreign participation in krona-denominated
issues, given the uncertain direction of the Swedish currency.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921123

