FT923-6489

FT  24 AUG 92 / SE reviews its powers to discipline


   By ROBERT PESTON and ROLAND RUDD


THE LONDON Stock Exchange is conducting an informal review of how to punish
listed companies which breach the rules contained in the exchange's Yellow
Book.
Senior officials believe the exchange's punishments are inadequate. 'Some
companies and their advisers are taking no notice of the Yellow Book',
complained one.
The Yellow Book contains the rules which companies should follow after they
are listed. One of the most common breaches is to release price sensitive
information to selected newspapers, before making an official announcement
to the exchange. Another breach is making a Stock Exchange announcement
which turns out to have been misleading.
Over the past few months, the exchange has investigated 26 examples of
alleged leaks by companies. If convinced there has been a deliberate leak,
the exchange will normally reprimand the company in private.
One official said: 'Do not under-estimate how embarrassing it is for a
company to be told that it has broken the rules.'
However, another exchange executive believes the exchange should be tougher.
It has two additional punitive powers. It can make a public statement
criticising a company or it can delist a company. The exchange would
probably never use delisting as punishment if a company leaked information.
'We have to consider the interests of shareholders', said an official. 'If
we delist the shares, they suffer, even though they are not to blame for the
rule infringement.'
The last time the exchange censured in public was a year ago, when two
directors of Mountleigh, Mr Nelson Peltz and Mr Peter May, were criticised
for selling shares in the group two months before it disclosed poor results
and launched a rights issue. In recent years, the only other companies to
face public censure were Polly Peck and Tottenham Hotspur.
Mr Peter Rawlins, the exchange's chief executive, has had a meeting with the
City & Financial Group of the Institute of Public Relations to discuss what
to do about leaking. 'We (the Institute) think the exchange should censure
in public' said Mr Geoff Kelly, head of public relations at investment bank
Barclays de Zoete Wedd.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920824

