FT923-15432

FT  02 JUL 92 / International Capital Markets: Launch set for Italy's first
futures market


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


ITALY'S first futures market will start trading between July 10 and July 15,
according to officials at the Bank of Italy.
The Mercato Italiano Futures (MIF), the Italian futures exchange, was
originally scheduled for launch in the first half of 1992, but technical
problems have delayed the start-up, according to dealers.
Instead of trying to create an exchange from scratch, the Italian government
bond futures market is being added to the existing screen-based system used
for trading the underlying bond market.
The Telematico system, started in 1988, helped revive interest in the
Italian bond market, which has since drawn increasing numbers of foreign
investors, attracted by high interest rates and the prospect of falling
yields and rising prices in the run up to European Monetary Union.
Some dealers believe that the Italian authorities may have missed the boat.
The London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange (Liffe)
launched a highly successful Italian government bond contract last
September, which saw off a rival contract launched by the Matif, the
Paris-based exchange, at the same time. The Liffe contract traded an average
daily volume of 29,000 contracts in June, substantially higher than in
previous months.
In addition, the Italian bond market has just come through a period of high
volatility following Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht treaty. On June
3, just after the referendum, nearly 68,000 Italian bond futures were
traded.
But the signs are that MIF will be able to attract a fresh source of
investors domestically.
The Liffe contract has been actively traded by international investors, but
dealers say many Italian banks and institutions have been waiting to use the
Italian market.
In addition, the new market is attracting some interest among retail
investors. According to the Bank of Italy, the Telematico system has now
been fully adapted, and is undergoing tests.
There will be 22 marketmakers in Italian bond futures on the Telematico
system, which consists of more than 200 screens throughout Italy, according
to the Bank.
The contract is very similar to the Liffe future: the MIF contract size is
L250m, compared with L200m for the Liffe contract, based on 8-10 year
Italian government BTP issues.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920702

