FT923-10962

FT  28 JUL 92 / People: Saxon Riley fills the gap left by Rowland


Sedgwick Group, one of the world's largest insurance brokers, has moved
quickly to fill the void created by David Rowland's decision to take on the
chairmanship of Lloyd's. Saxon Riley, 53, the group managing director, has
taken over as chief executive; a new chairman will be appointed by the end
of the year.
The elevation of Lancastrian Sax Riley is not a surprise. Since joining the
firm in 1964 from Scholfields, a Manchester insurance broker, he has moved
steadily up the organisation. The first signal that he was the heir apparent
came in January when he was promoted to his current job and given
responsibility for the group's insurance, reinsurance broking and risk
services.
However, Rowland's departure is still a blow for Sedgwick. He was brought in
as chief executive in 1988 from rival Willis Faber, following mounting
concern about Sedgwick's poor results. It was the first time that the
company had gone outside for a new chief and Rowland, 59, is credited with
knocking into shape a broker which had grown rapidly through acquisition.
A year after he arrived, Rowland also added the role of chairman; he
replaced Carel Mosselmans who had headed the group for five years. Until
yesterday's news it had been expected that Rowland would stay till 1995.
Sedgwick has chosen to use the occasion of his departure to split the role
of chairman and chief executive. A number of well known city figures on the
board who might fill the spot include Sir Michael Richardson, chairman of
Smith New Court, and Rupert Hambro, chairman of J O Hambro Magan.
Meanwhile, Sedgwick also announced yesterday that Rob White-Cooper, 49, had
been appointed a vice-chairman. He is chairman of the operations group
responsible for co-ordinating the worldwide activities of Sedgwick James and
is responsible for the European, overseas and Asia Pacific regions of that
company.
*****
Jonathan Neame becomes the fifth generation of the family to join Shepherd
Neame, the oldest independent UK brewer. He has been appointed company
secretary in succession to Bernard Cork who retires in November after 22
years with the Kent brewer.
Neame, 28, son of Robert Neame, chairman, has worked for the COBA Group, an
international consultancy, was educated at Pembroke College, Cambridge, and
the City University, and was called to the Bar in 1987.
*****
Kenneth Walker, formerly president and ceo of Cardis Corporation, has been
appointed president and ceo of GKN Parts Industries Corporation, based in
Memphis, Tennessee.
*****
Nigel Young has been appointed chief executive of HALMA's safety interlock
division, and chairman of Smith Flow Control and SERV Trayvou
Interverrouillage, the two companies in the division of which he is not
already chairman.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920728

