FT923-6446

FT  25 AUG 92 / Russia seeks debt deal with G7: Moscow to put case for
rescheduling at meeting in Paris this week


   By LEYLA BOULTON and DMITRY VOLKOV


   MOSCOW


RUSSIA IS to present its case for a rapid rescheduling of the former Soviet
Union's foreign debt at a meeting of Group of Seven deputy finance ministers
in Paris at the end of this week.
Mr Alexander Shokhin, the vice prime minister responsible for foreign
economic relations, told a meeting of regional governors yesterday: 'Russia
will not make it to the end of the year without a postponement of payments.
. . . The volume of payments which Russia owes exceeds its hard currency
revenues by two to three times.'
Without giving details, he said Russia was already Dollars 4bn short on
payments owed, and for this reason, Mr Yegor Gaidar, the acting prime
minister, had suspended repayments on commercial debts through
Vneshekonombank, which manages the total foreign debt of around Dollars
70bn. 'Our top priority is payments on grain credits,' he said, which
explained a 'fire brigade' like approach in finding cash to pay arrears owed
to Canada so that it would resume grain deliveries.
Mr Shokhin's remarks came as an International Monetary Fund delegation began
a round of talks in Moscow with Mr Viktor Gerashchenko, central bank
chairman, and government ministers about Russia's difficulties in meeting
the terms of its first ever agreement with the Fund.
That agreement, which unlocked a first-tranche IMF credit of Dollars 1bn,
was a minimal condition for Russia to hope for a full-scale foreign debt
rescheduling from its western creditors. So far this year, official and
commercial creditors have been rolling over payments of principal on
medium-term debts incurred before January 1 1991 on a 90-day basis. The
current deferral expires at the end of September.
But what was mooted by the G7 leaders at the Munich summit last July was a
rescheduling over 10 years of both principal and interest payments falling
due this year, with a grace period of 3-5 years during which nothing would
have to be paid.
Such a rescheduling was to be conditional on continued progress in following
the IMF agreement, and the final negotiation of a deal with the wider Paris
Club of official creditors, to be followed by an obligation for commercial
banks to offer similar terms.
But Paris Club negotiations, which have already been postponed until
September, have looked increasingly shaky as Russia has fallen behind with
payments excluded from the deferral, and with Mr Gerashchenko saying last
week he wanted to renegotiate the IMF deal.
The commercial banks are also at loggerheads with their governments over
whether such a rescheduling should be concluded, because they argue that
they have much more to lose than governments.
A row over the IMF agreement within Russia is intimately linked to debates
over how to settle Rbs3 trillion in arrears between state-owned enterprises.
Which solution Russia chooses will have a direct impact on its ability to
meet the targets set by the Fund for a budget deficit equalling 5 per cent
of gross domestic product and inflation of 9 per cent a month. Mr Konstantin
Kagalovsky, previously responsible for Russia's negotiations with
international financial institutions, has been appointed Russia's executive
director at the IMF in Washington. Mr Leonid Grigoriev, chairman of the
Committee for Foreign Investment, is being tipped as Russia's director at
the World Bank, once it manages to pay up its share of World Bank capital.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920825

