FT921-12029

FT  29 JAN 92 / Russia awards oil and gas contract


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


A US-Japanese consortium has won a much-contested tender to evaluate oil and
gas reserves off Russia's far-eastern island of Sakhalin, which Moscow says
will lead to a Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.7bn) exploration and development
project.
Marathon Oil and McDermott International of the US and Japan's Mitsui and Co
defeated four other teams, one of which included Exxon.
Details have yet to be announced, but the deal appears to be the most
ambitious of its kind to date. The Russian government hopes to conclude
several more agreements with western oil companies to help revive flagging
domestic production.
The deal, due to be concluded on March 31, is for a feasibility study into
the development of reserves estimated at 730m barrels of oil and more than
400bn cubic metres of gas. Such resources are of immediate interest to
Japan, just south of Sakhalin.
A Mitsui official said the consortium had made 'small' changes to its
original proposals after Russia set new conditions, including demands
related to the needs of local people. The composition of the committee
responsible for taking the decision was changed in midstream, he said.
A Russian industry expert said that local authorities in Sakhalin had
pressed for the tender to be restarted from scratch, but that the choice of
the US-Japanese consortium signified a victory for central Russian
authorities in Moscow.
Although the agreement is formally for a feasibility study, the oil
companies are likely already to have reached an understanding with Russian
authorities on profit-sharing.
Moscow is also due soon to produce legislation on mineral rights to clarify
the position of foreign investors.
The feasibility study is expected to take about 18 months. Providing the
facilities and infrastructure would require a further three to five years,
with production likely to begin in the late 1990s.
Russia's Ministry for Ecology and Natural Resources said: 'Given the
extremely harsh conditions of weather and pack ice . . . this will be one of
the largest and most complex hydrocarbon developments ever attempted.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920129

