FT922-13425

FT  11 APR 92 / Travel: Travelling modestly in troubled times - You don't
have to spend a fortune on travel


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


THIS IS not my first time in India, writes Lucia van der Post. I have been
before, a five-star traveller, sequestered from the heat, dust and crowds by
air-conditioned rooms and luxury buses, by meals in Taj Mahals and Oberois.
This time is different. I am here to look at work projects among poor
communities. Our food and accommodation will be paid for out of charitable
funds and will be modest.
I only begin fully to realise what this means when I learn that for our
group of nine there are just three rooms available at our first stop in
Delhi. I lose my nerve and stay with a generous friend in the city.
The India International Centre, where the group is staying at about Pounds
12 a night, turns out to be the most luxurious stop of the tour. Next door
to the Lodi gardens, to stay there is, it seems, a privilege conferred only
by being sponsored by a member.
We soon learn that with the rupee at about 44 to the pound, everything,
except internal flights and the top hotels, seems cheap. It is not long
before we are spending like spoiled princelings. We wander down Chandni
Chowk market, buying up khadi cotton tops in rainbow colours at Pounds 1.50,
hand-embroidered cotton tablecloths from Madras, silk scarves from Orissa,
wall-hangings from Rajasthan, wooden toys from Bangalore, beads from heaven
knows where. The rupee is getting stronger by the minute.
Lunches are taken on the hoof - bunches of flavoursome bananas, baskets of
oranges and coconut milk, all at under Pounds 1 a head. One day we treat
ourselves at The Gaylord on Connaught Place - lassi, biriyanis, kormas,
tikkas, naans, as much as we can manage for less than Pounds 5 each.
On our last night in Delhi, the group dines modestly in the club. I join my
generous friend and an international banker for dinner in a grand hotel. In
the middle of the night I am stricken - I reach for the Immodium and somehow
make it on to the plane for Bangalore. The rest of the group is in splendid
health.
In Bangalore we stay at the Ashraya, an Indian-style middle-ranking hotel.
Here I have my first encounter with cockroaches. 'Don't worry,' say my
companions, 'in the upper East Side in New York they can't get rid of them
either'.
I do the first of my room swaps and become acquainted with washing,
Indian-style. Based on the (no doubt sound) principle that it is unhygienic
to sit in dirty water, you either stand under a shower or contrive to use
the large bucket and small jug that is provided to get clean.
In Mysore we stay in the cheapest hotel of the trip. The Park Lane, at 2720
Curzon Park Road, costs Rs80 (just under Pounds 2) a night. I am very
fragile, and even the grey colour of what I think were once white sheets is
not enough to stop me falling gratefully to sleep. I am woken by shrieks
from next door as my companions meet their first cockroach.
In time we come to love the Park Lane. We take up the entire hotel and in
the shady courtyard we chat, drink lime sodas and lassi, and those who are
well eat plates of vegetable sizzlers for Rs25. Later, when I am well, I
dream of those vegetable sizzlers . . .
Every day we find new pleasures that cost little or nothing. Every village
has its market but the one at Mysore is special. We spend a morning there,
stunned by the sounds, smells and images. Just being there is enough.
We learn that the needs of modest travellers are very different from those
of five-star travellers - ear plugs (Indians seem impervious to noise and
nothing cheap is ever quiet), bath plugs and toilet paper are essentials.
Clean pillowcases, baby-wipes, water-biscuits and Marmite (for when you are
feeling fragile) are optional extras.
Near Vellore we have our loveliest day among rural villagers who are poor
but seem not to feel it. We look at their basketwork, visit houses, are
fascinated by the vitality and evident happiness of the children, eat supper
in the community centre and ponder why it is that they smile more often and
more sunnily than anybody we know.
In Madras there is a mini-rebellion. Even sweet-smelling roses cannot
console two of our number - the peeling wallpaper, more grubby sheets, a
cockroach emerging from the water-biscuits, the noise from the Nungambakkam
High Road has them almost in tears. A bottle of (Indian) champagne in the
Connemara hotel and a flit to three simple but clean double rooms with
bathrooms (Rs250 a night) in the Residency Centrepoint Guest House at 167
Kodambakkam High Road (gleaned from the modest travellers' bible, Lonely
Planet's Travel Survival Kit, India, Pounds 13.95) did the trick.
Modest travellers should budget for occasional treats. Some of us were ready
to kill for a bacon sandwich. I began to hallucinate about a cold glass of
Chablis and a salade Nicoise.
But what about the poor, I hear you say, how did you cope? I am left
fumbling for something adequate, or at least not banal, to say. We bought
bundles of small rupee notes and learned to be discreet about giving. In
Bangalore, overcome by the sight of a blind young man, the age of my son,
shuffling across a street, I pushed some notes into his hand. Out of nowhere
came a hideously deformed beggar, and then another . . . and another. I gave
them all the notes I had and still they came.
I cannot do better than quote Mark Tully's opening words in his new book (No
Full Stops In India, Viking, Pounds 16.99) about how his guests cope with
the poverty. They 'expect the taxi-drivers to take them back to their hotels
whatever hour of the night. Before leaving, they will check the fare with me
to make sure the taxi-drivers do not get a few more rupees than they are
due.'

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920411

