FT923-9722

FT  04 AUG 92 / US and Iraq pursue warof political gestures


   By ROGER MATTHEWS, Middle East Editor


THE US and Iraq continued their war of political gestures yesterday with
American marines preparing to land on the beaches of Kuwait and Baghdad
vowing never to renounce its claim to the tiny neighbouring country it
invaded two years ago.
Iraqi president Saddam Hussein, bolstered by his success in delaying the
entry of UN inspectors to the agriculture ministry in Baghdad, is again
trying to portray himself as the only Arab leader willing to confront the
US.
Baghdad newspapers repeated yesterday that Kuwait was Iraq's 19th province
and that the invasion on August 2 1990 was 'the greatest historic epic in
the contemporary history of Iraq'. They insisted that one day the province
of Kuwait would be returned to its 'rightful' owners.
The US response has been to bring forward planned manoeuvres with Kuwaiti
troops and to send more Patriot missiles to defend against possible attacks
by Iraqi Scud missiles. However, western diplomats do not expect Mr Saddam
to initiate any military action against Kuwait, although he is continuing to
root out pockets of dissent among the mainly Shia population in the south of
Iraq.
Up to 1,900 US marines and some 5,000 other troops will be participating in
the manoeuvres, which will continue throughout August. Kuwait has been
slowly rebuilding its armed forces but given the available personnel,
officials accept that the country's defence will remain for the foreseeable
future in US hands.
An opposition newspaper in Kuwait accused the government yesterday of
confusing the public by failing to explain the arrival of US troops. It said
the additional missiles and the troop deployment had raised fears about a
second Iraqi invasion rather than providing intended reassurance.
The anniversary of the invasion also served as a reminder of the estimated
800 Kuwaitis who are still being held in Iraq. In several countries Kuwaiti
embassies sought to focus attention on these people by taking out newspaper
advertisements.
In Tehran, hundreds of Iraqis demonstrated in support of the Shias in
southern Iraq. They called on the UN Security Council to halt the 'genocide'
by Baghdad's forces. A UN investigator last week accused Iraq of
indiscriminate bombing in the south and said large numbers had been killed
and many more forced to flee their homes.
Efforts to tighten UN sanctions against Iraq drew protests from Jordanian
officials yesterday who complained that vessels approaching the port of
Aqaba were being subjected to excessive delays.
Mr Tawfiq Kawar, head of Jordan's Shipping Agents Association, told Reuters
that in the past 10 days four ships had been delayed for up to three days
due to more rigorous inspection procedures by western warships patrolling
the Straits of Tiran.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920804

