FT924-6319

FT  21 NOV 92 / Finance & The Family: If you think you can do it better
yourself . . . - Planning Your Pension


   By ERIC SHORT


INDIVIDUALS who think that they, or their stockbrokers, can make a better
job of investing their contributions into a personal pension than the
investment departments of life companies have, for the last three years, had
the chance to find out if they are right.
Individuals can control their investments on a personal pension through a
self-administered arrangement. They can decide on where their money goes,
what equities to buy and sell and when, just like their personal investment
portfolios.
One main difference between a self-invested personal pension and a private
portfolio is that the assets have to stay within the overall pension
arrangement until the individual takes the benefits in the usual form, or
dies prior to retirement. And the usual procedures apply when benefits are
taken: only one quarter of the fund can be taken as tax-free cash, the rest
must be used to buy an annuity.
A self-invested personal pension still has to be launched by an approved
personal pension provider, usually a life company and the contract remains
under the control of the provider. Individuals, or their advisers, cannot
set up their own personal pension contract.
The investments under the contract are registered in the name of the
provider. The individual or his investment adviser is the investment manager
of the assets of that particular contract.
The life company will provide administration services according to
individual requirements - including record keeping, periodic valuations and
reclaiming tax. Equity dividends are paid net of advance corporation tax
which can be reclaimed by gross funds such as personal pensions.
Individuals are permitted to manage their own investments without
authorisation under the Financial Services Act. But if the individual uses a
professional adviser, that person needs to be authorised.
Problems arise if individuals want to manage the self- invested personal
pension portfolios of family members. SIB is unclear on this point.
Life companies generally play safe by retaining the right to veto the
appointment of an investment manager. If an IFA wants to manage the
portfolio, the life company wishes to be sure that the IFA is experienced in
managing a self-invested portfolio rather than a series of life company
funds.
The industry has been slow to design and market self- invested personal
pensions. In the first place, the administration procedures are complex and
secondly, intermediaries did not actively market the product because
effectively it is a one-off operation, with no consequences of generating
further contracts.
However, enough life companies are offering self-invested personal pensions
to give interested individuals a choice over the type of contracts and the
charges attached to them.
Investments which can be made by the individual include:
Stocks and shares such as equities, gilts and other fixed interest
securities, quoted on the UK stock market
USM securities.
Securities traded on recognised overseas stock markets
Unit and investment trusts
Life company unit-linked funds
Deposit accounts
Commercial property
On this last permitted investment, a self-invested personal pension offers
investors, especially the self-employed, the opportunity to buy property
which can then be leased to a business or partnership connected with the
investor, subject to the lease and the rent being on commercial terms.
If a partnership moves, the new building can be bought as an asset of the
pension contract from contributions of one or more partners - that is coming
effectively from the gross income of the partnership - and then leased to
the business, with the pension fund able to reclaim the tax while the rent
paid by the partnership is allowable as a business expense.
However, any such property must be bought on the open market - so it is not
possible to transfer property already owned by the business into his
personal pension contract.
Care will be needed when the individual is nearing the time to take the
pension benefits and the property has somehow to be converted into cash.
There are a few categories of assets not permitted as investments in a
self-invested personal pension - the main ones are residential property,
works of art and chattels (loans to the individual are not permitted even
for business purposes).
There are three basic formats on the market for self- invested pensions. The
first is an execution-only plus basic administration contract. This is
suitable for a portfolio of quoted securities but unsuitable for investing
in property.
The second type is a full self-invested contract but providing the full
range of services including handling property and other types of investment.
The third type is a hybrid contract with a minimum insured element, that is
a normal personal pension with a life company, with a self-invested contract
on top, plus full administration.
This hybrid arrangement is intended to ensure that the individual has a
safety net of benefit through the normal personal pension should the
self-investment turn sour. It also enables intermediaries to collect their
commission making it attractive to market.
The hybrid allows employees changing jobs to self-invest their transfer
money into a protected rights contract, with the insured element providing
the required guarantees.
The minimum contributions required to set up a self-invested personal
pension are high - Pounds 10,000 appears to be the lowest contribution that
certain life companies will accept. So such schemes are only available for
higher net worth individuals.
Charges on self-invested personal pensions are levied on a money basis,
rather than as a percentage of the contributions or fund. These can vary
from Pounds 500-Pounds 1,500 (plus VAT) to set up the plan and Pounds
300-Pounds 500 (plus VAT) annual fee thereafter. In addition, there are
usually transaction charges. With a hybrid, the usual charges apply to the
insured element. Of course, the individual may have to pay an adviser's
charges on top.

The Financial Times


London Page V

921121

