FT924-11268

FT  27 OCT 92 / Parliament and Politics: Tory MPs caution Major over Europe


   By ALISON SMITH and IVO DAWNAY


THE RIGHTWING 92 group of MPs yesterday warned the party leadership to step
back from a confrontation with Tory MPs over Maastricht that could put Mr
John Major's leadership at risk and condemn the party to months of civil
war.
Senior members of the group said that the prime minister's best way 'off the
hook' was to avoid a substantive motion on the treaty and instead either
allow a free vote or table an adjournment motion - a technical device that
would muddy the waters.
An overwhelming majority of the 60-odd MPs attending the meeting argued for
indefinite postponement of ratification of the treaty at least until Denmark
had clarified its position.
In a clear warning shot to Downing Street, the group insisted that the
cabinet was out of touch with grassroots opinion in the party. Some 21 of
the 30 MPs who spoke made clear they opposed the government's decision to
press ahead with the treaty.
The meeting, called for yesterday evening to discuss the state of the party,
was arranged even before the latest difficulties over Europe and the
government's climbdown over the pit closure programme. Its conclusions were
relayed to Mr Richard Ryder, the chief whip.
Sir George Gardiner, the veteran Thatcherite who leads the group, said
yesterday that Mr John Major should be wary of those among his colleagues
who were advising him to put his job as prime minister at stake over Europe.
Although Mr Major raised the stakes at the weekend, Euro-rebels remained
determined in their opposition, and their tone is unabashed.
The group of Euro-sceptics based on those who organised a motion calling for
a fresh start in the government's European policy after the Danish
referendum is planning to meet tomorrow to discuss tactics for next week.
One leading Euro-sceptic estimated there would be 40 to 50 'hard core'
rebels, even if some of those who signed the motion before the summer are
brought back into line.
Mr Tristan Garel-Jones, the foreign office minister, is holding a series of
meetings with dissidents to try to answer their doubts. Some potential
rebels have already concluded that they can support the government because
their concerns about European economic and monetary union have been allayed
by its seeming such a distant prospect.
All groups at Westminster are now waiting to see the final form of the
motion.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921027

