FT921-396

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (21): Darkest
before the dawn? - The underwriting recovery may be about to start


   By MAX LEHRAIN


JUDGING by the news surrounding Lloyd's over the past year, it may seem
pointless to consider whether or not to become a Name.
However, many fortunes have been based on the use of a a counter-cyclical
investment strategy. Should we then attribute great astuteness to the small
number of new Names commencing underwriting for the 1992 account? Or do they
merely have an unquenchable thirst for sophisticated gambling?
The market is currently in a phase of losses with Pounds 509m losses last
summer for the 1988 year of account. Lloyd's reports three years in arrears
and more are bound to be declared for 1989 and 1990 over the next two years.
The jury is still out on 1991, but it seems unlikely to herald a return to
significant profits.
The fortunes of insurance companies worldwide are notoriously cyclical and
there are now definite indications of a turn in the cycle. Indeed, it could
be said that the sun is rising in the east. Any recovery must be driven both
by improving rates and growth in demand.
Last year's Japanese typhoons and the current re-rating of many marine and
aviation policies are bringing significant increases. but there is still
little sign of an upturn in the all-important US property account, despite
increasing pressure on the domestic US insurance market.
However, even the US market cannot continue to maintain low premium rates
indefinitely and its exposure to junk bonds and real estate losses will add
to its loss of surplus in the current stage of the underwriting cycle, which
must ultimately lead to a reduction in capacity and an upturn in rates.
There have also been increasing calls for an amendment to the US legal
system, the worst excesses of which are perhaps now seen to benefit no one.
So, with firming rates, increasing demand coming from the emerging markets
of eastern Europe, and a world economic recovery providing a further boost
in demand, the stage could be set for a new era of profitable underwriting.
Regardless of the global insurance market conditions, the prospective or
continuing Name must convince himself that the recommendations of David
Rowlands' recently released Task Force Report really will help to redress
the balance in favour of Names' interests.
Syndicates and managing agents can no longer afford the luxury of a cost
plus operation. We know there is a move to cut costs, which is commendable,
but it so far has had little impact.
Executives of unprofitable syndicates are still earning excessive salaries,
despite the losses currently being faced by Names, and no syndicates have
yet deemed it necessary to reduce their charges to Names.
Over time, the introduction of the Task Force recommendations will help,
although they will do little to improve the immediate prospects for profit.
One of the more interesting proposals is the introduction of MAPAs (Members'
Agents' Pooling Arrangements) whereby smaller Names will be able to
participate in Lloyd's by entering a pool of all, or some, of the syndicates
with which their members' agent maintains agreements.
These MAPAs may serve several purposes: they will effectively act as unit
trusts spreading Names' exposure across a far greater number of syndicates
than would otherwise be possible, which may provide greater protection.
However, the market average is hardly an attractive prospect at present.
MAPAs will, however, fulfil one important role - that of providing some
visible measure of the skills and professionalism of members' agents, which
is vital if Names are to be given the opportunity to select their advisers
on the basis of performance.
The members' agents community has changed dramatically over the past decade,
falling from 271 in 1981 to 111 in 1991, and is likely to shrink further.
The fact is that smaller firms are unlikely to be in a position to offer the
range and depth of service that future Names will demand. This and the
requirement to remain commercially viable has led to the current round of
mergers and acquisitions.
Many existing members have found themselves in a position of being
transferred to new agents so it becomes all the more important that both
they and prospective new members examine closely the skills and relative
merits of their agent. Historically, most members have selected their agent
from a choice of one, having been introduced by a friend or relative, and
probably did not fully appreciate that different agents have a different
range of syndicates on which they are able to place Names, not to mention
their differing policies in respect of size of line on syndicates, markets
supported, stop loss, investment advice and agency charges.
Against this background, it is clear that Names must give careful
consideration to precisely what their agent or prospective agent has to
offer, probably with third party advice and, perhaps most importantly, they
should examine the track record of the candidate agencies.
Although much ink has been spilt about the horrendous losses' suffered by
some Names, a large number will come through the present difficulties
relatively unscathed due, in large part, to the skills of their members'
agent.
Once an agent has been selected, probably after interviewing several, the
next area to examine must be the costs associated with membership. l have
already mentioned that different agents levy different fees, but so do the
accountants, banks, insurance companies and stop loss brokers.
Income is but one element of a profit and loss account and significant
savings are frequently achieved by those Names who take the time to shop
around for these items. Advice on these cost saving measures should form
part of the service from any members' agent that takes its job seriously.
It is certain that if Lloyd's is to maintain its position in the
international insurance market, it must take positive and radical steps to
ensure that its capital base, currently provided by the Names who pledge
their wealth, is secure and that an acceptable combination of risk and
reward is achieved. Otherwise, it will not be in a position to take
advantage of the recovery in the insurance market that has already begun.
I believe that first and foremost the cost cutting must continue, at both
central and syndicate level, to win back the expense advantage once enjoyed
by Lloyd's over its corporate rivals and in the area of managing agency
charges and ancillary costs to ensure a better deal for Names.
Lloyd's must also ensure that, as it investigates the apparently attractive
world of corporate capital, it does not forget the individuals who have been
its lifeblood for 300 years.
So, to be or not to be .. I believe that if Names appreciate that they are
in the business of insurance, and are prepared to take the steps normally
associated with good commercial practice in respect of cost control and
relative performance evaluation, membership of Lloyd's has a great deal to
offer as an efficiently geared tax effective business opportunity.
As with any industry, quality management will ride out the present storm and
emerge relatively unscathed compared with their less professional or less
capable colleagues. With a public assault on costs and perhaps some
consideration as to whether self regulation is really necessary or helpful,
we may then look to the results of the 1990s with optimism.
The writer is managing-director of Grimston Scott

The Financial Times


London Page X

920330

