FT921-11815

FT  30 JAN 92 / Palestinians kick their heels in Moscow's cold


   By ROGER MATTHEWS and TONY WALKER


   MOSCOW


MOSCOW in winter is not the most inviting place, as Palestinian delegates to
a multinational forum on Middle East issues discovered this week.
Excluded from formal deliberations because of a row over the identity of
their nominees, the Palestinians were faced with the galling spectacle of
Israel sitting down for its first-ever meetings with several Arab states,
plus China, in the capital of what was until recently their most powerful
supporter.
After the euphoria of the Madrid opening of the peace process last October,
when it seemed that relatively quick progress might be possible, the Moscow
forum has reminded everyone of just how tough and complex the negotiations
will be.
With the Palestine Liberation Organisation seeking to reassert itself after
its setback in the Gulf war by resisting both international and, more
particularly, Arab pressure to send acceptable nominees to Moscow, the old
issue of who should represent the Palestinians again overshadowed efforts to
achieve peace.
But while the Palestinians were shut out of the formal sessions on such
issues as disarmament, economic development and the environment, all was not
lost for them. They were even claiming something of a moral victory after Mr
James Baker, the US secretary of state, had indicated that the co-sponsors
might agree to broader Palestinian representation in later negotiations.
The Palestinians were allowed to participate in last October's opening,
after bowing to Israeli demands that only representatives from the occupied
West Bank and Gaza Strip be included in their delegation.
In Moscow this week, the PLO, in a blatant challenge to the ground rules
agreed in Madrid, decided to make a stand by insisting on the inclusion of
diaspora Palestinians in the certain knowledge that Israel and the
co-sponsors would object.
The PLO, which has become increasingly alarmed at its formal exclusion from
the peace process, almost certainly calculated that whatever damage its
action rendered to the multilateral round in Moscow, it would not be
sufficient to derail the process itself, whose core is the bilateral
negotiations on land and sovereignty between Israel and delegations
representing Syria and Lebanon, plus a Jordanian-Palestinian team.
The Palestinians were at pains yesterday to distinguish between the Moscow
multilateral round, attended by 26 delegations including 10 from Arab
states, which they said were 'organisational', whereas the face-to-face
negotiations were 'substantive'.
Mrs Hanan Ashrawi, the Palestinian spokeswoman, did not sound the least
defensive when she said: 'The time has come to be firm and to deal
effectively with Israel.'
This more challenging stance is likely to be especially welcomed in the
occupied territories, where anxiety over continued Jewish settlement
building is becoming more acute.
The Palestinians are also likely to have calculated that Israel's ability to
make propaganda at their expense will be lessened by its own difficulties
with the US, which is threatening to withhold Dollars 10bn (Pounds 5.7bn) in
loan guarantees, unless the Israelis stop building settlements. This was a
subject discussed in a private meeting in Moscow yesterday between Mr Baker
and his Israeli counterpart, Mr David Levy.
But while the Palestinians may have been able to cut their losses in Moscow,
the event and its location carried with it some painful reminders of their
weakness and isolation.
Not only were the talks taking place in what had been the capital of one of
the first and most consistent supporters of Mr Yassir Arafat's PLO, but, to
add insult to injury, the Chinese, another of the PLO's traditional backers,
were also present after establishing relations with Israel last week.
The gesture of China's deputy foreign minister, Yang Fuchang, who warmly
embraced Mr Levy at the beginning of proceedings on Tuesday, could not have
expressed more eloquently changes in international relationships since the
collapse of the old world order.
The presence of the Saudi foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, in the
same room as the Israelis, must have been especially irritating for the
Palestinians. Of all Arab states, the Saudis have been the PLO's most
generous financial backer, but Mr Arafat's support for Iraq in the Gulf
crisis led to a cut off in Saudi assistance and to a continued chill in
relations.
Other Arabs present included Egypt, the only Arab state to have established
relations with Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Tunisia, Mauritania, Qatar, Oman,
Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates. Algeria and Yemen had planned to
attend, but stayed away when the Palestinians were excluded.
Syria and Lebanon, who have begun bilateral talks with Israel on land and
sovereignty, boycotted the Moscow forum because of lack of progress in their
direct negotiations with Israel.

The Financial Times


London Page 4 Illustration (Omitted). Photograph Mikhail Gorbachev, former
Soviet president, points the way to David Levy, Israel's foreign minister,
in yesterday (Omitted).

920130

