FT923-6607

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: Swiss eccentric who defies classification - The career
of the painter Jean-Etienne Liotard, known as 'The Turk'


   By SUSAN MOORE


THE notion of artistic eccentricity has a distinguished pedigree. Vasari
records how the old and reclusive Piero di Cosimo was enraged by the sound
of crying babies, coughing men, ringing bells and singing friars, and lived
on a diet of eggs which he boiled 50 at a time along with his glue.
Pontormo, if the mood so took him, would refuse to work for a Medici and
instead paint a Madonna for a builder.
It was the Romantics, however, who established the idea of a distinctive
artistic temperament and dress. Flowing locks and unorthodox costume became
means by which young bloods could assert their independence from the art
establishment.
What, then, is to be made of the pre-Romantic Jean-Etienne Liotard, 'The
Turk', who sported a scandalous belt-length beard and Turkish garb long
after his return to Europe? Is it simply hindsight that tempts the
organisers of a current monographic show to see his mode of attire as an
expression of aesthetic non-conformity?
Clearly he cannot be neatly pigeon-holed. This most versatile and
cosmopolitan of artists was born of French Hugenot parents in the Republic
of Geneva. He was apprenticed to a portrait painter, miniaturist and
enameller in Geneva, and to a miniaturist and engraver in Paris.
In 1735 he travelled to Naples with the French ambassador, le vicomte de
Puisieux. While in a coffee house in Rome, he overheard a group of gentlemen
praising his miniature of the Medici Venus, and made the fateful
acquaintance of William Ponsonby, future 2nd Earl of Bessborough.
With Ponsonby, Lord Sandwich and company he sailed for the Levant, and there
he remained, in Constantinople, for four years. Subsequently he went to
Moldavia on the invitation of the Prince, and proceeded to Vienna to paint
the Imperial court.
In Paris he became Painter Ordinary to the King, although fiercely excluded
from the French Academy. So he prospered, portraying the aristocracy and
bourgeoisie of France, Switzerland, Germany, Austria and England.
Even at the age of 80 he was producing still-lifes for Catherine II of
Russia. He was a highly proficient painter in oil and enamel, a sensitive
draughtsman and a virtuoso pastel painter.
Liotard is still celebrated as a painter in pastel. As a draughtsmen he is
less known. This exhibition, a collaboration between Geneva's Musee d'art et
d'histoire and the Musee du Louvre in Paris, is the first to reunite his
drawings - and what is not here is usefully published in the catalogue. The
whole is leavened by a sprinkling of pastels and oils, gouaches and
miniatures. Visitors to the Geneva view are also directed to the museum's
outstanding holding of delectable Liotard pastels.
The show opens with full-length figure studies or, more precisely, costume
studies of the peasant women of the Roman campagna in regional folk dress -
working and Sunday best - executed Watteau-style in red and black chalk.
Then come the elaborately dressed girls of Malta, Chios, Milos, and
Constantinople drawn for the publication planned by Liotard's English
companions.
In Smyrna and Constantinople, we find the Europeans gone native. The
frock-coated French consul in Smyrna lounges on a low divan. Alongside the
exotic henna-tipped Frankish women at the Turkish bath, Greeks, Tatars,
Turks, merchants and musicians, the British ambassador to the Sublime Port
sits musing in damask robe and soft slippers. The Levant seems all langour,
ennui.
From the first, Liotard's touch is careful but deft. He exploits both the
hard edge of the chalk as well as its softness, combining its delicacy and
its breadth. His miniaturist's taste for detail makes him the textile
historian's dream. Even a rapid sketch speaks volumes about stuff: no doubt
the lace, the embroideries, the woven silks, each applique flower and fringe
are identifiable. In pastel he goes a stage further and captures the
softness of silk, the bloom of velvet, the depth of a rich Turkey carpet.
Costume and textile often have more substance than the sitter.
Liotard is invariably content to depict exactly what he saw - this apparent
objectivity was to be much admired by Flaubert and Ingres. If the Empress
Maria-Theresa happened to look like a gute Hausfrau, so be it.
Only occasionally does he care to penetrate the psychology of a sitter, as
he does in his subtle portrait drawing of the seated Mehemet Aga or his
study of the young British archaeologist Richard Pococke in sombre Ottoman
rig, whose sensitive features radiate a keen intelligence.
Liotard can be refreshingly unconventional. Only rarely did he succumb to
the seductive charm of the prevailing Rococo style - a considerable
achievement for an artist who worked in pastel and coloured chalks. Into his
portrait drawings, even if not always into his oils and pastels, he
introduced an air of easy informality only previously acceptable in
portraits of literary figures, philosophers or artists. His drawings made in
the Levant are as fascinating to us as they were to our 18th century
forebears. Above all, they remain extraordinary documents of a particular
time and place.
The exhibition continues at the Musee d'art et d'histoire, Geneva, until
September 20, and shows at the Musee de Louvre in Paris, October 15-December
14.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920822

