FT924-12267

FT  21 OCT 92 / Clinton retains lead after debate: Bush fails to sway the
polls despite vigorous performance


   By JUREK MARTIN


   WASHINGTON


PRESIDENT George Bush gave it his best shot on Monday night. But there was
no immediate evidence, apart from the encouragement for his supporters, that
his vigorous performance in the final US presidential debate had turned the
electoral tide in his favour.
Four TV network polls found he was the least persuasive of the candidates.
Governor Bill Clinton, the Democratic contender, was adjudged the 'winner'
in two, Mr Ross Perot, the independent, in one, while the other had these
two tied. Only in the poll that gave the nod to Mr Perot was Mr Bush
reckoned to have done as well as Mr Clinton.
This confrontation saw some spirited exchanges, with all three attacking on
a variety of issues. The most eye-catching assaults, however, were launched
by Mr Perot on Mr Bush over his pre-Gulf war policies towards Iraq as well
as over Panama, the savings and loan scandals, the health of the banking
system, the North American Free Trade Agreement, foreign attempts to take
over US airlines, and Republican 'dirty tricks' in general.
Yesterday, a fortnight before the nation votes, Mr Clinton said he was
struck by the intensity of Mr Perot's criticisms of Mr Bush - 'he was really
mad'. He promised to continue in the final two weeks to hammer away at
economic issues, a strategy that has brought him leads of 12-18 points in
most national opinion polls and a commanding advantage at state level.
Mr Perot did not spare Mr Clinton, saying his economic policy - and Mr
Bush's - 'does not add up.' He also charged that Mr Clinton's record as
governor of Arkansas was 'irrelevant' as a qualification for the presidency,
while Mr Bush suggested it was an ominous warning for the country. Mr
Clinton sharply defended his stewardship of his state, which, he said, was
going in the right direction while the nation was not.
Mr Bush repeatedly said there was 'a dangerous pattern' to Mr Clinton's
behaviour of not speaking the truth and that he was, therefore, not to be
trusted in the White House.
Mr Clinton kept recalling Mr Bush's infamous 'read my lips, no new taxes'
pledge of four years ago and said that although Mr Bush was only too willing
to cede control of economic policy to his campaign chief, Mr James Baker,
'the person responsible for economic policy in my administration will be
Bill Clinton'.
This permitted the president one of his better interventions: 'That's what
worries me, he's going to be responsible.' Mr Bush admitted he made a
mistake in signing the 1990 budget act, imposed on him by a Democratic
Congress, but said Mr Clinton refused to admit he had made any mistakes in
governing Arkansas.
While Mr Clinton spoke in some detail of what he would do in the first 100
days of his presidency, Mr Bush fell back on the familiar litany of calling
for a balanced budget amendment, caps on mandatory spending and, of course,
no new taxes.
Republicans bid to woo women voters, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921021

