FT924-6382

FT  21 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Harland core division subject of buy-out
bid from ex-chief


   By ANGUS FOSTER


MR ROY ASHMAN, former chairman of Harland Simon, the controls company placed
in receivership by its banks last month, is negotiating a management buy-out
of a remaining Harland core division.
Mr Ashman, who resigned in February, has joined with two former executive
directors and a leading venture capital company to bid for the control
systems division.
The bid is being considered by Touche Ross, administrative receivers, and a
decision is expected next week.
Mr Ashman's return would be highly controversial. He is widely blamed by
Harland's institutional shareholders for the company's collapse.
Mr Ashman resigned following Harland's issue of a profits warning only days
after he had assured institutions trading was sound. Harland had been
expected to make profits of about Pounds 12.5m in the year to 31 March. It
later announced pre-tax losses of Pounds 6.3m.
Harland went into receivership seven months after Mr Ashman's departure. He
was paid Pounds 360,000 for loss of office and a further Pounds 960,000 from
Harland's small pension fund.
The company's downfall was largely due to a loss of confidence among its
bankers and customers because of two ventures for which Mr Ashman was
blamed. These were Perfect Information, a loss-making database service, and
Contraves, acquired with substantial liabilities last year.
Several institutional shareholders expressed concern about Mr Ashman's
attempt to buy back part of the company. 'It would be outrageous for someone
largely responsible for the collapse in shareholder value to buy back assets
on the cheap,' one said.
Harland's shares stood at 585p before the profits warning, but collapsed to
20p before suspension on the Stock Exchange in September, after Barclays,
Harland's main banker, cut the company's working capital facilities.
Touche Ross announced yesterday that Harland Crosfield, the Harland
subsidiary involved in printing controls, has been sold to Dobson Park
Industries for Pounds 2.3m. Crosfield's UK and overseas businesses had
unaudited net assets of Pounds 5.4m and profits in the year to March 31 of
Pounds 400,000 on turnover of Pounds 10.8m.
Other than the control systems division, only certain small subsidiaries -
including Contraves - remain unsold.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921121

