FT922-7110

FT  20 MAY 92 / Moderates thwart Militant in Civil Service union election


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


THE FAR-LEFT Militant group yesterday lost its strongest chance of winning
the leadership of a UK union when moderates swept the board in the elections
for top jobs at the Civil and Public Services Association.
The 125,000-strong CPSA is Britain's largest Civil Service union.
The election of Mr Barry Reamsbottom as general secretary and other
moderates to positions including deputy general secretary, treasurer and
president is likely to be welcomed by the government.
During the past 10 years, Militant has had a stronger influence in the CPSA
than in any other union, winning control of its executive for a year in
1987-88. This year, Mr John Macreadie, Militant's candidate for general
secretary and the union's deputy general secretary, was thought to have a
good chance against Mr Reamsbottom.
Under the leadership of Mr Reamsbottom and a moderate-dominated executive,
also elected yesterday, the CPSA is far less likely to clash with the
government or organise industrial action than it would under Militant.
'We will do a deal with John Major,' said Mr Reamsbottom yesterday. 'We are
pragmatists and I respect the decision of the British people to re-elect
him. He says he wants good public services; so do our members and the way to
get them is by giving them good pay and good conditions.'
The moderates are in favour of this year's pay offer to members which would
extend performance-related pay and provide basic rises of 4.25 per cent.
They are also more amenable to the creation of Civil Service agencies and
will adopt a less confrontational approach on the contracting out of
services than would a Militant-led union.
In the general secretary election, Mr Reamsbottom polled 13,649 votes
against Mr Macreadie's 10,561 and 3,918 for Mr Peter Thomason, candidate of
the soft left. Mr Alan Churchard, a moderate, succeeds Mr Macreadie as
deputy general secretary.
Mr Macreadie will become a national officer, a post he held before his 1987
election as deputy general secretary. In the poll for treasurer, Mr Keith
Mills defeated the incumbent Ms Chris Kirk, a soft left candidate.
In elections for the 26-seat executive, the moderates won 20 seats, the same
as last year, and Militant sympathisers three. Ms Marion Chambers was
re-elected as president and her moderate vice-presidents were also
re-elected.
Mr Reamsbottom said yesterday he wanted to establish a closer relationship
with the other Civil Service unions. However, merger with the NUCPS, the
second-largest Civil Service union, would not be brought back on to the
agenda following a vote by union members against it last year.
New man, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920520

