FT922-7239

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (7): Nordic players blame the new
rules


   By SARA WEBB


NORDIC BANKS incurred heavy losses last year, and the events of early 1992
suggest that many are again likely to suffer from substantial credit losses
and a high level of non-performing loans.
With hindsight, bankers claim that the rapid deregulation of the Nordic
countries' financial markets during the 1980s is partly to blame for the
sector's woes.
Finland, Sweden and Norway led a sheltered existence, with strict controls
on lending. When restrictions were lifted in the mid-1980s, banks scrambled
to lend to companies and individuals, often paying little heed to
creditworthiness.
The consequences, particularly to the real estate sector, became only too
clear in the 1990s as the Nordic economies were hit by recession.
In Sweden, the government announced this month that it would nationalise
Nordbanken, as the bank faced mounting credit losses and was in danger of
failing to meet the capital adequacy requirements set out by the Bank for
International Settlements. Nordbanken, which was already state-controlled,
ran up credit losses of SKr10.5bn (Pounds 1bn) in 1991.
The government's SKr20bn rescue package came only a few weeks after it had
been forced to announce a SKr7.3bn rescue package for Forsta Sparbanken, the
troubled savings bank hit by heavy losses in the property and construction
sector last year.
So far, the credit losses have related mainly to the real estate and finance
companies. However, some analysts express concern that, as unemployment in
Sweden looks set to rise, the next wave of bad loans could arise in the
private sector as households find it difficult to repay their debts.
In Finland, the central bank was forced to propose a rescue package for the
banking sector in March, having already stepped in to take over Skopbank,
the country's main savings bank.
The rescue package consisted of measures to bolster the banks' capital
adequacy ratios and restore confidence in the sector by setting up a new
FM20bn (Pounds 2.5bn) government deposit guarantee fund.
The Finnish economy is suffering from a deep recession, due partly to the
collapse of trade with the former Soviet Union and the downturn in the
forestry sector. The government was worried that banks would have to cut
back their loans in order to meet the 8 per cent capital adequacy
requirement, leading to a credit crunch and hindering an eventual recovery
in the economy.
Last year was also a bad one for the Norwegian banks, with the big three -
Christiania Bank, Den norske Bank (DnB) and Fokus Bank - reporting combined
net losses of NKr16bn (Pounds 1.4bn). The government was forced to prop up
the ailing banks, nationalising Christiania after its capital had been wiped
out and providing a cash injection for DnB.
Moody's Investor Services, the credit rating agency, recently warned that
Christiania and DnB were unlikely to break even this year.
Compared with the catalogue of disasters in Norway, Finland and Sweden,
Denmark can boast that its banking sector is in a relatively healthy state.
There have already been signs of rationalisation, with the smaller financial
institutions being bought by larger concerns in recent years.
As in the other Nordic countries, analysts point to the need to reduce staff
and branches in these heavily overbanked markets if costs are to be reduced.
Even so, the worry is that many banks in the region will continue to be
plagued by credit losses and that recovery will be slow.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920520

