FT922-7230

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (16): Fees down, rewards still high
 -Andrew Freeman explains why global custody is in vogue


   By ANDREW FREEMAN


IN RECENT years, international banks have become increasingly enamoured of a
business they long regarded as a necessary evil.
Global custody, a cross-border securities settlement and administration
product, was traditionally seen as an extension of the back-office functions
banks offered to their investment clients. Now, with balance sheets groaning
under the pressure of provisions against loans gone bad, custody is in
vogue.
The reason is simple enough. Custody is a fee-earning business with a
relatively stable client base. The banks' income is derived partly from an
annual charge based on the size of the assets under custody, but the bulk of
custody revenues is earned from customers' activity. Custody requires
minimal capital, although it does require continuous investment in
technology.
Small wonder, then, that the market for custodial services has grown in
parallel with cross-border activity by investors. A recent survey by
InterSec, a US consultancy, suggested that the world's largest pension funds
will have Dollars 780bn (Pounds 437bn) of foreign assets by 1995, rising to
Dollars 2,000bn by 2003.
If that extrapolation is correct, the pool of foreign assets will have grown
by a hundredfold in a mere 25 years. As funds have sought investment
opportunities overseas, they have turned to their custodians to provide
essential support networks.
There is another reason for custody's new-found popularity among banks.
After the stockmarket crash of October 1987, senior bankers became concerned
for the first time about the risks of systemic failure of the world's
settlement systems. They realised that the smooth flow of financial and
securities transactions is crucial to the security of their business.
Leading think-tanks, notably the Group of Thirty, studied clearing and
settlement practices and discovered that, in many markets, they were
woefully inadequate. The G30's recommendations and timetable for improved
settlement efficiency were widely adopted after its influential report three
years ago.
Meanwhile, custody has become much more competitive in the last five years.
Prices have been squeezed to the point where custodians now describe the
basic product as a commodity.
Fees have come down sharply as the bigger providers have used their muscle
to put pressure on vulnerable competitors. Clients, too, have become much
more aggressive in demanding a better service. Custody has not turned out to
be the dream product some bankers predicted.
However, the rewards from activities associated with custody can still be
huge. In particular, the commercial banks have always made good returns from
handling the foreign exchange transactions required whenever a fund buys or
sells foreign assets.
But there are also big returns available to the banks which use their
clients' custodial assets for stock lending. In return, the custodian is
allowed to lend stock and keep a share of the income. That might sound
unexciting, but returns on lending in some of the smaller securities markets
can be as high as three percentage points. Some large and sophisticated
customers have sufficient muscle, in the shape of their assets, to demand
custody virtually for free.
That is the type of arrangement thought to underlie the appointment by the
two huge Californian state employees retirement funds of State Street. State
Street, which has vast assets under administration, won the business away
from the rival Boston Company with a bid significantly lower than any
competitor managed.
Mr Marshall Carter, president of State Street, told a recent conference that
custody has evolved from the days when it offered relatively simple services
like safekeeping, settlement, corporate actions, income collection and tax
reclamations.
'Today, services must include decision support such as consolidated
reporting, performance measurement, risk analysis and analytics. We must be
able to demonstrate to our customers that we can help them reduce risk,' he
said.
At the same time, it is arguable that the banks have not been particularly
successful at developing the custody product. Because it essentially
involves the processing of information flows, custody has been a natural
beneficiary of the revolution in computer technology.
In practice, banks have struggled to keep pace with that revolution and have
often been saddled with expensive systems which are out of date soon after
they are installed.
It is possible that specialist IT companies will seek to move into the
commodity end of the custody business and drive prices even lower. Banks
which rushed to swell the ranks of custodians in the late 1980s could be
forced into embarrassing retreats.
That risk is increased by the fact that some of the world's largest
institutions are not yet active competitors in custody. The Japanese banks,
for example, have been notably slow to look beyond their domestic market.
Were they to do so, their assets and their ability to learn from others'
mistakes would make them formidable competitors.
In addition, the custodian banks face a dilemma over the development of
three international institutions which, ironically, they own: Swift, which
runs the global interbank message system, and the two international clearing
houses, Euroclear and Cedel. Each of them has the business framework and
expertise to become a key player in global custody.
year Swift will allow fund managers to become users of its system, opening
up the possibility of eventual partial disintermediation of the custodian
banks.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920520

