FT921-3661

FT  13 MAR 92 / German states seek right to veto EC deals


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THE prime ministers of Germany's 16 federal states yesterday demanded a veto
on all future transfer of national powers to multinational institutions as
their price for the ratification of the Maastricht treaties.
The moves by the 16 states amount to the most serious potential stumbling
block to ratification of the EC treaties yet to emerge in a member state.
The prime ministers themselves, whether supporters or opponents of
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government, made clear after a meeting yesterday
that they were determined to prevent any further erosion of their federal
powers, either to Bonn or to Brussels.
In a unanimous decision taken before top-level talks with Mr Kohl, the 16
Christian Democrat and Social Democrat premiers insisted that the German
constitution should be changed to give them effective powers of veto before
they would approve the treaties on European political and economic union.
They also demanded the right to receive and consider a report on the
fulfilment of all the economic and political preconditions for European
economic and monetary union (Emu), before moving to the creation of a single
European currency. The political preconditions would include further
strengthening of European political union, and the powers of the European
parliament.
The states are proposing an amendment to the German constitution 'as
compensation for the transfer of competences' to the EC, in particular
through the Maastricht treaty, and the related loss of their own powers.
In the article concerning the transfer of any German sovereign powers to
multinational institutions, the amendment would make such a transfer subject
to the 'consent of the Bundesrat', the upper house of the German parliament
representing the 16 states.
The amendment would go on to give the states the right to collaboration in
the formulation of German policy with regard to such institutions
Mr Hans Eichel, the Social Democrat premier of the state of Hesse, said the
premiers had decided not to demand renegotiation of the Maastricht treaty,
which they recognised as virtually impossible in EC political terms, but to
concentrate instead on changing the German constitution to protect their
interests.
He said the states were not trying to acquire an 'opt-out' clause by the
back door, comparable to the British clause included in the EC treaties.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920313

