FT922-712

FT  26 JUN 92 / Arts: Michael Nyman - Music in London


   By PAUL DRIVER


The London Opera Festival, running throughout June, is currently presenting
an evening of Michael Nyman's music at the Shaw Theatre. In the first half
the Endymion Ensemble, unconducted, play suites of the music Nyman has
written for films by Peter Greenaway: The Draughtsman's Contract, Zed and
Two Noughts and Drowning by Numbers.
The second half affords the premiere staging (by David Meyer) of an operatic
work which Nyman has derived from a television film in which he was involved
as composer and more: Letters, Riddles and Writs, a portrait of Mozart, with
a text drawn from documentary sources by the film's director, Jeremy Newson.
I found the first half quite hard to take. The ensemble is amplified (not
very skilfully), and it comes at one with a painful punch in the ear.
Nyman's minimalist-repetitive-rhythmic style has brightness and felicity,
often a seductive catchy charm. He is ingenious in spinning his own
pop-variations out of themes and motives from music of the past, Purcell's,
say, or Mozart's.
A piece like In Re Don Giovanni (not played at the Shaw Theatre), based on
Leporello's 'Catalogue Aria' is so unforgettable that the original now
sounds as though Mozart had allowed himself to be over-influenced by Nyman.
But the raucousness of Nyman's scores and the jigging motions they seem to
require from their performers - bows fly up and down like shuttles, trombone
slides work like pistons, bodies hippy-shake-shake - can be a mite
off-putting. The ensemble on Wednesday night, lit in cool and sexy
fluorescent hues, looked just like a busy sewing machine.
The chamber opera, half an hour long, featuring only two singers (and the
Endymion Ensemble), was a witty and haunting investigation of Mozart's
relationship to his father when it began life as the first of six Not Mozart
films, devised by Annette Morreau and shown (five of them, at least) on BBC
2 at the end of the 1991 bicentenary year.
Nyman has altered it considerably for stage presentation, not as far as I
could tell for the better, but one could tell little from this poor account
of the piece. The mise-en-scene - a spread of manuscripts, a rising
candle-chandelier, a daubed curtain with an inset window - was dull to
adequate. Counter-tenor Jonathan Peter Kenny as Mozart was unsure of
himself, and bass Martin Nelson in the triplicate role of father Leopold,
Sarastro and the critic Naegli thoroughly incoherent. Ute Lemper, the
original Wolfgang, was sorely missed, as was a conductor to keep the singers
at their places. The ensemble, heard from behind the curtain and on
loudspeakers inside the auditorium, was little more than a throb of raw
energy.
Nyman's music is entirely adapted from Mozart's. Both composers were garbled
to death on Wednesday. Perhaps things will have improved by tonight.
The Shaw Theatre. Sponsored by The Guardian.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920626

