FT922-4522

FT  05 JUN 92 / Arts: Songmakers' Almanac - Concert


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


The timing of this programme on Wednesday by the Songmakers' Almanac was
delightful. Under the title 'Community Singing' it set out to hymn European
unity on the very day that newspaper headlines were proclaiming the dream of
unity gone for good and the Community locked in discord - a different song
altogether.
As the programme reminded us, however, the issue of Europe as a single
nation has been in the minds of men for a century and more. This recital was
in the British Library's Stefan Zweig series and it was the words of the
Austrian writer that provided the running theme of the evening. On the day
that Bleriot crossed the Channel, Zweig apparently declared that there was
no longer any point in 'guards, customs controls and border duties', which
sounded like heresy being recited here at St John's, Smith Square, so close
to the Palace of Westminster.
In words or music Graham Johnson had sought to find connections among the 12
EC countries. The programme was effectively an intricate study of the
cross-fertilisation that has taken place between the various cultures and it
was a shame that its balance was upset by the last-minute absence of the
soprano, Nancy Argenta. Her replacement, Richard Jackson, found himself
awkwardly asked to deputise as a baritone Ellen in one of Schubert's Sir
Walter Scott settings.
That was one of many songs in which the composer chose poetry in a language
other than his own. Sarah Walker, for example, gave us Poulenc setting
Shakespeare and Haydn's solo Italian cantata Arianna a Naxos. Almost every
British mezzo must be tired of being compared to Janet Baker by now, but for
scalding Italian passion there really has been nothing to compare with Baker
in this particular piece, even if she did not have Walker's rasping chest
tones.
Of the three singers, Martyn Hill was in the most consistently good voice.
He offered Roussel tackling James Joyce and Gounod's seductive 'Maid of
Athens' to words by Lord Byron, a gift of a song that Johnson at the piano
milked for all its worth. Then, to finish, a sensitively shaped performance
of Britten's Six Holderlin Fragments, a short cycle which finds English
composer and German poet uniting in search of the Greek ideal.
All told, there was music or poetry from most of the EC countries - but not
Denmark. Perhaps the Songmakers' acute ear had caught a pre-echo of the
events to come.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920605

