FT922-636

FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (3): Cautious optimism for this year -
Banking and Finance


   By KAREN FOSSLI


AFTER five years of disastrous results, Norway's banking sector, which is
struggling to recover from Europe's worst post-war financial crisis, sees
cautious optimism over the prospects for this year.
In the first quarter, the 23 commercial banks' aggregate operating losses
shrunk to 0.9 per cent of total assets from 1.24 per cent in the same period
last year. The banks' first-quarter operating profit rose 32.4 per cent to
NKr1.205bn from NKr910m.
Combined credit losses retracted by 18.4 per cent to NKr2.071bn from
NKr2.54bn, leading to an aggregate 46.6 per cent advance in pre-tax profit.
A reduction in credit losses is the single biggest factor contributing to
the commercial banks' first quarter improvement.
Aggregate net interest earnings in the period rose 4.6 per cent to
NKr2.566bn from NKr2.453bn, while operating costs were cut by 8.2 per cent
to NKr2.662bn from NKr2.866bn, benefiting from a 24 per cent reduction in
staffing over the past four years.
Central bank figures show that the volume of non-performing loans was
reduced to NKr15.3bn by the end of the first quarter from NKr19.1bn just
three months earlier. Recent reports point out that in the last year,
Norway's four biggest banks - Den norske Bank (DnB), Christiania Bank, Fokus
Bank and Sparebanken Nor - reduced combined assets by NKr90bn, mostly
through big reductions in loan volume.
Since 1987, the commercial banks have suffered almost NKr40bn in credit
losses. 1991 was the worst year ever when they reached NKr14.2bn. However,
more recent trends suggest they may end the year roughly in balance,
according to the central bank.
Last autumn, the government was forced to intervene to prop up the banks by
injecting NKr15.5bn of taxpayers' money into their empty coffers as a result
of equity capital either being wiped out or nearly erased by credit losses
and a plunge in the value of collateral - mainly real estate - for loans. In
Oslo, property values are said to have fallen by 35 per cent in the past
four years.
Although estimates vary, as a result of the rescue action, the state is the
dominant shareholder in the banking system with ownership of between 50 per
cent and 70 per cent. As Mr Hermod Skaanland, the central bank governor, put
it in his annual address to the business and political community: 'Stability
has been restored, but the (banking) crisis will remain unresolved until the
banks are in a position to raise capital in the private market on normal
market terms.'
But the government and the central bank agree that it is too early even to
raise the issue of reprivatising Christiania Bank and Fokus Bank. 'Although
in many respects it is desired to bring in private owners, it is too early
to fix a strategy for privatisation,' the government said in last month's
revised national budget for 1992. 'Privatisation can first occur when the
value of the banks can be fixed with more certainty than there is today,' it
added.
The government has rejected a scheme to help revive the banks in which their
bad loans would be transferred to a bank established by the state  - a
so-called bad loan bank. 'The (finance) ministry will not support the
establishment of a state finance institution which buys bad engagements from
the banking sector.'
However, Mr Svein Oeygaard, the finance secretary, said recently that the
government might consider proposals by individual banks to establish their
own subsidiaries into which they could offload non-performing loans.
In the revised budget, the government proposed a plan to help the banks
further. It would allow so-called 'unspecified loan loss reserves' during a
transitional period to qualify as tier capital. Tier capital is the banks'
supplementary capital, plus equity, subordinated capital and core capital,
under the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) capital adequacy rules.
This allowance alone could curb the banks' need for state support this year,
which was estimated by the government to be NKr3.4bn at end-1991. At the end
of last year, the commercial banks had an aggregate capital adequacy of 7.1
per cent in relation to risk-weighted assets, helped by state transfers. By
comparison, before state cash transfers, at the end of last year's third
quarter, the figure was merely 4.6 per cent.
The banks are not the only finance sector concerned. According to the
finance ministry, the aggregate operating profits of the insurance companies
last year halved to NKr2.8bn due to lower financial income caused by stock
market weakness and losses in the value of bank shareholdings and bonds.
At the end of last year the Oslo stock exchange All-share index was 9.4 per
cent below the level of 1990.
The index declined throughout 1991 and bank shares saw an 80 per cent plunge
in market value. At the same time, the insurance companies' costs escalated,
but credit losses comprised just 0.3 per cent of total loans (an estimated
NKr200m).
By comparison, the commercial banks' aggregate credit losses comprised 5.3
per cent of loans and savings banks 2.6 per cent.
In what could be described as a purging process, later this year a
government-appointed commission will issue a far-reaching report on the
causes behind Norway's bank crisis.
In the meantime, a government-funded study of the crisis, led by Professor
Torger Reve of the Bergen-based Norwegian School of Economics, Business and
Administration, has concluded that, following deregulation, the banks lack
competitive experience and have pursued growth strategies which increase
their risk exposure, resulting in substantial credit losses.
The report emphasised the problems experienced by the banking sector in
converting from a regulated to a market-based system.
The banks expanded their total volume of loans from just over NKr110bn in
1984 to just under NKr300bn by 1990, it said.
In this expansion, many of the banks never realised profits from basic
banking but made gains from non-banking activities such as foreign currency
trading and stock market investments.
'The banking crisis which most observers thought was over in 1989-90 has
reached its worst years ever in 1991-92. The crisis goes beyond being a
banking crisis, and it is more correct to talk about a breakdown of the
whole financial system,' said Prof Reve's far-reaching report.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920626

