FT921-11802

FT  30 JAN 92 / Management (Marketing and Advertising): Airlines set fair
for improved service - Trends that may mask a move to higher prices


   By NIKKI TAIT and DANIEL GREEN


Has 'service' become a buzzword in the traditionally utilitarian US airline
industry? Or is it a marketing wheeze, masking a push for higher prices?
While European and Asian airlines have been soft selling to business
customers for years, US carriers have started to flaunt business class
services for the first time on internal routes.
Lavish marketing literature - displaying roses on dinner-trays, foot-rests,
and wide leather seats - is becoming rife. Northwest Airlines, for example,
plans to introduce personal videos for all economy class travellers, and is
putting seatback televisions into all its aircraft.
But US air travellers may have cause for scepticism. After the hefty
fare-discounting of the past 18 months, there are signs that internal fares
are firming. All carriers would like to push the trend further, and some of
the latest initiatives seem designed to achieve just that.
Perhaps the loudest noises have come from American Airlines. With a good
deal of fanfare, the Dallas-based carrier announced that it would
reconfigure 10 DC-10 aircraft used on its seven flights-a-day service
between New York and Los Angeles. Out would go almost 100 coach seats, and
in would come a new 'business class' cabin, housing up to 52 higher-margin
passengers.
American suggests that the domestic US market is to copy the international
marketplace, where three-tier pricing is commonplace. The motivation would
be the increasing number of 'global' travellers who demand continuity of
service.
It did not take big rivals like United and Delta long to retaliate. United
tartly observed that it revamped its own business class last November and
that this is already available on 'feeder' flights - domestic flights which
connect with aircraft going on to international destinations. Delta, in more
mild form, makes a similar observation. Even Air Canada hopped on the
bandwagon, announcing an overhaul of its DC-9 fleet, providing 'executive
class' on all flights between the US and Canada.
A solid pricing argument can be made for the three-class system. A full
economy fare for LA to New York is Dollars 752. A first class ticket is
Dollars 1,288. American says the new business class fare will be equidistant
between these two levels - at around Dollars 1,000.
The key unknown, however, is how many passengers will want the intermediate
service. Those extra dollars will not buy all the first class facilities -
personal video screens, for example - but they will achieve extra leg-room,
leather seats, and a superior meal service.
On the plus side, business class sells elsewhere in the world, and MGM
Grand, owned by West Coast businessman Kirk Kekorian, has prospered by
providing upmarket facilities on the LA-New York route.
That said, some travel agents are cautious. One Manhattan agent noted there
was 'not much demand' to existing business class feeder flights.
Similar impressions in Europe have taken years to overcome. Market research
showed passengers' priorities were safety and cheap tickets. No frills
services on Laker and People Express, where passengers could bring
sandwiches and load their own luggage, were the result.
Says Virgin: 'We don't regard seatback screens as soft-sell. We have had
calls from passengers to check whether a flight has them or not.' Virgin's
other ploys are among the softest sells in the business: free head massages
and aromatherapy kits to help you overcome jet lag.
In the heavily regulated world outside the US, such extras might make a
difference to customer loyalty: BA, JAL and Virgin all charge Pounds 2,895
for a business class return fare from London to Tokyo.
Northwest Airlines is spending Dollars 70m on personal videos as part of a
general Dollars 450m upgrade. More grandiose developments, which might allow
the system to provide home shopping facilities and viewing of live sporting
events, are promised for the future.
The airline, moreover, was frank about its motive, noting a lowly standing
in the 'customer preference' league. More objective observers might put the
point more bluntly, saying that Northwest became notorious for shoddy
service in the wake of a troublesome merger with Republic Airlines in 1986.
Whether free videos make amends remains to be seen.

The Financial Times


London Page 12 Photograph Soft sell, airlines are stepping up efforts to
attract business class passengers (Omitted).

920130

