FT922-13352

FT  11 APR 92 / Financial services report optimism


   By DAVID BARCHARD


OPTIMISM is increasing in Britain's financial services sector even though
business volumes are still falling, according to a survey of business
prospects among 361 companies by the Confederation of British Industry and
Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte, the accountancy firm.
Against that, banks, which comprise the largest single financial services
industry, were more pessimistic than in the last quarter of last year.
The survey, carried out between February 27 and March 18 and published
yesterday, shows that 31 per cent of financial institutions expect their
business volumes to rise in the present quarter, compared with 17 per cent
expecting a decline.
The strongest signs of optimism came from venture capitalists, fund managers
and building societies.
Although business volumes are still falling, companies in the survey report
that their overall profitability is improving for the first time for two
years. Insurance brokers and fund managers experienced the highest increases
in profitability, but falls in profitability were reported by banks, venture
capitalists and life assurance companies.
'Rising profitability is being helped by the rise in the value of fee,
commission, or premium income received and a marked reduction in operating
costs,' the report says. In spite of the drop in business volumes, almost
all types of financial services companies are managing to bring down their
operating costs. The only exceptions recorded in the survey are insurance
brokers.
Building societies and general insurance companies say they expect a further
reduction in their costs over the next three months.
At the time of the survey, though, the financial services sector appeared
uncertain about future investment decisions. Although investment in
information technology looks likely to continue to grow over the next 12
months, most companies reported cuts in investment in land and building.
Although the banks surveyed are more pessimistic than other types of
institution, with 30 per cent reporting reduced optimism, the report says
there are signs that the decline in business confidence among banks is
slowing.
Banks say the volume of business they are handling declined in the first
quarter of the year for the seventh successive quarter.
They are not expecting business volumes to change in the present quarter,
and three quarters of the banks in the survey say low demand is likely to
limit business growth.
Financial Services Survey, March 1992. CBI Economic Trends Department, 103
New Oxford Street, London WC1A 1DU. Pounds 195 to non-CBI members.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920411

