FT922-4219

FT  06 JUN 92 / Travel: Regeneration of Goethe's spa / Visiting Karlovy
Vary, where BMWs have replaced Yuri Gagarin


   By JAMES HENDERSON


IN THE last century, German wives would write into their marriage contracts
an annual, expenses-paid visit to a spa of their choice (not necessarily the
same one as their husband's). A spa visit was the fashionable thing to do: a
rejuvenating release from the routine, a moment to diet and generally dry
out before the coming year's excesses. Jaded wives and their liverish
husbands would head for a spa to walk the woods and colonnades, to catch the
afternoon concert and perhaps an admirer's eye, and to take the waters.
The most famous destination in central Europe was Karlsbad, perhaps because
its waters were the most efficacious, but more likely because the company
was the most illustrious. The Karlsbad guest-list read like a roll-call of
European aristocracy. It was known as the Adelsbad, the spa of the nobility.
Karlovy Vary (the Czech for Karlsbad) is hidden in the high Bohemian forests
not far from Czechoslovakia's border with Germany. Hundred-yard sweeps of
sumptuous neo-classical and renaissance-type facades snake along a tight
river valley, while behind them tall, turn-of-the-century villas stand
higgeldy-piggeldy on the hillsides. It is a luxurious town.
Karlsbad became the in-place when it was patronised by Goethe at the turn of
the 19th century. He made 14 visits in all and liked the place so much that
it brought him out in verse. One of the earliest visitors was General
Wallenstein who, in order to cure his gout, travelled there with a retinue
of 50 coaches, oxen, lambs and enough beer and wine to put his physicians in
a faint. He was walking again in a few weeks.
Peter the Great came to take the waters in the early 1700s and later in the
century Prince Metternich, the Austrian chancellor, visited the spa to
conduct confidential meetings.
In its heyday in the second half of the last century, the town saw further
political manoeuvrings when King William of Prussia and Bismarck came to
treat with Emperor Franz-Josef of Austria. They did not reach an agreement
and soon they were at war.
Apart from royalty, Karlsbad also attracted the leading writers and
musicians of the day. Goethe's friend and fellow playwright Schiller had to
sink 18 beakers of spring-water after lunch and dinner each day. Fontane,
Stifter, Turgenev and Tolstoy came, as did Liszt, Paganini, Wagner, Richard
Strauss, Brahms, Chopin and Dvorak, after whom a park is named. In Lazne I,
the principal public bath-house and casino, there are two huge tableaux of
Karlsbad notables from across the centuries.
Another famous visitor was Karl Marx, who was watched by the police during
his visit. Seventy years later a statue was raised to him in the town. After
the war, the spa of the nobility became the spa of the people.
There was a hierarchy to the hotels in the communist years. Czech communist
party members would stay in the Bristol Hotel and soldiers in the White
Cross Sanatorium; foreigners were usually sent to the Richmond, slightly out
of town. And strangely, for the 40 years of their influence, the Soviets
quite unashamedly occupied an imposing hotel on the hill-top with the
unlikely name of the Imperial. The communist legacy still remains in one or
two buildings, nightmares in ferro-concrete, but otherwise 40 years of
imposed uniformity has utterly failed to suppress the town's old atmosphere
of self-assured luxury.
The cumbersome names are gone already. The Czechoslovak-Soviet Friendship
Colonnade is known as Zitkova after its architect and by its old German name
Muhlbrunnen. Yuri Gagarin has been deposed from his titular position at the
town's central colonnade; now it is just known as the Sprudel. After a spell
as the Moskwa, the Grand Hotel Pupp is preparing to reclaim its former
position as one of the leading hotels in Europe. BMWs and Mercedes are
already beginning to pull into the forecourt.
Among the many sanatoria there are four main public spas, oddly numbered
Lazne I, III, V and VI. The most famous is Lazne I, so grand that it looks
more like a theatre than a public bath-house.
Inside it is warm and steamy, with the slightly fusty smell of a peat-bog
rising up the grandiose stairway from the basement. It even feels fertile
and regenerative, as though something might sprout.
You see the crowds queueing dutifully, filling in their treatment cards
before lying in a darkened room for a pelloid pack or for electrotherapy,
presided over by business-like women in white coats - the sort of place
James Bond might have ended up on a bad day a few years ago. Lazne I is also
known as the Kaiserbad and downstairs you can take a mineral jacuzzi in
Emperor Franz-Josef's private bathroom.
The traditional treatment in the spa is still the ambulante kur, the walking
and drinking cure. There are 12 main springs in the town, set in four
colonnades. Thousands of walkers parade up and down the streets each day,
pausing occasionally to take a snifter. Bulbous silver taps splutter with
the mineral water (which forces its way out from hundreds of feet down) into
marble bowls, at anything from 30' 70' centigrade. You drink it from a
special cup with a spout, so that the minerals by-pass your teeth, and
regulars even lodge their cup with a concierge, drawing it out each day when
they come to take the waters.
The water is slightly viscous, sulphurous and in general pretty revolting.
But drink it they do, cup after cup, on doctor's orders.
If the idea of 50 glasses of disgusting water in a day is daunting, then
another essential part of the walking cure might be more appealing: the
cafe. Karlovy Vary is a leisurely town and you will see hungry guests
whiling away the hours between healthy forest walks in the hills and the
afternoon concerts. The Cafe Elefant has faithfully been serving
surreptitious visitors for nearly 300 years. Once the guests have left their
hotel, no longer under the gaze of medical minders in the sanatorium, they
race down here and gorge themselves on an apfelstrudel and Chantilly cream,
just to spite their three weeks of fasting, and put a few pounds straight
back on.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920606

