FT922-578

FT  26 JUN 92 / Sir James Stirling: British architect on the world stage -
Obituary


SIR JAMES Stirling, the internationally famous architect, died suddenly in
London yesterday. His schemes always showed an extraordinarily inventive
intelligence. His knighthood in the Queen's Birthday Honours two weeks ago
marked his belated recognition in this country as an architectural giant.
The son of a Scottish marine engineer, James Stirling was born in Glasgow in
1926. After war service he completed his architectural training at Liverpool
university, a school then unique in the UK for its open-minded attitude to
modernist ideas. Stirling became a member of the architectural avant-garde;
Le Corbusier's late work was the greatest influence on his early
development.
His first partnership, with James Gowan, resulted in several important and
influential commissions. It was the expanding world of higher education in
the 1960s which proved a mainstay of the practice. With Leicester
University's Engineering Building (1959-63), Stirling won world celebrity.
Critics enthused about the brick and glass tower with glazed workshops. They
pointed to the influence of his passionate interest in Liverpool's 19th
century factories and warehouses.
Practising independently, Stirling built the Cambridge History Faculty
Library (1964-67), which consolidated his reputation as the most original
talent among British architects. (It soon became notorious, and remains to
some extent the rallying point of British anti-modernists.) At the same time
he completed residential buildings at St Andrew's University, and the Florey
building, a student block for Queen's College, Oxford, last of the series of
buildings using engineering brick and industrial glazing.
Stirling joined Michael Wilford to form his second, enduring professional
partnership. The 1970s were lean years, but his reputation outside Britain
continued to grow. Success came with the magnificent new Staatsgallerie in
Stuttgart, the art gallery regarded as the city's architectural jewel.
Important commissions in the US and Germany followed: buildings at Rice
University; Cornell University; the Fogg Museum at Harvard; the Berlin
Science Centre. In the UK, the 1980s at last gave Stirling his long deserved
prominence: commissions for the Clore Gallery at the Tate, built to ex-hibit
the Turner bequest; and the Tate Gallery in Liverpool.
Stirling's death leaves still hanging the tortured question of redevelopment
at No 1, Poultry, in the City of London. Stirling himself was always a
resolutely apolitical architect, never doctrinaire in his approach. In the
profession he was admired as a tireless fighter for the integrity of his
schemes, and as an unpompous, unaffected man - a highly influential teacher
and mentor to a generation of architects. He revelled in his role as 'enfant
terrible'.
Charles Jencks, the architectural historian, has called Stirling 'the most
important architect of his generation'.
UK readers may recall with pleasure a recent series of television
advertisements which featured two young German businessmen discussing (with
English subtitles) the new Rover Sterling car belonging to one of them - a
choice causing some anxiety in the firm. Driving into Stuttgart - home of
Mercedes-Benz - the anxious colleague is clearly impressed by the car's
performance and refinement and, as it pulls up outside the Staatsgallerie,
the driver nods knowingly at both car and building, declaring proudly:
'Britischer Architekt]'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920626

