FT922-4216

FT  06 JUN 92 / Travel: Dingle's damp splendour / Tramping across the
deserted mountains of Europe's western-most beauty spot


   By ANTHONY TOOLE


WHEN the film of Ryan's Daughter was released, one critic complained there
was too much emphasis on the scenery, whereas the grandeur of Ireland lay in
its people. While there is some truth in this, it can be said that the
beauty of Dingle, in south-western Ireland, has to be seen to be believed.
Its Atlantic beaches, backed by mountains, have a splendour rivalled by few
elsewhere in Britain. But it was the mountains I had come to explore. Though
it is firmly fixed on the tourist route, Tralee lacks much of the garish
vulgarity of nearby Killarney. It also lacks a lake so that, from the edge
of town, the eye is drawn toward the land sloping upward to the west: the
foothills of the Slieve Mish.
From Derrymore I took a narrow road past a number of farm buildings. The
steep, heavily vegetated sides that hung above the road were ablush with
colour: the purple of heather, foxgloves and orchids, yellow gorse, orange
lilies, pink honeysuckle and, as this was Kerry, the ubiquitous crimson
blaze of fuchsia.
I moved on to the open hillside. The ground rose steeply. Drizzly showers
blew in from the Atlantic and swept across Tralee bay. It seemed, for a
time, as though I had chosen the only wet, misty peaks on Dingle, for the
others to the west were clear. But persistence was rewarded, and good
weather followed.
Caherconree came into sight, hinting at a grandeur that might rival
Mangerton or the Macgillicuddy's Reeks. The promise was not quite fulfilled,
as scale was lacking, but there was ample compensation. From Gearhane summit
the whole peninsula, from Tralee to Brandon, opened out while south-westward
the edge of the Iveragh peninsula could be glimpsed across Dingle Bay.
On the western slopes of Caherconree lie the remains of the highest
fortified structure in Ireland, from which the mountain gets its name. It is
said to have been built in the first century AD, and was the legendary scene
of treachery involving Cuchullain and Blanaid, the wife of Curaoi.
In Ireland there are almost no tracks in the mountains. One has to study
one's map and pick out what appears to be the best or most interesting route
to a summit. I spent the night near the shore of Lough Slat, at the head of
the heavily forested Owencashla valley.
Above me stood Stradbally mountain. A fire-break led up the hillside. Open
ground above had been raked by drainage channels, now overgrown, into which
it was too easy to fall. A struggle through more conifer and thick gorse
made me wonder if I had taken the correct route but soon the trees were
behind me and the valley opened out to reveal Lough Caum, above which
towered great rock folds.
A steady ascent brought me to the summit of Stradbally, then a short drop to
the col and an easy uphill stretch led to Beenoskee. To the right lay a
tremendous fall to Lough Acummeen, the surface of which was being torn into
clouds of spray by a strong gale. The view of Brandon should have been good
from here, and certainly it rose impressively from the coastal plains; but
its head was hidden in Atlantic mists.
A descent of over a mile, southward, led to a col at the end of the
Owencashla valley. There I picked up what appeared to be a strange track,
more than 20 ft wide, taking a direct line up the slopes beyond. How had the
track been made, and by whom? Certainly not by walkers, for there are never
that many on any Irish mountain, except Croagh Patrick, the holy mountain.
Nor could it have been dug by machine, for the slopes were too steep and the
boulders too large.
Water? That would have flowed over the precipitous rim at too many points.
Only the footprints of countless sheep broke the surface of the peat. I was
glad of the track, however, as the alternative was an arduous trek over
heather and deep grass.
From the summit I dropped quickly to the shore of Lough Slat, accompanied by
the rain that had threatened all morning. Still mystified by the track, I
asked a forestry worker if he could enlighten me. It was, he said, a
fire-line, dug to protect the forest when it was first planted.
Beyond the Beenoskee-Stradbally group, almost everything can be given the
tag 'most westerly in Europe': Conor pass, Brandon, Dingle town, Mount
Eagle, Dunmore Head. The Conor pass is magnificent. Even Honister, Llanberis
and Glencoe are wanting by comparison. From its summit, several small peaks
can be reached with ease, some of them in a matter of minutes. The view is
out of all proportion to the small effort needed to reach them.
But the real magnet on this part of the peninsula is Mount Brandon. Brandon
can be climbed by way of the Saint's road from Ballybrack, in the west, in
not much more than an hour, but the slopes are easy and grassy and though
the view from the summit is the same as by any other route, one has the
feeling that it has not been earned. Full appreciation of the mountain is
only obtained by tackling it from the east.
From the village of Cloghane, a narrow road led to the south-west. About a
mile from the village I cut across fields to the southern tip of Lough
Cruttia and was then able to concentrate on the real struggle: the ascent of
Brandon peak, a 2,764-ft subsidiary of the true giant.
The slopes of Brandon peak are so steep that the contour lines on the map
blur into each other. It is not so much a scree slope as a near-vertical
field of boulders, up which one forces an improbable route.
A fox jumped from a rock just above me and bounded away to the south. A
little higher, a small family of wild goats, presided over by a shaggy
patriarch, watched warily as I climbed past them. The top of Brandon peak
was narrow and pointed, and rose into the lower strands of the cloud. From
here, a broad ridge led down to a grassy col, above which Brandon mountain
rose steadily.
The summit of Brandon holds, on the very edge of a precipice, the remains of
a church reputed to have been built by St Brendan. Its situation gives
testimony to the toughness of the man who, legend says, sailed away from
these parts in a leather-skinned boat to discover America centuries before
Columbus or Lief Eriksson.
Finally, I tackled Mount Eagle. At the summit I could see nothing, but so
close was the ocean that I was able to catch, just occasionally, the cries
of seagulls and the sound of waves breaking on Dunmore Head. If one were to
forget Iceland, then all of Europe lay to the east of me and the next
mountains west were the Appalachians. But they would have to wait for
another year.
An excellent book, recently published, is David Herman's Great Walks:
Ireland, which offers 30 walks of differing length and difficulty, from
short strolls to mountain scrambles. There are detailed route descriptions
and maps. The photographer is Michael J Stead. Publisher: Cassell, Pounds
16.95.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920606

