FT922-4440

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (1): Democracy in the balance - The
transition to multiracial rule is proving difficult and slow as whites
battle to preserve power and privilege. Patti Waldmeir assesses the prospect
for establishing freedom and stability in one of the most divided societies
in the world


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


WHAT will replace apartheid in South Africa?
Will South Africans rise above their 350-year history of division and
exploitation to build a liberal, multiracial democracy, a model to divided
societies worldwide? Will they experiment with democracy, but fail, leaving
black domination to replace white oppression? Or will the country's
politicians, black and white, do an unholy deal to stifle dissent and
restore civil order, jointly imposing authoritarian rule?
After two years of horrifying political violence, tortuous negotiations
which have yielded little obvious progress, an accelerating decline in black
living standards, and an explosion of crime, many South Africans are
suffering from a crisis of confidence about their future.
The tremendous sense of relief and elation which greeted the release from
prison two years ago of Mr Nelson Mandela, African National Congress (ANC)
president - and the vision of a brave new egalitarian future which he
inspired - has proved difficult to sustain under the pressures of political
transition.
The historical imperatives which drove white and black to the negotiating
table remain the same - in spite of the failure of last month's plenary
session of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (Codesa), the
constitutional negotiating forum. Codesa is floundering, and the
installation of a multiracial interim government, which had been expected
within weeks, now seems likely to be delayed.
But the reality remains that neither the ANC, the largest black group, nor
the ruling National Party, the most powerful white party, can run South
Africa on its own. They need each other, and sooner or later, they will
strike a deal. What is not certain is whether it will be a fully democratic
deal.
'There is nothing inevitable about a democratic outcome to transition in
South Africa,' says Professor Frederik van Zyl Slabbert, a former liberal
politician who has stimulated debate on future political systems. 'I think
we have the capacity to become democratic, but if I have to be very frank, I
cannot see us approaching it within the next 10 years . . . The dynamics of
the transition may precipitate undemocratic options.'
None of the 19 parties to Codesa exhibit truly democratic instincts. They
all pay lip service to democracy. But the National Party has only recently
discovered the need for political tolerance - now that its own interests are
at risk - and the ANC permits dissent only so long as it does not threaten
unity. Both are deeply suspicious of the press, intolerant of criticism,
dirigiste in their economic policies and authoritarian by nature.
Indeed, the two sides have already largely agreed that a multi-party interim
government should retain similar emergency powers to those exercised so
brutally by the National Party, which detained 40,000 people in the late
1980s. In a passage chillingly reminiscent of the bad old days of apartheid,
a working document agreed to by all the Codesa parties notes that 'special
measures are necessary to deal with the threat to public order during the
transitional period', including detention without trial (subject to
unspecified 'procedural controls'), and powers to declare a state of
emergency on the advice of an unelected interim executive appointed by
Codesa.
Senior National Party officials admit privately that they envisage a period
of authoritarian rule until the end of the decade - imposed in the interests
of stability and economic growth - and the ANC, worried about its ability to
control its own constituents, seems likely to agree.
Both have already agreed to rule by coalition, in a government of national
unity aimed at reconciling all South Africans to a new constitution. The
duration of the coalition is still in dispute: the government wants
coalition government to be entrenched in an interim and a permanent
constitution. If the National Party has its way, South Africa will be
governed for decades by a coalition which would guarantee the political role
of whites.
The ANC, for its part, is intent on achieving majority rule - though it
favours voluntary coalition for the first two to five years of the new
regime. Some moderate ANC officials believe the government of national unity
should last until the end of the century. For the National Party, though,
coalition government on its own will not be enough to prevent abuse of power
by the (black) majority. It wants a constitution which devolves power
substantially to regional and local government - making it impossible for
central government to dominate.
The party's position is that South Africa's fragmented and fractious society
cannot be governed peacefully from the centre. That may well be so, but the
drive for regionalism has a more immediate goal: to accommodate the
political ambitions of Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, who would be
guaranteed power in his ethnic base of Natal. He could never compete as a
national politician but he would resist - perhaps violently - being
sidelined under a unitary constitution.
Strong regional government would achieve another cherished National Party
goal. It would ensure that the Western Cape, the only region where blacks do
not form the majority, would become, in the words of one junior minister, a
kind of 'haven for civilised western values'. (This assumes that whites and
coloureds (mixed-race peoples) would make common cause together against
Africans, probably a realistic assumption.)
The ANC, with its ideal of non-racialism, finds such notions abhorrent but
its officials are realistic enough to admit that ethnicity cannot simply be
wished away, and that devolution can help accommodate it. In a recent paper
entitled 'Rooting Democracy on African Soil', ANC constitutional lawyer Zola
Skweyiya argues: 'It is necessary to consider the challenge that ethnicity
poses to democratic transformation and the way in which this challenge may
be diffused.
'The experiences of independent Africa, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, and the former
USSR have demonstrated clearly how difficult it is to replace individual
ethnic identities by a commitment to a single overarching nationalism.'
But Mr Skweyiya acknowledges that his view is not received wisdom within the
ANC and many tough battles lie ahead before the new government's structure
is agreed.
Indeed, the next few months could prove the most difficult so far in the
transition. Codesa must resolve the central question of who wields power in
the new South Africa. Will whites have an effective veto, through an upper
house packed with political minorities? Will they exercise a veto over the
new constitution, by insisting that all clauses are passed by three-quarters
majority? How much power will devolve to regions?
The ANC will not easily relinquish its demand for a majority-rule
constitution, but this is incompatible with the National Party's bottom line
 -a large political role for whites, guaranteed indefinitely. The movement
will be tempted to exercise its own veto over the process of reform, by
calling for a general strike and other forms of mass protest.
Meanwhile, economic growth - which is so crucial to stability - will
continue to be sabotaged by political upheaval.
But given South Africa's peculiar legacy of apartheid and ethnic diversity,
poverty and isolation, nation-building was never going to be easy. With any
luck, the inter-racial goodwill which persists against all the odds, the
Christian commitment of most South Africans, and the desire for economic
advancement will ensure that South Africa avoids the risk of social
disintegration. It remains to be seen whether democracy will survive the
strains of the transition.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920605

