FT921-3664

FT  13 MAR 92 / Personal View: Time to unmask a pensions charade


   By PHILIP CHAPPELL


One good could yet emerge from the Maxwell pension saga; we could re-examine
the whole basis of British pension funds and the choice between final salary
and personal pension schemes. The subject is an issue of public concern; the
ill-defined ownership of pension funds is just one aspect of a wider
problem. At least the plundering would have been more difficult if the
assets had been directly owned by individual members.
Britain is unique in its dedicated belief that a funded final salary
occupational pension is the ideal form of retirement saving: money-purchase
personal pensions, on a defined contribution basis, are seen as the
second-rate alternative. Too few people challenge the mathematics of the
choice.
Final salary schemes are certainly advantageous to long-serving employees
with 40 years' service, and especially to those who are able to ratchet
upwards their salary shortly before retirement. It is even better for those
who require as little as 20 years' back-service to earn full two-thirds
pension entitlement. Such pensions are inevitably expensive to the scheme
and have to be paid for by other members: the apparently innocuous Pounds
50,000 bonus for the chairman just before retirement may cost pension fund
members nearly Pounds 500,000.
The huge majority of the workforce does not serve 40 years with the same
employer and is therefore disadvantaged by final salary schemes. Despite the
efforts to drag fair treatment for transfer values out of a reluctant
pensions industry, there is still an inherent bias against job changers.
The evidence lies in the fact that 6m pensioners today enjoy total
occupational pensions of Pounds 18bn, an average of just Pounds 3,000. That
includes spouses, short-service and adjustments for commutation and
inadequate escalation. But if pensions were providing the two-thirds of
average earnings which is the desirable objective, the average should be
nearer Pounds 10,000.
It is time to study the mathematics behind the financial probabilities of
money-purchase provision.
Looking at the numbers in real terms, and assuming average earnings growth
of 2 per cent and a (generous) multiplier of 12 times for an annuity
purchase, to fund a two-thirds salary after 40 years an individual saver
needs to set aside about 13 per cent of annual earnings at an average
investment return of 4 per cent (currently available on index-linked funds).
The same outcome would be reached with 10 per cent on a 5 per cent return
(achieved over the last 40 years from a broad portfolio) or just 8 per cent
on a 6 per cent return. These numbers are well below the contribution rates
of most final salary schemes; so what is happening to the balance where
combined contribution rates of 15 per cent or more are being paid into such
schemes?
The point is even more valid by using the actual numbers over the past
decade. Over this period, national average earnings grew at about 10 per
cent and the average return on all pension funds at 16 per cent. Such is the
power of compound interest at higher rates that, if invested at 16 per cent,
the personal saver would need to save just 5 per cent of annual earnings to
retire on two-thirds of salary.
This arithmetic demonstrates that the concept of employers' contributions to
meet the needs of the average earner is a charade: what is being used is a
variety of devices to fund early retirements and other cross-subsidies. The
final salary funding basis is demonstrated to be mathematically unsound and
inherently inequitable.
Of course, it is not that simple - and existing funds provide additional
benefits such as life cover; but these are benefits that can be cheaply
purchased separately.
The 1986 Social Security Act gave all employees the right to opt out of an
employer's occupational scheme; but it was fundamentally flawed in pandering
to the final salary brigade. It did not require an employer to provide a
genuine choice by compensating an opting out employee for the fact that the
employer was not contributing to the scheme. The argument is even more
devious since senior managers have a vested interest in ensuring that the
contribution costs for their part of the deal should not openly be inflated
by providing such choice.
The solution is simple: the 1986 act must be amended to ensure that any
employer offering final salary schemes must also offer a matching
contribution to employees who decide not to join the scheme.
On these assumptions, personal pensions are not a second-rate alternative,
but a positive financial advantage to the large majority of the workforce.
Personal pensions provide flexibility, simplicity and comprehensibility -
the tax rules impose no limit on pay-outs, and many pensioners could expect
an actual entitlement in excess of two-thirds final salary.
Money-purchase schemes reduce the concentration of power which is inherent
in the cross-subsidisation of final salary schemes; they also identify
employees far more closely with their contributions. The disadvantages of
their cost structures could be hugely simplified by employers running such
schemes on behalf of their workforce. Critics of the alleged uncertainty of
money-purchase schemes can be reassured, since these schemes provide
flexible retirement dates and can offer investment in more secure assets as
retirement approaches. Powers to choose and rights to own more than Pounds
300bn of assets would be restored to 11m citizens.
Oh, there is one other advantage. Actuaries become less significant; watch
the correspondence columns for their crocodile tears.
The author is director of the Association of Investment Trust Companies. He
is writing in a personal capacity
Joe Rogaly's column returns next week.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920313

