FT922-524

FT  27 JUN 92 / The Lisbon Summit: Major sets out British priorities


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


A DIRECT link between the Community's prospects of rescuing the Maastricht
accords and Britain's determination to decentralise EC decision-making was
drawn yesterday by Mr John Major.
Sketching out Britain's priorities for its presidency, the UK prime minister
said EC leaders must respond to the growing anxieties of European voters
about the direction of the Community.
His comments came as British officials said the Danish vote against
Maastricht had left Mr Major with an important coincidence of interest
between his ambition to decentralise and enlarge the community and his
partners' concern to rescue European union.
Mr Major, who underlined his personal commitment to Maastricht, suggested
that its rejection by the Danish electorate reflected much wider fears
across Europe about the creation of a Brussels 'monster' out of touch with
popular aspirations.
Brushing off the threat of rebellion by Conservative MPs, he insisted that
his government would meet its obligation to ratify Maastricht.
In a contribution to the summit designed to balance his determination to
keep Britain at the 'heart of Europe' against the concerns of Conservative
Euro-sceptics at home, Mr Major set out priorities for the British
presidency.
The first was to give 'life' to the concept of subsidiarity - the devolution
to national governments of powers which had been unnecessarily assumed by
Brussels. He told the summit that the Commission should be obliged to give
more effective justification for all new legislation and should consider
ditching unnecessary or outdated directives.
He suggested that EC governments should supplement that drive to reduce
public concerns about the 'remoteness' of the Community with much greater
efforts to strengthen links between national assemblies and the European
parliament in Strasbourg.
In parallel the Community should demonstrate its commitment to a wider
Europe by finalising a negotiating position for the first batch of Efta
applicants to the Community.
Mr Major said he was ready to meet half-way the insistence of the southern
EC states that negotiations on enlargement should not start until the
Community had established the 'cohesion' fund envisaged at Maastricht.
British officials said the prime minister's refusal to accept an immediate
increase in the Community's financing ceiling in no way undercut his
readiness to see the establishment of a cohesion fund. Mr Major's position
was that there was ample room within the existing constraints to finance
cohesion payments for at least two years.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920627

