FT924-6282

FT  21 NOV 92 / Hawks & Handsaws: The great tapioca war


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


WARNING: when it pivots, when it moves from intro to finale, from preamble
to message, this column is going to mention tapioca pudding. I wish it could
be avoided. I wish I had never seen or heard of tapioca pudding, or imagined
that it existed. When we get to it, I will type extremely quickly so as to
rush us towards the end; but at least you have been warned.
This week, I finished reading The Rise and Fall of the Third Chimpanzee by
Jared Diamond, who is ranked among the world's top zoologists. As the FT
said when Rise and Fall was first published, it is an important book -
certainly among the best science books I have read.
It is about our animal heritage. We are chimpanzees. More than 98 per cent
of our genes are shared with the two other species of chimpanzee. We are
greatly influenced by our animal origins, but we are also - uniquely and
destructively - human.
The first indications that our ancestors were unusual among animals were the
crude stone tools that began appearing in Africa about 2.5m years ago.
Nothing much happened for another 1.5m years, though by 1m years ago we had
spread to warm parts of Europe and Asia. Evidence for the Great Leap Forward
in human behaviour suddenly appeared in Europe about 40,000 years ago.
Whatever caused the leap, it involved only a tiny fraction of our beings,
because we still differ from the pygmy and common chimpanzee in only 1.6 per
cent of our genes.
Now scroll forward to the modern day. We are proud of some of our hallmarks
as a species: our language, art, technology and agriculture. A few weeks
ago, we even launched a systematic search of the Milky Way for signs of
other intelligences. But we are cursed by several self-destructive traits,
two of them so serious that they may produce our fall: xenophobic mass
killing and our accelerating assault on our environment. If the estimate
that half the world's 30m species will become extinct in the next century is
correct, says Diamond, then species are now disappearing at the rate of
about 17 an hour.
Diamond says he would not have written his book if he considered the chances
of our own extinction remote; equally, he would not have written it if he
thought our predicament hopeless. He says there are many grounds for
pessimism. But he himself is cautiously optimistic. 'We do not need novel,
still-to-be-invented technologies to solve our problems,' he says. 'We just
need more governments to do many more of the same obvious things that some
governments are already doing in some cases. Nor is it true that the average
citizen is powerless.'
The average citizen. Me. You. It is my belief that while governments and
other bodies must display unprecedented political will and spend enormous
sums on top-down projects to rehabilitate our species and our planet, there
is still scope for small people - you, me - to do our bit, bottom-up.
But where to start? I believe that each one of us should concentrate hard so
as to bring to mind some small-scale horror, some bit of nastiness - and
then strive to exterminate it, to squash and quash it. And then move on, to
something slightly larger, nastier and more horrid, and exterminate that.
And then move on . . .
I have decided where I will start: with the tapioca pudding served in the FT
restaurant. This is not the time nor the place to give my opinion on the FT
restaurant. But their tapioca pudding is an affront to human decency, a
negation of man's cultural flourishes and accomplishments. It makes me
queave and faint just to see it sitting there. I would not dream of offering
it to a common chimpanzee, or even to a pygmy one.
My theory is this: if I can exterminate the FT's tapioca pudding, there is a
reasonable chance that I and my colleagues will be nicer to our significant
others once we reach home; this niceness will spread, like ripples on a
lake; people will be happier; they will start to spend money, which will
kick-start the economy; they will even vote more sensibly - goodbye Laurel
and Hardy; bigger and better tasks will be attempted almost everywhere;
substance abuse will cease; spring will not be silent; wars will not be
fought; the planet will be saved, and man will make contact with
extra-terrestrials.
Call me cock-eyed, but I believe it can be done.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

921121

