FT922-4283

FT  06 JUN 92 / A break in the march of history: The Danes' 'no' offers the
chance to create a more flexible EC


   By MARTIN WOLF


The Danes have shown they retain the moral courage displayed so famously by
their fathers and mothers during the Second World War. They may not have
stopped the onward roll of the Euro-wagon, but they have certainly put a
spoke in its wheel. And an excellent thing this is, too. For little valuable
has been lost. On the contrary, the Danish referendum offers an opportunity
to create a more flexible and more open Community.
Unnecessary in its goals, obscure in its language, incompetent in its
detail, the Maastricht Treaty has few redeeming features. It was quite
unlike either the customs union or the single market. This was the first
important step in the history of the European Community that could not be
justified as an expansion of the freedom and prosperity of the ordinary
European. The treaty is basically about power: mainly about who would set
Europe's monetary policy, to a lesser degree about who would set its foreign
and defence policies.
Neither is necessary. Europe already has a common monetary policy, set by
the Bundesbank, Europe's best central bank. Europe already has a common
defence policy, set by Nato. Maastricht would have dethroned the former and
accelerated termination of US involvement in the latter.
The notion that Europe - lacking labour market flexibility, labour mobility,
substantial fiscal transfers or a common fiscal policy - is fit for monetary
union seems fantastic. Yet those who believe in this cause need not despair.
They can still enjoy all the benefits of monetary union, most simply by
tying their currency still more closely to the D-Mark, perhaps by
instituting currency boards.
Many will complain that this is no way to 'build Europe', as if Europe does
not already exist. The Danes, they will assert, have obstructed the march of
history, with a capital aitch. But after communism's collapse, how can
anyone speak as if the future were known and pre-ordained?
The truth is otherwise. For its most convinced proponents, the long-term aim
of the Maastricht Treaty is the creation of a multinational, multilingual
superpower. Nothing in historical experience suggests such a structure is
feasible, let alone desirable.
Some still seem to argue that without further development of the EC, another
European war threatens. But why would forcing the Germans to abandon the
D-Mark render them more comfortable with their neighbours? Why should the
attempt to mount common military actions assuage deep differences among
Europeans in their desire for such interventions? How, in fact, can the
Maastricht Treaty make internecine struggles less likely than does the EC as
it already stands?
Above all, a treaty with so wide a sweep requires trust in those entrusted
with its execution. Such trust is impossible when one commissioner justifies
a proposal to limit the working week to 48 hours by appeal to a clause on
health and safety at work, another threatens the UK with withdrawal of a
derogation on VAT supposedly entrenched by unanimity, both of them confident
that the European Court will support them by reference to the ultimate aims
of the EC. Whatever powers one might suppose have been granted, far more
will finally be taken.
What, for example, might the Commission make of the Community's obligation
to 'contribute to the flowering of the cultures of the member states'? What,
more ominously, might the Commission make of the obligation to 'ensure the
conditions necessary for the competitiveness of the Community's industry'?
If the failure of the treaty could remove much that is both unnecessary and
undesirable, it also creates opportunities to improve the EC's constitution
and, above all, to enlarge the EC.
The principal problem is the role of the Commission. This posed no great
difficulty when the powers of the EC were restricted. The greater the EC's
powers, however, the more intolerable becomes the Commission's sole right to
propose Europe's most important legislation. These are mere appointees.
Worse, they are appointees convinced they possess inside information on the
purposes of history. These wings should be clipped.
Yet it is in relation to potential entrants that the failure of Maastricht
is most helpful. Deepening was bound to be an obstacle to widening. As it is
now, the EC could perhaps have been enlarged. But the powers that would
ultimately be transferred by the Maastricht treaty cannot possibly be
wielded by a council of ministers containing, say, 25 participants. The
powers that would be transferred as a consequence of the further revisions
necessitated, in time, by the Maastricht treaty could certainly not be
wielded by such a body. Something akin to a European government would be
needed. Since such a body cannot be created, enlargement would be halted.
Equally important, the greater the responsibilities exercised by the EC the
more difficult it would be for a heterogeneous group of countries to wield
them at all. With common monetary, economic, defence and foreign policies,
an EC containing Poland, the Czech lands, Slovakia, Hungary, Lithuania,
Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia, Croatia, Bulgaria and Romania - quite apart from
Sweden, Norway, Finland, Austria and Switzerland - would have been
unworkable.
In practice, it would never have advanced that far. The demands made by
poorer states for resources to finance their move to economic and monetary
union are already too great an obstacle to further enlargement eastwards.
The Danish rejection offers the possibility of a more open EC; it offers the
prospect of a more internally flexible EC; and it offers the prospect of a
more modest EC. Member states may now make such arrangements among
themselves as they wish. Should some states wish to unite with one another -
France and the Benelux with Germany, for example - they should be encouraged
to do so, thereby creating a new currency and one member state where there
used to be several. Meanwhile, other member countries might ask themselves
whether the exchange rate is not, after all, a price like any other.
The EC will always be more than a simple free trade area, but it should now
remain less than a political union. Best of all for Mr Major, the British
are not to blame for these blighted ambitions. It was not, it turns out, 11
against one. As the British government takes the presidency, it should
forget the historical, geographical and cultural absurdity of a Britain 'at
the heart of Europe' and seize the opportunity the Danes have presented it
with. Maastricht should now be renegotiated.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920606

