FT924-868

FT  22 DEC 92 / Government to help insurers meet cost of terrorism


   By RICHARD LAPPER and RALPH ATKINS


THE government yesterday bowed to pressure from the insurance industry and
agreed to meet part of the costs of bomb and other damage caused by
terrorists in mainland Britain.
Business will also be required to make a substantial contribution under new
arrangements, in a move which could sharply increase insurance costs for
policyholders who opt to take out cover against terrorism.
The Corporation of London, for example, will see premiums on its Pounds 5bn
portfolio of property in the City and Westminster double from its estimated
present level of about Pounds 2m by the end of the year. Premiums in areas
of the country deemed to be of lower risk may rise by as little as 10 per
cent.
The government agreed to back the new scheme after resisting pressure to
provide direct compensation to victims of bomb damage as it has done since
1969 in Northern Ireland.
Mr Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, said the government had
'decided in principle to act as reinsurer of last resort'. He said the
government's involvement would be of limited duration and cost and 'should
cause minimum interference necessary with the working of the market.'
The announcement was widely welcomed. Mr Mike Jones, chief executive of the
Association of British Insurers, said: 'I know from the support we have
received that many people will be sleeping easier tonight'.
Mr Michael Cassidy, chief executive at the Corporation of London, said he
was 'delighted' but there was 'obviously concern about the impact (of the
cost) on City businesses'.
Insurers announced last month that they would be unable to continue to offer
cover against terrorism after their own reinsurers withdrew support in the
wake of claims of Pounds 800m after bomb attacks in London in April.
Under the new arrangements, details of which are still being worked on,
policyholders will be able to 'buy back' cover for terrorism. These
additional premiums will be channelled into a mutual pool to be reinsured by
the government. The cost of the 'buy back' will vary according to the sum
insured and the location of the property.
The Treasury and Mr John Major, the prime minister, were cautious about any
signal it might send to terrorists. But Mr Heseltine appears to have
persuaded them that the market alone could not deal with the problem.
Downing Street described the result as 'predominantly commercial'.
There was little suggestion in Whitehall that Mr Heseltine's description of
the measures as 'temporary' should be interpreted as involving a time limit.
Officials said only that the government did not want to help companies 'for
ever and a day'.
Mr Tony Baker of the ABI said there was no possibility of policyholders
being left 'high and dry' by any sudden suspension of the new arrangements.
Terrorism's rising cost, Page 4

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921222

