FT924-11990

FT  22 OCT 92 / Arts: James Saunders play re-opens Criterion - Theatre


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


One of the loveliest theatres in London, the Criterion in Piccadilly Circus,
has re-opened after a four year pause for refurbishment. It looks
resplendent from inside and out. You can still hear the sound of the
underground beneath, though perhaps the trains run a little less frequently
than they used to.
In one way the place might never have closed. It has come back with Making
It Better by James Saunders whose Next Time I'll Sing to You and A Scent of
Flowers made him seem a promising playwright in the early 1960s.
It is not that Saunders has gone backwards, merely that he has failed to
develop. Here we are with a rather slight, well enough written play that is
not going to offend anyone; nor excite them either.
For the culturally aware, there are two references to Graham Greene within
the first few minutes. There are also the comforting background and voices
of the BBC World Service.
Jane Asher playing Diana Harrington must be one of the few actresses who can
claim to sleep with the entire cast. Not that she is a nymphomaniac; there
are only three, apart from herself.
In order of appearance they go as follows: her husband, who has decided to
'come out' and therefore leaves her; an old Czech, who has defected in the
pregnant year of 1968 and whom she picks up in a pub; and a young Czech who
has first been the male lover of her husband.
On stage it all looks quite innocent. The setting is London, the time 1989 -
the year of the real Prague spring. (Saunders has previously worked on
Redevelopment, one of the plays by the Czech President, Vaclav Havel). There
is still a little spying going on, but not nearly enough to make a plot.
The Czech connection is simply that both Diana and her husband have
previously worked for the BBC in Prague. Now they are back in Bush House,
the headquarters of the BBC's overseas broadcasting, where it seems that
Czechs are two a penny.
Here there are a few jokes. One had forgotten what asinine programmes the
World Service puts out between news bulletins: snatches of Buddy Holly and
helpful documentaries on the spread of science and technology.
'Well, of course,' says the announcer, 'the history of telecommunications is
still developing. Next Wednesday we shall be talking to the man who tried to
put a telephone in every village in India.' Possibly this is Saunders being
satirical; it struck me as the funniest line in the play.
Making It Better is not a bad piece, just a bit slow. Ms Asher is a very
professional actress who would be better still if she had sharper lines.
Larry Lamb as her sometimes husband looks exactly like the sort of man you
would expect to meet in the World Service of the BBC.
David de Keyser and Rufus Sewell play the old and young Czechs respectively.
It is mildly surprising to find that the director is Michael Rudman;
normally he goes for something more ambitious. He had already directed
Making It Better at the Hampstead Theatre earlier this year, so perhaps he
sees hidden depths.
The best news remains that the Criterion is back on the map.
Criterion Theatre. (071) 839 4488

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921022

