FT923-6514

FT  24 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Policy choice for US voters


RHETORICALLY, the choice of economic policies being offered to American
voters looks familiar. The economy needs a stimulus: the Republicans offer
tax cuts, the Democrats a large programme of public investment. Mr Bush
looks back to President Reagan, Mr Clinton to President Roosevelt; or to put
it in oppositional terms, Mr Bush wants to make the rich richer, Mr Clinton
to tax and spend.
The reality is totally different. Both programmes are based on unrealistic
arithmetic; more important, the president's proposals have no chance of
being put into action, short of a wildly improbable upset in the
Congressional elections. The real choice is whether to continue with the
contest which has kept the president and the legislature deadlocked for the
last four years, or to take the risk of an active, interventionist president
with Congressional backing - an activist who will have to learn on the job.
Despite the clear disillusion of voters, there is something to be said for
the deadlock they have so far chosen to perpetuate. Mr Bush inherited an
appalling mess - not only a huge Federal deficit, but a largely bankrupt
financial system. Keynesians might argue that it is only the deficit which
has prevented large-scale private default from pushing the US economy into a
slump. In any case, the largely unintended Bush strategy of tackling
financial reform with energy, but leaving the deficit on the back burner,
has worked out quite well.
Signs of recovery
The economy still looks flat, but thanks largely to the Federal Reserve and
a floating exchange rate, it is in fact recovering. Slow export-led growth
should continue were the president to win re-election, though as the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has forecast, there
is unlikely to be much acceleration. It is not an inspiring prospect, but
the president's friend Mr John Major would settle for it.
The president's domestic frustrations have also had a welcome result. They
have driven Mr Bush into concentrating on what he knows best, the
international scene. Some of the results - continued G7 co-operation
(low-level, but better than squabbling), the Brady debt relief plan, and
most promising the North American Free Trade Area - have been bright
features in a dark scene. If Mr Bush could give Mexicans a vote, he would
win in a landslide.
At the same time it must be said that the president's domestic proposals are
ill-considered, unimaginative, and unworkable even if they were desirable.
His hurriedly promised tax cuts, a concession to his right wing, rely on
capping spending on entitlement programmes such as government health care
programmes. His opponents must wish that anyone believed this to be a
serious proposal, for it would guarantee them the votes of nearly everyone
over 50. But in fact it is simply an advance script for attacking Congress.
For the rest, the deficit would be limited by what Mr Herbert Stein, a
Republican economist, once decribed as President Reagan's one important
fiscal innovation, the asterisk - used in Reagan budgets to mark spending
cuts yet to be identified.
Clinton's plan
Mr Clinton's proposals are more carefully considered, and serve desirable
ends - an improved infrastructure, better education, welfare conditional on
willingness to work, and investment incentives for the private sector. The
package would also, according to some Wall Street analysts, give a strong
boost to activity. However, outsiders must wish that the Republican insult,
tax and spend, were more accurate.
The spending proposals are clear, but the tax proposals do not match them,
as a distinguished Democrat economist, Ms Alice Rivlin, has pointed out.
Some are also objectionable, notably the usual demagogic promise to tax
foreign corporations more heavily; and this is a suggestive mistake, as is
the heavy reliance on defence cuts. There is a disturbing streak of
isolationism and protectionism in the Democratic party, both among
grassroots supporters and such senior figures as the House majority leader,
Mr Richard Gephardt. Mr Clinton is an intelligent and pragmatic figure, and
may resist these pressures; but if he wins the voters' support, he must
expect a wary welcome in the outside world.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920824

