FT923-9756

FT  04 AUG 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Indonesia reinstates palm oil
allocation system


   By WILLIAM KEELING


   JAKARTA


INDONESIA has reinstated an allocation system for the sale of crude palm oil
from state plantations while 'difficult negotiations' with private sector
businesses on deregulating sales continue, industry officials have said.
The state-plantations produce about 70 per cent of Indonesia's palm oil
production, which is forecast to exceed 3m tonnes this year, up from about
2.5m in 1991.
The peak season is just beginning and industry officials expect about 40 per
cent of the state plantations' production to be designated for export.
Government officials estimate that the state plantations exported 45m kg of
palm oil in May, and 30m kg in June.
Production and sales from private plantations is not regulated but is almost
entirely devoted to domestic refineries.
Last year the government introduced a sealed tender auction for state
plantation production, forcing local and foreign buyers into direct
competition. In March, however, the auction system was suspended because of
government concern at the rising cost of domestic cooking oil.
Players in the palm oil sector include some of Indonesia's largest and
politically most well-connected businesses, such as the Salim Group and the
Sinar Mas Group.
Under the new system, foreign buyers must either buy from domestic companies
that have received allocations, or negotiate directly with the state
marketing board. Industry officials say the price under the allocation
system is based on the previous month's Rotterdam cif price, less Dollars 40
a tonne.
Domestic demand for crude palm oil is expected to increase sharply with the
completion of new refining capacity. Industry officials estimate refining
capacity will rise from from 1.7m tonnes in 1991 to about 2.5m tonnes by the
end of this year.
Industry officials warn Indonesia may be following in Malaysia's footsteps
by over-investing in refineries. Competition among refiners for palm oil
would provide upward pressure on prices in a deregulated market.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920804

