FT922-4394

FT  05 JUN 92 / Brussels switches track on HDTV


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


THE EUROPEAN Commission has given up trying to persuade satellite operators,
equipment manufacturers and broadcasters to sign a single document legally
binding them to promote high-definition television (HDTV).
The Commission has decided to change direction, by asking the industry
groups to agree to a watered-down 'declaration of intent'. Companies will
have to conclude bilateral contracts with the Commission, laying out their
individual strat-egies, so as to benefit from its proposed Ecu850m (Pounds
593m) plan to encourage wide-screen television services in the EC.
Even so, the move is still likely to raise fears that the Commission is
intent on trying to dictate HDTV strategy to industry. This was the flaw
that crippled its original advanced television policy in the mid-1980s.
When it launched the HDTV action plan in April, the Commission proposed a
legally binding 'memorandum of understanding' as one of 'three integral
pillars' of its strategy, along with the plan itself and the directive on EC
satellite television transmission standards, agreed before Christmas.
Wide-screen television - a first step towards full HDTV - is unlikely to
become a reality unless industry co-operates to produce suitable programmes
and equipment.
Officials said yesterday that the Commission's action plan, rather than the
memorandum, would now provide the backbone of the policy. They stressed that
the plan had emerged from discussions with industry.
EC telecommunications ministers will discuss the five-year plan for the
first time in Luxembourg today. They will reach no formal agreement because
the European Parliament has yet to give its opinion on the proposal and
because the controversial funding element depends on approval of the EC
budget for 1993-97.
The commission may still have trouble getting industry to sign up before the
terms and financing of the action plan are agreed.
Industry representatives were to meet in Brussels on Wednesday to discuss
the situation, but delayed the meeting until June 15 to assess the reaction
of EC members to the Commission's proposal.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920605

