FT921-3836

FT  12 MAR 92 / Appointments: Sloughed off


Graeme Elliot, executive vice chairman of Slough Estates, is the latest
high-profile casualty of the property slump.
Slough, a company specialising in industrial property, has made him
redundant on the grounds that 'with the changing market place, the role of
executive vice chairman did not offer a sufficient challenge for someone
with Graeme's qualities'.
Sir Nigel Mobbs, chairman and chief executive, stressed that Elliot was not
a 'scapegoat' and the timing of his departure was unconnected to the group's
results in two weeks' time. Elliot, 49, and a chartered accountant, joined
Slough in 1985 from RTZ.
Sir Nigel says his own role is likely to increase after Elliot's departure.
Paul Orchard-Lisle, a senior partner of surveyors Healey & Baker, who has
been on the board since 1980, has been appointed non-executive deputy
chairman.
Derek Wilson, finance director, and Roger Carey, the director responsible
for UK development, have been appointed group managing directors.
*****
Aad van Adrichem, group operations director of Marling Industries, the
industrial textile and vehicle-body manufacturer which on Monday put out a
profits warning that wiped nearly a third off the value of the shares, 'has
agreed' to leave the board to pursue other interests.
David Abel Smith, chief executive since the beginning of the year, claims
the departure of van Adrichem and the warning of a loss for the financial
year ending March 31 were wholly unconnected.
Hinting that some rather grand titles had been doled out around the company
before his time, Abel Smith says that in practice Dutch-born van Adrichem,
48, who joined a Dutch arm of the company in 1985 and has since also run the
Canadian operation for a while, had been the director of a single subsidiary
 -producing air bags. Marling said on Monday it could not tell when the air
bags venture would contribute to group profits.
Abel Smith says the company will not be looking for another group operations
director. 'That's me.'
'We're good friends. It was all very amicable,' he adds.
*****
Scholes, the Cheshire-based electricals company which just last Friday
announced its chief executive designate had left six weeks after his
arrival, said yesterday that chairman and chief executive Reg Harrington has
been taken seriously ill and will not return.
The plan had been that the ebullient and extrovert Harrington, who turns 55
today, would split his role during the year, allowing the newly recruited
Barrie Lawson to take over as chief executive. Harrington has been struck
down in the past few days with the recurrence of an earlier illness. Exactly
a year ago group managing director Chris Fitzpatrick took early retirement
because of ill health.
Finance director Bill Riches, 55, who assumes Harrington's executive
responsibilities for the time being, says Scholes is now looking to recruit
someone to assume the role of chief executive as soon as possible - 'someone
with whom the chemistry works, who is adaptable and whose style of
management fits in with the company's philosophy.' Non-executive director
Richard Morgan has been appointed non-executive chairman.
*****
Morgan Stanley, which has been one of the most successful of the US
investment banks at establishing a European presence in recent years, has
appointed two executives jointly to run its European business. The division
of the top job reflects the growing scale and complexity of the business in
Europe, the bank says.
Stephen Waters, joint head of the bank's worldwide mergers and acquisitions
business, moves from New York to head Morgan Stanley's European investment
banking business. He becomes co-head of the 1,500-strong European business
along with Steven Ward, the head of fixed income operations in London.
Former head in London, Timothy Hulquist, returns to New York, where he will
be in charge of foreign exchange, commodities and the bank's trust company.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920312

