FT922-502

FT  27 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Morland forecasts 28% rise in profits


   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE


MORLAND, the Thames Valley-based brewer, yesterday shored up its defences
against a Pounds 101m hostile bid from Greene King with a forecast 28 per
cent increase in pre-tax profits to at least Pounds 7.6m for the year ending
September 30.
Earnings per share were expected to grow 15 per cent to 26.1p; and total
dividends would be raised to 8.4p, 18 per cent higher, the company said in a
circular to shareholders.
Mr Jasper Clutterbuck, Morland's chief executive, said: 'Greene King has
been trying to suggest Morland faces strategic difficulties in the new world
of brewing. Our forecast demonstrates what nonsense this is.'
The forecast does not include any contribution from a trading arrangement
agreed with Courage earlier this month. If the Greene King bid fails,
Morland will brew 20,000 barrels of Courage beers, and Courage will buy a
minimum of 5,000 barrels of Morland's Old Speckled Hen ale a year,
generating additional taxable profits of Pounds 800,000.
'We would have liked to compare our performance with that of Greene King,'
Mr Clutterbuck said, 'But it has not told us what its profits were for last
year. Instead it questions our net asset value. Only on a break-up do
shareholders benefit from asset values - it is profits that pay dividends.'
Mr Clutterbuck added: 'Greene King's offer - 450p cash or a paper equivalent
of about 479p - does not even reward Morland shareholders for owning a top
performing company with an excellent record and prospects, and it certainly
does not contain a premium for control.'
Mr Simon Redman, Greene King's chairman, responded yesterday by describing
the profit forecast as 'feeble'.
He added: 'It does nothing to mask Morland's strategic difficulties of weak
brands, no critical mass, low brewery utilisation, and higher cost
production.'
Morland had attempted to present the deal with Courage as a solution to its
problems. 'In reality it is nothing but a quick fix,' Mr Redman said.
The bid was triggered last month by the Whitbread Investment Company's need
to reduce its stakes in a number of regional brewers to comply with
government legislation. Greene King bought a 28.5 per cent stake in Morland
from Whitbread, and was pledged a further 14.9 per cent if no higher bidder
emerged.
The East Anglian brewer extended its offer to July 2 after announcing last
week that further acceptances of 2.8 per cent had given it control of a
total of 46.22 per cent of Morland's shares.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920627

