FT923-9694

FT  04 AUG 92 / Leading Article: Retirement at 65


THE SOCIAL Security Advisory Committee, an independent body set up by the
government, has done its creator proud. Yesterday's report on equalising the
state pension age says what the Treasury would most like to hear: that the
retirement age for women should be moved from 60 to 65, to equal that of
men. The packaging of this fiscally prudent suggestion is politically
alluring. 'A significant part of the money saved,' says the report, should
be used 'to improve the well-being of the most vulnerable groups.'
Even better, the cash should be diverted towards making the state pension
scheme of the future 'more responsive especially to the needs and
requirements of women'. These elements of the SSAC package form an
'indivisible whole'. In sum, backing is given to a proposal that will
eventually save some Pounds 3bn a year, provided that most of it is spent on
disadvantaged pensioners.
The suggestion is practical. Equalising the retirement age at 65 would bring
the UK in line with most west European countries. Italy and Germany are
moving in that direction, while France, the committee says, is currently
reconsidering the costs of an earlier decision to shift downwards to 60.
Moving to 65 would also allow the UK pensions industry to heave a huge sigh
of relief. It is still wrestling with the consequences of the EC court
judgement in the case of Barber v Guardian Royal Exchange Group. This ruled
against discrimination in occupational schemes, since when the trend has
been toward equalising at 65. If the government establishes that age for
state beneficiaries, it would be set in concrete.
Critics who accept that the cost of moving the pensionable age for men down
to 60 is prohibitive may prefer a flexible decade, during which retirement
could take place at between, say, 55 and 65. The SSAC report rejects this.
It describes it as a system for trading off the savings on those who retire
early and receive lower pensions against the costs of higher payments to
those who defer retirement to a later age. On this basis the long-term sick
and disabled, plus those for whom redundancy or unemployment in their 50s is
a form of involuntary early retirement, would need income support for the
rest of their lives.
The principal flaw in the SSAC's admirably succinct report lies in its
rationale for proposing piecemeal improvements to the social security
system. It wishes to avoid too great an increase in dependence on income
support. The latter is a means-tested benefit, with a lower take-up than
retirement pension. Certainly take-up should be encouraged in every way
possible, but the eventual phasing-out of universal benefits and their
replacement by better targeted payments to those most in need should be as
much an objective of government policy as the phasing-in of an equalised
state pensionable age of 65.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920804

