FT924-12095

FT  22 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Dissidents come under fire at Hoskins


   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE


DISSIDENT shareholders in Hoskins Brewery, the Leicester-based real ale
concern, were yesterday accused of trying to gain control of the company
without making a bid for the shares.
In a letter to shareholders, Mr Barrie Hoar, chairman, said that their
investments in the company would be 'exposed to a significant level of risk'
if the dissidents succeeded in their attempt to remove him and his brother,
Mr Robert Hoar, from the board.
Resolutions to replace the brothers - whose family holds 30 per cent of
Hoskins - with Mr Richard Cattermole, head of Ryan Elizabeth, a pubs and
hotels operator, and one of his associates, Mr JE Lea, will be put to the
vote at an extraordinary meeting on November 18.
The meeting was requisitioned by a group led by Mr Cattermole, a 5 per cent
shareholder, and Mr Dennis Bailey, a director of Hichens Harrison, the
stockbrokers, and a former director of Hoskins.
According to Mr Barrie Hoar's letter, Mr Bailey was asked to resign from
Hoskins' board in November last year.
During his four years as a director, Mr Bailey was involved in advising
Hoskins on the acquisition of Netherton Ales, which resulted in a loss of
Pounds 250,000, and of Tatlocks, a catering company, which resulted in a
loss of Pounds 380,000, the letter states.
Mr Bailey had also proposed the acquisition of Edencorp Leisure, which owned
a Portuguese leisure centre, and was now in compulsory liquidation and under
investigation by the Department of Trade and Industry.
The letter adds: 'Shareholders in Hoskins have already suffered as a result
of Hoskins' brief association with Mr Bailey and Hichens.'
Mr Bailey said yesterday that he had resigned from Hoskinson his own
initiative after a boardroom row over the manner in which Mr Barrie Hoar was
negotiating the sale of the Tatlocks business to a former director.
'Mr Hoar is obviously attacking me because I supported Mr Cattermole's
demand for an EGM,' he said.
Mr Hoar's letter to shareholders also queries Mr Cattermole's business
record.
Of various statements that Ryan Elizabeth owned up to 60 pubs and five
hotels, it says: 'We have only been able to identify 26 pubs and four hotels
. . . of which seven pubs are closed and not trading, and the hotels are
shown in the latest accounts as loss making.
'Ryan's profits were wholly dependent on capitalising interest and the one
off sale of lease premiums,' it claims.
Mr Cattermole was not available for comment yesterday.
Hoskins recently sold nine pubs for Pounds 2.45m to Wolverhampton & Dudley
Breweries, leaving it with its brewery and seven houses. Completion of the
deal will eliminate its borrowings and leave it with about Pounds 750,000
cash.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921022

