FT924-6532

FT  20 NOV 92 / Arts: Grieg's 'Peer Gynt' - Concert


   By DAVID MURRAY


Most music-lovers know that Grieg's famous Peer Gynt Suites were drawn from
the theatre-score he composed for the first production of Ibsen's epic, at
the playwright's express request. From time to time we hear more of the
music, when some orchestra takes the trouble to collect suitable singers,
and an actor or two to narrate and to speak some lines when a musical
fragment needs them.
But such performances have always relied upon a posthumous edition published
in 1908, when some parts of the score had already gone missing. Only in 1986
was everything found and reinstated in the right order, thanks to the
doctoral labours of Rune J. Andersen. Though Neeme Jarvi and the Gothenburg
Symphony recorded the complete score the next year, it seems that their
Barbican performance of it on Wednesday was the first before a live audience
since the original staging in Christiania (now Oslo).
It was done in style. Peer Gynt has just one serenade, evidently written not
to over-stretch a leading actor who does not sing much, and his Solveig two
pretty songs, but the excellent Hakan Hagegard and Barbara Bonney were
imported to sing them. Laurence Howes had devised an ingenious English text,
often in rhyme like Ibsen's, and ample enough to establish some characters
and the gist of the story.
Gerard Murphy and Simon Callow enjoyed themselves hugely as Narrator (plus
Boyg and Button-Moulder) and the speaking Peer - despite Callow's erratic
grip on his words: at one point he addressed his desert princess not as
'Lily of the sand', but 'of the Strand'] - with ripe support from Susan
Engel and Joanne Pearce. Probably this version stretched out longer than
originally foreseen, for the announced Bartok Concerto was quietly scrapped;
but this Peer filled up the time very pleasurably.
The Gothenburg orchestra is clearly first-class and Jarvi's spontaneous
dramatic instincts were exactly what was needed to keep the score sharp. The
lesser among its 26 numbers are, after all, fairly routine swatches of
theatre-music. On the other hand, to hear all the bits is to be struck by
Grieg's personal way with harmony, consistently genteel but also piquant,
and his fine ear for instrumental colour without tricks.
It was particularly rewarding to hear the choral passages restored. Though
Grieg was careful not to demand too much of the voices, the arrival of their
human timbre is always planned to telling effect. The Tallis Chamber Choir
did more than justice to all their music, whether as trolls, houris or
decent churchgoers. The three herd-girls who lure Peer to a night of passion
turned out to make a lusty Valkyrie-ish trio, and Der-Shin Hwang sang a
sultry desert princess.
Sponsored by Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken London

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921120

