FT923-15596

FT  01 JUL 92 / Muscles flexed in power play: Juliet Sychrava on the case
for electricity discounts


   By JULIET SYCHRAVA


MR Tim Eggar, the energy minister, is in a confrontation with Britain's
blue-chip companies that might force him to tighten electricity industry
regulation.
Yesterday angry industrialists from the Energy Intensive Users Group lobbied
the minister for an urgent reduction in their electricity bill, just a day
after ICI publicly complained about electricity prices.
ICI said that without an electricity price cut, its chlorine business could
not compete in Europe.
'Our problem needs to be solved pretty well overnight,' said Mr Bryan
Bulloch, power services manager at ICI's chlor-alkali plant.
Mr Peter Ruff of the Chemical Industries Association, of which ICI is a
member, supported ICI's view. 'It is in the government's interest to make
sure energy pricing is realistic in the chemical sector,' he said.
The chemical industry contributed about Pounds 3bn to the balance of
payments, and employed 300,000 people, but sharply rising electricity bills
were threatening the sector, he said.
Other large companies, such as Blue Circle, Ranks Hovis McDougall and GKN,
also attacked Mr Eggar when he met the Major Energy Users Council (MEUC)
earlier this week.
The companies say their bills have risen by anywhere between 10 per cent and
30 per cent since electricity privatisation two years ago.
That contrasts with Mr Eggar's claim that 'the benefits of privatisation are
coming through', made last week after South Wales Electricity said it would
cut its prices by up to 2 per cent.
Mr Frank Dobson, Labour's energy spokesman, said that with average profit
increases of 40 per cent, other regional companies could have done far more
for customers.
What Mr Eggar can do for those customers now is uncertain.
Traditionally, the government has countered complaints from ICI and others
by saying they were simply paying the price of losing the subsidies they
enjoyed before privatisation.
Many large users deny that they want subsidies back. Mr Ruff said the CIA
just wanted a breathing space until companies such as ICI could genuinely
choose their supplier, for instance from overseas.
But Mr Neil Tribick, vice-chairman of the electricity group of MEUC, wants
lower prices for big customers now. That does not mean subsidies, he says,
it means normal commercial practice. 'At the moment, the domestic consumer
buys his energy at the same rate as industrialists buying a million times
more. There is no recognition of large consumers' value to the industry.'
Without large consumers there would be no reliable demand, but peaks and
troughs that would make the generators' life impossible, he claims.
Domestic consumers already pay an average of about 3p a unit more than large
consumers. But, Mr Tribick and others argue, the differential is far less
than on the Continent, where, he said, his competitors paid at least 10 per
cent to 15 per cent less for their electricity.
Another large user from the steel industry said: 'If we moved across the
Channel we would pay 50 per cent less.'
That, many large users say, is because of high UK prices, not Continental
subsidies. Breaking down the UK price, they argue that it could be
substantially cut.
First, the 11 per cent nuclear levy or subsidy all electricity consumers pay
to Nuclear Electric should go, especially now that the company is making
more money.
Second, the regional companies' and National Grid Company's profits show
that their charges to customers for using the electricity network were set
too high at privatisation and should be brought down.
Finally, they should receive a discount on the underlying cost of wholesale
electricity.
ICI has another suggestion. It could buy coal on the world market and pay
the electricity industry a charge for converting it to power. Mr Bryan
Bulloch of ICI said yesterday: 'I think there is a chink there for a
solution and the DTI may seriously consider it.'
Large users believe there are a number of things Mr Eggar can do now. He can
encourage Offer, the industry watchdog which is reviewing National Grid's
charges, to take a firm line.
He can bring forward the review of the regional companies' charges, which is
due in 1994, and start cutting the nuclear levy.
One large user pointed out that there was a precedent for tightening
electricity regulation and squeezing profits in this way. 'The history of
privatised monopolies is that regulation needs to be tightened up. The
government set charges too generously. Now it must squeeze them.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920701

