FT924-8243

FT  12 NOV 92 / International Company News: Chrysler plans Dollars 17.3bn
investment


   By KEVIN DONE, Motor Industry Correspondent


CHRYSLER, the US vehicle maker, is planning to invest Dollars 17.3bn between
1993 to 1997 in capital expenditure and new product development, according
to Mr Robert Eaton, vice-chairman.
Mr Eaton, who takes over as chairman from Mr Lee Iacocca in January,
admitted that 'it was not clear one-and-a-half years ago that Chrysler would
survive this current recession'.
The company had considerably weakened its balance sheet to maintain a very
ambitious new product development programme, and Mr Eaton said that Chrysler
now had to rebuild its finances as a top priority.
Chrysler, the smallest of the three US vehicle makers, was profitable in the
second and third quarters of this year, the first time since the first half
of 1990 that the group has been profitable in two consecutive quarters.
Both General Motors and Ford reported a loss in the third quarter this year.
Mr Eaton said that Chrysler's spending plan was more than the company had
achieved in profit in its entire history.
It was an 'unbelievable' achievement that the company had maintained its
product programme intact during the recession, and Chrysler was now planning
to launch a new product every six months for the next three years.
'We have trashed our balance sheet to get to this point,' he admitted, and
the company had been forced to sell assets worth Dollars 1.7bn in 1991/92 to
maintain spending on product development.
Chrysler was aiming to achieve an investment rating on its debt by the first
quarter of 1995 and was seeking to reach a cash balance of Dollars 5bn by
1995 compared with around Dollars 3.2bn at present.
The Dollars 6.8bn revolving credit agreed with its banks earlier this year
had been Chrysler's last big hurdle to 'keep the company financially
afloat'.
The company's low debt rating was blocking access to the US commercial paper
market, which increased the group's costs by Dollars 300m a year and meant
that Chrysler was unable to offer competitive leasing deals, said Mr Eaton.
In 1990 Chrysler and Fiat halted far-reaching year-long negotiations about a
possible merger of their car-making operations, and Mr Eaton said that the
US car maker was no longer seeking any significant collaboration deal.
'We do not feel that we need to be looking for a merger to maintain our
viability,' he said.
Last March Chrysler reduced its holding in Mitsubishi Motors of Japan from
10.9 per cent to 5.9 per cent with the sale of 43.6m shares for Dollars
215m, and Mr Eaton said the US car maker was also prepared to sell the
remaining stake.
'We do not think the holding is at all necessary to our continuing
relationship. There are no plans, but yes, we could sell it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921112

