FT923-9876

FT  03 AUG 92 / Minister urges employers to combat bias


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


MR PATRICK McLOUGHLIN, the employment minister, has urged employers to
review their recruitment and promotion policies regularly to ensure that
they are not discriminating against any sector of society.
He was commenting on the publication of a report on the experiences of young
black people of education and the labour market.
The report, funded by the Employment Department, shows that although
proportionally more Asian and black young people continue in education or
vocational training after the age of 16 than their white peers, they have
more difficulty in getting a job.
Young people of Afro-Caribbean and Asian origin make up an increasing
proportion of the potential workforce in the UK, particularly in the inner
cities.
Mr McLoughlin said: 'If British employers are to deal effectively with the
challenges of European and international competition they must utilise the
skills, talents and abilities of all people, irrespective of race, gender or
disability.'
The report shows a high participation rate of young black people in
full-time, post-16 education - 37 per cent of whites, 51 per cent of
Afro-Caribbeans and 67 per cent of Asians. By the third post-compulsory year
the differences were even starker, with more than one in two Asians and more
than one in five Afro-Caribbeans remaining in full-time education, compared
with about 16 per cent of whites.
According to the survey, young black people were not finding their way
successfully into the labour market. Using a model that excluded those in
full-time education and comparing individuals with the same attainment,
education route and parental education, the survey found that for white men
from professional backgrounds the probability of being in employment was 84
per cent, for Afro-Caribbean men with parents in manual occupations the
probability was 70 per cent, and for Asian women with parents in manual
occupations the probability was 51 per cent.
Against the Odds, Research Management Branch, Department of Employment,
Sheffield S1 4PQ. Pounds 5.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920803

