FT921-1391

FT  24 MAR 92 / New world watchdog in search of bark and bite: The CSCE will
seek to define its role after the end of the Cold War in a summit meeting
which starts today


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER


The founders of the various international security organisations have a
penchant for uninspiring titles and acronyms.
The 'Helsinki Follow-Up Conference', which begins in the Finnish capital
today and ends in July with a full-scale summit of its 48 member states is a
case in point. Yet it is potentially one of the most significant
international gatherings since the collapse of the Soviet Union and the
communist system in eastern Europe.
Its avowed purpose is not only to review the work of the Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) since the last conference of its
kind ended, in Vienna, in 1989, but to attempt to give the CSCE the
necessary teeth to turn itself into an effective guardian of the continent's
security. That will require not only imagination, but political will. In
particular, it remains to be demonstrated whether the increased enthusiasm
of Britain and the US for the organisation in a radically transformed
European political and military environment is more than skin-deep.
The reservations of Washington and London are based partly on the belief
that a 48-member organisation, now embracing countries such as the US and
Canada at one end of the spectrum, and Russia and the newly-independent
Central Asian republics at the other, can never be an effective body for
taking decisions and action. The organisation is likely to grow further with
the inclusion of new states such as Georgia. More fundamentally, the US and
UK fear that if too much weight is attached to the CSCE's security functions
it will undermine the already diminished role of Nato, even though the CSCE
lacks the latter's characteristics of a military alliance with mutual
defence guarantees.
It is a matter of continuing debate among western governments whether Nato
has been deprived of most of its raison d'etre following the dissolution of
the Warsaw Pact, or whether instability in the eastern part of the continent
requires western countries to keep up their military guard. For the moment,
the view that a continuing insurance policy is required, in the form of a
viable western defence organisation, has won the day. Equally, however, Nato
members have recognised that they cannot permit a security vacuum in eastern
Europe.
These twin considerations, instead of leading to a strengthening of the
CSCE, the long-existing political forum for bridging the east-west gap, have
initially spawned a hybrid 'son of Nato', the North Atlantic Co-operation
Council (Nacc). Though not offering the full membership and security
guarantees that many of the east European states and even Russia want, Nacc
offers them a permanent forum for consultation and co-operation on security
and related issues.
There is no reason to suppose that Nacc would continue to play this dominant
role if the CSCE were strengthened and made more effective. The prospects of
this happening have improved as the view that Nato and the CSCE could be
truly complementary has become rather more firmly rooted. Both the US and
British governments have begun to abandon their lukewarm attitude towards
the CSCE and to underline the constructive division of labour that could be
achieved in the security field if the two organisations stick to their
appointed functions. One of the more useful suggestions endorsed by the US
is that, if any peace-keeping forces were required to keep combattants apart
in a conflict for which the CSCE was trying to find a political solution,
these could be provided by Nato.
The CSCE does not have, and can probably never aspire to, the formal
military structure that Nato has. However, the CSCE can boast a wider
membership than Nato, and competence in the fields of disarmament,
confidence-building measures, the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and human rights.
The CSCE's achievements since its establishment by the 1975 Final Act in
Helsinki, have been much greater than the adverse publicity it has often
received. It became an international benchmark for the respect of human
rights and principles such as non-interference in the internal affairs of
others.
The CSCE's role in the disarmament process, if less spectacular than the
bilateral negotiations on the reduction of nuclear arms between the US and
the Soviet Union, was also vital. While there has always been a dispute over
whether it should be used as an arms control forum, it has served as the
umbrella organisation, in particular, for the Conventional Forces in Europe
(CFE) treaty signed in December 1990.
But above all, the CSCE has played a leading and innovative role in the
field of military confidence-building, notably through the Stockholm and
Vienna agreements of 1986 and 1990 respectively, which provided for the
right of states to observe big military manoeuvres, laid down minimum
periods of notice for exercises above a certain size and provided for
verification measures. It is now proposed to create a new security forum
which will deal both with future talks on confidence-building measures and
the incompleted conventional arms talks in Europe.
In the post-Cold War era, in which the risk of war between the two big
military blocs has been replaced by the threat of multiple conflicts between
ethnic groups seeking independence, it should be one of the CSCE's main
tasks to build on these military confidence-building measures with an
effective process to prevent and resolve political conflicts. At the moment,
it is ill-equipped to undertake such tasks.
The extent to which the CSCE has been hamstrung by its rule that all
decisions must be taken by consensus was underlined by its impotence in the
Yugoslav crisis. Since then, a cautious step towards modifying this rule has
been taken by CSCE ministers, who decided at a recent meeting in Prague that
a single member state could be overridden if found guilty of 'clear and
gross violation' of its CSCE commitments. Yet it is accepted that any move
under this so-called 'consensus minus one' rule would be confined to
political statements.
Much more ambitious is a proposal by Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the German
foreign minister, to overcome the problem of decision-making in such an
unwieldy body. Germany, backed by the Netherlands, is suggesting that to nip
a dangerous conflict in the bud, a special committee of about five member
states should be designated to work out a solution with the parties to any
dispute.
Whatever the decision on this matter, however, it is clear that if the CSCE
is serious about its conflict prevention role, the special Conflict
Prevention Centre in Vienna created by the CSCE's 1990 Paris Charter will
have to be given a shot in the arm. A director, two officers, a few
administrative staff and an annual budget of Dollars 1m are hardly
sufficient to deal with disputes as serious as the one between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, to which the CSCE is now addressing itself.
This conflict between the two former Soviet republics, is just the kind of
emergency which a new-style CSCE will have to tackle. But to do so, the
ministers and officials in Helsinki will have to give the organisation the
tools and resources to do the job.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920324

