FT924-6587

FT  20 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Sullivan trying again for the Post


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


MR DAVID Sullivan, the controversial publisher of the Sunday Sport, is
planning to try again to get a controlling interest in the Bristol Evening
Post group.
An approach was blocked two years ago by Mr Nicholas Ridley, the trade and
industry secretary, after a Monopolies and Mergers Commission investigation
on the grounds that it would not be in the public interest.
As the Bristol Post yesterday revealed a 44 per cent increase in pre-tax
profits to Pounds 2.83m in the six months to September, Mr Sullivan said he
planned to return to the MMC.
'Last time I had no track record in running newspapers apart from the Daily
Sport; now I have the Sunday News and Echo,' Mr Sullivan said. The News and
Echo is an orthodox newspaper circulating in the north of England with a
claimed circulation of about 70,000.
Mr Sullivan, an unwelcome 10 per cent shareholder in the Bristol Post,
described the results as competent rather than brilliant.
'They are gradually doing things I said they should do such as closing down
newsagents that weren't making money,' he added.
Bristol Post's pre-tax profit increase, from Pounds 1.96m last year, was
achieved despite static turnover of Pounds 17m in the main newspaper
publishing business and a depressed advertising environment.
Mr Michael Gay, chief executive, said the group was benefiting from
rationalisation and improvements to operating methods. In the main newspaper
division staff numbers had been reduced by 14 per cent, or 127. Further cost
savings are likely at the group, which also runs confectionery and newsagent
shops and has distribution and property interests.
Mr Gay said changes were not related to the presence of Mr Sullivan, who had
been seeking, unsuccessfully, a seat on the board to give 'a younger, more
dynamic input to the company.'
Technological developments and lower advertising volumes will enable the
group to make a further reduction of more than 50 staff this year.
The Pounds 830,000 trading profit in the newspaper division was greater than
that in the 52 weeks to the end of March. All sections increased their
profits; group sales rose nearly 3 per cent to Pounds 30.9m.
Earnings per share rose to 7.95p (6.04p) and the interim dividend is lifted
to 4p (3.75p).
Mr Mark Beilby, media analyst at stockbrokers SG Warburg, described the
result as a solid set of figures. 'It shows that newspaper groups can do
pretty well despite the recession.'

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921120

