FT923-6453

FT  25 AUG 92 / Pressure builds to raise UK interest rates


   By PETER MARSH and IVO DAWNAY


THE GOVERNMENT faced renewed pressure yesterday to raise interest rates as
sterling remained under strain in the European exchange rate mechanism.
Intervention by the Bank of England and other central banks to buy dollars
for D-Marks helped to lift the pound slightly against the German currency,
but financial markets signalled the high possibility of a politically
unpopular rise in UK base rates.
The three-month interbank rate, at which UK banks lend among themselves,
rose yesterday by  1/4 percentage point to about 10 3/4 per cent. This
indicated a likely rise by the autumn of nearly 1 percentage point in base
rates, now 10 per cent.
However, yesterday's braking of sterling's recent falls gave the Treasury
and the Bank valuable breathing space in their fight to stave off a rise in
borrowing rates, which would almost certainly prolong the recession.
The UK currency closed in London last night above its day's lows but still
perilously close to its ERM floor of DM2.778, indicating continued weakness.
An increase in Britain's current account deficit from Pounds 747m in June to
Pounds 934m last month did little to help sentiment.
A Downing Street official insisted that the government's position remained
unchanged. 'We will do whatever is deemed necessary to ensure that sterling
remains within its exchange rate mechanism bands,' he said.
Government spokesmen attributed the turbulence to the weakness in the dollar
and continuing concern over a possible 'no' vote in the September 20 French
referendum on the Maastricht treaty. One official said a firm 'yes' could
help to stabilise sterling. But he added: 'If it went no, then the countries
that are vulnerable could have problems.'
A senior minister conceded there was little alternative to 'toughing-out'
the uneasy market sentiments. 'We are engaged in one of those wait-and-see
situations and the government is determined to see it out.'
The Bank yesterday refrained from any public action to buy pounds for
D-Marks on the cur - rency markets, an action which might help push up
sterling's value and further stave off the possibility of a base-rate rise.
Sterling's weakness triggered a fresh attack on government policies by Mr
Gordon Brown, the shadow chancellor. He said the deteriorating trade outlook
and growing imports signalled 'a fundamental weakness' in the economy that
had to be addressed by a stimulus to investment and employment.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, returned to London last night from his
Italian holiday. His absence has sparked disquiet on the Conservative
backbenches. Mr John Carlisle, MP for Luton North, repeated his call for the
chancellor either to restore confidence or to be replaced.
Bonn defends Bundesbank over dollar, Page 2
ERM 'may have to be scrapped', Page 7
Industry fears weak dollar will worsen recession, Page 7
Present pain for future gain, Page 12
Editorial Comment, Page 12
Lex, Page 14
Currencies, Page 23
World stocks, Page 29
London stocks, Page 32

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920825

