FT923-10994

FT  28 JUL 92 / IMF calls for deep cuts in Greek public spending


   By KERIN HOPE


   ATHENS


THE International Monetary Fund has urged Greece to slash the public deficit
by Dr1,300bn (Pounds 3.7bn) by the end of 1993 in order to meet the
Maastricht timetable for economic convergence with its European Community
partners.
In its annual report on the Greek economy, the IMF called for deep cuts in
public spending, including rapid reform of the state pension system where
outlays account for about 15 per cent of the country's gross domestic
product.
The normally confidential report was made public by Mr Stefanos Manos, the
economy minister, who hopes to make Greeks more willing to accept continued
austerity by revealing the extent of the country's economic problems.
The report said the government's current efforts to reduce the deficit by 4
percentage points this year to 13 per cent of GDP were inadequate for
meeting the Maastricht target. 'Primary adjustment of 8-10 percentage points
of GDP was needed in 1992-93 to put Greece on the path to convergence with a
clearly declining debt to GDP ratio,' it said. The public debt last year
reached 116 per cent of GDP, compared to the Maastricht requirement of no
more than 60 per cent by 1997.
'The focus of the stabilisation effort should be on a curtailment of public
spending,' the report addded. 'Lasting savings in the central government's
wage bill require significant cuts in public employment, including the
abolition of unnecessary functions.' A hiring freeze is nominally in effect
in the public sector, but the government has been reluctant to incur the
political cost of large scale dismissals.
Greece requested IMF technical help in its second attempt in two years to
overhaul the pension system, but discussions with trade union officials have
been delaying the launch of a less generous scheme.
A stabilisation programme launched last year has succeeded in reducing the
current account deficit from 5.4 to 2.2 per cent of GDP and cutting the
inflation rate from 20.9 to 15.1 per cent - still almost three times the EC
average. However, the size of the deficit remains a serious obstacle to
further progress.
In addition to the government's unwillingness to enforce harsh spending
curbs, its revenue forecasts still appear too optimistic. According to the
report, further reforms of the fiscal system, including a broadening of the
tax base and higher indirect taxes are crucial to boosting revenues.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920728

