FT924-11564

FT  24 OCT 92 / Finance and the Family: Beware of mutations - A botanist's
view of the stock market


   By HARRY HOPKINS


IN 1735, the 28-year-old Swedish naturalist, Karl Linnaeus, published
Systema Naturae, making sense of the chaotic profusion of the botanical
world by surveying each flower for a crucial factor, then using this to work
out an order of genera, species and sub-species.
It has often seemed that the stock market could usefully take a leaf from
this young man's book. It could prove a revealing exercise.
For example, the Linnaean approach, when applied to the animal world,
reveals that the brilliant blue jay and the funereal raven emerge alike as
Corvidae - of the crow family.
Apply it to the stock market and the superficial categories of the market
reports, such as 'industrials' and 'engineerings' and 'blue chips' are left.
By applying the crucial common factor approach, shares as varied as oil
explorers, package tour operators, toy makers and part of the rag trade
might be classified together as Volatilae, possibly sub-species Extremes.
The outstanding common factor is that these managements must stake large
sums of money, often many months ahead, on an unpredictable outcome -
whether the drill bit will encounter oil in commercial quantities, whether
the public elect to book the right foreign holidays at the right time (the
packagers having long ago paid for accommodation and transport) or whether
this season's colour really proves to be blue.
The share price charts will confirm the classification. In 1989-90
much-tipped Tuskar Resources gushed up to 89p on Columbian oil strikes, only
to droop to 1p and, finally, suspension this year, as the money ran out
faster than oil revenues came in. Air Tours, climbing more than 500 per cent
in 1991, fell precipitately this summer as it emerged that tour operators
had over-estimated public demand.
Again, a financial Linnaeus, casting a penetrating eye over the
conventionally classified columns, might bring together motor manufacturers,
hotels, and airlines under the shared factor of high and inflexible fixed
costs.
Just as car makers cannot dispense with expensive, sophisticated assembly
lines when sales dwindle, so the hotelier cannot turn off the heating or cut
his staff drastically when guests stay away. In times of recession, one
might be tempted to name this species Ponderosos - except that when recovery
comes, and occupancy rates or throughput rises, the gains can be
disproportionately high.
As for the Acquisitives, these would probably require an entire genus today
, broken down into species and sub-species, ranging from mere rescuers to
predators, red in tooth and claw. For the latter the crucial factor might be
frequency of cash calls on shareholders, compared with rise in earnings per
share. Thus, in its four years as a public company, Resort Hotels has called
on its shareholders four times in four years, but its managing director now
assures them that it has reached critical mass and is in an earnings phase.
Certain species, for which there would be no lack of candidates, would be
Fructus Conditi Crastinus Dies, or Jam tomorrow. Other sub-species might
indicate acquisitions being made too often (Bimec? Ratners?) or Not Often
Enough. Nigel Rudd, the chairman of Williams Holdings, once pointed out that
the will which sets master acquirers on their empire-building course, is
not, in the nature of things, something that lasts for ever.
Emerging from this taxing area, the new Linnaean classifier would surely
find comfort in a rare but well-defined species which he might christen
Dormitors, or sleepers, to borrow a trade term for books that go on selling
steadily year in year out, letting their authors prosper.
Those which might be included are Great Universal Stores, the gorgeous
gussies of the 1950s, earnings still rising unbrokenly into the recessionary
1990s, Glaxo, which saw its share earnings rise nearly 1,400 per cent
through the 1980s, and Marks and Spencer, which has seen its profits rise
without break for 40 years.
It is this species which has made its patient shareholders rich, and us
eager pursuers of Volatilae look like idiots. Clearly an increasingly
important species to mark out these days would be Globals with more than
half their earnings derived from overseas, not only insuring against
domestic recession, but profiting by expanding horizons.
Again this is a species that increasingly transcends the conventional
categories, embracing not only Unilever, with 85 per cent of its earnings
coming from overseas, and the oil majors, but also the APVs and the
Rentokils. The last named has 55 per cent of its earnings now derived from
overseas, including France, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, North America and
Asia. All of these countries are apparently in thrall to the company's new
infra-red Mouse Alert.
As the successors of Karl Linnaeus discovered, species can mutate. This is a
game at which any investor can play. Why not, for instance - since
psychology is as important as the facts - a sub-species for stocks
temporarily placed in the Doghouse (Trafalgar House et alia)? Or a species
for High Cost of Entry (a mighty preserver of niches)? Or for recession
proofs, now being the time to test them? Or perhaps, in cautionary mode, a
Fulgens Maximus species for miracle working financial stars who simply must
be followed.
Do it yourself classification by special factors can be an education.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921024

