FT921-15493

FT  09 JAN 92 / Politicians lose control of elements in army: Five EC
monitors died because of rifts within the federal forces


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


THE shooting down of a European Community helicopter on Tuesday has
convinced western diplomats in Belgrade that the federal army must be
brought under political control as soon as possible.
But because Yugoslavia's federal structures have disintegrated, it remains
uncertain under whose control the army should be placed. Moreover, diplomats
believe it will be impossible to rein in the army, and have no confidence in
any permanent ceasefire until all factions are united under a single
command.
At the time of the incident on Tuesday the federal army was under the
nominal control of General Veljko Kadijevic, the defence minister, who was
reported to have resigned last night. He had accepted the latest ceasefire
forged by the United Nations, which envisages, among other things, the
withdrawal of the federal army from Croatia. He had also agreed to the
deployment of UN peace-keeping troops in Croatia.
But the downing of the EC helicopter showed the general could not control an
army divided into several camps.
First, there is the Titoist/Yugoslav nationalist element, represented until
recently by Gen Kadijevic. It is wedded to defending the territorial
integrity of Yugoslavia, and by implication, the federation.
This faction was supported by Mr Ante Markovic, the former prime minister,
and by Mr Slobodan Milosevic, Serbia's president, after June 25, when
Slovenia and Croatia declared independence. The military attack on Croatia
was aimed at preventing the republic from seceding from the federation.
Another faction consists of hardline Serb nationalists led by Gen Blagoje
Adzic, the chief of staff, who has temporarily assumed the defence
portfolio. His outlook is conditioned by history  - his family was killed by
the Nazi-backed Croat Ustashas during the second world war.
As a Serb nationalist determined to redress historical grievances, Gen Adzic
has forged close links with the Serb nationalists in the self-proclaimed
Serb republic of Krajina, southern Croatia, in eastern Slavonia, eastern
Croatia, and in Banja Luka, northern Bosnia-Hercegovina.
This tacit alliance not only opposes the acceptance by Gen Kadijevic and Mr
Milosevic of a UN peace-keeping force, but it has widened the differences
among the army's top officer corps and Serbia's leadership.
Yesterday, Mr Milan Babic, head of the Krajina Serbs, who was pushed into
power by Mr Milosevic, with the backing of the federal army, blamed Gen
Kadijevic for the helicopter tragedy. Mr Babic implied that the general's
acceptance of the UN ceasefire terms had provoked rogue elements in the
armed forces opposed to the ceasefire, particularly Serb nationalists in
Croatia who feel the army is no longer protecting them.
Behind the scenes lurks Mr Branko Mamula, former federal defence minister,
now head of the revamped Communist Party of Yugoslavia, and who remains
ideologically committed to Yugoslavia. Mr Mamula has extensive contacts in
the army and is visited regularly by Mr Milosevic.
But his colleagues say he is acutely aware that the federal army needs a
secure base, financial assurances and a new role, even if that role was
confined to one republic.
Gen Marko Negovanovic, the former federal head of counter-intelligence, and
now defence minister of Serbia, continues to play a pivotal role.
Once opposed to the break-up of the federation, he is now trying to salvage
a smaller, Serb-dominated rump Yugoslavia in which the army could play a
prominent role.
Bringing all these elements together under one single command  - and under
political control  - is plagued with difficulties, western diplomats said.
'We also have to consider how the middle ranks of officers can be reined in.
'We cannot yet talk of any lasting peace,' a diplomat commented.

The Financial Times


International Page 2

920109

