FT921-3655

FT  13 MAR 92 / Green light for UK gas suppliers: Deborah Hargreaves reports
on the ending of British Gas's monopoly


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


A Pounds 1bn a year UK gas market has been opened up for independent
suppliers this week with British Gas's agreement to reduce its share of
industrial and commercial customers from a virtual monopoly to 40 per cent
by 1995.
Pressed by the government, British Gas also agreed to run its pipelines as
an arm's length business serving it and other suppliers on equal terms.
The two changes, together with the prospect of independent suppliers serving
retail customers later in the decade, will mark the end of British Gas's
virtual monopoly over UK gas supplies.
This was particularly welcome news for the small number of independent gas
suppliers who now see scope to expand their business. 'We welcome the
proposal to release gas to new suppliers,' said Mr Norman Ellis, managing
director of Kinetica, a gas company jointly owned by North Sea producer,
Conoco, and electricity generator, PowerGen. 'But we hope we will be
consulted about the mechanisms of the new arrangements to avoid
disruptions.'
So far, only nine companies supplying 1,900 customers compete against
British Gas. They account for a fraction of the industrial market which
itself is one-third of the total UK gas market. But the government is keen
to encourage smaller, entrepreneurial gas marketing companies to become
active in the market to forge links between a wider range of customers and a
source of supply.
The choice of supplier is a luxury so far enjoyed only by large business
users, but soon small companies will benefit when the government lowers the
consumption threshold for companies to choose an alternative supply.
Large energy users have generally welcomed having a choice of supplier. 'We
are keen to talk to companies that can provide us with one overall price for
gas - the British Gas price schedules are extremely complex,' said one
energy buyer.
Rivals to British Gas have, in the five years since its privatisation, come
from the large oil companies which produce gas in the North Sea. 'The
independents are really gas traders which can balance supply and demand,
making supply available when customers want it by negotiating with producers
and arranging a transport contract,' explains Mr Alan Marshall, managing
director of Agas, a UK independent wholesaler. His company is concentrating
on supply to large industrial sites.
But taking on British Gas will be no easy feat. Some of the independents
have found partners among regional electricity companies eager to diversify
since they were privatised. Seeboard, the supplier to the south-east of
England, recently became the latest of four electricity companies to
announce the formation of a gas supply subsidiary.
The electricity companies are preparing to move into the domestic market
when that opens up. Household customers could then choose a joint gas and
electricity supplier with the cost of both fuels covered on one bill.
United Gas, an independent gas sales company, has teamed up with the
electricity companies to move into the smaller end of the market. 'We looked
at the market and saw there was no point in supplying large users because we
just couldn't compete with British Gas on price,' said Mr Peter Bryant,
deputy chairman. 'But we saw the opportunity for suppliers to medium-sized
customers, and eventually households.'
Midlands Gas, in which United has a 25 per cent stake, was the first
electricity venture pioneered by Mr Bryant. The company has a contract to
provide the fledgling supplier with 36m therms of gas for its first year of
operation.
According to Mr Roger Gill, managing director of Midlands Gas, the company
has 420 customers and will soon sell all its gas allocation for the first
year.
Mr Bryant also wants to develop new forms of energy contracts for the UK
market and be actively involved in building up short-term sales. No
short-term market exists in the UK, but increasing competition could lead to
the sale of some gas on a monthly basis as in the US.
United has experience of the US market as it is an offshoot of Utilicorp,
the second-largest gas marketing company in the US. Utilicorp buys reserves
and sells them on to customers at a small, fixed premium.
Kinetica is looking beyond pure gas supply. The company has grown into one
of British Gas's largest rivals and supplies more than 900 sites. Mr Norman
Ellis, managing director, says: 'We've always believed that just being a
trader has its limitations. A lot of British Gas's strength comes from
owning its own infrastructure such as gas pipelines.'
The company has secured the first contracts to build independently owned
pipelines in the UK to supply two power stations.
British Gas owns the transmission grid, but must hive this off into a
separate subsidiary, a move the government hopes will convince competitors
the company's transit tariffs are fair.
British Gas is obliged to give rivals access to its pipelines, but has been
accused of providing more favourable transport tariffs for its own supplies.
'For a balanced independent company to succeed in what will be a highly
competitive market, I'm convinced it will need its own pipelines,' said Mr
Ellis. 'But getting a foothold in that business has been very, very
difficult.'
The country is unlikely to become criss-crossed by a mass of rival gas
pipelines, however. Once British Gas hives off its pipeline and storage
facilities, competitors will have access to its main pipeline system and the
smaller domestic lines right up to the household meter.
To reach domestic customers, rivals may have to install their own meters.
This is one of a number of criteria being thought through before this sector
is opened.
Mr Bryant believes competition will begin to develop for household users by
the end of the decade. But he stresses the government needs to set some
standards for entry into the market to ensure that rival suppliers are not
likely to run out of supply and cut off domestic users.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920313

