FT921-11693

FT  30 JAN 92 / The Bush Budget: Commander lacking firepower against
recession - President sets out to lift public confidence and avoid damage to
economy with modest mix of measures


   By LIONEL BARBER, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


IT WAS a beautifully crafted, politically astute speech. But at the end of
his State of the Union address to Congress on Tuesday night, it was clear
President George Bush had delivered not so much a tour de force as a tour
d'horizon.
Despite heavy advance billing, Mr Bush offered an unexceptional message to
Americans worried about their jobs and their country's future: sit tight and
stay the course.
His long-awaited growth package turned out to be a modest mix of measures
designed as much to avoid damage to the economy as to bolster public
confidence in an early recovery. This minimalist response to a recession
which has endured longer than any downturn since the 1930s matches the
president's instincts. His cautious approach points to one conclusion: he
has placed his bets on a recovery by early summer as the platform for
re-election in November; a restoration of confidence remains the key in his
view.
Henry Adams, the great essayist, wrote that the president resembles the
commander of a ship at sea. 'He must have a helm to grasp, a course to
steer, a port to seek.'
In the past six months, few people have had much idea where Mr Bush wished
to steer his country. The longer than expected recession caught him
off-guard; the lack of an effective response sent his approval rating into
free-fall. This week, polls showed Mr Bush at 43 per cent, half of the
(admittedly unrealistically high) level achieved after the Gulf war. In his
speech to Congress, Mr Bush took the political offensive by playing his
tested role of commander-in-chief. He invoked the images of an America
triumphant in the Cold War and the Gulf war, the pre-eminent power in the
world.
Mr Bush then alluded to the benefits gained from the victorious struggle
against Soviet communism. He spoke of the prospect of an end to the nuclear
stand-off, through further significant reductions in long-range nuclear
forces on land and at sea. He also proposed cutting a further Dollars 50bn
(Pounds 27.6bn) in defence spending over the next five years, beyond the 25
per cent cut in US armed forces already planned. The Democratic majority in
Congress is looking at cuts of up to Dollars 100bn as part of a 'peace
dividend', but Mr Bush noted that by 1997 he would have cut defence by 30
per cent since taking office in 1989. 'This deep, and no deeper,' he warned.
It took Mr Bush 17 minutes before he mentioned the country's domestic
difficulties. His admission that the economy was the nation's 'primary
problem' was immediately accompanied by a call to arms similar to the days
of Desert Storm. 'I know we're in hard times, but I know something else,' he
said. 'This will not stand.'
Those four words, of course, were the same used to put President Saddam
Hussein on notice that he should withdraw from Kuwait or face the full might
of the US military. On Tuesday night Mr Bush soon revealed that he possesses
a good deal less firepower to deal with the recession.
The overwhelming reason - but one which Mr Bush skirted - is the federal
budget deficit which ballooned in the 1980s and has exploded under his
administration.
Yesterday, in his fiscal 1993 budget submission to Congress, Mr Bush
revealed that the deficit is likely to reach Dollars 399bn in the current
fiscal year - a crippling legacy to future generations and one which
constrains his actions.
In fact, Mr Bush's principal growth measures were not only trailed in
advance by a White House anxious to capture maximum publicity in advance of
the New Hampshire primary election on February 18; they are also modest in
scope.
The biggest surprise is an executive order to employers to withhold less in
federal taxes from workers' pay cheques - a move which the White House
estimates could give a Dollars 25bn stimulus to the economy. The effect
would be to give the average family Dollars 350 per worker to spend this
year; but that amount will be recouped by the government next year when
refunds will be smaller or taxes due will be higher.
Other proposals, which he termed 'short-term', include a Dollars 500 a child
increase in the personal exemption; a Dollars 5,000 tax credit for homes
purchased before the end of the year; a tax credit of up to Dollars 3,750 a
year for the poor to buy health insurance; extension of federal unemployment
benefits; a new 15 per cent investment tax allowance; and a call for a
phased cut in the capital gains tax cut to 15.25 per cent.
This last proposal is likely to run into stiff resistance on Capitol Hill.
Mr Bush raised the stakes by calling on Congress to pass his package by
March 20 - an unrealistic deadline raising the prospect of trench warfare in
the run-up to November, with Mr Bush railing against a 'do-nothing' Congress
just as President Harry Truman did in 1948.
The Democrats will counter that Mr Bush is a 'do-nothing' president, at
least when it comes to falling education standards, health care reform and
other domestic ills. Their case rests on a belief that Americans want a more
activist leader in the White House, that the age of scepticism about
government's ability to solve problems has passed.
By contrast, Mr Bush demonstrated faith in American optimism, the belief
that once the recovery begins the majority of Americans will regain their
confidence, spend money and vote Republican.
'Moods come and go, but greatness endures,' said Mr Bush, 'and maybe for a
moment it's good to remember what in the dailyness of our lives, we forget:
we are still and ever the freest nation on earth - the kindest nation on
earth - the strongest nation on earth.'
Editorial comment, Page 18

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Illustration (Omitted). Photograph Vice-president Dan Quayle
(top left) and Thomas Foley, Speaker of the House, applaud George Bush
during the president's annual State of the Union address to Congress
(Omitted).

920130

