FT922-531

FT  27 JUN 92 / Rose garden of the east up for sale: Quality fears as
Bulgaria's valuable rose-oil industry changes hands


   By THEODOR TROEV


WHILE thousands of Bulgarians are out in the fields this month harvesting
rose petals - the country's most valuable crop - the state rose oil
companies are looking for ways to secure the future of this unique industry.
The rose, known as Rosa Damascena, is the only symbol of Bulgaria's
manufacturing which has remained unsurpassed for almost four centuries. The
Bulgarian rose attar is still essential to most haute couture perfumes, as
well as to some body lotions and pharmaceuticals, because it preserves the
scent implanted in the perfume.
Officials from the leading rose oil producing centres - Kazanluk, Karlovo,
and Plovdiv - are almost as reluctant to give precise figures on prices or
annual output as they were under the old communist regime. Exporters say the
current price is about Pounds 3,200 a kilo. The Bulgarian attar generally
dictates prices on the world market because of its quality. Annual
production can be guessed at - the country has about 3,000 hectares of rose
fields and from 500gm-1kg of rose oil can normally be produced from one
hectare.
Bulgaria and Turkey, its main competitor in this field, are reported to have
about 150m rose bushes between them. Other leading producers are Iran,
Morocco and China.
Industry observers say Bulgaria is producing more than half the world's
attar. It enjoys the right combination of climate and soil in its main
rose-growing area, the Valley of Roses, a wind-sheltered valley extending
more than 70 miles along the Balkan mountains range. The oil-producing roses
grown there flower for only 30 days a year, from mid-May to mid-June, and
are picked in the early morning - otherwise the unique aroma disappears.
As thousands of Bulgarians and foreign visitors enjoy the annual festival,
industry officials are asking how the political changes in the country may
affect the industry.
The consequences of restitution of the land to its former owners, which is
already taking place, and the future privatisation of state companies, are
some of the concerns. The rose oil industry is still 96 per cent
state-owned, but the pre-communist owners will have the right to re-claim
land once the restitution bill is passed.
Mr Evgeni Hristov, president of the Research Institute of the Rose in
Kazanluk, said he was worried over whether new landowners would buy their
seedlings from the institute, which controls the country's rose quality.
'Our main task is to keep up the quality of the world-famous Kazanluk Rose
that we have been selecting for such a long time,' Mr Hristov said.
The institute has been state-owned since it was founded in 1907, but its
current administration hopes to transform it into a joint stock company with
possible foreign participation. Since economic reforms started last year,
the institute has become a state-owned limited liability company,
self-financed mainly through the sale of seedlings.
A number of foreign companies have shown interest in the cultivation of
roses and other essential oil crops, such as lavender and spearmint. The
Bulgarian Rose Company in Kazanluk has been negotiating with Belgian and
German partners for the processing of these crops. An Italian businessman
visited the Research Institute of the Rose last week to discuss the
production of beauty creams based on Bulgarian rose-pronounced compositions.
Pharmachim, a Bulgarian state-owned joint stock company, is the leading
exporter of the country's Rose Gold. Fragrance-producing companies, such as
the Swiss-French Givaudan-Roure, the American IFF (International Flavours
and Fragrances), the Dutch-British Kuest, the French Charabot, or the
British-American Bush Boac Alan are some of its traditional customers. Such
companies then deal with the top perfume manufacturers and Bulgaria's attar
finds its way worldwide and back to its country of origin as an essential
ingredient of Tosca, Opium, or Carrera, to name but a few of the perfumes.
The Bulgarians, who badly need foreign currency for their ailing economy,
say they welcome western partnership. They are still cautious, however, when
it comes to direct foreign investment and partnership in their most
prestigious industry. American companies have been trying to invest in the
cultivation of roses, provided there would be offers to buy all the rose oil
produced. Bulgaria has been reluctant to make such a deal for fear of
over-dependence on one client and loss of its traditional European markets.
Mr Lalyu Chavdarov, production manager of the Kazanluk institute, said he
believed strict controls would have to stay as the industry opened to
private and foreign investment.
'Such central control may not seem to correspond with the free market
principles, but otherwise profit-hungry private companies may ruin the image
of our rose oil with attempts to sell sham products,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920627

