FT921-15542

FT  09 JAN 92 / Arts: The Marvellous Boy - Bush Theatre


   By CLAIRE ARMITSTEAD


Thomas Chatterton was an extreme example of the phenomenon of doomed youth.
When he died, by his own hand in 1770 at the age of 17, the precocious
Bristolian was the author of a series of pseudo-medieval poems and a forged
correspondence involving a 15th century monk which was so convincing that it
kept the scholars quarrelling for years. According to Keats, who dedicated
Endymion to him, he was 'the purest writer in the English language'. To
Wordsworth, he was 'The marvellous boy/ The sleepless soul that perished in
his pride.'
Hence the title of this show, which paints Chatterton as not marvellous at
all but a tittering, capricious whelp, not unlike Peter Shaffer's portrayal
of that other prodigy, Mozart, in Amadeus, but without the scatology.
To a certain extent Public Parts have a point. The conception of Chatterton
today is dominated by the Henry Wallis painting of 1856, which shows a
Byronic youth trailing decorously over the edge of his deathbed. The fact
that his death, by poisoning, would certainly not have been decorous
presents an intriguing counterpoint to his enshrinement in the romantic
imagination.
In their attempt to get to grips with Chatterton, this Bristol-based company
confronts his family after his death - his widowed mother, his passionate
and embittered sister and, most bizarrely, his paternal grandmother (played
by a man), whose senile delusions are seen as tracking into the precocious
fantasies of her two grandchildren.
This then is a play about the power politics of the imagination. The thesis
is that the fictitious Thomas Rowley was the creation of the childhood games
of Thomas and his sister Mary. He, being a boy, was sent to charity school;
she, being a girl, was not, so it was he who acquired the skills to make
something of the fiction.
Rowley is represented as a spirit invoked by the two children in a local
church; a cappella singing of latin masses sets a quasi-mystical scene as
ancient figures are conjured from their tombs into recitations in
middle-English.
This does not, of course, explain how a teenage boy living in the mid-18th
century came to master medieval language. More seriously, it is hard to
suspend disbelief far enough to admit Tim Crouch's Thomas, who is
bumptiously unappealing in his assumption of childish moods and mannerisms.
Julia Limer's production is simply not strong enough to carry off the
inversions that lead to a boy who looks years older than his mother (Carrie
Wale) and a grandmother (Luke Williams) who seems designed to keep the whole
piece on the level of travesty.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920109

