FT924-5967

FT  24 NOV 92 / Charred, not changed


   By JOE ROGALY


Before the great fire of Windsor the talk of London and elsewhere was that
Britain's royal family was on the skids. If that was so last week, then it
still is today, despite the flames that dominated the weekend news. If the
prospect last Thursday was that Prince Charles would never become king, it
is the same this Tuesday morning. A charred national monument will make no
difference, however glorious the original may have been. Hampton Court was
gutted by fire six years ago; since then, coincidentally, its occasional
inhabitants have been the victims of incessant crescendos of public
disrespect.
Hold on. This is not a prediction that a revolution is around the corner.
The establishment of a federal republic of Britain would be a remarkable
constitutional advance, but the odds in favour of any such development are
slight. Yet they are not zero. None of us really knows what the heir
apparent has on his mind. Gossip suggests that he is fed up, that he might
try to have the crown passed over his head to his son's. If he does so the
whole institution will probably crumble. Only a brave or unintentionally
destructive dauphin would risk that.
The dramatic flames of the weekend have put such speculation on hold, at
least for a day or two. It is natural to express sympathy for the Queen, as
seen on TV bravely surveying the conflagration in her raincoat. No one who
fails to make the appropriate noises will be regarded as a gentleman.
Certainly Her Majesty is held in greater public esteem than any other member
of her family. While she reigns, the institution is secure. What may come
after her is less predictable. This is not because the monarchy is costly,
although if it was privatised and managed as a tourist attraction, as it
should be, a strong finance director would doubtless find much fat to trim.
You would then be well advised to take shares in Royal Attractions plc. It
could be a far better bet than Euro Disney.
The fact that the Queen pays no tax, even on her private investment
portfolio, does rankle with a great many people. Some Labour MPs, notably
those on the public accounts committee, miss no chance of reminding us of
her tax-free status. Perhaps that is why we have been reading stories about
the prime minister negotiating a new fiscal concordat with the palace.
Monarchists must hope that he is successful. He should be. There is no case
for the Queen withholding the tax she should pay on her considerable
personal fortune. This is a simple problem of equity, which in theory can
easily be resolved.
It is harder to prescribe an antidote for the de-mystifying effect of our
national obsession with the private lives, or the imagined private lives, of
the supposedly dignified element of the constitution. It is not the Queen's
fault that the private behaviour of some members of her family is similar to
that of many of her subjects. The House of Windsor is not the product of a
long line of saints; its forebears were human, and therefore imperfect. The
damage that has recently been done to its reputation is not the consequence
of any change in royal behaviour, but rather the result of a change in the
level of intrusive salacity the public will accept from - indeed demand of -
the media that serves it.
If none of these concerns existed there would be near-unanimous support for
the decision, affirmed by Mr Peter Brooke yesterday, to finance the
restoration of Windsor Castle from public funds. The heritage secretary has
logic on his side. The building belongs to us taxpayers. We have maintained
them since 1831. The monarchy is irrelevant to this argument. Even if we
lived in a republic this valued historic monument would be maintained by the
public purse.
As it is, provided we turn up at the right time we may see most parts of it,
including some of the burned-out area - although you may need an invitation
to a state banquet to get into the grander state rooms. Those who argue that
Windsor Castle should be subject to normal planning permission and fire
regulations have a point. But that is a red herring. The cry of 'let the
Queen pay' is not rational, although strongly felt. It means 'let the Queen
pay taxes'.
There is no general cry for what is really needed, which is the
disestablishment of the monarchy. British democracy would be less stultified
if it was disconnected from the process of government. The Crown sits at the
apex of our unwritten constitution. It puts the lid on the glass jar inside
which sit the suffocating elements of a Britain that should be long past: an
over-powerful executive (thankfully rather hamstrung for the moment); a
tradition of secrecy in the name of the Crown; a tendency for ministers to
make arbitrary decisions; an obsession with maintaining the unitary
structure of the United Kingdom. Every milligram of ash at Windsor Castle is
a small national tragedy; a bonfire of the constitutional nonsense that
rests on the House of Windsor would be a huge national triumph.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921124

