FT922-4295

FT  06 JUN 92 / Dentists expected to hold ballot on fees cut


   By ALAN PIKE, Social Affairs Correspondent


BRITISH Dental Association leaders meet today to decide whether to ballot
their members on action over the government's plans to cut dentists' fees.
The association's board is almost certain to proceed with a ballot that
would offer Britain's 18,000 dentists a range of options, including complete
withdrawal from providing National Health Service treatment. Other possible
forms of action include a ban on accepting new adult NHS patients and
refusal to co-operate with NHS administration.
The immediate cause of the dispute is a decision by Mrs Virginia Bottomley,
health secretary, to reduce dentists' fees by 7 per cent. Fee scales need to
be cut, the government says, because dentists' earnings are exceeding the
recommendations of the doctors' and dentists' pay review body.
The dispute is exacerbated by a long period of strained relationships
between dentists and the government over a contract introduced in October
1990. Discontent with the contract has led some dentists to withdraw from
NHS work, and more are threatening to do so if fees are cut.
The review body recommended an 8.5 per cent increase in dentists' net
remuneration for 1992-93 and set average net earnings at Pounds 35,815.
Ministers accepted that but say the present scale of fees on which dentists'
payments are calculated would provide incomes 'substantially more' than
those proposed by the review body.
The government believes it would require a 23 per cent reduction in fees to
bring dentists' remuneration to the recommended level. It says the proposed
7 per cent cut would still give dentists an average of Pounds 40,000 this
year.
Dentists' negotiators have rejected the proposal. Further talks are
scheduled for June 17 but, with neither side expecting the other to move,
the BDA ballot is likely to start soon afterwards.
The dispute over the proposed fees reduction has brought to a head simmering
tension about the contract, which marked a shift from payment per procedure
to flat-fee arrangements. Dentists say their relative pay position declined
in the 1980s, and claim the contract is administratively complex and
undervalues preventative work.
Mr Michael Watson, the BDA's head of employment services, said yesterday:
'The reaction of most dentists to a 7 per cent fees reduction would be to
try to recover the loss by doing 7 per cent more work, and this would not be
good for the rational organisation of the service.'
Mrs Bottomley says the government is committed to a fundamental review aimed
at developing a more effective remuneration system, under which the health
department and dentists' representatives negotiate expenses scales intended
to achieve the review body's recommendations on net pay.
Many dentists would support such a move, but would not want the review to
take place in the middle of a dispute.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920606

