FT924-12015

FT  22 OCT 92 / De Klerk to force through amnesty


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   CAPE TOWN


SOUTH AFRICA'S president, Mr F W de Klerk, yesterday decided to force into
law a bill allowing him to grant secret amnesty to security force members
for apartheid crimes, after it was rejected by the segregated parliament.
It is the first time he has overruled parliament since taking office in
September 1989, and demonstrates the heavy pressure he is under from his own
security forces to provide amnesties before a multi-racial interim
government takes power, probably some time next year.
Earlier in the day, the president suffered a humiliating defeat when Indian
legislators blocked the bill in parliament. He said last night he would
refer the bill to the multi-party President's Council, a section of the
executive branch of government dominated by his National Party.
The President's Council was designed to overcome exactly those circumstances
which arose yesterday: defeat of the governing party in one of the non-white
houses of the three-chamber parliament.
If a bill is defeated in any house - - white, coloured or Indian - it cannot
become law without being referred to the President's Council (the 308-seat
parliament debates jointly, but legislators vote separately according to
race).
Mr de Klerk is likely to be sharply criticised by opposition parties for
using such an undemocratic mechanism to frustrate parliament's will.
African National Congress officials said yesterday they would nullify any
amnesties granted under the law. They did not expect the bill to prove a
serious obstacle to constitutional negotiations.
Mr de Klerk claims the legislation is necessary to complete the release of
ANC political prisoners, but lawyers dispute this, believing its main aim is
to protect the security forces.
Liberal Democratic party spokesman, Mr Tony Leon, called it a 'charter for
crooks, criminals and assassins'. He said: 'It massively widens the net of.
. . . state killers and others in this rogue's gallery of South Africa's
terror who will now qualify to walk away from their deeds unnamed, undis
closed and unpunished.'

The Financial Times


International Page 8

921022

