FT922-3967

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (21): Green issues, black
thoughts - Environment New Media


   By DAVID LASCELLES


THE THIRD REVOLUTION by Paul Harrison IB Tauris, Pounds 16.95, 359 pages
BEYOND THE LIMITS by DH Meadows, DL Meadows and J. Randers Earthscan, Pounds
9.95, 300 pages
THE MINER'S CANARY by Niles Eldredge Virgin, Pounds 16.99, 250 pages
EARTH IN THE BALANCE by Al Gore Earthscan, Pounds 14.95, 407 pages
OUR COUNTRY, THE PLANET by Shridath Ramphal Lime Tree, Pounds 16.99, 291
pages
WHAT ARE we to make of the environment? If the general message in the
torrent of titles brought out to coincide with the Earth Summit is anything
to go by, the planet will be lucky to survive far into the next century. But
who really believes that? If the sense of alarm was that acute, Rio would
produce action rather than, as seems to be the case, mere words.
Dare I say that having read a large number of 'green' books I remain
relatively unmoved by the dangers to the planet which they describe.
Doubtless this is because I am part of the problem which many of these
authors identify: a tendency to ostrich-like behaviour. But I am talking
about a literary rather than a scientific problem. I do not doubt that the
environment faces grave dangers. But I cannot ignore a dulling sameness in
these books: the reiterated facts about the threats to land, water and air,
the same complaints about political inaction, the same calls for 'global
solutions'. What one is looking for is a flash of insight, a ring of truth.
The five titles above are among the more illuminating of the genre. Two, The
Third Revolution and Beyond the Limits, are good introductions to the
issues. Beyond the Limits is a sequel to The Limits to Growth, which
appeared 20 years ago. The authors revisit the subject, using the same
computer model with which they made their earlier predictions that the world
was on an unsustainable path.
What makes this book valuable is that it contains 14 scenarios for the
planet's future, using different assumptions for variables such as
population and economic growth. This allows the reader to apply his own
imagination to the problem with much more instructive results than the
'global disaster' approach.
Paul Harrison's thesis is that rising tensions between the rich and poor
worlds are the biggest threat. A compelling writer, he supports this with
first-hand accounts of life among the world's underprivileged and
dispossessed: the Madagascan peasant who has to slash and burn the forest to
survive, the poor of Abidjan. Unlike history's earlier revolutions - caused
by shortages - the third revolution of the title will be caused by waste and
wasting.
Ultimately, the worry about the environment is a worry about extinction. But
in The Miner's Canary Niles Eldredge reminds us that it is not an uncommon
phenomenon, that it has a stimulating effect on evolution - and that we are
probably due for another mass extinction pretty soon anyway, based purely on
averages.
The real question, though, is whether homo sapiens' meddling with the
environment puts a new complexion on extinction. Unfortunately Eldredge
ducks out at this point. 'It is not easy, in general, to tell human from
non-human agency in the ongoing destruction of the modern biota,' he writes.
(The book is not as turgid as that one quote suggests). However, Eldredge
clearly wants us to worry about man's interference with nature and our
ability to bring mass extinction upon ourselves.
So what are the solutions?
This is the point at which one is looking for realism. It is too easy to
demand a global action plan, or bemoan the lack of political will. Yet this
is what most green books do, with the sort of disappointing result one sees
in Rio.
At least Al Gore, a member of the US Senate, is close to the political
action. Earth in the Balance is a readable, passionate account of the
problem. But it echoes his own frustration at the failure of public opinion
to stir greater action at governmental level. He has his theories for this.
One is technological hubris: we think we can fix the problem. Another is
that our civilisation has become addicted to consumption and, like all
addicts, we react irrationally. We can even deny that the problem exists.
But Gore also belongs to the global solution school. He calls for an
environmental 'Marshall Plan', backed by annual summit meetings, with a
number of strategic goals to stabilise the population, develop appropriate
technology and measure the impact of decisions on the environment better.
Shridath Ramphal is also close to government. A former foreign minister of
Guyana and for 15 years secretary-general of the Commonwealth, he brings a
Third World perspective to the debate in Our Country the Planet. The 'feudal
relationship' between rich and poor countries is the big culprit in his
view. For him, the choice lies between muddling through, creating a new form
of imperialism in which strong countries tell the weak how to behave, or his
preferred route of 'enlightened change'.
Big issues, all of them. And if nothing else, Rio has stimulated debate and
educated millions to what is at stake. But the green literary genre remains
one-sided. I still await the book that hits home.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920609

