FT924-5914

FT  24 NOV 92 / International Company News: More job cuts at Bayer as
earnings plunge 32%


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   FRANKFURT


BAYER, Germany's leading chemicals and drugs group, yesterday announced a
sharp drop in profits, a rising tally of job losses, and warned that there
was no sign of improvement.
A 32 per cent slump in third-quarter earnings dragged pre-tax profits for
the first nine months of this year down to just DM2.2bn (Dollars 1.37bn) -
16 per cent less than in 1991.
Bayer, last of the top three chemicals corporations to report, blamed a
'dramatic' fall in volume sales in the third quarter for the accelerating
downturn. Mr Manfred Schneider, the new chairman, said orders for chemicals
in the three months to the end of September were down between 10 per cent
and 15 per cent.
Rivals Hoechst and BASF last week announced nine-month profits down 19 per
cent and 45 per cent respectively.
The D-Mark's revaluation against the US dollar and other currencies had a
substantial impact on sales and profits, Mr Schneider said.
Bayer's turnover, down 2.4 per cent at DM31.7bn at the nine-month mark, fell
7 per cent in the third quarter to DM9.6bn.
First-half sales were virtually unchanged at DM22bn, and profits were 10 per
cent lower.
Mr Schneider said exchange rate fluctuations accounted for one-third of the
earnings fall so far.
An early effect of the post-summer downturn, which has hit most German
industry, has been a marked increase in the number of job losses. Bayer,
which started the year planning 3,000 and later revised the figure to 4,000,
said yesterday that 6,200 jobs would go by the end of the year.
Reductions would continue next year if there were no fundamental changes in
chemicals markets, Mr Schneider said.
Other structural changes were also under way, he added. These included the
planned closure of factories making ingredients for dyestuffs.
Although Bayer had managed to increase prices for over-the-counter medicines
and some consumer and veterinary products, the chemicals business was still
suffering for reductions due to world overcapacity and slack demand.
Even pharmaceuticals had not been able to escape this trend, Mr Schneider
noted. Overall, prices had fallen 2 per cent in the period under review.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

921124

