FT923-10999

FT  28 JUL 92 / West helpless as Russian budget deficit swells


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


THE RUSSIAN government is rapidly losing control of the budget deficit and
inflation and there is little that the west can do to help, according to
both foreign experts and Russian government officials.
Two separate credits of Rbs500bn have been approved by the government for
industry under the influence of the powerful industrial lobby - with
expectations that inflation will surge as a result.
The new chairman of the Russian central bank, Mr Victor Gerashchenko -
former chairman of the Soviet state bank (Gosbank) - has said he favours
soft loans to key industrial sectors, and has postponed the convertibility
of the rouble for the foreseeable future.
These measures would relieve the pressure on industry, but would also delay
the date of any substantial restructuring and increase both budget deficit
and inflationary pressures.
Moreover, the price likely to be paid to farmers for grain this year will be
at least Rbs10,000 a tonne. Such a sum is much higher than the government
had wished, but likely to be necessary since farmers are refusing to sell.
This in turn will lead to huge increases in the price of bread - the most
politically sensitive of all prices - and to further inflation.
In the opinion of Professor Steve Hanke of Johns Hopkins University who is
working on proposals to stabilise the rouble: 'My belief is that we could
have inflation at 50 per cent (the commonly-defined threshold for
hyperinflation) by the end of the year because they cannot stop the credits.
There is nothing the west can do about this.'
President Boris Yeltsin has revised down his previous forecast of when the
economy would stabilise - from the latter part of this year to early next.
Negotiations between the Russian government and the International Monetary
Fund, suspended over the holiday period, are expected to restart in late
August or in September but hopes that a stand-by agreement will be reached
in the autumn are now evaporating.
An IMF spokesman in Washington said that the forecast of an October signing
of the agreement was 'the Russian government's estimation' and added that
'it's not clear if the Russians know how difficult this process is'.
Furthermore, some powerful Russian politicians increasingly confidently
dismiss the desirability of western assistance. General Alexander Rutskoi,
the vice president, said that 'the time has come when we should no longer
hope for a kind uncle - the IMF'.
Mr Yeltsin said last week that he had defied the requests of the IMF to
freeze wages and raise energy prices, though he added they would be raised
to world levels by the end of next year.
Intensive discussions within the IMF and at senior levels in the Group of
Seven leading industrial countries now focus on how far the IMF should
continue to act as the judge of Russian reform on the part of the G7. Some
officials, alarmed by the possible collapse of reform and with it, the
Russian government under Mr Yegor Gaidar are calling for direct assistance
from rich countries to Russia in order to prevent a backlash against both
the market and democratic institutions.
The worsening economic situation is prompting increased security precautions
against public discontent. An emergency committee, possibly including a
paramilitary force, is to be set up in St Petersburg following a warning
from Mr Sergei Stepanshin, the city's security chief, of disturbances 'in
the wake of a worsening economic and political situation'.
The Russian Security Ministry has also announced the formation of a special
force of former KGB officers to protect officials against assassination.
Evidence of attacks is sketchy but Itar-Tass news agency, quoting the
ministry, said the force was being set up following 'more than 100 terrorist
acts' in Russia over the past year.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920728

