FT921-14351

FT  16 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Beijing steps up pressure over US
sanctions - A look at the two countries' campaigns ahead of today's deadline


   By YVONNE PRESTON and NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


ACCUSED by Washington of being the biggest pirate of US copyright and
patents in the world, China has fought a tough and noisy campaign to prevent
the US from imposing punitive trade sanctions against Chinese exports worth
up to Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 84bn).
As today's US deadline approached for the Chinese to reach an acceptable
agreement on the issue or face stiff retaliatiion, Beijing steadily
increased the tempo of its campaign.
This reached a peak last week with the threat of counter-retaliation in the
form of a 'hit-list' of Dollars 1.2bn-worth of US exports, from aircraft,
chemicals and steel, to cotton and corn, that could be subject to tariffs of
up to 100 per cent.
Meanwhile, Beijing left no stone unturned in its efforts to prove its good
faith.
A little more sincerity on the US side was what was needed, its negotiators
loftily claimed, while blithely affecting to be unaware of considerable
evidence of wide-ranging piracy in videos, computer software, books, movies
and music recordings.
The Communist Party newspaper People's Daily took up the cause of proving
that China meant well, trying to present a country unjustly misrepresented
by its critics, notably the US.
It gave prominence recently to a report of a crackdown on unauthorised
Chinese editions of the US novel Scarlett, the bestselling sequel to Gone
with the Wind.
The Shanghai Translation Publishing House bought the exclusive copyright,
the paper said, and planned to publish a Chinese edition in simplified
Chinese characters.
It reported that, when the State Administration of Press and Publication
Copyright Bureau learned that other Chinese publishing houses planned to
bring out their own editions, they were ordered to stop translating and not
to publish.
The People's Public Security News managed to track down an alleged US
infringement of copyright against a Chinese novel.
The newspaper accused the International Daily News based in Los Angeles of
serialising the novel without permission.
However, the real issue is less about pirated books - although there are
thousands locked up in university libraries and in private rooms in Chinese
bookshops - than about protection for highly valuable computer software and
industrial patents.
Chinese patent law protects only processes not products. Chinese companies
have been able to take up US products, such as pharmaceuticals and chemical
fertilisers, slightly change their manufacturing process and thereby avoid
infringement of patent.
Trademarks are another problem area.
Here, China points to what it sees as US guilt. A Xinhua news agency report
last year said China had declared illegal and confiscated products
infringing the M & M chocolate patent of Mars Inc, and fined the infringers.
By contrast, complained Xinhua, the US delayed settling a case of
infringement of the trademark of China's Qingdao Brewery, even though the
case had dragged on for two years.
Nevertheless, the weight of the case appears to remain overwhelmingly with
the US. When Mr Joseph Massey, the US assistant trade representative,
emerged last month from the fifth and penultimate scheduled round of talks
in Beijing, he made no secret of US dissatisfaction.
He described China as 'the single largest pirater worldwide of US
copyrights' and 'the largest unauthorised user of US pharmaceuticals.'
He said: 'We are suffering substantial economic harm because of Chinese
piracy,' he said.
US manufacturers estimate they have lost Dollars 430m (Pounds 240m) from
copyright violations on the Chinese mainland.
All of this of course increases unwanted trade tensions. Moreover, China
does not want a trade war.
But neither does the US want to deal with a rogue elephant, trampling
international convention and violating copyright and patents on its hard-won
and expensively-researched intellectual property.
US and Chinese trade officials yesterday were still negotiating in an
attempt to head off a trade war over Beijing's failure to provide adequate
protection for intellectual property rights, writes Nancy Dunne in
Washington.
Mrs Carla Hills, the US Trade Representative, has set today as the last
possible deadline for settlement. If no agreement is reached, US sanctions
are to be announced shortly. The Chinese government has threatened to
retaliate.
Among the points of dispute was a proposal by Beijing to establish a
two-tier system of protection for softwear copyrights. This would provide
stronger protection for foreign than domestic copyrights; US companies fear
joint ventures would fall under the domestic regime.
The US is also demanding a definite date - and it must be near-term - for
China to join the Berne Copyright Convention.
The dispute over intellectual property rights came to a head last spring,
when the US, under a provision of trade law called Special 301, cited China
for failure to protect softwear, movies, records, trademarks and drug
patents.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920116

