FT924-740

FT  22 DEC 92 / Syndicated Loans: Italians pay the price in post-Efim market


   By BRIAN BOLLEN


ITALIAN borrowers are returning to the international syndicated loan
markets, but in some cases are having to pay more for their funds as a
result of the recent Efim affair.
Efim, the Italian state holding company, was put into voluntary liquidation
in July, and bankers are still waiting to receive their money back.
Italian borrowers were absent from the international syndicated loans market
while bankers lobbied the Italian authorities for a commitment to repay
Efim's debts in full.
The Italian authorities eventually agreed to repay the loans in full.
However, some Italian borrowers who recently launched syndicated credits
have found they are paying double what they would have paid before the Efim
affair.
In addition, bankers claim the Efim affair has forced them to examine
Italian companies' balance sheets more closely. They expect only the top
tier of Italian borrowers to participate in the syndicated loans market, in
spite of the fact that a number of Italian names have heavy borrowing
requirements.
The market is still struggling to find the proper pricing level. Monte dei
Paschi di Siena (MPS) attracted some attention last week with an Ecu50m,
10-year facility for its mortgage lending subsidiary, Monte Paschi Fondiario
e Opere Pubbliche.
Led by Hill Samuel, Bayerische Landesbank, Italian International Bank and
Monte dei Paschi, the deal carries a margin of 52 1/2 basis points over the
London interbank offered rate (Libor) for the first five years, rising to 57
1/2 basis points over Libor thereafter.
The pricing was described as aggressive by some bankers. A similar deal for
MPS, signed in January this year, started at 47.5 basis points over Libor
for five years, rising to 50 basis points for the final five years. The
premium of 5-7 1/2 basis points is considered by some bankers to be too low
in the wake of the Efim affair.
While the 26 1/4 basis points commitment fee and front-end fees ranging from
20 to 35 basis points make the all-in yield around 60 basis points, bankers
maintain this is not generous enough, and many would have been happier if
MPS had not been looking for such long-term funds.
MPS has the status of a foundation and no beneficial owner.
By comparison, a recently completed Dollars 57.5m 2 1/2 -year loan for
Isveimer, the state-owned development bank for southern Italy, carried a
margin of 50 basis points over Libor and offered front-end fees of up to 60
basis points for a more generous all-in yield of around 70 basis points.
Before the Efim affair the margins that Isveimer was paying were lower
though on a rising trend. At the end of 1990, for example, it was paying 25
to 27 1/2 basis points over Libor for seven-year money.
The pricing on its latest facility, arranged by Chase Manhattan, was
dictated by the borrower's recent Dollars 150m five-year floating-rate note
issue.
That offered investors 75 basis points over Libor and a put option every six
months in an attempt to overcome fears about investing in Italy.
In spite of the short maturity and generous yield, the loan was not a
success. The syndicate is complete, but only one of the six banks joining
Chase is not Italian.
Bankers warn against reading too much into the success of Fiat's recent
five-year revolving credit, which was increased to Dollars 800m from the
original Dollars 500m.
Vattenfall, the Swedish electricity producer and distributor, announced its
debut in the international capital markets with a Dollars 750m
multi-currency Eurocommercial paper programme established through Swiss Bank
Corp, the arranger. SBC is joined as a dealer by Deutsche Bank, Lehman
Brothers, JP Morgan and Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken.
Funds are described as being mainly for working capital, bridge financing
and liquidity reserve purposes.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921222

