FT924-12179

FT  22 OCT 92 / Backbench Tory MPs express guarded relief


   By ALISON SMITH


THE RELIEF was almost palpable. Tory backbenchers used to treading
delicately through a minefield of bad economic news had something of a
spring in their step yesterday after Mr John Major's new emphasis on
achieving economic growth.
'Smile - the world's a happier place,' was the euphoric reaction of one MP.
Beyond the immediate buoyancy produced by the prime minister's positive
tones, however, the Tory ranks are far from united over economic policy. The
question of cuts in interest rates and the linked issue of sterling
re-joining the exchange rate mechanism still has the ability to divide the
Conservative troops and could disrupt the passage of the Maastricht bill.
Mr John Whittingdale, the MP for Colchester South and Maldon and a former
adviser to Lady Thatcher, said: 'I am delighted to hear what the prime
minister said and hope it will soon be followed with a cut in interest
rates.'
Others called for a further, swift, 2-point reduction in interest rates  -
'presented properly this time', said one MP, in a barbed reference to the
negligible impact on economic confidence of the 1-point cut last Friday.
Mr Terence Higgins, the former chairman of the all-party Treasury committee
of MPs, welcomed Mr Major's words, without placing too much reliance on
further interest rate reductions. He said that the committee had repeatedly
emphasised 'the need to complement monetary policy with action which will
lead to the direct creation of jobs'.
There was caution from some MPs about the risks of importing inflation if
interest rates were cut so far that sterling fell. Some highlighted the
confidence-boosting effects simply from talking about growth, while others
emphasised capital public spending as the engine for recovery.
Whether the government's words are accompanied by the deed of reducing
interest rates is critical for the Commons discussion of the bill ratifying
the Maastricht treaty, because of its impact on sterling's re-entry to the
ERM.
The mood at Westminster was sharply divided. Some saw the receding
likelihood of the UK going back into the mechanism as underlining the
'irrelevance and anachronism' of the treaty, while others, on both sides of
the Euro-divide, said that moves towards recovery would ease the passage of
the bill, simply because MPs would feel less anxious.
One Euro-enthusiast was even confident enough to comment that what he
admitted was 'the enhanced implausibility' of the Maastricht treaty's
provisions on economic and monetary union as a result of the change of
emphasis would not be a problem.
What he saw as a result of more MPs feeling more comfortable with the bill
was seen by another Euro-enthusiast in a somewhat less cheerful light.
Mr Peter Temple-Morris, MP for Leominster, said on BBC radio: 'I think that
there is a worry which is slightly going beyond whether one happens to be
for particular aspects of the European Community or against them, and that
worry concerns really the survival of the government.'
In spite of his appeal for loyalty, many Euro-sceptics were undeterred, and
even encouraged. With the prospect of divisions ahead, yesterday's bloom of
backbench optimism may yet fade if there is little early sign of economic
recovery.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921022

