FT924-8053

FT  13 NOV 92 / Farm trade talks set for next week


   By DAVID GARDNER and NANCY DUNNE


   BRUSSELS, WASHINGTON


EC and US negotiators are expected to try to settle their differences over
farm trade and the Uruguay Round world trade reforms next Wednesday and
Thursday in Washington.
Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture commissioner, and Mr Ed Madigan, US
secretary for agriculture, will resume the farm subsidy negotiations that
came tantalisingly close to success in Chicago 10 days ago, while Mr Frans
Andriessen, EC external affairs commissioner, and Mrs Carla Hills, US
special trade representative, will try to tie up an agreement on other
sectors covered by the round, ranging from intellectual property to
financial services.
Hopes are high on both sides that this meeting will get the breakthrough on
the EC-US oilseeds dispute needed to conclude the six-year round, and avert
the threat of a transatlantic trade war.
'We want to be flexible. We can do a deal within CAP (Common Agricultural
Policy) reform,' said Ms Carol Brookins, a Washington agriculture consultant
familiar with the negotiations.
'But we didn't spend more than five years of money, time and energy to cut a
deal for one year and then see what happens in the future.'
The US intends to levy 200 per cent tariffs on Dollars 300m of EC food
exports from December 5, as sanctions for Community oilseeds subsidies which
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) has twice ruled against.
The EC has chosen to emphasise continuing the negotiations but foreign
ministers of the 12, meeting in Brussels on Monday, left little doubt the
Community would retaliate if the US sanctions went ahead.
Gatt director-general Arthur Dunkel met Mr MacSharry and Mr Andriessen in
Brussels yesterday, and is due to meet their US counterparts in Washington
on Monday. Mr Dunkel warned that the row could sink any hope of the
extension of world-wide free trade promised by the Uruguay Round.
The Commission, which negotiates for the EC, assured Mr Dunkel it intended
to make every effort to secure a deal. Evidence of Brussels' intent - after
this week's conclusion of the bitter row between Mr MacSharry and Commission
president Jacques Delors - is that the Commission has laid plans for a
special session to examine any deal for as early as next Friday.
Mr Steve Yoder, president of the American Soyabean Association, said a deal
which set the limit for EC oilseeds production at 10m tonnes would be
'totally unacceptable' to the House and Senate.
He said the 9.5m tonne limit the EC had offered was 'extremely soft.' It is
based on an estimate that yields will drop from 2.6 tonnes per hectare to
1.9. Instead, he said, yields are likely to rise.
Besides agreeing to a satisfactory output level, Mr Yoder said the
enforcement mechanism to guarantee it must be 'severe enough' to ensure that
farmers will be discouraged for growing oilseeds.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

921113

