FT924-8268

FT  12 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Enlightened self-interest in a
multi-racial sugar sector - Philip Gawith on efforts to make up for years of
benign neglect of the mainly black small growers


   By PHILIP GAWITH


WHILE SOUTH Africa's politicians make heavy weather of lending
constitutional shape to the new South Africa, a whole range of initiatives
across the business and social spectrum make clear that the transition
process is, in other respects, well under way.
One such initiative is in the sugar industry, one of South Africa's largest
agricultural sectors, which has the unique feature of having a large
non-white component.
Located mainly in the coastal regions of Natal, the industry is split
between the 2,000 almost exclusively white commercial, or quota, growers and
the 40,000, mainly black, small growers. The latter - defined as anyone
producing less than 150 tonnes of sucrose a year - farm about 20 per cent of
the total area under cane, but produce only 10 per cent of the total crop.
In April, however, these growers launched the Small Grower Development
Trust, a move which, seen together with other deregulation initiatives, has
the potential fundamentally to alter the shape and functioning of the
industry.
Although the examples of individual commercial growers assisting their
smaller neighbours are many, going back decades, the industry attitude
tended towards benign neglect rather than any concerted effort at small
grower advancement.
An important exception to this was the formation in 1973 of the Financial
Aid Fund, an effort to assist small growers, most of whom would not have
been eligible for assistance on normal commercial grounds, through provision
of subsidised loans. To the extent that the scheme has contributed to the
dramatic increase in small grower numbers from 3,000 in 1973 to 40,000 now,
the fund has achieved great success.
This surge in numbers, however, must be kept in perspective. With the
average size of farm only about 2.5 hectares (six acres), most of these
units are too small to be viable and act only as supplementary sources of
income, to the tune of R2,000 to R3,000 (Pounds 280 to Pounds 420) a year.
Probably less than 15 per cent of the small growers qualify as proper
farmers, these being the ones with larger than average plots.
Thus although the sugar industry had achieved considerable success in
broadening its base, the development of these new farmers had lagged. Most
of them were not on a viable financial footing, and they were not properly
integrated into industry structures.
They felt disenfranchised and powerless in the running of the industry and a
perception took hold that the industry's interest in them did not extend
beyond viewing them as a source of production.
This is where the trust comes in - an initiative of small growers, supported
by the industry, to promote their personal empowerment and development as
farmers. Essentially it aims to support and assist them in the development,
improvement and extension of their sugar farming operations. There will be
three main phases to its activities - first the development of
administrative and organisational support structures; then offering improved
extension services; and finally provision of further financial support. The
first phase will involve the stationing of administrative officers at all
the mills where small growers deliver cane. Their job will be to improve
communication with small growers, and to provide assistance across a wide
range of training, financial, organisational and other needs.
A total of R70m is being sought both in South Africa and abroad to ensure
the trust's viability. The industry will donate at least R20m over the next
five years, while the small growers themselves intend to levy a sum of 30
cents a tonne of cane to help finance the trust.
Small growers had already benefited from deregulation initiatives in 1990,
allowing those within 30 km (18 miles) of a mill free entry into the
industry - commercial growers must purchase quota - while in 1991 racially
discriminatory restrictions on land ownership were scrapped, to the
potential benefit of small growers.
Although the trust did not have its origins in politics, the greater
attention being given to small grower needs is undoubtedly intertwined with
the political reform process under way in the country since February 1990
when the African National Congress was legalised and its leader, Mr Nelson
Mandela, released from prison. Mr Patrick Sokhela of the newly formed trust
notes: 'We said if the country is changing, there is no way we can carry on
like this'. The grievance being referred to was one of representation -
until a few months ago, representation on the producer body, the South
African Cane Growers Association, was on a 'one tonne, one vote' basis, with
the result that small growers only had three representatives on the board of
37.
Now the composition of the SACGA board has been revised to a
regionally-based structure where small and commercial growers will enjoy
equal representation in each region. Apart from being the necessary
political accompaniment of the trust - empowered people will clearly want
representation - the structural changes in the industry also represent
formal recognition by established interests that there is more to small
growers than how much cane they produce.
One issue is why commercial growers should be so keen on assisting their
poorer colleagues? Clearly there are a number of motives at work here. One
is goodwill - many commercial growers have long provided assistance to small
grower neighbours, so formalising this through the trust is a logical
development. Millers also approve, because the trust holds out the promise
of increased cane deliveries.
The trust is also underpinned by impeccable socio-economic logic. Driving
just north of Durban through parts of Kwazulu - the Zulu homeland
interspersed with Natal - where most of the small growers are, the uplifting
potential of the sugar industry is clear. Where the sugar farmers are
present and successful, lifestyle standards are clearly superior to where
farmers are merely involved in subsistence crops. The distinction is almost
as simple as looking to see whether they live in comfortable,
commercially-built dwellings, or whether they are in more basic mud-huts.
There is also a strong whiff of of enlightened self-interest about industry
support for the trust initiative. After all, with white agriculture in South
Africa apprehensive about how it will fare under a future government, what
better defence for the sugar industry than the presence in its midst of the
largest semi-commercial black farming sector in the country, supported by
its richer partners in a way which amounts to affirmative action?
Mr Mike Mathews, executive director of the South African Sugar Association -
the body that administers the industry on behalf of growers and millers -
concedes that the industry has not done as much as it might, in the past, to
help small growers, but adds, 'I don't think anybody in this country can say
they did enough, or did all they could'. He also adds that the sugar
industry's record enjoys favourable comparison with just about any other
agricultural sector in the country.
Although the trust's aims are admirable, the challenges it faces are
formidable. As mentioned, many small farmers are on sub-economic units, not
least because traditional systems of land tenure mean that farmers do not
own the land they farm; it is held by the chief and hence consolidation of
plots into a larger entity requires more than a willing buyer and a willing
seller. Empowerment also means grappling with basic problems like literacy.
There is also more that can be done to help the small grower. Thus there is
pressure to have small grower redefined as one producing not 150, but 200
tonnes of sucrose a year (though 150 tonnes of sugar currently grosses about
R100,000 - a not inconsiderable sum); and to have the 30-km restriction
limit removed. Means also need to be found of allowing these farmers to
obtain access to preferential Land Bank loans from which they are at present
excluded, owing to factors of size and risk.
For both political and economic reasons, these are challenges that simply
have to be overcome. If there is any area in agriculture where there exists
a reasonable platform from which to develop a sizeable number of black
commercial farmers, it is in sugar.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921112

