FT921-15197

FT  11 JAN 92 / Books: Behind the myth of Middle Earth - From Nabokov to
Tolkien, the FT critics review the most interesting of the recently
published volumes of biography and memoir


   By MARTIN MULLIGAN


BILBO PEERED out from the shelter of Gandalf's cloak. He shivered at what he
saw. Their eagle eyrie high among the crags of lofty Isengard gave an
unrivalled view for many hundreds of miles in every direction. Middle Earth
was under attack from a vast army. An army familiar in form - elves,
wizards, goblins and dwarves were all to be seen - but they were somehow
insubstantial, in sharp contrast to the warriors the hobbit had encountered
on his travels. 'There are so many of them,' Bilbo sighed. 'They'll sweep
away everything, everything.' 'Fear not, little one' the wizard replied.
'Nothing can destroy that which has been forged by the Master. These are
mere reflections of his great creation. Only the true dream will survive, as
your children and grandchildren will see in years to come.'
So might the denizens of his imaginary world view the floodtide of
imitations which have been a commercial consequence of the immense popular
success of JRR Tolkien's literary invention. Now, in the centenary year of
his birth, the fantasy industry has gone into overdrive. But what little is
really known of the man himself?. Two books published to mark the centenary
bear the authentic Tolkien stamp, and provide fresh insight into the man
behind the enduring myths of Middle Earth.
The Tolkien Family Album (HarperCollins, 90 pages, Pounds 12.99), compiled
by Tolkien's daughter Priscilla and his eldest son John, witnesses that the
distinguished Oxford professor of Anglo-Saxon was no dry and dusty academic
but a devoted husband and loving father of four. The books which were to
bring him international fame in the most unexpected quarters started life as
bedtime tales for his children, who also proved his sternest critics.
His life was as rich and colourful as that of any of his Middle Earth
creations. He was an eccentric yet loving father and an attentive husband,
whose lifelong love affair with his wife is recorded in the epitaph on their
joint gravestone: 'Edith Mary Tolkien, Luthien, 1889-1971. John Ronald Reuel
Tolkien, Beren, 1892-1973.' It is a reference to his own story in The
Silmarillion of the love between Beren, a mortal man, and Luthien, an elf
maiden.
The spiritual depth of his books and their sub-text of ceaseless conflict
between good and evil reflect the author's Christian faith. He was a
committed Roman Catholic and his religious example perhaps played some part
in the shaping of his son John's vocation to the priesthood.
The Tolkien Family Album offers a uniquely intimate and affectionate glimpse
of the life from which the world-conquering fictions of Middle Earth stem.
John and Priscilla Tolkien have painstakingly sifted a mass of memorabilia,
family photographs and keepsakes to create a warm, refined tribute to the
memory of their father. Handsomely produced, designed in the style of an
Edwardian family album, the volume is striking also for the quality of its
photographs.
Everyday life chez the Tolkiens is brought energetically to life. Many
anecdotes illustrate the love which went into the writing of The Hobbit and
its sequel, and the atmosphere in which both works grew. These insights go
some way to account for the extraordinary excitement which the books still
generate. The Tolkien phenomenon seems to be actually gaining in vitality as
the years pass. Anyone curious about the human context and inspiration for
the mythology of Middle Earth will find that The Tolkien Family Album
provides an indispensable perspective.
Sauron Defeated (HarperCollins, 482 pages, Pounds 20) forms the ninth volume
of the encyclopaedic History of Middle Earth, as drawn up from his father's
papers, by Christopher Tolkien, the sternest infant critic and adult editor
of the Tolkien oeuvre. Each of the book's three sections contains hitherto
unpublished writings by JRR Tolkien, scrupulously copy-edited and annotated.
There is an Epilogue to The Lord of the Rings which finds Sam Gamgee
answering questions from his own children about his epic adventures. The
Notion Club Papers, forming the second part of the book, report the
fictional discussions of a literary society in Oxford. Hobbitomanes
everywhere will not want to be without either of these volumes. As a casual
reader, the chief interest to me of Sauron Defeated is the light it casts on
the Tolkien phenomenon.
By this I mean that Nature once produced a genial Oxford professor who had
only to breathe on any particle of his remarkable imagination to have that
particle live and expand until it became a complex ingredient of an
autonomous 'secondary world'. Fifty and more years later, another man, woman
or child in another country and culture takes up one of his books and is
drawn so completely into that imaginative world that even the least curious
student of human nature must be driven to ask: How?.
The fine content of both these additions to the Tolkien canon only amplifies
that stubborn question, the answer to which may in the end prove as elusive
as the Ring itself. Enough rationalising. Enjoy.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920111

