FT924-5939

FT  24 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Going back on the acquisition trail - BET's
plans to move out of low-margin businesses


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


WHEN Mr John Clark arrived at the helm of BET, the business services company
which was bleeding cash after a burst of rash acquisitions, he said a
turnaround would take three years.
Half way through that period, this timetable is looking increasingly
ambitious. The process of disposing of some of the 1,000 businesses bought
in such haste in the late-1980s appears to be going slowly with only 18 sold
and Pounds 81m of cash raised.
As a result, Mr Clark may move BET into its next phase of reorganisation -
the acquisition of new service businesses that will give the company the
chance to grow earnings - before it has sold the bad apples in the barrel.
Shareholders will, therefore, need nerves of steel a lot of patience.
Yesterday, the business services company that aims to do its clients' chores
while they concentrate on their core businesses, reported a 43 per cent fall
in interim pre-tax profits to Pounds 40.5m.
That was not all. The share price is now 16 per cent below the 110p at which
BET in July did its Pounds 200m refinancing rights issue, and the company is
questioning if it can continue paying a dividend that is uncovered by
earnings.
In the absence of any recovery in earnings - which Mr Clark appears to have
ruled out yesterday - and assuming a cut in next year's dividend - which Mr
Clark flagged as a possibility - BET's share price has significantly further
to fall if its yield is to be maintained.
Nor are there many signs of hope on the trading front. The depth of the
recession means that following Pounds 11m of exceptional reorganisation
costs in the first six months, BET will face further 'significant'
exceptional costs in the current half.
What is perhaps as damaging to the share price is the sudden revelation that
the company faces an ACT problem. While the definition of an ACT problem is
left to directors' discretion, City observers were being told as recently as
two months ago that there was no concern about a write-off of ACT.
In the absence of any economic turnaround there is, therefore, a need for
acquisitions in the UK to produce more taxable profits. But again BET faces
a problem.
BET realises it must diversify away from its dependence on the UK, which
currently accounts for 56 per cent of sales - albeit only 21 per cent of
operating profit.
As Mr Clark says, 'The cash freed up from disposals can be used to improve
BET's mix of businesses which is at present too exposed to the economic
cycle and the UK economy.'
From the point of view of the balance sheet, however, BET at least has
greater room for manoeuvre. Thanks to the disposals and the rights issue,
which repaid Dollars 380m (Pounds 251.6m) of auction market preferred stock,
and continuing strong cash flow, gearing is heading in the right direction.
After the recent disposal of Initial USA, at the high price of Pounds 42m,
gearing is down to just 12 per cent.
While further quick disposals would increase BET's freedom of movement, the
balance sheet is clearly in shape to move on to the acquisition trail.
Mr Clark says this, in itself, is quite an achievement. 'We think we have
put substantially behind us the financial strength question,' he says.
'Right now we are talking about what is the right mix of businesses to get
earnings growth. That's a significant conversation to be having.'
What BET is moving towards is a fundamental reallocation of assets away from
low or negative margin businesses towards assets that will improve its
growth potential.
The problem for shareholders watching this tricky balancing act is that very
little is clear with BET. As Mr Clark told them yesterday, BET has more
skeletons in its cupboard and there are still aspects of the business that
still need to be changed; it is very difficult to forecast a tax charge or a
level of provisions for reorganisation and it is difficult to see why the
final dividend should be maintained - other than the proximity any cut would
have to July's rights issue.
A consolation might be that Mr Clark has been there before. 'This is the
third turnaround I have done and they are always worse than you imagine,' he
says.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921124

