FT922-7435

FT  19 MAY 92 / Lang warns Scottish electronics industry


   By JAMES BUXTON, Scottish Correspondent


MR IAN LANG, the Scottish secretary, has warned that there will inevitably
be 'fallout' among electronics companies operating in Scotland because of
technological change and recession.
His warning echoes widely held fears in Scotland that Silicon Glen, as the
Scottish electronics industry is sometimes known, is vulnerable to the
changes sweeping the computer world. About 45,000 people work in Silicon
Glen.
'There has to be fallout among some of the electronics industry in Scotland
as a consequence of the changes that have taken place and the previous rapid
expansion of the industry,' Mr Lang said in an interview with the Financial
Times. 'It is absurd to pretend that there is not going to be.'
The world computer industry is in turmoil as advances in microprocessor
technology have reduced the cost to new companies of entering the industry,
while demand in many markets has slowed. Prices have fallen and industry
leaders such as International sses.
Scotland has several personal-computer and workstation manufacturers,
including IBM, Compaq, Digital and Sun Microsystems, as well as other
electronics plants.
Although Unisys recently closed its plant at Livingston with the loss of 700
jobs and Compaq last year reduced its workforce by about 10 per cent,
Silicon Glen has not so far experienced large job losses. Some new
foreign-owned companies have recently arrived.
Mr Lang said: 'We should never assume that inward investment (direct
investment by foreign-owned companies) is the answer to all our prayers. It
is a high-risk strategy in the sense that high-tech industry has a shorter
shelf life.
'It is susceptible to recession and more so to obsolescence, and the
combination (of the two) can be very serious indeed. We shouldn't assume
that all these companies are absolutely secure for ever more.'
His concern, he said, was 'as much about ensuring that indigenous Scottish
industry benefits from inward investment as with attracting inward
investment in the first place.' Some opportunities had been taken up, he
said, 'but there is still scope, especially in the manufacture of
components, for Scottish companies to find niches.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920519

