FT922-13293

FT  13 APR 92 / Carrot and stick for middle classes: John Major may want to
edge economic policies toward the centre


   By BARRY RILEY


Britain's middle classes can breathe again. Neil Kinnock, with his 59 per
cent income taxes, did not get the key to Number 10 Downing Street after
all. He will not be given the chance to threaten the incomes, the lifestyle
and the house prices of the well-off.
But even John Major, planning his strategy for a five-year term as prime
minister, may need to rethink some of the tenets of Thatcherism. He will not
wish to leave room for another class-based attack on the Conservatives in
1996 or 1997. True, Britain's recent poor economic performance has not had
the anticipated fatal consequences for Mr Major and his government, but he
would be foolish to rely on repeated opposition failure.
It was quite a scare for the middle classes, who feared that they would be
wide open to high marginal tax rates in the absence of the myriad tax breaks
and allowances that used to protect them in the 1970s. Their self-confidence
has anyway been slipping under the burden of slumping house prices and the
decimation by bankruptcy of the small business sector. These are the people
who run the country: they are the managers, the professionals, the higher
civil servants and the successful businessmen. Under Margaret Thatcher the
Conservatives had swept to power three times - twice with Commons majorities
of more than 100 - on the theme that low income taxes, free markets and the
encouragement of individual enterprise would transform the British economy.
The muddled corporatism of the 1970s had failed.
The new Toryism was much more radical than the one-nation approach of
Macmillan and Heath. The heady rhetoric in the early 1980s was that if the
middle classes were given the opportunity and the incentives, they would
deliver. The whole country would benefit. But amid the longest recession
since the 1930s the question must inevitably be asked, have the middle
classes reneged on that promise? Comparatively few voters last Thursday
apparently thought that Labour's strategies would prove any more effective,
but the radical Tory approach has proved disappointing, too. Delicately,
John Major may want to edge his economic policies towards the centre ground.
For a brief few years, it is true, the British economy boomed. In the five
years between 1985 and 1989 economic growth averaged 3.7 per cent a year.
But it was quite unsustainable and we are paying for it now. Although loudly
celebrated at the time, the Thatcher 'miracle' now appears largely to have
been an illusion.
You can make numbers tell most tales if you try, but over the 12 years of
Conservative rule up to 1991, economic growth averaged just 1.7 per cent a
year. This was marginally better than the 1.4 per cent a year achieved
during the previous six years of Labour government. Margaret Thatcher
notably failed, however, to restore on any consistent basis the more dynamic
growth rates recorded up to 1973.
Indeed, the early 1970s appear to have been the watershed. In the 30 years
up to 1973, growth averaged 3.1 per cent, but in the 18 years since then the
pace of expansion has been only half as rapid. There can, of course, be many
explanations for these secular changes, including the strength of the world
economy at large and, at home, changes in population size and structure. In
the 1960s the British population was rising at 0.6 per cent a year, in the
1980s at only 0.2 per cent. Other countries, such as Germany, also suffered
an economic deceleration in the 1980s. The slowdown may not have been any
fault of the politicians. Yet they claim the credit for good times and will
inevitably get the blame for the bad.
Nevertheless, to give the middle classes their head can have tremendously
positive effects. In the 1980s, for instance, managers were given back the
right to manage, and the efficiency of much of British private enterprise
greatly improved. A new wave of entrepreneurs sprang up, and changed the
face of much of the the corporate sector.
But the middle classes can also be snobbish and money-grabbing. They are
drawn towards pleasant service industries rather than to manufacturing
industry, and to the south of England rather than the north. Home ownership
is a middle class ideal symbolising independence and wealth, but in the
context of financial deregulation it can - and did - turn into an excuse for
rampant speculation.
High rewards for those who achieve great commercial success, especially if
they accept high risks, are eminently justifiable. But there must also be a
culture of self-restraint, or uncontrolled greed will take over. We have
seen far too much of this as top company executives have entered into a
dizzy pay spiral in which each pay rise is self-justifying in relation to
the rewards of competitors, in the absence of any independent concept of
fair or appropriate reward.
In the late 1970s the top 20 per cent of households received 43 per cent of
gross income and 37 per cent of post-tax income. By 1988 these households -
essentially, the middle classes  - were enjoying a 50 per cent share of
gross income, and 44 per cent after tax. During the 1980s the ratio of the
pre-tax earnings of the top 10 per cent of employees to those of the bottom
10 per cent rose from 2.6 to 3.1 times, and pay of the chief executive of
the average large UK public company climbed from Pounds 90,000 to Pounds
400,000. These increases in differentials could have been justified by
improved growth, but the evidence for any positive impact is hard to find at
present, although admittedly the bottom of a recession may not be the best
time to look.
Spending, meantime, seemed to grow even faster than incomes. Margaret
Thatcher's home-grown economics based upon living within one's means and
being self-reliant culture of huge borrowing and overconsumption in which
asset price inflation was expected to bail out - and indeed handsomely
reward - every debtor. A government which began by sternly fighting
inflation and declaring strict monetarist principles presided over a
borrowing binge from the mid-1980s onwards. Bank and building society
lending was climbing at about Pounds 14bn a year when the Tories took over
but at the peak in 1989 it was almost Pounds 90bn. House price inflation in
London had reached 20 per cent by 1987, but middle-class greed was allowed
to run unchecked.
By the late 1980s millions of young people seeking a foothold on the housing
ladder were being sucked into a dangerous vortex of speculation which now
leaves many of them technically bankrupt. The Conservatives might have
expected to be more severely punished at the election for this betrayal.
Again, the principle of privatisation, itself a tremendously potent idea for
improving the dynamics of the economy, was somehow twisted by middle-class
greed. As with housing the profit motive was brought into play, this time
with the ostensible motive of turning people into private shareholders. But
the profit should be proportional to the risks. Instead, privatisation
offers too often became the route to a quick and easy gain for those who had
the stake money and knew how to deal in shares.
The neglect of manufacturing industry was another characteristic feature of
the years of Tory rule. Britain has produced huge numbers of accountants and
lawyers, many of them handsomely paid, and the media, financial services and
all sorts of consultancy services are bursting with talents. But the
dominant middle-class ethic has been hostile to manufacturing industry, and
few of the best products of our education system head in that direction:
relative pay levels clearly tell them not to. You can argue that this
explains the loss of half of the former economic growth rate. Failure
adequately to supply domestic demand for manufactured goods has become
painfully obvious in the current recession, when visible trade has remained
substantially in the red despite the weakness of domestic consumption
overall, which has trimmed import demand.
Manufacturing output has grown by only 0.5 per cent a year over the 12 years
since 1979, and hopes for a revival in the 1990s now rest largely upon
imported Japanese expertise in sectors such as motors and electronics. These
hopes may seem rather more fragile now that the Japanese stock market is in
process of collapse and its banking system may follow suit. Some of the
Japanese money may go home.
If excessive taxation is unfair and disruptive, as the Tories have succeeded
in persuading the British electorate, so is an excessively unequal
distribution of rewards. And the natural priorities of the British middle
classes do not necessarily harmonise with the requirements of a modern
economy. A nation of accountants will soon forget the skills needed to build
motor cars. Moreover a nation can only get rich quite slowly, and if large
numbers of individuals are getting rich quickly it is a sign of the
misdirection of resources.
Margaret Thatcher thought it was enough to dangle a bunch of carrots. In
chasing them, the middle classes would naturally head in the right
direction. Neil Kinnock wanted to take back the carrots and wield a heavy
stick. Now John Major will maintain the incentives, but does he also need to
apply the occasional touch of the whip in order to keep his troublesome cart
horses in line? Certainly he will want to keep any recovery in the house
market well under control, or excessive credit growth will lead to problems
for sterling within the European Monetary System. The government will look
to improvements in standards of corporate governance to keep a lid on pay
awards to top executives. But there are few real signs that the Major regime
has yet moved far in the direction of developing an industrial policy that
might get the battered and distorted British economy back into a more
balanced shape.
In the end the middle classes are paid by results. Their greatly enhanced
perks and differentials have scarcely been justified by the economic
achievements of the past decade or so. Yet this does not mean that the
middle classes cannot produce the goods, just that they need better
leadership. Perhaps a re-elected Conservative government without the
distractions of an early poll to worry about will be able to supply it.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920413

