FT923-9566

FT  04 AUG 92 / Home market scheme faces cost queries


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


MOST people would like to see a revival in the housing market but few agree
on how to achieve it.
Abbey National said the tax credit scheme it proposed yesterday was only an
outline. It seems clear that it would need significant changes before it
could be implemented.
The scheme's rationale is that the housing market is in a vicious circle.
House prices cannot rise because there are no transactions. Yet with prices
depressed, many people cannot afford to sell their homes, because they would
lose money.
By allowing the seller to offset the loss against income tax, Abbey National
hopes to turn the vicious circle into a virtuous one. The tax benefit would
enable people to sell their houses, restoring activity to the market and
allowing prices to rise. Once prices started to rise, the need for the
scheme would disappear.
For example, if a purchaser bought a house for Pounds 60,000 and sold it for
Pounds 50,000, the scheme would allow the Pounds 10,000 loss to be offset
against income tax. Either the seller would not pay tax on salary until the
credit was worked off, or the Inland Revenue would send a refund in the form
of a cheque.
There would be restrictions. The benefit would be available only once and
the proceeds would have to be reinvested in another property. There would
have to be a limit on the amount of the credit - Abbey National suggests
Pounds 10,000 a homeowner - and independent valuation of the sale price, to
prevent someone making a bogus sale at a bargain price to claim the credit.
Mr John Wriglesworth, housing finance analyst at UBS Phillips & Drew, said:
'Abbey National should be given praise for thinking of something new and for
trying to revive the housing market. 'But the scheme has a fatal flaw -
cost.'
The exact cost is impossible to quantify.
Another important factor is how the homeowner's 'loss' would be worked out.
Abbey National quotes the Council of Mortgage Lenders as saying that 375,000
homeowners have 'negative equity' - their houses are worth less than their
mortgages. With the average negative equity estimated at Pounds 2,662, Abbey
National says the cost to the Treasury would be Pounds 250m.
In the text of its proposal, Abbey National consistently refers to the
homeowner's 'loss' as the difference between the purchase and an independent
current valuation of the sale price. Except in cases of 100 per cent
mortgages, that loss will be much larger than the 'negative equity' element.
For a homeowner who put down Pounds 10,000 and borrowed Pounds 50,000 to buy
a Pounds 60,000 house, which is now worth Pounds 48,000, the negative equity
is Pounds 2,000, but the total loss is Pounds 12,000.
The cost of compensating owners for their full loss would be much larger.
Simply compensating owners for the 'negative equity' element would
discriminate against those who had prudently saved to put down a deposit on
their home.
Even if the scheme was restricted to the 'negative equity' element, Mr
Wriglesworth estimates that the cost would be much larger than Abbey
National's Pounds 250m. He believes that there are 1.5m homeowners with
negative equity, and that therefore the cost to the Treasury would be
between Pounds 1.5bn and Pounds 2bn.
Mr Wriglesworth suggests a potential cap on the tax credit of Pounds 2,500,
but it would still not be enough to help those worst affected by the housing
slide. An owner who could sell his house for Pounds 5,000 less than the
original loan would receive a cheque for Pounds 2,500 from the Inland
Revenue, but this would still leave him owing the building society Pounds
2,500. He would also face estate agents' and solicitors' fees if he moved.
In its present form, therefore, the scheme might not achieve its purpose,
especially as it would not help first-time buyers.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920804

