FT923-6402

FT  25 AUG 92 / Lib Dems to examine identity and strategy


   By ALISON SMITH


THE Liberal Democrats are to carry out an extensive review of the party's
identity, philosophy and strategy at next month's conference, which could
mean a reappraisal of their attitude to a possible pact with the Labour
party.
Mr Charles Kennedy, party president, said yesterday at the launch of the
conference agenda: 'The party will consider whether we still hold out
replacing Labour as an objective  - short or long-term  - and, if not, what
implications does that have for our political stance now?'
The debate will be spread over most of the Harrogate conference. It will
start with a consultative session on the first afternoon, which will form
the basis for a motion for formal debate later in the week.
There will be a separate debate on a consultation paper, Challenge,
Opportunity and Responsibility, drawn up by a working group chaired by Mr
Paddy Ashdown, party leader.
The paper, to be published a week before the conference, is designed to
raise questions about the policy issues that will have to be addressed in
the next general election, with the intention of producing a framework
document for consideration at next year's conference.
Mr Kennedy emphasised that the strategy discussion would be primarily about
the Liberal Democrats themselves rather than the prospect of deals with
other parties. He said Mr Ashdown had made clear that he did not see a way
forward for 'mechanistic pacts'.
Two fringe meetings will be addressed by Labour MPs. Mr Calum MacDonald, MP
for the Western Isles, will speak at a meeting organised by LINk, an
organisation formed to discuss electoral co-operation. Mr Frank Field, MP
for Birkenhead, will take part in a debate with Sir David Steel, the former
Liberal leader, on whether realignment could deliver electoral success for
the centre-left.
The conference will be addressed by Mr Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the Danish
foreign minister  - just two days before it is to discuss a motion calling
on Denmark to reconsider its Maastricht treaty referendum result and a week
before the French referendum on the issue.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920825

