FT924-11568

FT  24 OCT 92 / Markets: Looking into a black hole - The Bottom Line


   By ANDREW TAYLOR


IN A WEEK in which the UK Prime Minister has signalled that he wants more
private investment in roads and railways, British and French shareholders
have been asked if they want to put more cash into the biggest private
transport project of all.
Stockholders in the Channel tunnel have until November 15 to exercise
warrants offering them more shares in the project which has risen in cost
since 1987 from Pounds 4.8bn to more than Pounds 8bn. If all the warrants
were exercised, Eurotunnel would raise a further Pounds 100m.
But as Eurotunnel itself makes clear, the warrants are at present virtually
worthless. The offer works out at around Pounds 4.50 per share. At last
night's close, Eurotunnel shares stood at Pounds 3.60.
Even allowing for the easy dealing facility offered by Eurotunnel, that
makes it much cheaper for shareholders to buy shares in the market than to
exercise the warrants in three weeks' time.
Leaving aside the question of the warrants, should shareholders be
considering putting any more money at all into a company which has still to
agree with its contractors and bankers over how much extra the tunnel is
going to cost, and who is going to pay for it?
It is exceptionally difficult to put a value on a company which is still
more than 12 months away from producing its first pound of turnover. Profits
and dividends, on the most optimistic forecast, are unlikely to appear much
before the turn of the century.
The project is currently in technical breach of its loan covenants. In this
situation there is a great risk that the patience of bankers will snap and
they will either take over the development or demand substantial equity in
return for their continued support.
Analysts calculate that the group will need to raise at least Pounds 500m
more after the tunnel opens. This would be in addition to Pounds 1.5bn of
equity and more than Pounds 7bn of loans committed already.
Investors, with no historic yield or prices earnings ratio to guide them,
can only rely on forecast revenues and dividends up to the year 2041, when
Eurotunnel's concession to operate the Channel tunnel ends.
Projections by Eurotunnel, its critics, bankers, and independent
stockbrokers depend crucially upon what view is taken of the outlook for
interest rates and inflation over the next 50 years.
Stockbrokers Barclays de Zoete Wedd have devised a computer model to project
the future value of Eurotunnel's shares. It says that a movement of just a
quarter of a percentage point in average inflation over the period could
equate to a 30p difference in the group's current share price - just over 8
per cent of Eurotunnel's market value.
Investors must thus consider forecasts of future traffic flows, fare
increases, likely operating costs, interest charges, revenue and dividend
projections. They must then make allowance for the fact that their money
will lie idle for several years before they receive the first dividends.
The way to do this, and to take account of operational risk and the effect
of inflation on future dividends, is to recalculate future earnings in
today's money.
Eurotunnel has chosen a discount rate of 12 per cent, which would normally
be applied to a low risk utility with a secure and easily identifiable
stream of income.
Some analysts believe that this discount rate is too low, given that revenue
in the first 18 months is likely to be less than previously forecast due to
delays in opening and late delivery of trains.
BZW's median case, based on a 12 per cent discount rate, suggests that
Eurotunnel shares are currently worth Pounds 3.36. This should rise to about
Pounds 7.40 by 1999. Schroders, in a recent circular, valued the shares 'at
no more than 320p.'
At this level there is little attraction for new shareholders unless they
believe that British and French inflation will be higher and interest rates
lower than the market presently expects.
Private shareholders who bought right at the beginning will have travel
concessions. Whether they decide to sell or hold will depend upon what value
they put on these.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921024

