FT921-3776

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: Revolution that exploded into uncertainty -
The upheavals that have shaped the past five years in parliament


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


   IT has been an extraordinary five years


less a parliament than a paroxysm. The Thatcher revolution turned into the
Tory rebellion. An economic miracle turned into a mirage.
The political giants of a generation staggered bloodied from the national
stage they had dominated for a decade.
Now their disbelieving understudies in the House of Commons must take a leap
in the dark. Mr John Major will fight the first general election since the
1970s which the Conservatives could lose. Mr Neil Kinnock has a fighting
chance of proving that Labour is no longer predestined to be the party of
permanent opposition.
It has been a parliament which shifted decisively the terms of the political
debate. The poll tax, Europe and a boom-to-bust economy stranded extremists
of right and left. Mr Major and Mr Kinnock have converged on safer
centre-ground. As a cabinet minister confided this week as he contemplated
April 9: 'We're all pragmatists now.'
The voters were given the window of television to watch the drama and the
brawls, the anger and the pathos. The timing could not have been better.
Images of Sir Geoffrey Howe's bitterly brilliant resignation speech and Mrs
Margaret Thatcher's tragically defiant farewell etched themselves on the
national consciousness.
Mr Bernard Weatherill, hitherto just a voice floating across the radio
airwaves, brought cult status to the role of the Speaker.
It is hard to believe that it has been only five years.
The poll tax then was nothing more than a single paragraph in the
Conservative manifesto. Mrs Thatcher, resting on a triumphant majority of
102 seats at Westminster, was privately pondering the break up of the state
health and education systems. The water and electricity industries were
still owned by the government. The national curriculum was no more than a
nostalgic gleam in Mr Kenneth Baker's eye. Hospital trusts were not even
that.
Of the 21-strong cabinet class of 1987 only eight survive. Some - such as Mr
Peter Walker and Mr Norman Fowler - resigned to spend more time with their
families (and businesses). Others, such as Mr John Moore - one of that
unhappy breed of former future prime ministers - were cast into obscurity.
Mr Nicholas Ridley self-destructed. Mr Nigel Lawson and Sir Geoffrey
departed angrily. Mrs Thatcher had no choice.
The opposition parties did not escape the upheavals. Dr David Owen, the man
who had promised to break the mould, instead led the SDP into oblivion. The
then obscure Mr Paddy Ashdown was left to salvage something akin to the old
Liberal party from the wreckage of the Alliance. The Greens grabbed 15 per
cent of the vote in the European elections before vanishing again into
anarchic obscurity.
Then there was the trivia - important in that it demonstrated that an
apparently impregnable majority at Westminster was insufficient shield
against political mistakes. Who remembers now the abortive identity card
scheme for football or the political miscalculation which embroiled
ministers in a public row over salmonella in eggs?
The biggest mistake, of course, was the poll tax: the project of a prime
minister who had come to believe that she could lead the electorate in any
direction she chose. But, as in 1381, the peasants revolted. Mr Major has
spent much of his 16 months in Downing Street consigning the the 20th
century version of this medieval impost to a later chapter in the history
books.
It was the interaction of economic management and Europe which proved fatal.
The image of Mr Lawson's tax-cutting Budget in 1988 - Mrs Thatcher declared
him 'brilliant, brilliant, brilliant' - disintegrated into the Downing
Street row over the exchange rate mechanism.
The economic miracle turned out to be an old-fashioned boom. Mrs Thatcher
denied her chancellor the anti-inflationary shelter of the ERM. Mr Lawson
stormed from the cabinet as recession clouds gathered.
It was Europe too that brought the cataclysm; and with it the images which
seared themselves into the political memory.
There was Mrs Thatcher at her most dangerously defiant as she shouted 'No No
No' to European integration after the Rome summit. It was a step too far.
Sir Geoffrey, a sheep transformed into a lion, shocked himself, the Commons
and the nation with a devastating indictment of Mrs Thatcher's leadership.
She was fatally wounded.
Mr Michael Heseltine seized his moment. Yet she returned to the despatch box
to deliver a valedictory speech which left her cabinet colleagues visibly
shame-faced. Even Mr Kinnock, it was said, felt for her.
So these last few days it has been Mrs Thatcher rather than Mr Heseltine who
has sat brooding on the backbenches as her successor prepared for the
election her party would not let her fight. She will campaign for Mr Major
but she long ago made it clear that he could not be judged 'One of Us'.
Mr Major has done as much any leader could in 16 months to quell the
turmoil. There are no longer the angry, unscripted explosions from the
despatch box. He has managed his party at Westminster rather than dragged it
by the scruff of its neck. Consensus has replaced conviction, ideology has
given way to pragmatism. British troops fought in the Gulf with none of the
partisan chauvinism or Tory triumphalism which accompanied the expedition to
the Falklands. The Maastricht deal on European union created only a
resentful ripple, the poll tax was ditched without fanfare.
It may not be enough. This was the parliament in which the Labour party
learnt again that it could win as well as lose elections. It took its
chances. Mr Kinnock began to align policies with presentation. Ideological
baggage like unilateral disarmament, the trades union closed shop and
anti-Europeanism was thrown wholesale from the Labour wagon. He is still
voluble, and occasionally, volatile, but the Labour leader has regained his
confidence.
Mr Kinnock might yet lose. But so might Mr Major. And therein lies the
legacy of this parliament.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920312

