FT922-13336

FT  11 APR 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Sterling flies on Tory win


STERLING reacted with predictable elan to the news of the Conservative
party's unexpectedly easy election win.
In overnight trading the pound had already risen three pfennigs against the
D-mark. It opened at DM2.8799, climbed over the day, and closed at DM2.8850.
'As soon as the exit polls came out showing the Conservatives in front,
people started piling into sterling and it's gone up in leaps and bounds
ever since,' said the head of one London foreign exchange.
He described the outcome of the election as 'the result the market had
dreamed of' and said the market now expected to see new money from fund
mangers and overseas investors beginning to fly in over the next few days.
As the UK currency continued to strengthen and short sterling futures
soared, there was speculation of a base rate cut. However, some analysts
cast doubt on this scenario, especially with the removal of political
pressure on the Conservatives to do so.
Mr David Mackie, UK economist at JP Morgan, thought the jump in sterling and
the slide in interest rates reflected an unwinding of the political risk
premium that appeared when the election campaign started.
The dollar sprang higher in confused late European trading. Mr Neil
Mackinnon, chief economist at Yamaichi, the Japanese securities house, in
London pointed out that the dollar had managed to shrug off the Federal
Reserve's rate reduction on Thursday.
'This is a constructive sign for the dollar,' he said.
By late afternoon the dollar had jumped to DM1.6360 from a DM1.6235 start
and a DM1.6164 close in New York on Thursday. It rose to Y132.85 from a
start of Y132.28 and a close in New York of Y132.02.
In the US the dollar opened higher against the D-mark and the yen but fell
agains sterling. One factor helping to off set Thursday's Fed easing was a
higher than expected rise in the consumer price index. The 0.5 per cent
increase prompted inflation fears which put pressure on the long end of the
bond market.
The D-mark gained sharply on the Swiss franc, but dealers detected no sign
of intervention by the Swiss National Bank which came into the market twice
last month to support the franc.
In mid-afternoon the D-mark broke through resistance at 92 centimes - a
point last reached in April 1981 - which was the signal for heavy stop-loss
orders to emerge.
The D-Mark ended sharply lower against sterling, closing at its lowest in
London for over five weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920411

