FT921-4014

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Departmental Government Statements: Measures to
help charities - Inland Revenue


THE chancellor proposes in his Budget to introduce a package of measures to
help charities and to give further encouragement to charitable giving. The
measures include:
A reduction from Pounds 600 to Pounds 400 in the minimum limit for Gift Aid
payments.
A relaxation in the rules for some deeds of covenant.
Simpler procedures for charities making tax repayment claims.
These changes will apply from July 1 1992. The minimum limit for gifts by
individuals and close companies qualifying for relief under the Gift Aid
scheme will be reduced from Pounds 600 to Pounds 400 (net of basic rate
income tax). There is no minimum limit for gifts by non-close companies. The
new limit will apply to gifts made on or after July 1 1992.
Under present rules, charitable covenants which are written to last for four
years or until some later event (for example, the donor giving up membership
of the charity) cease to be effective for tax purposes after four years. If
charities want to continue to receive tax relief, they have to get donors to
sign new covenants every four years.
The chancellor's proposal will allow tax relief for covenants of this type
to run on without covenants having to be renewed or replaced, provided the
donor's power to stop making payments cannot be exercised within the
four-year period. This will simplify the present rules and reduce
administration for charities, particularly those which operate membership
covenants.
The Inland Revenue proposes to make improvements in its current procedures
for dealing with tax repayment claims by charities. These are designed to
reduce the routine paperwork which charities now have to send in with their
claims, and to make better use of Revenue resources.
In order to check claims, the Revenue will continue the visits it already
makes to look at charities' records. These visits will help charities to get
their tax claims right first time. The existing power to inspect charities'
records of Gift Aid donations will be extended to cover covenants and other
income on which charities claim tax repayments.
New, fuller guidance for charities on making covenants and running covenant
schemes will be available from Claims Branch in time for the start of the
new procedures, which will apply to claims made on or after July 1 1992.
New telephone helplines will also be available. Charities will be able to
telephone if they have questions about their tax repayment claims or about
the rules for tax relief. The numbers will be included in the new guidance.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920311

