FT923-10911

FT  28 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Finnish group rules out offer
for Avonmouth smelter


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


   KOKKOLA, FINLAND


OUTOKUMPU, the state-owned Finnish mining and metals group, has ruled out
making an offer for the Avonmouth zinc smelter in the UK which was put up
for sale in March.
Mr Erik Nyholm, president of Outokumpu Zinc, said Pasminco, the Australian
company, had chosen the wrong time to dispose of Avonmouth because there was
too much zinc production capacity, particularly in Europe.
The market would not be in supply-demand balance until 1993 at the earliest.
Outokumpu was also worried about possible pollution clean-up charges
associated with the UK smelter - although he admitted his company had not
looked very closely at that situation.
Avonmouth is the UK's only zinc smelter. Pasminco recently completely a
Pounds 10m programme there that expanded its annual capacity to 105,000
tonnes of zinc and 50,000 tonnes of lead bullion. However, Pasminco has
decided to sell Avonmouth and its other European assets to reduce debt and
to focus on its operations in Australia.
Mr Nyholm pointed out that about 140,000 tonnes of annual zinc production
capacity had been closed down in Europe recently but the industry had been
surprised when Nuova Samim had abandoned plans to close its 100,000
tonnes-a-year Crotone smelter in Italy. Samim would keep it operating while
building a new 120,000 tonnes smelter. 'If Crotone had closed, the market
would be in balance,' said Mr Nyholm. 'The new Italian smelter makes no
sense - it will simply lose more money than the old one. This is expensive
politics.'
Mr Nyholm said that the technical squeeze on the London Metal Exchange's
zinc market was not helping the industry. Contracts all over the world were
linked to the LME price which, because of the squeeze, was at present about
Dollars 200-a-tonne too high. These artificially-high prices were delaying
closure of uneconomic capacity.
Mr Nyholm said Outokumpu had complained privately about the squeeze to the
LME board. He said the LME should make up its mind whether it wanted to be a
market for consumers and producers or one for speculators.
As long as the technical instruments were available for speculators to play
the market, manipulation would continue. As long as there were traders
wanting to make short-term profits, manipulation would continue, he added.
However, it was not possible to fight the fundamental market situation for
ever and eventually the price might collapse. 'We expected the price to
collapse this summer but instead the squeeze goes on to October.'
Outokumpu Zinc, which owns Tara, in Ireland, Europe's biggest zinc mine, and
a smelter at Kokkola, was just about breaking even at today's LME prices and
a weak dollar, he said. Tara produced 187,500 tonnes of zinc in concentrates
last year while the Kokkola smelter produced 170,400 tonnes of refined zinc.
This year, Kokkola is scheduled to produce 168,000 tonnes following a
two-week closure for essential maintenance work.
Mr Nyholm pointed out that the world consumed about 6m tonnes of zinc a
year, compared with 200,000 tonnes of excess capacity today. 'So as soon as
demand picks up the surplus will quickly disappear,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920728

