FT923-15498

FT  02 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Telecom pact to cut rates for overseas
calls


   By HUGO DIXON


TELEPHONE companies will come under pressure to cut their international
charges following a milestone agreement by the world's telecommunications
industry in Geneva.
The International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT), a
United Nations-affiliated body which groups telecommunications ministries
and companies from around the world, has agreed to reform the complex
accounting rate system which has been blamed for keeping international call
charges well above costs.
The decision was taken unanimously at a meeting of the CCITT, attended by
delegations from 46 nations, in Geneva last week and details have only just
emerged.
The main element of the deal is a recommendation to cut accounting rates - a
type of wholesale price which telephone companies charge each other for
delivering international calls - to costs over a period of one to five
years.
The price consumers pay to make international calls is made up of two
elements: the accounting rate, which the local telephone company pays to its
counterpart in the recipient country to 'deliver' the call, and a premium to
cover the local company's costs and profit margin.
These accounting rates are thought to be typically two to three times the
actual cost of delivering calls and underpin the high prices which consumers
pay.
The agreement to cut accounting rates - which is the culmination of more
than a year of negotiations - will not feed through automatically into lower
consumer prices. But pressure from national regulatory authorities and
growing competition in the industry is expected to force cuts eventually.
The CCITT, which had previously denied there was a link between accounting
rates and consumer prices, said it believed its recommendation would 'in
time, positively affect user charges'.
Mr John Berndt, who runs the international communications business of AT&T,
the largest US telecommunications group, said the agreement would 'translate
into real benefits for customers around the world'. BT, the largest UK
group, said it was a 'useful step', but refused to commit itself to cut
prices.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920702

