FT924-8122

FT  12 NOV 92 / Gillette receives Brussels ultimatum


   By ANDREW HILL and GUY DE JONQUIERES


   BRUSSELS, LONDON


THE European Commission yesterday gave Gillette, the US shaving products and
toiletries group, six months to shed its financial interests in Wilkinson
Sword, its main competitor, and hand back Wilkinson's former businesses in
several non-EC countries.
The order follows broadly similar actions by competition bodies in Britain
and Germany. Gillette's links with Wilkinson are also being investigated by
authorities in other countries, including France and Australia. Gillette
owns 22 per cent of Eemland, Wilkinson's Dutch-registered parent company, to
which it has also made a sizable loan. The Commission said these
arrangements, along with pre-emption and conversion rights and options in
Eemland, enabled Gillette to influence the latter's commercial policy.
This constituted an abuse of a dominant position by Gillette, which has an
estimated 70 per cent of the world market for wet shaving products.
Wilkinson, which had a turnover last year of DM316m (Pounds 130.5m), makes
most of its sales in Britain and Germany.
The Commission has ordered Gillette to dispose of its equity interest in
Eemland and the loan. The six-month deadline was not announced officially
but was confirmed by industry sources.
Gillette must also hand back to Eemland former Wilkinson operations in the
countries of the European Free Trade Area (Efta), eastern Europe, eastern
Germany and Turkey.
The Commission said agreements between Gillette and Eemland to split the
Wilkinson trademark between the EC, where it is controlled by Eemland, and
other European countries, where Gillette operates both brands, necessitated
co-operation between the two companies.
Gillette yesterday denied influencing Eemland and said it would consider
launching a court appeal against the Commission order, as it has done
against the British and German decisions.
Gillette said it did not expect Brussels' action to affect a decision by
Eemland last month to seek a buyer for Wilkinson. Eemland has denied that
the planned sale was influenced by mounting international anti-trust
pressure on Gillette.
Mr Mike Dowdall, Eemland's chairman, said the Commission order was 'a damp
squib'. He expected to have sold Wilkinson before Gillette was obliged to
sever its links with Eemland.
Gillette's involvement in Eemland began three years ago when the latter was
formed to buy the former Swedish Match consumer products business, including
Wilkinson, from Stora Kopparbergs, Sweden's leading paper and forest
products company.
As well as taking a 22 per cent non-voting stake in Eemland, Gillette lent
the company Dollars 69m (Pounds 45.6m) at a high rate of interest. The value
of the loan is believed to be much greater today, since the interest on it
is being capitalised over its lifetime.
Gillette also purchased all Wilkinson's non-EC operations. However, it was
later compelled by the US Justice Department to sell the US business back to
Eemland.
The Commission said any buyer of Gillette's equity stake in Eemland would be
required to assume responsibility for the loan by the US company. If a buyer
could not be found, Gillette might have to write off the loan.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921112

