FT922-7185

FT  20 MAY 92 / People: Humphreys and Birkdale: 'a good fit'


The appointment of Richard Humphreys as a non-executive director to The
Birkdale Group, the marketing and human resources consultancy, will probably
be viewed as the most interesting move in the UK marketing world this year.
The second occurred when Humphreys was fairly unceremoniously forced out
from Saatchi and Saatchi in February, where he had been president and joint
chief executive of Saatchi and Saatchi Worldwide, one of Saatchi's two
international agency networks. Saatchi's boss, Robert Louis-Dreyfus, decided
that Humphreys should make way for the American, Ed Wax, to take single
overall charge of SSAW.
Wax was in London last week to oversee two days of SSAW managerial
restructuring. Far from gloating at Humphreys' misfortune, Wax was
eulogistic in his praise. Throughout the advertising world - where open
compliments and concealed stilettos go hand-in-hand - there seems to be a
genuine consensus that Humphreys is one of the nice guys of the business.
Neil McClure, Birkdale's chief executive and also ex-Saatchi, and Simeon
Galpert, financial director, formerly with WPP, who have been trying to
tempt Humphreys to join since he left Saatchi, are cock-a-hoop.
Humphreys says he and Birkdale 'are a good fit' and that the intention is
for the company to grow 'fast and furious' by acquisitions. He has spent the
past two months 'travelling the world' looking at suitable purchases. He is
sanguine about the prospects for acquisitions, despite the wretched state of
those marketing services companies which also gobbled others up in the
1980s; 'everybody has learnt a lot since then.'
Humphreys is to take 814,000 new ordinary shares in the company for 42.275p
a share - a 5 per cent discount to the current mid-market price -
representing 4.76 per cent of the enlarged share capital of the company.
Under its new management Birkdale is beginning to pull itself into shape,
chalking up modest pre-tax profits - Pounds 64,000 - in the six months to
September 1991. And once Humphreys takes up a senior executive appointment
there later this year, we may hear more of the company - particularly if the
economy takes off.
*****
Graham Sunderland (above left), general manager of Yorkshire Bank, the north
of England banking group owned by National Australia Bank, is retiring in
June, after 14 years at the helm and 44 years with the bank. In the 14 years
since he became general manager, Yorkshire's pre-tax profits have risen from
Pounds 12m to Pounds 107m last year. He is being replaced by David Knight
(near left), currently his deputy.
*****
Richard Dunn, chief executive of Thames Television, has been appointed
chairman of Independent Television News despite the fact that Thames ceases
to be an ITV broadcaster at the end of this year. Dunn has made it clear
that Thames intends to retain a 20 per cent stake in ITN.
*****
Ewen Macpherson, the new chief executive of venture capital group 3i, has
resigned as chairman and director of the Ship Mortgage Finance Company, a
subsidiary of 3i. Brian Larcombe becomes the new chairman. It is traditional
for the finance director of 3i to take the chair at this offshoot.
Macpherson had been 3i's finance director until he was promoted earlier this
year, and replaced by Larcombe.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920520

