FT921-3852

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Capital Markets: Gilts concern gives way to
hope - Dealers can see a silver lining in the PSBR cloud


   By SARA WEBB


THE BANK of England will have to issue a torrent of UK government bonds in
the next financial year, given the government's forecast of an unexpectedly
high Public Sector Borrowing Requirement (PSBR).
While the gilt-edged securities market was shocked by the scale of the
government's borrowing requirement, some dealers and investors are hoping
that the Bank will use the opportunity to improve the liquidity of specific
gilt issues and perhaps issue some altogether new stocks.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer's forecast of a PSBR of Pounds 28bn in
1992-93 in Tuesday's Budget means an estimated Pounds 33bn in gross gilt
sales - or an average of Pounds 2.75bn a month.
The Bank began buying back some of the small illiquid gilt issues between
1987 and 1990, and attempted to improve the liquidity of specific benchmark
stocks when the government returned to borrowing in 1991. The move has been
welcomed by gilts traders, who prefer to have fewer, bigger issues, and many
hope that this trend will continue.
'There is still considerable scope for increasing the size of existing
issues,' says Mr John Kendall, economist at Baring Sterling Bonds. 'While
many of the obvious gaps in the market have been filled, there remain many
areas where new issues would be welcome.'
The main areas where dealers and investors would like the Bank to issue
stock are:
At the very long end of the yield curve.
The Bank has already approached the domestic institutional investors to
gauge their interest in a 'super-long jumbo gilt' with a maturity of 25 to
30 years. Such a maturity would appeal to insurance and pension fund
managers, who could use it to match their liabilities. Some fund managers
point out that a very long-dated gilt would be helpful for pricing
long-dated sterling corporate bonds.
The Bank has made it clear that it is waiting for yields to drop further
before it issues such a gilt. However, one economist pointed out that the
Bank will be forced to issue across a broad range of maturities and may soon
have to tap the long end of the market, adding: 'Beggars cannot be
choosers.'
Gilts in the five to 10-year area which are used by the swaps market.
The Bank has already taken steps to improve the liquidity of certain gilts
used by the swaps market, for example the 10 per cent gilt due 1996. Traders
believe there is still scope for further issuance of stocks used by the
swaps market. Mr Kendall predicts that the Bank will probably issue more of
the 10 per cent Treasury due 1996, the 10 1/2 per cent Exchequer due 1997,
or else a completely new five-year gilt, the 12 per cent Exchequer due 1998,
and the 10 per cent Treasury due 2003.
The 10-year area.
Dealers emphasise that overseas investors often like to buy 10-year issues
when they invest in foreign government bond markets. The Bank has already
boosted the liquidity of the 9 3/4 per cent Treasury gilt due 2002 to make a
liquid 10-year issue, but traders say that the size of the issue could be
increased further, from around Pounds 5bn to between Pounds 7bn and Pounds
10bn.
'The greater the liquidity, the more acceptable it is to big investors,
especially those who want to trade actively,' says one gilt dealer. Some US
investors have complained in the past about the difficulty of doing big
trades.
Mr Simon Briscoe, economist with Midland Montagu, warns: 'If sterling moves
to the narrow band (of the Exchange Rate Mechanism of the European Monetary
System), we could see a massive influx of foreigners to the gilt market, and
a lot of it would be in the 10-year sector.' A Conservative victory in the
election on April 9, and the prospect of falling inflation, could also
entice foreigners into this sector.
To fill gaps in the maturity profile.
Mr Kendall believes there is demand for a new gilt issue maturing between
July 1995 and November 1996, and for issues maturing after 2000,
particularly around 2010.
Low coupon issues.
Mr Chris Anthony, economist with UBS Phillips & Drew, suggests that there
could be demand from higher-rate taxpayers for a low-coupon conventional
gilt. Such stock would have the advantage of a low income stream, but the
potential for large capital gains (on which investors would pay no capital
gains tax). However, Mr Anthony points out that such an issue would probably
be 'quite small and should not be overplayed'.
Further index-linked issues.
Index-linked issues would also satisfy any private investor demand for
low-coupon stocks, and there is some speculation that the Bank may issue an
index-linked stock when the 1992 issue is redeemed later this month.
The Bank announced that it would use auctions to sell over half of the new
gilt issues, and would increase the size of its auctions to between Pounds
2bn and Pounds 3bn, or more, if market conditions allow. Given the amount of
issuance it will have to tackle, the Bank is no doubt keeping its fingers
crossed and hoping that gilts resume their upward trend.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920312

