FT921-12084

FT  29 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Long wait for mobile-phone calls home


   By MICHIKO NAKAMOTO


INTERNATIONAL travellers hoping to ring home from round the world by
hand-held mobile phones are likely to have a long wait, judging by the
problems a top contender is having, Michiko Nakamoto writes.
Iridium, a subsidiary of Motorola, the US electronics group, which is a
leading contender to provide global satellite communications systems, is
having trouble enlisting widespread international support for its proposed
system.
The group, planning to start up a global satellite communications system
using hand-held phones by 1997, has had to modify its proposed system, which
will use a constellation of 77 low-earth-orbit (LEO) satellites, to make it
more marketable than in its original form.
Iridium proposes making its process complementary to, rather than in
competition with, terrestrial cellular systems, by allowing subscribers to
use the same handsets for cellular systems as well as its satellite one.
The move follows the group's failure to win enough financing in the first
phase of its Dollars 3.2bn (Pounds 1.76bn) project before a self-imposed
deadline last November.
Iridium postponed the closing on November 15 of an international private
placing of its shares aimed at raising Dollars 175m until after an
international conference in Spain where radio spectrum allocations will be
considered for various applications, including mobile satellite systems.
Publicly, the group contends its decision to postpone the closing was to
accommodate a number of prospective European investors unwilling to make
pledges ahead of the World Administrative Radio Conference (WARC-92), set
for Torremolinos, Spain, from February 3 to March 3. If the WARC does not
allocate the necessary spectrum, introduction of Iridium's proposed system
could be delayed.
Mr Leo Mondale, Iridium's vice-president for international relations,
admitted financing did not depend entirely on the WARC decision. 'I can't
say yes, we have cheques from all these people subject to the result of the
WARC,' he said.
The problems are not only financial. Global communications systems need
international political acceptance to start up. With four to six groups
proposing varying systems, the competition and political manoeuvres are only
just beginning.
Iridium has already run up against Inmarsat, the international consortium
backed by its 64-member countries, which provides global communications
systems via satellite to ships and aircraft.
Inmarsat has its own plans to develop a global hand-held communications
system but does not expect to launch this until the end of the decade. In an
attempt to enlist Inmarsat's support, Iridium stresses it would lease
capacity to Inmarsat members and has approached some individually.
Separately, the US group claims potential competitors, including Inmarsat,
would like to see the decision on spectrum allocation delayed, to stop
Iridium gaining a head start.
Inmarsat maintains it favours spectrum allocation. But if allocation is to
be made, it should be open to all satellite systems.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920129

