FT924-789

FT  22 DEC 92 / Hotline for complaints about EC barriers


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


FRUSTRATED about frontier controls? Piqued by passport checks? From January,
you can ring a telephone hotline to complain about remaining barriers to
free movement around the European Community.
Euro Citizen Action Service, a Brussels-based lobby group for citizens'
rights, yesterday launched a fax and telephone service which will field
complaints that the EC has missed its January 1 deadline for ending passport
checks at internal borders.
Ecas is running the service between January 4-8 only, hoping to tap a
supposed undercurrent of discontent about the failure of most countries to
lift all internal border controls on people.
But the complaints hotline will undoubtedly not satisfy some free-travel
proponents, who favour a more direct approach. Some federalist members of
the European Parliament are likely to test the legality of British
resistance to lifting controls by crossing to Dover without a passport early
in the new year in the hope of being turned away.
Ecas volunteers will tell callers of a more timid disposition how to lodge a
formal complaint with the European Commission, and will compile a list of
gripes which could be used in a European Court case against Brussels or
individual EC governments. Ecas also wants to encourage people to complain
if they are deprived of information at borders about their rights in the new
internal market.
At the Edinburgh summit 10 days ago leaders of the 12 Community countries
admitted that free movement of people - one of the aims of the single market
 -could not be 'completely assured' by January 1. Nine Continental countries
aim to lift internal controls at land frontiers by the middle of next year.
But airports have been given until December 1 to end passport checks on
internal EC flights. Britain, Denmark and Ireland may lighten passport
controls but are likely to retain some form of check at all internal borders
beyond that date.
The Commission shares the Ecas interpretation of EC treaty rules that all
controls should go, but appears to have dropped the immediate threat of
legal action against member states which maintain passport checks.
Ecas, Rue Defacqz 1, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. Frontier control hotline
(available only from January 4 to January 8): Brussels 534 8325 (telephone),
534 5275 (fax).

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921222

