FT921-14239

FT  17 JAN 92 / (CORRECTED) Childcare: The double bind for working parents -
The childcare dilemma


   By EDWARD BALLS


Correction (published 22nd January 1992) appended to this article.
Childcare in Britain is both more expensive and less widely available than
in any other European country. Many people in Britain are frustrated by
their inability to afford convenient and high quality childcare. Little
wonder that, with an election pending, childcare provision is rising towards
the top of the political agenda.
But is this lack of affordable, quality childcare a matter of concern for
public policy? Those concerned solely with economic efficiency, remain
sceptical: childcare, they argue, is expensive, so no one should be
surprised that most people cannot find quality care that is affordable and
accessible. The pro-childcare lobby is, in reality, a vociferous,
special-interest group, comprising well-paid and skilled working women, who
want the state to subsidise them to employ lower-paid child-minders.
Yet there is more at stake than economic efficiency; and can these
economists be sure that there is no economic case for government
intervention? Perhaps by disregarding the actual and potential skills of
married women, the UK is wasting an important economic resource.
The state could try to improve the skills and therefore the earning
potential of women with children, by subsidising childcare. This would
increase the incentive for employers to invest in the skills of their women
workers. A more direct way would be for the government to subsidise their
training.
But the notion that state childcare should be used to encourage women back
to work to offset an impending 'labour shortage' is absurd. Declining entry
of young people into the labour market will not cause a shortage or workers,
any more than the rise in female participation caused a glut in the 1980s.
Instead, the rise in the demand for women's labour will raise the relative
real wages of employed women. Conversely, subsidising women who enter the
labour force will depress wages for unskilled workers.
This failure to understand the wage effects of changes in labour
participation leads to wild claims about the savings from increased state
childcare provision, as a recent study from the Institute for Public Policy
Research demonstrates. The report describes three increasingly ambitious
ways to improve childcare in Britain towards European levels, which would
cost between Pounds 4bn and Pounds 11bn a year, equivalent to an extra 2p-5p
on the basic income tax rate.
The report argues that the extra tax revenue generated by an estimated
33-150 per cent rise in female employment would more than pay for the
scheme. This startling conclusion rests on the unrealistic assumption that
this large influx of largely unskilled labour will neither reduce the wages
of, or taxes paid by, unskilled women or men.
Yet non-economic arguments may justify a greater role for government in the
care of pre-school children if the electorate is willing, as in other
European countries, to pay higher taxes to cover the costs.
Subsidising children:
Why should individuals bear the main cost of raising their children? Society
has an interest in children, too, and should contribute to the cost of their
upbringing. If society wants generous maternity leave, maternity pay and
childcare, to encourage people to have children, it should share the cost.
Level playing field:
The UK tax system discriminates against two-parent households in which both
work by requiring them to pay for childcare out of their net income.
Families in which one parent does not work pay no tax on the effective
income they derive from parent-provided childcare. Tax relief for childcare
expenses would offset this distortion. In the UK it applies only to
employer-subsidised workplace nurseries.
Equity and redistribution:
Extending tax relief to all forms of childcare would make what is a highly
regressive tax break even more unfair. Tax relief for childcare
disproportionately transfers income to above-average wage-earners, with the
largest benefits going to top-rate taxpayers. If the government has
redistributive goals in mind, it should target support on low-income and
single-parent households. Income-related childcare vouchers or a childcare
tax credit would make it easier for low-income families to work. But
relieving poverty, especially among single-parent families, might be better
achieved by improving financial support to parents on low incomes, whether
or not they want to work.
Education:
There may be a separate social or educational case for providing nursery
education for 3-4-year-old schoolchildren. In the UK, only 35-40 per cent of
children in this age-group are in publicly funded nursery education or
childcare, compared with 65-70 per cent in Germany and 95 per cent in
France.
Gender equality:
The state could also decide to subsidise skilled women to remain in work
through their child-bearing years as one way of raising the economic status
of women to an equal footing with men, both within the workplace and within
the household. Women do not, in practice, have the same career-chances as
men. The cost of having children is usually borne at the expense of the
woman's career and wages, regardless of whether this makes economic sense
for the family; at the same time, women with children may be passed over for
promotion.
Subsidising childcare is one way of enabling more women to challenge
society's deep-seated assumptions about their career prospects. This social
argument for subsidising childcare, in a way which would inevitably favour
skilled women, could be economically costly and would be distributionally
regressive. Whether there is a compelling public interest argument for doing
so is not a question economics can answer.
This is the second article in a series on childcare.
CORRECTION (PUBLISHED 22ND JANUARY 1992).
The article should have read: 'The report argues that the extra tax
revenue, generated in part by an estimated 33-150 per cent rise in
full-time equivalent employment of women with children under five, would
more than pay for the scheme.'

The Financial Times


London Page 17 Illustration (Omitted).

920117

