FT921-12042

FT  29 JAN 92 / Personal View: The four commandments of industrial progress


   By DOUGLAS FRASER


The performance of British industry when compared with its overseas
competitors improved significantly during the 1980s, but is still well below
that of the best, and is falling behind again. Against this background it is
relevant to ask how public-sector bodies such as the National Economic
Development Office (Nedo) can make the most effective contribution to
improving the performance of Britain's industry.
The process of change and improvement in individual companies can be
outlined in the following terms. First, complacency has to be destroyed,
perhaps by imminent bankruptcy or the loss of a big contract. Second, there
needs to be a leader with a clear vision of what can and should be achieved.
Third, there needs to be an understanding of that vision and commitment to
it throughout the organisation. Fourth, the organisation requires the
wherewithal to bring about the changes envisaged, including a climate of
economic stability. Exactly the same process applies at the level of an
industry, or indeed of a nation. It may not be generally appreciated how far
the UK has gone down this road, nor how far it has yet to go.
In recent years, the principal shock to national complacency was the 1980-81
recession coupled with high exchange rates and an environment in which
industry could not look to government as a saviour. That recession hurt the
worthy as well as the unworthy. But the bruises of 1980-81 have now faded
and the current recession is preventing industry from focusing on the
long-term changes that are needed to improve competitiveness still further.
As a result, there is a continuing need for uncompromising analysis of the
performance of different industries to enable companies to measure
themselves against the best international standards.
Over the past four years, Nedo has published reports which pull no punches.
Other organisations such as the National Institute of Economic and Social
Affairs have also published detailed performance comparisons which challenge
companies in the UK. These analyses help with the second stage of managing
change - that of identifying areas for improvement.
One of the great changes in the UK since the 1960s and 1970s is the extent
to which the Trades Union Congress and the Confederation of British Industry
no longer seek to negotiate on behalf of all employees and all employers.
While they are effective at consolidating and representing the views of
their members, there is no longer a feeling that they can deliver particular
actions such as imposing ceilings on pay rises. This belief in the executive
powers of institutions was corporatism; it was wrong-headed at the time and
it is now dead.
Those who speak of corporatism today, whether in derision or nostalgia, are
simply not aware of the profound changes of understanding and attitude that
have taken place. Change in companies can only be made by those who work in
them, or by those who are agents of their owners. However, in deciding what
to do, managers need access to ideas and a great deal of information so they
can select what is appropriate to their situation. There is no monopoly in
the provision of ideas. Consultants, industry bodies, research
establishments, universities, the government and Nedo can and should make a
contribution.
This is the kind of joint effort that Bill Jordan, chairman of the NEDC
Engineering Sector Group and president of the Amalgamated Engineering Union,
and Ian Gibson, chairman of the NEDC Engineering Skills Working Party and
chief executive of Nissan (UK), described in a recent presentation to the
National Economic Development Council when they spoke of their committees'
codifying and marketing best practice in the engineering industry.
The involvement of a top manager and a top trade unionist in such a
programme is an illustration of the third stage of improving competitive
advantage - gaining understanding of, and commitment to, change throughout
an organisation. Ideas for change, no matter how good, are ineffectual if
they are not understood, supported and adhered to by those who have to
implement them at all levels.
The National Economic Development Council's Sector Groups and Working
Parties involve about 500 senior industrialists and trade unionists, 80 of
whom are chairmen or chief executives in their organisations. Their
involvement both increases the credibility of any recommendations and helps
to ensure their implementation. Government is also a part of the tripartite
process with trade unions and employers. Proposals which demand changes in
government behaviour which are not consistent with the values of that
government are as useless as similar proposals addressed to trade unions or
to managers.
The fourth stage of managing change is providing the resources to implement
that change. At the level of an industry this generally means skilled people
and finance for investment. In the UK, significant progress has been
achieved in industrial training, but the backlog of years of under-training
is a challenge still to be met. Industrial profitability, although improved,
is still not at the levels required for the UK to match its international
competitors.
Among the resources that industry needs is the economic stability which
allows managers to plan for the future with confidence. Discussions at the
National Economic Development Council have helped to build an understanding
of the importance of these factors.
Over the last 10 years UK industry has made progress on all four
requirements for change. However, a successful transition is not one-off but
a continuous process. The challenge for the UK and its institutions is to
make continuous progress under all headings. The National Economic
Development Council's Sector Groups and Working Parties have sought to
become one of the principal agencies that drive this process.
The author is industrial director for the National Economic Development
Office.

The Financial Times


London Page 19 Illustration (Omitted).

920129

