FT924-11920

FT  23 OCT 92 / Bingham Report - Investigation into the BCCI scandal: Attack
on Major rejected


   By DAVID OWEN


MR NORMAN Lamont, the chancellor, told MPs yesterday that he would
vigorously pursue all the recommendations made by Lord Justice Bingham in
his report into Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which was closed
by the Bank of England in July last year.
Mr Lamont leapt to the defence of Mr John Major, the prime minister, and
other Treasury ministers past and present over their role in the supervision
of BCCI before its closure.
Claims by Mr Gordon Brown, shadow chancellor, that Mr Major must accept a
share of the blame for the BCCI debacle were 'absolutely disgraceful', Mr
Lamont said. The report made it 'quite clear', he added, that the conduct of
Treasury ministers including Mr Major was 'not open to criticism in any
respect'.
Labour should accept that the real responsibility for what had happened lay
with the criminals who 'perpetrated the fraud', rather than seeking 'to get
whatever miserable political advantage they can out of this'.
Mr Lamont also defended the conduct of Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Bank
governor, in the face of repeated Labour calls for him to resign. 'I do not
believe it would be right to call for the resignation of the governor of the
Bank of England,' he said, adding that he had 'every confidence' in him.
Repeatedly questioned on the subject of compensation for BCCI depositors, Mr
Lamont offered no additional help over and above that provided by existing
schemes. He said that Pounds 50m in compensation had already been paid to
9,000 people out of a figure of up to Pounds 85m that could be paid out.
'I do not believe we should have a system of 100 per cent compensation,' he
added. He sought to differentiate the position of BCCI depositors from those
affected by the Barlow Clowes collapse on the grounds that, in the case of
Barlow Clowes, no relevant compensation scheme was in existence.
Mr Lamont was also dismissive of the recent US report into BCCI published by
Senator John Kerry, saying that he did not accept its findings. The document
made 'some wild allegations which were incorrect'.
Mr Brown focused his remarks on the question of responsibility, asking
whether it was 'right that junior Bank of England officials should alone
shoulder the blame'.
Mr Lamont should accept that Mr Leigh-Pemberton's statement in April last
year that BCCI was in pretty good shape constituted 'something of a
misjudgment'. Far from the Treasury being uninformed, they knew full well
that there was a problem and chose to do nothing more.
The refrain was echoed by Mr Alistair Darling, a Labour Treasury spokesman,
who said that 'many people think it is high time that those who took
decisions must stand up and take responsibility when things go wrong'.
Mr Keith Vaz, Labour environment spokesman who has campaigned on behalf of
BCCI depositors, was among those to demand Mr Leigh-Pemberton's replacement.
Mr Vaz told Mr Lamont: 'The credibility of the governor of the Bank is no
more. He should apologise for what has happened and you should sack him.'
A series of written questions tabled by Mr Vaz later elicited the
information that the 'total direct costs' of Lord Justice Bingham and his
inquiry team had amounted so far to Pounds 595,000.
Mr Brian Sedgemore, Labour MP for Hackney South and Shoreditch, asked
whether Mr Leigh-Pemberton stood 'outside the laws of England'.
In an early-day motion, Mr Sedgemore had suggested that a Serious Fraud
Office inquiry into allegations of corruption concerning Bank employees
related to BCCI may have been prematurely wound up 'for political reasons'.
Addressing the difficulty of international supervision of banks, Mr Terence
Higgins, former Tory chairman of the all-party Treasury and Civil Service
committee which published its own BCCI report earlier this year, said it was
essential to have 'someone to regulate the regulators'.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921023

