FT921-15461

FT  10 JAN 92 / FT Law Report: Digest of cases reported in Michaelmas Term


   By AVIVA GOLDEN


R v MONOPOLIES AND MERGERS COMMISSION, EX PARTE SOUTH YORKSHIRE TRANSPORT
LTD AND SOUTH YORKSHIRE TRANSPORT AUTHORITY
(FT, December 6)
The South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Authority owned the entire share
capital of South Yorkshire Ltd which was a public transport company
providing local services in South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire, Derbyshire,
Nottinghamshire and Humberside. Although acquisitions of other transport led
to a reference to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, at first instance,
it was held that there had been no merger situation qualifying for
investigation on the ground that the reference area was not a 'substantial
part' of the UK. Upholding that decision by a majority, the Court of Appeal
stated that, in context, 'substantial part' had quantitative and qualitative
connotations, used in a comparative sense, the comparator being the whole of
the UK, Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 'Important', 'special' and
'significant' though the reference area might be, especially for those who
lived and worked there, there were many other such areas in the UK and the
reference area did not qualify for the description of 'a substantial part of
the UK'.
ATTORNEY GENERAL BY THE RELATION OF YORKSHIRE DERWENT TRUST LTD AND OTHERS v
BROTHERTON AND OTHERS
(FT, December 10)
The action was between the owners of land in Yorkshire through which the
River Derwent flowed and the defendants concerned to protect any public
navigation rights on the river. On a preliminary issue in the action, the
question was whether section 1 of the Rights of Way Act 1932 applied to
public rights of navigation. Mr Justice Vinelott had answered in the
negative but his decision was reversed by the Court of Appeal. Allowing the
landowners' appeal, the House of Lords stated that section 1(1) referred to
'user' by the public and of the way being 'actually enjoyed' and 'dedicated'
as a highway. It was clear that what was being referred to in 'a way . . .
upon or over land' was the physical site on which the feature described as
'the way' ran. An ordinary English reader would not consider that 'a way
upon or over land' was apt to refer to the permanent feature of a lake or
river running through land, or would think of 'land' as referring to the
surface of the water.
THE MOTOR VESSEL P
(FT, December 11 1991)
The buyers had agreed to buy the P from the sellers by a sale contract in a
memorandum of agreement (MOA) form but, by the completion date, the parties
were at loggerheads over the ship's condition. The buyers obtained an
injunction to give the sellers notice 'forthwith' but that the order should
not take effect until payment of the purchase price and/or delivery of the
vessel. When the injunction was obtained it was believed the court had
jurisdiction to make a Mareva order when the buyers, under an MOA were about
to pay and take delivery, but they also wanted to make sure that a
sufficient part of the price would remain in London. The Court of Appeal had
since held that no such jurisdiction existed (see Veracruz 1, FT, November
19 1991). Further, the buyers were not justified in making the application
ex parte because they had nothing to lose by giving advance notice.
DEUTSCHE BANK AG v IBRAHIM AND OTHERS
(FT, December 13)
In order to secure a loan, the defendant offered the plaintiffs' bank the
title deeds to two flats in London. Neither of the leases was granted to or
registered in the name of Mr Ibrahim. The tenants and registered leasehold
proprietors of the flats were his two daughters. In the present proceedings
the bank claimed a declaration that it had valid equitable mortgages of the
two leases while the daughters counterclaimed for delivery up of the leases.
Dismissing the bank's claim, Mr Newberger QC, sitting as a deputy Chancery
judge, held that where a father provided purchase money for property for his
children, there was a presumption of advancement that the property was not
held in trust for him but beneficially vested in the children in whose names
they had been acquired. However, even though the evidence showed that the
daughters had authorised the deposit of the title deeds with the bank, they
could defeat the bank's claim because they could rely on the absence of any
written memorandum by them sufficient to satisfy section 4 of the Statute of
Frauds 1677 so as to answer for the debt of another.
UNION TRANSPORT plc v CONTINENTAL LINES SA AND OTHERS
(FT, December 17)
between the defendant shipowners, domiciled in Belgium, and the charterers
who commenced proceedings in the Commercial Court claiming damages because
the shipowners had failed to nominate the vessel to lift the cargo. The
charterers contended that 'the place for performance of the obligation in
question', namely the shipowners' contractual duty to nominate a vessel, was
in London. Therefore under Article 5(1) of the Brussels Convention the
shipowners could be sued in the UK. The shipowners argued that since the
obligation to provide a vessel was not to be performed in England, the
charterers could not found jurisdiction under article 5(1). They therefore
applied to set aside the writ and service but their application was
dismissed. The Court of Appeal dismissed the shipowners' appeal, who now
appealed from that decision. Dismissing their appeal, the House of Lords
stated that the obligation in question was the obligation to nominate a
vessel, and that the place for performance of that obligation was in London.
Accordingly the English courts had jurisdiction under article 5(1).
BP OIL DEVELOPMENT LTD v INLAND REVENUE COMMISSIONERS
(FT, December 18)
In 1985, BP agreed to transport and process pipeline liquids from a field
owned by the Marathon Oil group by pipeline that was owned by Marathon and
then connected to the BP's pipeline in Scotland. Section 6(1) of the Oil
Taxation Act 1983 provided that in computing assessable profit or allowable
loss the positive amounts (price received for oil won) included 'tariff
receipts' attributable to that field. By subsection (2) the tariff receipts
were the aggregate of the amount of consideration received by the
participator in respect of '(a) the use of a qualifying asset; or (b) the
provision of services or other business facilities'. BP appealed to the
special commissioner against the assessment to PRT, claiming it was entitled
to separate tariff receipts allowance in respect of each of the qualifying
assets which it made available for use by the Brae Field. Dismissing BP's
appeal, the House of Lords stated that the amount of qualifying tariff
receipts to be reduced under section 9(1) was the whole of the qualifying
tariff receipts - not particular discrete amounts of qualifying tariff
receipts derived from the use of particular assets.
ITALIA EXPRESS
(FT, December 20)
Mr Ventouris claimed Dollars 4m against Mr Mountain as a representative of
Lloyd's underwriters under a war risks insurance policy for the vessel,
Italia Express. The underwriters contended that the loss was caused by Mr
Ventouris's alleged wilful misconduct, and the mainstay of their case was
the evidence of Mr Georgis Dimitrios Ventouris (GDV), his first cousin. The
court was asked to rule on the admissibility of a large number of tape
recordings under the Civil Evidence Act 1968 made by GDV in conversation
with divers and others alleged to have arranged for the sinking of the
vessel. The underwriters submitted that the statements on the tapes were
statements made in a document 'admissible as evidence of the facts stated
therein, of which direct oral evidence by them would be admissible' under
the Act. Refusing the application, Mr Justice Hirst stated that the
principle objects of Part I of the Act (sections 1 to 10) were to ensure
that all first-hand hearsay statements were admissible provided certain
conditions were fulfilled, and to allow second-hand hearsay to be received
if contained in a record. It would be highly anomalous if the principle,
clearly enshrined in section 2(3), that oral statements should be first-hand
did not also apply to documentary statements.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920110

