FT922-13449

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: How it looks after four more years -
London Markets


   By PETER MARTIN, Financial Editor


The FT's newly installed Group VII fax machine has mysteriously offered up
the following analyst's note dated July 9 1996 from Back, Track & Hindsight,
the London stockbroker.
THE main investment themes of John Major's second term of office are now
obvious. At the begining, however, it was easy to lose sight of them amid
the market's April 1992 post-election euphoria.
Our specialist team of Retrospective Portfolio mangers, using 20/20
Hindsight, our proprietary suite of analytical software, have identified
four themes of the second Major term:
Convergence, divergence, explosion. At the UK level, all the attention in
1992 was focused on the way in which the ERM made sterling a high-yielding
D-Mark. This was a replica of the prevailing wisdom at the European level:
economic convergence on the way to monetary union.
Convergence ruled for the first year or so, dragging foreign money into the
UK markets to take advantage of cheap valuations compared with much of the
rest of the world. But the political tensions that resurfaced across the EC
once the first flush of recovery gave way to sluggish growth led to the
second phase: divergence. As governments increasingly tried to edge their
economic policy away from the restrictive clutches of the Bundesbank, the
pressures inside the ERM became too great.
Result: explosion. What started as an attempt to ease the strains with One
Last Realignment rapidly degenerated into a 'temporary' period of floating
rates, during which sterling fell sharply. This finally gave John Major a
bout of rapid economic growth. But by igniting two years of 7 per cent-plus
inflation, it made people who'd plumped for bonds rather than equities wish
they hadn't thought a new era was dawning.
Manufacture or die] Sterling depreciation was a bonus for a manufacturing
sector that had already settled into a period of sustained outperformance.
As one engineering company boss put it, even before John Major was
reinstalled in Downing street: 'I can hire a graduate engineer for half the
cost of my German competitors, and in a business where what matters now is
engineering value-added, that's a significant long-term cost advantage.' The
international focus of those manufacturing firms that survived the 1980s
helped them get through the slow growth of the early 1990s in better shape
than the more domestically-oriented service industries. Except for one:
Wasting away. It was inevitable that the waste issue would hit the UK in the
mid-1990s as it had hit the US, Scandinavia and Germany over the preceding
decade. Helped by the Recycling Charter introduced by the new minister for
rubbish, Lord Patten of Bath, the industry took off in the UK. Among the
keenest participants were the water companies, whose momentary relief at
escaping from Labour's vague threats to de-privatise them them soon gave way
to gloom about the increasingly fierce regulatory regime. Waste provided an
unregulated escape route. Still, the roller-coaster growth the industry
offered - and the swings in ratings suffered by all glamour sectors with
scandal potential - made the waste arms of the water companies uneasy
bedfellows with their regulated activities. A wave of flotations seemed
inevitable.
Shares of ageing minds. Two long-running trends - the ageing of the baby
boom and the oversupply of consumer brands caused by globalisation and by
manufacturers' attempts to offset slow underlying growth with lots of
new-product launches - combined to create the mind-share showdown. As the
baby-boom turned 40, its members' willingness to learn about new brands
declined sharply, greatly raising the premium on existing brands. This
particularly applied to brands which had enjoyed their peak of
fashionability during the baby-boomers' adolescence. Few UK companies
controlled world-wide brand-names any more, but those that did moved briskly
to a premium rating, creating a Nifty 15 of high-priced consumer stocks.
These four themes are not the only key investment principles identified by
Retrospective Portfolio Management. Advanced techniques in this field -
marketed under the Firm's slogan 'You'll Always Look Good With Hindsight' -
also allow us to identify with accuracy trends that didn't happen. One of
these is the big Property/Banking Play of 1994. The theory was that the best
way to play a coming recovery in London property prices was to buy the
shares of the banks, since by now they had foreclosed on most of the
property.
Just as the pessimists' predictions of the 1980s top in the property market
had proved several years too early, however, the optimists' predictions of
the bottom also overstated the speed of developments. Though some
fundamental trends seemed to be moving in property's favour  - not least the
inflation generated by sterling depreciation - the underlying lack of demand
still told against it.
The key to the success of Retrospective Portfolio Management is to avoid
over-eager asset allocation decisions. We are recommending that clients who
wish full exposure to the retrospective trends of the second Major
government should be fully invested in our key themes by Q2 1997. Investment
research for the next prime ministership is well under way, and clients can
expect full briefings with support material in early 2002.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920411

