FT921-14331

FT  16 JAN 92 / The Lloyd's Report - Analysis: Names may get 'route to
leave' - Open years


   By RICHARD LAPPER


THE REPORT offers no immediate respite for the thousands of Names who are
members of syndicates with 'open years', Richard Lapper writes. Those are
accounts that cannot be closed because of uncertainty about future claims,
for example those arising from US liability business underwritten up to 40
years ago.
Nevertheless, it suggests changes that might help to improve matters and
indicates a way in which Names might be able to buy their way out.
It says Lloyd's 'must offer Names a route to leave if they so wish, albeit
at a price which fairly reflects their outstanding liabilities. Unless the
society (Lloyd's) can demonstrate that Names can resign if they wish, it
will be hard to persuade new Names to join'.
The task force says long-tail liabilities, in which claims emerge sometimes
decades after policies are written, represent 'one of the greatest problems
facing the society'.
It was unable to develop reliable estimates about the size of future claims
arising from asbestos-related diseases and environmental pollution.
Rejecting mutualisation - in which all Names would pool resources to pay for
the losses of those worst affected - the task force suggests that Lloyd's
must seek to trade out of its difficulties.
That strategy 'implies maintaining a steady pattern of profitable growth,
enabling existing Names to pay their losses from future profits while
attracting new capital to the market to participate in new business'.
It suggests that CentreWrite, the reinsurance company created by Lloyd's in
July last year, should shift its focus away from reinsuring syndicates with
open years towards reinsuring individual Names.
The task force suggests a reversal of policy on syndicates unable to close
years. Instead of pressing syndicate managers to close years, as Lloyd's
does at present, it should accept that leaving a syndicate open provides
'the most pragmatic response to grave uncertainties such as major latent
liability exposures'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920116

