FT923-6542

FT  24 AUG 92 / 'Heads buried in the sand' over VAT rules: A look at EC
changes facing importers and exporters


   By ALAN CANE


TIME IS running out for importers and exporters faced with meeting tough new
European Community value added tax regulations from January 1.
With four months to go, revenue authorities across the Community fear that
many - perhaps most - companies have yet to take steps to change their
business systems to satisfy the requirements.
The new regulations will affect every company in the Community that imports
or exports goods. They comprise a series of interim measures designed to
bridge the gap between current national arrangements and a harmonised,
Community-wide VAT system planned for 1997. They are designed to do away
with the paperwork that causes delays at border crossings.
They make mandatory a series of new reports, including comprehensive
statistical records of the movements of goods and lists of sales to
companies in the Community.
Customs and Excise said: 'People seem to have been burying their heads in
the sand, hoping the problem would go away. It will not go away and for some
companies it may already be too late to make the deadline.'
Customs and Excise says that about 140,000 UK companies trade with other EC
countries each year and a further 420,000 believe they will be trading with
other Community countries within three years. Yet most have not started to
modify their computer systems to enable them to generate the new reports.
Software specialists are warning that they may have underestimated the time
needed to make the changes.
The UK has moved faster than mainland Europe to create and to comply with
the legislation. Yet of 30,000 UK companies that will have to submit the
most detailed statistical returns, only 3,000 have sought clarification of
what is expected of them. The consequence for companies inadequately
prepared for the changes will be costly. If they are unable to generate VAT
data from their computer systems they will have to compile the information
manually, or employ a clearing agent or accounting consultancy. Failure to
satisfy the authorities could lead to fines or - in the case of failure to
provide accurate statistics - criminal charges. Customs and Excise has made
clear that it will be lenient with companies making errors in the first year
of the transitional period.
Some experts believe that compiling the information manually would be
expensive and time-consuming. They do not think it is a viable option for
companies with significant cross-border trade. Some companies already use
clearing agents to prepare the single administrative document which
accompanies exports and which will be swept away by the changes.
A few UK companies, among them British Steel, Kingfisher Group, and Marks
and Spencer, are well advanced with their preparations. British Steel has
been working on changes to its computer systems since the middle of last
year. Mr James Whitfield, British Steel's director of financial services,
said the company had up to 100 people working on the project. 'It cuts
across all the functions in the company,' he said.
In spite of the early start, Mr Whitfield cannot guarantee the system will
be complete by January 1, principally because final details of the
legislation have yet to be settled: 'To that extent, we are working in the
dark,' he said.
A number of UK software companies are developing software to handle the
changes, but companies will not be able to solve the difficulty simply by
buying and installing a software package.
The packages need data to process and that can only be generated
economically by making changes to a company's basic accounting software.
Mr Richard Collier-Keyward of accountants Coopers & Lybrand said UK
companies were aware of the legislation but had failed to warn their
computer managers of the changes that would be required. 'About 50 per cent
will get it right in January and the rest will muddle through - at a cost,'
he said.
Problems for companies and VAT authorities are compounded by the fact that
each country is at a different stage in preparing its legislation. By July 1
this year only Denmark and the Republic of Ireland had passed legislation
while Italy and Greece had not even produced a draft law.
The consequences of VAT legislation for business computing will be dealt
with in the next issue of Software at Work to be published with the FT on
September 11.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920824

