FT921-14319

FT  16 JAN 92 / Technology: Pen is mightier than the board - Computers
without keys are proving their worth in business and industry


   By DELLA BRADSHAW


For many businesses the laptop computer represents the latest in blue-sky
technology - of a piece with nuclear fusion or rocket research. No so at the
London & Edinburgh Insurance Group, where the most sophisticated laptops are
already been edged towards the door.
They look set to be ousted by pen-based computers, electronic tablets
reminiscent of a Victorian school slate, complete with a stylus or 'pen'.
The insurance company is using them for assessing the damage claims made by
garages for the repair of crashed vehicles. 'We hope generally to save time
and money,' says Clive Fletcher, claims director at London & Edinburgh.
At the moment when London & Edinburgh engineers visit the repair centre they
take a laptop computer and a sheaf of report forms which represent the
vehicle diagrammatically in an exploded form. The assessor notes the
sections of the damaged vehicle which need replacing and marks sections on
the report forms.
Code numbers referring to each part are then typed into the laptop and the
data are sent over a communications link to a mainframe computer belonging
to Audatex, the Watford-based vehicle damage assessment company. The
mainframe calculates the cost of parts and repairs, even down to items such
as whether the paintwork is matt or metallic. This repair cost is then sent
back to the laptop.
The time-consuming part of the operation is transferring the data from the
worksheets into the laptop. Geoffrey Sharp, chief staff motor engineer at
London & Edinburgh, hopes the pen-based machines will do away with that
duplication. 'We're engineers and although we've taken to keyboard skills
quite well, we're still not that quick at it.'
Instead of the worksheets, the trials have put Gridpad pen-based machines,
from Victor Technologies, part of the Tandy group, into the hands of the
assessors. Displayed on the screen are the expanded vehicle diagrams. But by
touching individual components of the car on the screen with the pen, the
machine automatically records the parts that need replacing. That data can
then be sent over the communications line directly from the hand-held
machine.
Sharp believes that the drawbacks in the system are more with the software
than the hardware - London & Edinburgh is looking at systems from both Grid
and the US computer company NCR. In particular, it has proven impractical to
put diagrammatic descriptions of every car on the market on to the Audatex
software.
Each expanded diagram takes up about 700 kilobytes of memory, says Alex
Leonard, managing director of Audatex. Audatex is now supporting 32 vehicle
models on the Gridpad, which includes more than 1,100 derivatives and
accounts for about two thirds of the cars on UK roads.
But, says Leonard, repairers should choose about 15 of the cars that they
repair most frequently and keep copies of the appropriate diagram on floppy
discs. 'For example, a Porsche dealer is unlikely to want to repair a Ford,'
he says.
Bill Clough, president of Microslate, the Montreal-based pen computer maker,
believes the only answer to memory limitation is to use CD-Roms (compact
disc read only memory). Then when an accident assessor visits, say, a Ford
garage he or she could insert the Ford disc, and replace that with a Toyota
disc if visiting a Toyota repair centre.
In North America Microslate is targeting blue-collar workers with its pen
computer - delivery men, warehouse overseers, or retail floor staff. 'This
is because in the US the white-collar market is 95 per cent saturated with
computer technology,' says Clough. 'The blue-collar workforce is only 11 per
cent saturated.'
In Europe manufacturers take a different view, says Alasdair Macgregor, UK
marketing manager for workstation systems at NCR. 'Initially we're aiming at
the mobile white-collar worker. That is where most corporations can get the
best return on their investment.' Included on Macgregor's list of
professions, which he describes as 'very, very, very varied' are engineers,
insurance personnel, doctors and even architects.
One software developer working with NCR to produce a package for architects
and surveyors is SurvSoft, of Weston-Super-Mare. The company expects to have
a system on the market before the middle of this year to aid surveyors when
they are called in to refurbish buildings.
The SurvSoft software, now in the final testing stage, contains a visual
collection of building components - walls, floors, ceilings, wiring and so
on. By touching the appropriate component with the pen, the surveyor can put
them together to give an accurate representation of the building in what
Pitman calls 'two and a half D' - the height, length and depth are included
but the diagram has no true perspective. The appropriate measurements are
inserted by calling up a calculator pad on the screen and then indicating
the appropriate figures.
Pitman points out that at Pounds 4,500 for the hardware and software
combination the equipment costs about the same as surveying of a high-street
premises. 'As it doubles the speed of the survey we believe it pays for
itself after just two surveys,' he says.
Such applications could speed the acceptance of pen-based systems, says
Chris Fell, an analyst at information technology research group Dataquest.
'It's an applications- driven market,' says Fell.
'In the past company X has come out with a wonderful new box and people have
bought it. That is no longer the case. Now people see they can get by with
all the equipment they've got and that is one reason why we have seen a fall
in the personal computer market,' he adds.
The software developed by SurvSoft relies on the surveyor only to use the
pen to highlight pictures and figures - no keyboard is needed, nor does the
surveyor have to write information on the pad. Fell refers to this category
of machines as pen and notebooks, and believes this will be the first stage
in the development of the technology.
The second stage will be true 'slates' on to which the user can scribble
words which the system will be able to recognise. Fell predicts it will be
1994 before such systems become reliable enough to find widespread
acceptance. However some small handwriting recognition elements are already
proving useful.
A further factor which could inhibit the growth of the market is the choice
of operating system for the pen systems. SurvSoft, for example, uses
'windows' software, enabling the software developer to put pictures or
'icons' on the screen. This approach is being pushed by Microsoft with its
Pen Windows adaptation of the popular Windows software environment.
Although this will enable users to adapt Windows applications for use on
pen-based systems, many believe its lifespan will be limited because it is
merely the adaption of a desk-top operating system for use with a hand-held
machine.
More promising in the longer-term, believes Fell, is the Penpoint operating
system developed by Go, the California start-up company, specifically for
pen-based portables.
Whatever the outcome, many believe that the emerging pen technology could be
the next revolution in computing. 'I think this is a piece of technology
which is really here to say,' says London & Edinburgh's Fletcher. 'Not just
in our industry but in many others as well.'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
FORECAST FOR PEN-BASED COMPUTERS
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Europe
'000 units       1992     1993     1994     1995    1996    1997
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Pen/note            5       40      185      520   1,050   1,720
Slate              10       30       85      575     860   1,115
Total              15       70      270    1,095   1,910   2,835
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Dataquest (January 1992)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 13 Illustration (Omitted).

920116

