FT921-1370

FT  24 MAR 92 / International Company News: Record Telecom Argentina float
raises over Dollars 1bn


   By JOHN BARHAM


   BUENOS AIRES


THE ARGENTINE govern-ment has raised more than Dollars 1bn in the country's
most successful privatisation.
The government yesterday completed the privatisation of Telecom Argentina
when it sold its remaining 30 per cent share in the country's second largest
telephone company to individual and corporate investors in an international
share offering.
Officials said the Telecom flotation far exceeded their forecasts and
out-performed the Dollars 838m raised last December from the sale of 30 per
cent of Telefonica de Argentina, the country's leading telephone company.
There is concern, however, that Telecom's share price has been inflated by
excessive bank financing. One bank offered to lend investors 80 per cent of
their bid, many of whom hope Telecom will emulate Telefonica's share price,
which has risen by two-thirds since flotation in December.
An analyst said: 'This is like a great big margin trading South Sea bubble.'
Government officials are considering restricting bank financing in future
flotations.
The privatisation process began in November 1990 when the telephone system
was split into two companies and 60 per cent of their capital sold to two
foreign operators in 1990 for Dollars 5.03bn in foreign debt certificates
and Dollars 214m in cash. The remaining 10 per cent of equity is held in
trust for company employees.
Mr Pedro Lopez, an official of the National Securities Commission, said the
government had received more than 340,000 applications from potential
investors offering Dollars 5.95bn for the shares.
However, only Dollars 1bn to Dollars 1.1bn worth of applications will be
accepted, since most of the bids were made below the price established by
auction.
Officials say that only about 20 per cent of the bids were made by foreign
investors, the rest coming from Argentine investors using local or offshore
funds.
Telecom, managed by the French and Italian state telephone companies which
hold 39 per cent of the company, has stated it expected to raise sales this
year to Dollars 1.2bn, up 39 per cent on 1991. Net profit is forecast to
rise 30 per cent to Dollars 120m. Net margin is to rise to 25 per cent of
sales by 1996, when annual sales should reach Dollars 2bn.
The second consecutive success of a privatisation issue has fuelled the
booming Buenos Aires equity market, which climbed yesterday on the strength
of the Telecom flotation. Telefonica shares closed at 42 cents a share
yesterday.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920324

