FT923-10825

FT  28 JUL 92 / Wellcome share sale a windfall for research


   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor


The Wellcome Trust will double its spending on medical research by
reinvesting the Pounds 2.16bn raised from the Wellcome share sale in higher
yielding securities. The extra income could support up to 2,000 additional
scientists and support staff, working mainly in the UK. The trust's
projected income for next year - Pounds 220m - will match that of the
government-funded Medical Research Council.
'The Wellcome Trust intends to fund more scientists for the long term,
including whole careers,' said Dr Bridget Ogilvie, its director. 'It will
offer better working conditions, with support for new centres of scientific
excellence and funding for whole teams of researchers and technicians
together with the latest equipment.'
To celebrate the success of the sale, the trust announced a series of
spending initiatives yesterday. They include a Pounds 50m contribution over
five years to a new genetic research institute. It will house 300 scientists
and technicians, working under the direction of Dr John Sulston as part of
an international effort to decode all 100,000 human genes. (The institute's
name has been decided - it will be called the Sanger Centre after Dr Fred
Sanger, winner of two Nobel Prizes - but its location is still under
discussion.)
The trust also showed that, with its new financial strength, it will be able
occasionally to reverse the brain drain. It announced a Pounds 3m grant to
bring a leading US immunology research team to the UK. Prof Douglas Fearon
and six colleagues will move from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore to
Cambridge University.
Dr Ogilvie said the trust was spending Pounds 50m to renovate its
headquarters, originally built in the 1930s, on London's Euston Road. Trust
officials were previously reluctant to disclose the cost of the
refurbishment for fear of provoking calls from scientists that the money
would be spent better on research.
The building, which is due to reopen early next year, will contain a new
Centre for Medical Science and History including a public exhibition called
Science for Life. Dr Ogilvie said Sir Henry Wellcome (1853-1936), the
trust's founder, 'was the showman of his age. He would have been thrilled to
bits to see his building used in the way he had intended.'
In the autumn the trust will hold meetings with universities and medical
charities to plan its expansion in more detail.
Observer, Page 15: Lex, Page 16;
Market Report, Page 34

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920728

