FT924-6489

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (3): Deficit sends warning signal - Stephen
Fidler says that 1993 will put the Salinas economic policies to the test


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


THE COMING year will provide a severe test for the economic policies of the
Salinas administration. With two years of the presidency of Mr Carlos
Salinas left to run, the euphoria over Mexico's profound economic reforms
has begun to abate. Economic growth has slowed and a more sober vision of
the future has settled over financial markets and business.
The warning signal has been raised by a current account deficit
significantly exceeding the government's earlier forecasts. Extraordinary
measures - including deliberately contrived customs delays at the border -
may keep the deficit this year just below Dollars 20bn, at 6 per cent of
gross domestic product, compared with Dollars 13.3bn in 1991.
The government's arguments about why this should not matter are well
rehearsed: its budget surplus means that the deficit is entirely a private
sector phenomenon; that big inflows of capital are driving the current
account deficit, not the other way round; and that much of the deficit is
due to imports of capital goods which will eventually expand the economy's
productive capacity.
While these arguments were largely accepted in 1991 as reserves expanded
because of big capital inflows, the 1992 capital influx has appeared more
uncertain.
'Last year, the government could argue that the current account was caused
by big capital inflows. That doesn't explain why the current account deficit
this year will be significantly higher than last year's, while capital
inflows have been more hesitant,' says Mr Jonathan Heath, head of Macro
Asesoria Economica, an economic forecasting group in Mexico City.
Some government officials now admit that the sustainability of the financing
is an issue. In the end, the capital account surplus will by definition
equal the current account deficit, adjusted for changes in reserves. But,
given that a s u b s t a n t i a l portion of the capital inflows are
short-term in n a t u r e, a sharp loss of confidence for whatever reason
would trigger outflows of funds and risk economic dislocation until a new b
a l a n c e of payments equilibrium is found.
'The current account deficit is of concern to us because it is of concern to
the financial markets,' says one official. The government calmed one such
bout of financial uncertainty last month by a shift in exchange rate policy.
Over time, the new policy will widen the band of possible valuations of the
peso against the US dollar. Prior to October, the maximum rate of daily
devaluation had been 20 centavos a day, an annual 2.3 per cent. The new
policy doubled the maximum possible rate of devaluation, but left the
ceiling on the peso's value unchanged at 3,056 to the dollar.
The band of possible values for the peso will thus widen to just over 9 per
cent if the same policy is in place by the end of next year, from about 3.5
per cent now.
The aim is partly to increase the uncertainty facing speculators, and to
encourage them to invest in longer-term instruments. The minimal
fluctuations of the peso encouraged speculators to borrow at low interest
rates in dollars to lend them at much higher rates in pesos.
A senior government official says that the new policy does not rule out the
eventual possibility of moving to a fixed exchange rate. 'This formula does
not prohibit the fixing of the currency. The options are all still open.'
The change should ease concerns about the effect of an overvalued currency
on Mexican competitiveness, though it will not erase them. Mr Heath reckons
it will halt the erosion of competitiveness: the maximum devaluation rate
for the currency is just about equal to the difference between expected US
inflation and his forecast for Mexico (7.6 per cent in 1993 against his
expectation of 11.9 per cent this year). Productivity growth should then
start to reduce the extent of the overvaluation.
If productivity is the key to future balance in the economy, then it is
widely accepted that further deregulation is the key to expanding
productivity.
Opinions about how far such f u r t h e r d e r e g u l a t i o n is
necessary vary. Some economists, such as Mr Rogelio Ramirez de la O, who
runs a corporate economic consultancy, believe it has to be drastic. 'I
don't think the supply side of the Mexican economy can support 4 per cent
growth over a long period with sustainable current account deficits,' he
says.
The economy is thus doomed to stop-go policies unless the government buys
time to improve the supply side by allowing the aggressive sale of domestic
assets to foreign companies. To do this, it would have to open up the still
significant areas of the economy in which foreign investment is restricted.
The government sees no such sharp dilemma, in part because of a belief that
import growth will abate as the pent-up demand that followed the
debt-depressed 1980s eases. They also believe that when the economy improves
in the US, to which 70 per cent of Mexican exports are bound, so will
Mexico's balance of payments.
The need for further deregulation is nevertheless accepted, for example, in
the country's labour laws which forbid a reduction in nominal wages unless
there is a business emergency. 'We have inflation i n e r t i a in M e x i c
o: wage settlements have been too high for inflation to fall faster,' says a
government official.
A sweeping simplification of the 1973 investment law is already planned,
according to officials, which will allow 100 per cent foreign ownership of
all but a few strategic industries. The government also plans legislation
over the coming year to make the central bank independent.
The concern about wage inflation has been partly addressed in the latest
pacto - the annual accord between the government, business and the trade
unions which has been set every year since 1987. The October accord, which
included the shift in exchange rate policy, contained a commitment that
contractual wage awards should be limited to single digits in the coming
year. Previous pactos had addressed only minimum wages.
This provided significant support for the government's single-digit
inflation target for the coming year. 'It's impossible to understand Mexican
economic policy without understanding the importance of the pacto,' says Mr
Angel Gurria, undersecretary for international financial affairs in the
Ministry of Finance.
As part of the consensus building, senior government officials meet business
and union leaders every Thursday to discuss issues ranging from the
competitive problems facing the machine tools industry to increases in the
price of health care.
Hopes in the longer term for investment - and in particular for the stable,
long-term direct investment most needed by the Mexican economy - hang on the
ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement, negotiated last
year with the US and Canada.
Despite the change in administration in the US, the odds are still heavily
in favour of its ratification, if only because failure to do so would so
damage the Mexican economy that it would have important ramifications for
its northern neighbour. In the meantime, however, the close scrutiny of
Nafta in the US Congress could prove unsettling in Mexico.
In the longer term too, the government needs, as the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development pointed out in its first report on the
country this year, to increase savings. 'Unless the national saving ratio
recovers, investment may  .. have to be scaled back,' it said.
For the year ahead, however, the government underlined in the annual budget
that there would be no dash for growth. The government plans to run a budget
surplus of 1.7 per cent of GDP next year, and expects growth to be a
sluggish 3 per cent and inflation 7 per cent. This year growth is forecast
at 2.7 per cent, and inflation at 11 per cent.
Provided that in 1994 the economy is growing faster and inflation is under
control, Mr Salinas will not mind. Such is the economic backdrop he needs
for the presidential elections which, one way or another, will provide the
ultimate verdict on his reform programme.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921120

