FT922-435

FT  27 JUN 92 / Books: For adults in the making - FT Children's Book of the
Month


   By MICHAEL GLOVER


A BONE FROM A DRY SEA
by Peter Dickinson
Gollancz Pounds 10.99, 192 pages
PUBLISHERS, parents and children alike have difficulty in knowing where
childhood ends and adulthood begins. For the child, it is a time of acute
existential uncertainty; to the publisher of books for children, it is
experienced as a problem of marketing strategy that can be summarised as
follows. At some point between the age of about ten (when many children are
still unselfconsciously voracious readers) and twelve, the desire to read is
often replaced by a yearning to do almost anything but read. The business of
living and self-discovery assumes an almost overwhelming importance; action
succeeds contemplation. And bookishness becomes for many an embarrassment,
an impediment to social advancement.
How does a publisher deal with these in-between-age-children who are no
longer children, adults-in-the-making who are not yet adults? Being human,
they fudge, and hope for the best.
One solution, however, has persisted. Twenty years ago, the Bodley Head
created a special new category of books for this age-group, YA (Young
Adults), and this uneasy, partially satisfactory description has survived to
this day, in spite of the fact that it smacks of condescension and that no
young person would ever admit to belonging to such a group. Why should they?
They are not, in their own opinion, 'in between' anything; they are merely
their own difficult, moody, tortured selves who, from time to time, try to
knock some sense into the frustrating and hopelessly outmoded imbeciles who
still hold partial sway over their lives.
Yet the problem is a real one . There does indeed come a point when the
familiar subject matters of books for children have been outgrown; but the
reader's experience of life and understanding of language makes him or her
unready for the fully fledged adult novel. So YA has its uses.
Amongst the finest in this category of novelists is Peter Dickinson, who has
published almost 20 titles in as many years with Victor Gollancz, ranging
from his early experiments in science fiction and fantasy to this month's
absorbing mixture of archaeology and pre-history, A Bone from a Dry Sea.
Dickinson succeeds where many others fail, precisely because he combines a
forceful simplicity of language with just the right level of complexity of
ideas to make his novels absorbing and intellectually challenging.
The narrative consists of two elements which alternate: the world of an
archaeological dig in the present and the world of pre-history four million
years ago - or 'then' and 'now,' as the chapters are labelled. The novel's
time-span in the present is surprisingly short - just a few days; in the
past, it seems to stretch back and away into infinity, giving a pleasing
sense throughout of sudden changes of pace.
The past is pure conjecture in which Dickinson is staring through lenses of
time 'right at the edge of imagination's eyesight,' as he puts it. He
imagines the existence of a tribe of African hominids, one of whom, a young
female called Li, is slowly beginning to emerge into a surprising degree of
self-awareness. She is a questor, a problem-solver, a creature who needs to
push herself to the furthest intellectual limits - for the sake of the
acquisition of knowledge alone. Is there something uniquely human about
that? If so, she must be numbered amongst our ancestors.
By staring at a spider setting its trap, she learns the rudiments of fishing
 -how to fashion the crudest of nets from gourd-fibre. Hers is a strange,
marvellous world, whose hugeness and otherness are gradually becoming
intellectually apparent.
In the time-span of the present, a team of archaeologists is searching and
sifting that same portion of pitiless African terrain for remains of - a
tribe of hominids? They hope so, in order to establish their world-wide
importance as a team of discoverers. These two worlds swim apart and come
together again, the one illuminating the other in details large and small.
This is a challenging, positive novel, which will be enjoyed by all
intelligent homines sapientes of twelve and above. Positive? Of course. If
you write under the banner of YA, nihilism must be avoided at all costs -
lest the senior librarian accuse you of corrupting youth by piling
depression upon depression.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920627

