FT924-6285

FT  21 NOV 92 / Motoring: Europe bows to Japanese - Stuart Marshall predicts
a first in the Car of the Year voting


   By STUART MARSHALL


FOR THE first time, it looks odds-on that Europe's Car of the Year will be
Japanese. The jury is out and the verdict will be delivered next week. But I
am confident of my forecast unless more than usual of the 59 motoring
journalists involved vote nationalistically or perversely - and some always
do just that.
One look at the list of eligible vehicles is enough to prove my point. There
are 15 entrants, but only 12 completely different cars if you accept that
the Mazda 626 and MX6, Mitsubishi Colt and Lancer, and Mitsubishi Space
Runner and Space Wagon are variations on themes rather than separate
entities. Only three of the 12 - the Alfa 155, Fiat Cinquecento and Renault
Safrane - are completely European products.
The two likeliest winners, the Nissan Micra and Toyota Carina E, have
Japanese names but were created mainly for European buyers. They are being
made in Britain. Micras come from the plant at Washington, County Durham,
which for five years has been supplying Europe with Bluebirds and, more
recently, Primeras.
The Carina E (the E stands for Excellence in Europe) will be rolling off the
assembly tracks at Burnaston, Derbyshire, by January but its engines are
being produced already at Shotton, north Wales; some are being exported to
Japan. So if, as I predict, the Micra and Carina E become winner and
runner-up, the victory will be Anglo-Japanese rather than purely Japanese.
First, though, a look at the runners as they parade in the paddock.
The Alfa 155, a four-door saloon with front-wheel drive and a Twin Spark
four-cylinder or V6 engine, is a pleasant car with sporting overtones but
not in the running for the award.
More of the jury's votes (members have 25 each) will go to the Fiat
Cinquecento, due in Britain early next year. Compared with Japanese
micro-cars, it is simple and low-tech. But it is small, cheap and
economical. Jurors with an eye on the environment will favour it.
The medium-large Renault Safrane is the Renault 25 replacement; it arrives
in Britain in January. Its comfort will appeal to many a business user but
it is hardly a Car of the Year.
The Micra should win because it brings business car standards of refinement
to the runabout-cum-small family car segment. It can be had with power
steering, ABS brakes, air-conditioning, and an advanced form of automatic
transmission.
The Carina E should be close behind, not least because it raises quality
standards in the 1.6 to two-litre family-cum-fleet class to new heights.
(Toyota's Camry and Lexus did the same for the middle and top management
segments).
The latest Corolla also brings similar executive-class refinement to the
mainly retail buyers of small / medium cars.
The 2.1-litre, 185-horsepower Honda Prelude high performance coupe is being
touted as Europe's safest car. It has driver and passenger airbags and
four-wheel steering and might appeal to buyers who lust after, but cannot
afford, a Mercedes-Benz SL.
Honda's CRX two-seater has a neat hardtop which stows under the boot lid. It
is a civilised and entertaining sports car for the 1990s.
The sleekly-styled Mazda 626, MX6 coupe and Xedos models may pick up votes
because they feature some of the smallest V6 engines in production.
The Mitsubishi Colt and Lancer are two more examples of the crop of high
quality small and small/medium Japanese cars. The Mitsubishi Space Runner
and Space Wagon are multi-purpose vehicles costing no more than typical
family hatchbacks. All are good, but not Car of the Year material.
Were I making a book on the result, I would offer these odds: 4-5 Nissan
Micra; evens Toyota Carina E; 3-1 Honda Prelude and CRX, Toyota Corolla; 5-1
Fiat Cinquecento and Renault Safrane; 7-1 Mazda 626; 10-1 Mazda MX6 and
Xedos; 12-1 Mitsubishi Space Runner and Space Wagon; 20-1 Mitsubshi Colt and
Lancer; 50-1 Alfa 155.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

921121

