FT921-11968

FT  29 JAN 92 / Economic gloom predicted in election run-up: CBI sees drop
in business confidence


   By PETER MARSH, Economics Staff


BRITAIN'S general election campaign will be fought against the background of
deep economic gloom, according to a report by the Confederation of British
Industry.
Yesterday's industrial trends survey recorded a big fall in business
confidence over the past three months and said manufacturing output was
declining at a higher rate than government figures show.
Meanwhile, an opinion poll in today's Daily Mail puts the Tories 1 point
ahead of Labour, at 41 per cent.
While the CBI study said inflationary pressures in manufacturing were at
their lowest levels for more than 30 years, it said job losses in the sector
were increasing.
It predicted that by the middle of this year factory investment will decline
by 32 per cent, compared with the period in late 1989 before the start of
the recession.
This bleak assessment for manufacturing, which accounts for just over a
fifth of the economy, supports indications that even a mild recovery is
unlikely to be visible over the next few months.
It will add to pressure on Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, to stimulate
the economy in his second Budget on March 10.
The CBI findings sparked angry exchanges at prime minister's question time
in the Commons. Although Mr John Major insisted that the recovery might
already have started, Mr Paddy Ashdown, leader of the Liberal Democrats,
said the prime minister was 'talking up false economic dawns'.
The survey has tracked the economy for 33 years and is closely followed by
the Treasury and private sector economists.
It found that business optimism has dipped sharply since the autumn, partly
because the recovery promised by the government for the second half of 1991
failed to materialise. Another factor was the slowdown in other economies
such as Germany and the US.
It said factory output was continuing to fall, though at a slower rate than
in the early part of last year. According to the CBI's data, which are based
on analysis of its survey answers, manufacturing output in the third quarter
of 1991 was down 10.6 per cent compared with the all-time peak around the
start of 1990.
This is considerably more gloomy than the equivalent figures from the
government's Central Statistical Office, which show a 6.7 per cent decline
over this period.
The CBI projects a further fall in manufacturing output in the first quarter
of 1992, which would take the decline since 1990 to 13.2 per cent. This
would be comparable with the 15.5 per cent reduction during the 1979-80
recession.
Countering the CBI's statistics, the CSO said its figures gave a better
picture of trends in manufacturing. They were based on a broader sample of
companies, and used quantitative measures to assess output.
The CBI said its survey pointed to 73,000 jobs being lost in manufacturing
in the first quarter of 1992, as against 68,000 in the previous three
months. This would take the total fall in employment in the sector since the
start of the recession to about 500,000.
The CBI drew attention to its findings on manufacturing investment, which it
reckons will reduce the chance for UK companies to make up ground lost
during the recession.
Editorial comment: CBI adds to the gloom, Page 18
Sharp fall in business confidence, Page 7
PM insists recovery is under way, Page 10
Four commandments of industrial progress, Page 19
London stocks, Page 38

The Financial Times


London Page 1 Graph (Omitted).

920129

