FT921-12056

FT  29 JAN 92 / Arts: London Sinfonietta, Glass and Larrocha - Queen
Elizabeth Hall/Royal Festival Hall


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS and MAX LOPPERT


The London Sinfonietta has been criticised more that once over recent
seasons for the narrowness of its programming - for keeping faith too
exclusively with the composers of the post-war generation with whom its
reputation was established, and in doing so failing to nurture as wide a
range of younger composers as they might have done.
There has been undoubtedly been some substance to those accusations but the
orchestra's programme on Monday, conducted by Oliver Knussen, was exemplary
in its youthful content: the eldest of the five composers represented was
33, the youngest 21, and only one of them, Magnus Lindberg, could be
regarded as an established, familiar figure.
The proper happy ending to such an enterprising, sparkily delivered
programme would of course have been a revelatory experience, a sequence of
performances bringing into the spotlight young composers of fully rounded
individuality and assurance. It wasn't quite like that; only Lindberg's
substantial piece Joy seemed to be stamped with authority and stylistic
confidence, while David Horne's Out of the Air, first heard in Birmingham
last year, impressed again for its sustained fluency rather than its
striking ideas.
The remaining composers - linked, it seems, by an attachment to Tanglewood,
where Knussen is a course director - generally worked within a middling
post-modern idiom that was as hard to pin down as it was unmemorable. In Rob
Zuidam's Dinamismo di cane al guingazaglio the music was streaked with hints
of brassy Dutch minimalism; for Detlev Galnert's Mahler/Skizze the mood was
dark, compacted and expressionist, while John Gibson's Flight of Fancy was a
suite of uncomplicated character pieces that had Coplandesque hints of wide
open spaces.
The Lindberg piece was at once far more ambitious and demanding. It was
commissioned by the Ensemble Intercontemporain and first played by the group
a year ago; the 23 instruments are augmented by a battery of electronic
keyboards and sampled sounds. There are recognisable Parisian fingerprints -
the synthesised skitterings patented at IRCAM and the discomfiting unison
doublings of live and electronic tones - but they are contained within a
lucid if fractionally overlong scheme that is packed with the big gestures,
the real ideas, that make Lindberg's music fascinating and rewarding.
*****
The very last two adjectives which could have been applied to Philip Glass's
solo piano recital in the Royal Festival Hall last week would have been
fascinating and rewarding; that Glass should feel the financial or artistic
need to embark on such a gruesome enterprise was the only point of interest.
He is a competent pianist, no more, and his playing was spotted with memory
lapses as he riffled through a series of arrangements drawn from his music
of the last 15 years.
Taken out of context Glass's work seems more schematic than ever, though one
is left with some admiration for his scoring, which evidently provides an
edge and muscularity to the textures that his pianism could never imitate.
Perhaps a more brilliant performer might have enlivened the textures, added
light and shade, teased out inner parts; but then more brilliant pianists
would be unlikely to concern themselves with such warmed-up musical gruel.
Alicia de Larrocha is now a member of a select group of pianists, those
whose solo recitals attract substantial numbers of people to the Festival
Hall. The limpid beauty of her playing brings with it an uncompromised
benediction; the qualities of serenity, warmth and radiance have been
distilled by the years. No wonder there seemed to be a notable number of
student-age audience-members on Sunday afternoon: in her manner and style
the least didactic of pianists, she is nevertheless a mature model of
pianistic virtues and graces.
She plays Haydn without the least recourse to point-making, and Beethoven
without letting the faintest touch of pressured, whipped-up urgency mar her
unfolding of argument. Eloquently simple line-shaping, concentration on
colour-shading: these were the features, and the delights, of her Haydn F
minor Andante and Variations and her Beethoven D major ('Pastoral') Sonata,
Op. 28. It is hard to describe both performances without making them sound
placid, lacking in dramatic vitality; and hard to do justice to the shining
musicality with which they were imbued, which gave the impression - rare,
wonderful illusion] - that the notes were singing themselves, free of all
editorial interference.
Upon these composers Miss de Larrocha sheds a light that is all her own. In
Granados - on this occasion four of the best-known numbers from the Goyescas
Suites plus 'El pelele' - she is of course incomparable, the pianistic
equivalent of Victoria de los Angeles in her ability to enrich these lovely
but slight piano reveries with a feeling of what one can only call
civilisation, so that their importance seems out of proportion to their
length and weight.
Over the years Miss de Larrocha seems to have become an ever more patient
expounder of the 'Fandango by candlelight' and the pulsating rhythms of 'El
pelele'. The climax is built with infinite control, over a broader, steadier
span, but there seems no loss of coruscating vitality in the fingerwork.
Precious pianist, precious experience.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920129

