FT923-15714

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Doubts and delays in the
queue to join


   By ERIC FREY, DAVID MARSH, IAN RODGER and ROBERT TAYLOR


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
COUNTRIES hoping to join the European Community remain confident their
applications will not be disrupted by the imbroglio caused by the Danish
'no' vote.
Austria, Finland, Sweden and Switzerland have already applied for
membership. Norway is expected to apply by the end of the year.
The decision to delay official negotiations until after ratification of the
Maastricht treaty will not stop preparations for entry taking place under
the British presidency. Britain will press for better economic treatment of
Malta, Cyprus and Turkey to sugar the pill of temporary rejection of their
applications.
Clearly, further delays to Maastricht ratification would have great
potential to hold up enlargement talks. Additionally, there is unease that
scepticism about the EC in countries such as Germany will spread among the
electorates of the Nordic and Alpine countries.
These countries see full membership as a natural progression from the
greater economic links they are due to forge under the European Economic
Area free trade zone between the EC and the European Free Trade Association
due to start on January 1.
The five Efta countries would all bring political stability to the EC
'club'. Their per capita gross national products are all equal or superior
to that of united Germany. Most can even calculate their net balances in the
EC budget; Austria, Sweden and Finland together will pay Ecu3bn (Pounds
2.1bn) more to Brussels than they get back.
Despite these prospective members' wealth, negotiating exclusions from EC
rules in areas such as agriculture will in some cases pose problems.
Difficulties are likely in adjusting countries' laws not simply to the
demands of the Treaty of Rome but also to the Treaty of Maastricht. 'If it
weren't for Maastricht, things would be a lot more simple,' says - with
understatement - a pro-EC Swiss diplomat.
In particular, most Efta applicants will have to adapt traditional policies
of neutrality to the need to participate in a common EC foreign and security
policy.
The Swiss, throwing off their traditional aversion to greater European
openness, seem less fearful about the consequences of EC membership than
other Efta countries.
The Swiss government has recently been dropping hints - as have the Swedes -
of willingness to participate in some form of common European defence
policy.
A Swiss poll in May indicated that 61 per cent favoured joining the EC while
only 27 per cent were opposed and 12 per cent undecided.
The Danish 'no' vote may even have been a blessing in disguise for pro-EC
forces in Switzerland. The EC has responded to the Danish vote with an
attempt to intensify 'subsidiarity', heartening the many Swiss advocates of
a decentralised community.
Not only the Swiss but all have to submit their EC applications to national
referendums. The question is whether a time of slower economic growth across
Europe makes voters more or less ready to accept change.
Worries about the effects of EC membership are apparent in most applicant
countries. Since the Danish vote public opinion has been moving against the
EC in the Nordic region. The 'no' campaigners claim the EC will undermine
their countries' democracies, weaken their generous welfare systems, and -
in the case of Sweden and Finland - draw them into a western military
alliance.
Across the Efta area, there are strong signs that the enthusiasm for EC
membership among the political parties and business elite is not fully
shared by the people. In Norway, where scepticism is particularly strong,
the latest opinion poll showed that 53 per cent of respondents were against
EC membership, and only 33 per cent were in favour. In Sweden the political
consensus on EC entry - forged last year - is still holding.
But Swedish opinion seems to be growing in favour of an early referendum on
EC entry. Surveys show misgivings coming to the surface. Only a few months
ago, polls indicated that more than 60 per cent of Swedes backed membership.
But a recent survey found that only 31 per cent supported Swedish entry, 36
per cent said they were definitely or probably against the idea, and 33 per
cent were undecided.
EC doubts are also noticeable in Austria. The country's main parties and
business groups, which - like those in Sweden - hope to join in 1995, see
Austria as a de facto EC member in the economic field.
Political leaders are increasingly willing to modify or even dump the policy
of neutrality. Chancellor Franz Vranitzky has repeatedly stated his
government's support for Maastricht, including the common foreign and
security policy. However, surveys show 80 per cent of the population would
rather forgo EC membership than abandon neutrality.
Even though Austrian supporters of Community membership outweigh the
Euro-sceptics, the margin is narrowing. In May, the ratio was 51-to-41.
Austrians seem suspicious of the Brussels bureaucracy and of further
dominance of German businesses. They want to preserve the country's strict
environmental and consumer-protection laws.
While the two largest Austrian parties are clearly pro-EC, the leftist
Greens have only recently abandoned their strict anti-Community stance for a
somewhat more flexible position. Mr Jorg Haider of the right-wing Freedom
party was previously one of the most ardent supporters of EC membership. But
he has become critical since the Danish referendum, and observers expect him
to campaign against the EC if he feels the popular mood is moving that way.
Efta governments will be doing their best to dampen the potential of
populists like Mr Haider. But uncertainty about the future of the EC may
allow such figures - and the negative message they carry - to proliferate.
Contributors: Eric Frey, David Marsh, Ian Rodger, Robert Taylor
'If it weren't for Maastricht, things would be a lot more simple'
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
European Community
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Customs union
Free trade in goods, services, capital and labour form Jan 1 1993
Maastricht treaty envisages economic and monetary union
Schengen agreement on free travel
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
European Economic Area (EC & Efta)
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Free trade in goods, services, capital and labour - target date Jan 1993
Border controls remain, but formalities simplified
No customs union or common tax policy
Excludes fisheries and agriculture
Efta states to adopt EC law
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
EC Association Agreements
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Turkey (1963) Malta (1970) Cyprus (1987) Andorra (1991) San Marino
(1992)
Free access to EC for most industrial goods and tariff reductions for
most foodstuffs.
Poland, Czechoslovakia & Hungary (Visegrad countries)
Full trade liberalisation by 1999
Laws and rules modelled on EC
Moves toward free flow of workers, services and capital
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920701

