FT923-6554

FT  24 AUG 92 / Lebanese choose first MPs for 20 years: Hizbollah guerrilla
group enters the political mainstream


   By LARA MARLOWE


   BAALBEK


MOSLEM and Christian residents of northern Lebanon and the Bekaa Valley
voted yesterday in Lebanon's first parliamentary elections in 20 years.
A few ballot boxes went missing with voters' lists, irregularities which
appeared to favour government candidates. But the pro-Iranian Shia Moslem
Hizbollah movement, the most popular party in the Bekaa Valley, said it
believed the poll was free and fair.
The Hizbollah fielded four candidates in the Baalbek-Hermel region - marking
its transition from a secret guerrilla movement associated with the
kidnapping of westerners in Lebanon to a mainstream political party.
The poll went ahead despite objections by Maronite Catholics, concentrated
in the mountainous coastal strip running from east Beirut up to Jbeil, and
in the Israeli-controlled 'security zone' in southern Lebanon. These regions
observed a 'day of mourning' in protest at the poll yesterday.
But Christians in northern Lebanon and the Bekaa are generally allied with
Syria and participated in the voting. 'We would not participate in this
election if we did not think it was free,' Sayyid Ibrahim Amin, a Shia
cleric, member of the Hizbollah political bureau in Beirut and the leading
candidate on Hizbollah's list, said. 'This doesn't mean that the government
will not do some cheating. Elections that are 100 per cent free and fair
exist only in paradise, and we do not live among angels.'
Down the hill at Baalbek's Palmyra Hotel, the Lebanese Speaker of Parliament
Hussein Husseini, Hizbollah's main opposition in the Bekaa, was concluding
an election-day meeting with Gen Ghazi Kenaan, the chief of Syrian military
intelligence in Lebanon. Syrian troops and plain-clothes intelligence
officers manned check-points every few kilometres throughout the Bekaa, but
there were no Syrians in the villages or polling stations.
The Hizbollah are the only party to have published an election programme for
the controversial poll, which is scheduled to continue next week in Beirut
and Mount Lebanon and on September 6 in the south.
Many Shia voters said yesterday that they supported Hizbollah because it was
the only group in Lebanon which continues to fight the Israeli occupation of
the south. But the programmes of the 'Party of God' in the Bekaa, which
include Iranian-financed supermarkets, schools and hospitals, have also won
it the loyalty of many in this neglected region.
Hizbollah parliamentary candidates claim they will improve living conditions
for the poor throughout Lebanon if they are elected. 'In some of the world's
worst dictatorships, people are respected to the extent they have water,
electricity, streets, hospitals and job opportunities,' Sayyid Ibrahim Amin
said. 'These are not available for a large segment of the Lebanese
population. The Lebanese people live in a system that despises them. This
didn't start with the civil war. It's been going on for 50 years.'
Condemnation of the Maronite elite who ruled Lebanon until the civil war was
implicit in Sayyid Ibrahim's speech. The majority of Maronites, about a
third of the population of Lebanon, are boycotting the legislative elections
because 40,000 Syrian troops are still in Lebanon. 'Was the election of
Bashir Gemayel in 1982 free, with Israeli troops in Beirut?' asked Sayyid
Ibrahim. 'It was the same parliament that elected him. If they had opposed
the 1982 presidential election, their opposition today would be more
credible.'
The enmities of the 1975-90 civil war still linger. 'The Maronites are
saying these elections are not fair because that is their last excuse,' Ali
Shirazi, a 20-year-old French literature student and Hizbollah supporter
from Baalbek, said. 'They are sulking because they are losing their
domination over everyone else in Lebanon.'
Twenty-five kilometres from Baalbek, in the Shia village of Chmestar, Mr
Talal Salman, editor of As Safir newspaper, one of Beirut's main dailies,
said he understood the Maronites' reservations but regretted their boycott
of the poll.
'The balance of the country will be lost through their decision,' he said,
pointing out that there are no Syrian soldiers in the Jbeil and Kesrouan
regions, where opposition to the vote is highest.
Mr Salman, whose newspaper is considered pro-Syrian, noted that Syria was
named in the 1989 Taif Accords to help implement the peace plan. 'Syria has
lost the lives of many soldiers in 16 years in Lebanon and they see
political influence as payment for that sacrifice. Israel, by occupying part
of Lebanon, gives Syria the right to be here. You cannot tell the Syrians to
go while Israel is still here,' he said. In the run-up to yesterday's
elections, Lebanese officials travelled every day to Damascus to confer with
Syrian Vice President Abdel Halim Khaddam. 'This silly government in Lebanon
doesn't have the confidence to make its own decisions,' Mr Salman said.
'Over the years, the Maronite leaders were the ones who went most often to
Damascus to ask favours. This is a transitional period after the war, and it
will pass.'
Meanwhile, women in chadors and girls in tight blue jeans, Hizbollah
fighters, lawyers and teachers crowded into the Chmestar girls' public
school down the road from Salman's house to post their ballots under the
watchful eye of Lebanese policemen armed with automatic rifles.
Mr Habib Shadad, a civil servant in suit and tie from the Ministry of the
Interior, sat next to a metal ballot box securely closed with two padlocks,
in the presence of representatives of the five competing candidates' lists.
Shadad held his right hand over the slot in the top of the ballot box at all
times, lifting it only when voters had shown their identity papers, been
checked off on the voters' list and slipped their ballot into a
ministry-stamped envelope. 'This is my responsibility before God,' he said
of his role in supervising the election. 'I am 30 years old and I never
voted before today. I hope we have elections every day, so we can express
our opinions like the French do.'
But would the elections be free and fair, in view of the presence of Syrian
troops? The civil servant's spontaneous reply: 'God willing,' he said.
'According to what I heard from the media and (Syrian) President Hafez
al-Assad, it will be.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920824

