FT922-4437

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (3): On top of the world again -
African and other states now welcome contact with Pretoria


   By MICHAEL HOLMAN


'WE'RE international now, you know,' said the immigration official at
Johannesburg's Jan Smuts international airport. She agreed not to stamp the
visitor's passport, as requested - but made clear that his caution dates
from a different era.
With barely an exception, African and other states who once refused visas to
visitors with a South African immigration stamp in their passports, now
welcome contact.
Trade that was once under the counter is coming into the open, cultural and
sporting links with the world have been revived, and President F W de Klerk
seems to be in competition with Mr Nelson Mandela, the ANC leader, over the
number of foreign capitals they can visit.
Last October's Commonwealth conference, when heads of state agreed to lift
what were termed people-to-people sanctions, such as visas and air links,
seemed itself a watershed in Pretoria's relations with the world.
However, few events better illustrated South Africa's diplomatic
breakthrough on the African continent than the effusive welcome accorded
President de Klerk on his historic visit to Nigeria last April.
In a speech that placed his guest in the pantheon of anti-apartheid heroes
that includes Mr Nelson Mandela, President Ibrahim Babangida put a seal on
Pretoria's African breakthrough, and laid the foundations for an alliance
between two regional super-powers.
South Africa's admission to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) - of
which General Babangida is chairman - must await formation of an interim
government. But once a member, Pretoria will be able to borrow from the
African Development Bank.
Trade and political links have also been established with Egypt and Kenya -
the former seen as Pretoria's foothold in the Middle East. They complete a
trio of strategic posts on the continent which, Pretoria diplomats believe,
would also be appropriate for a post-apartheid government.
The same government officials who once had to cope with a hostile world are
now helping mould foreign policy.
For the time being, at least, the ANC remains aloof from the process. But
Pretoria's officials believe they share common concerns, including the need
for a stable transition to democracy in Angola.
'We are an African country, and our problems are African problems,' says Mr
Neil van Heerden, director-general of foreign affairs: 'We would want to say
(to industrialised countries) as a bloc: 'We won't pay the prices you want
for Mercedes if you won't pay a good price for our coal'.'
He treads carefully when reviewing foreign policy, aware that priorities may
change should constitutional negotiations reach agreement on an interim
government. But he believes that foreign policy, in the past dominated by
adversarial relationships, will now be strongly influenced by trading links.
'Our main priority is the Pacific rim,' says Mr van Heerden, and expresses
some doubt about prospects for membership of the Lome convention, which
offers a group of developing countries preferential access to Europe's
markets.
Membership may be difficult and a protracted process, Mr van Heerden
believes. 'We would look instead for a bilateral agreement between Pretoria
and Brussels.'
Eastern Europe, once a focus of attention, seems to be declining in
significance for Pretoria.' There was a surge of enthusiasm,' says Mr van
Heerden, which led the opening or revival of several trade missions, 'but
now we regret it because what you find behind the Iron Curtain is a
collection of poor countries.'
State and city sanctions will continue to inhibit trade with the United
States, but there will be a recovery of US business interest in South
Africa, says Mr van Heerden.
The number of American companies fell from 360 to 110 as the disinvestment
campaign took its toll: 'Now we're seeing US corporations probing the market
again.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

920605

