FT921-1309

FT  25 MAR 92 / Arts: Iphigenie en Tauride - La Scala, Milan


   By MAX LOPPERT


Riccardo Muti's second contribution to the current Scala season is a new
production of Gluck's penultimate opera. Muti, revered by the Milanese,
could court even greater popularity in his home theatre by reserving for
himself the surefire popular favourites - but he does not. There is an
admirable high-mindedness about this, and also about the conductor's
determination to mastermind, as a key feature of his music-directorial
tenure, a steady Scala revival of the neo-Classical operatic repertory,
whether Mozartian (Idomeneo and Tito) or Gluckian (the original versions of
Alceste and Orfeo).
His conducting of such works proclaims a particular aesthetic - when
preparing Alceste, five years ago, Muti borrowed a phrase from the sculptor
Canova, 'estrarre la carne dal marmo' (extracting the meat from the marble),
to describe it. This approach to the most concentrated, intimate and exactly
proportioned of all Gluck's Paris masterpieces had both meat and marble.
Like all Muti's performances it was an outstandingly fine-chiselled,
smooth-polished piece of work. Intense care was taken over the drawing of
clean lines, vocal and instrumental, the limpid balance of parts, the
unimpeded flow of sections. Intense personal feeling was sensed in the
command of the work's dramatic peaks. 'O malheureuse Iphigenie]', begun by
both orchestra and protagonist as a half-voice meditation and developed only
later into a full-throated lament, provided a remarkable example.
A work which represents one of opera's most elevated reconciliations between
the dictates of action and contemplation, past memory and present emotion,
was grasped in one piece and delivered whole. And yet something was missing.
It was less the modern-instrumental forces and large chorus that seemed a
touch old-fashioned than the somewhat homogenised use of them. The shrieking
flutes and piccolos in the opening storm, the throbbing and whirling string
figures in Orestes's second-act psychological crisis, the C-major
trumpet-and-drum exaltation of Pylades's 'Divinites des grandes ames': all
lacked the piercing vitality of sound-colour that transforms Gluck's
purposefully bare scoring into white-hot music-drama.
But then, Muti could hardly have been urged in this direction by the
ponderously plodding production. The famous 1957 Scala Iphigenie en Tauride
staging by Visconti has left behind a store of indelible images  - notably
Maria Callas amid Benois's colonnades and staircases - even for those who
never saw it. Any images deposited in the memory bank by the current Scala
staging, by the veteran Giancarlo Cobelli in the designs of Paolo Tommasi,
will probably be of the negative kind: the heavy grey pseudo-granite panels
clumsily lit, the ugly grey priestess costumes, the feeble floor-level
writhings of Orestes's demons, the Classical-drama-by-numbers chorus
movement.
La Scala does not favour the 'engaged' grapplings with 18th-century
masterpieces that are now the rule in trans-alpine opera theatres; the best
one can say of Cobelli's production is that it left the principals free of
the dramatic impositions that sometimes go with those 'engaged' grapplings.
And as Iphigenia and Orestes were cast at the day's highest level, this
proved a virtue.
In her first attempt at the former, one of the most sublime but also most
taxing roles of the dramatic-soprano repertory, Carol Vaness surpassed even
the highest-pitched expectation. As one might have expected of a singer,
versed in Handel, who is the world's foremost current Donna Anna and
Idomeneo Electra, she compassed every facet of the music. The combination of
taut-drawn line, freely lustrous tone and chastely contained yet sometimes
fierily passionate expressivity was wonderfully apt.
Miss Vaness is at once a full-blooded and a grandly stylish Classicist; one
could believe in her both as Clytemnestra's daughter and as a high
priestess. Though her French delivery had evidently been studied with care,
some phrases of recitative emerged less clear in delivery than others. The
art of eloquent, emotionally affecting Gluck declamation is learnt through
long experience; she must be encouraged to pursue it, and to take on Gluck's
Alcestis and Armida as well - since the days of Crespin, Gorr and Callas
herself, no leading soprano has shown herself so well fitted for the task.
In this art she will no doubt profit from the example of her Orestes, of
which role it would be hard to imagine a nobler exponent than Thomas Allen.
Towards the end there were moments of slight pitch-slipping (tiredness?);
for the most part Mr Allen made his high-lying phrases ring out with awesome
force - not, of course, a matter of decibels but of focused vocal and
dramatic artistry - and, even more important, with the ability to etch every
syllable on the listener's consciousness. In two fearful cries of
'Agamemnon?' he seemed to sum up the opera's psychological profundity.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920325

