FT921-14357

FT  16 JAN 92 / US stock market brushes aside gloom of the latest figures:
Statistics are pessimistic but financial markets are betting that the
economy will rebound in the second half


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


THE LATEST economic figures suggest that the US economy is weakening rather
than strengthening. Yet share prices bound from one new high to another.
The explanation offered on Wall Street is that investors are betting that
the economy, after three years of stagnation, will begin a sustained
recovery later this year. Lower yields on bonds and bank deposits following
the Federal Reserve's aggressive easing of monetary policy before Christmas
have also prompted a shifting of cash into the stockmarket.
US forecasters' consensus is that the economy will indeed rebound in the
second half of this year. Most have pencilled in growth of about 3 per cent
at an annual rate - exactly the forecast they made this time last year for
the second half of 1991. The question is whether the optimism will again
prove misplaced.
It is certainly difficult to draw any comfort from recent economic
statistics. Worse-than-expected figures for retail sales released this week
indicated that 1991 was the worst year for department stores in at least two
decades. Sales fell sharply in December and were revised down substantially
for November. Car sales for the first 10 days of January were also down
sharply, signalling no early recovery of consumers' spirits.
'The deterioration in consumer spending in the fourth quarter is a major
hurdle for the economy," says Mr David Resler, chief economist at Nomura
Securities in New York. The stockmarket, he adds, is 'totally blinded to
current events and looking well into the future.'
Figures for employment and production are little more encouraging. In
December, the unemployment rate rose to 7.1 per cent, a five-year high.
Non-farm employment rose 31,000, which seemed a relief after the plunge of
265,000 in November.
But the rebound did not reflect private-sector strength because it was more
than accounted for by an erratic rise in state and local government
employment. Taken as a whole, the fourth quarter showed a marked
deterioration in employment prospects.
The Purchasing Managers' Index - a much-watched guage of manufacturing
industry's health - is falling at an accelerating rate. Last month, it fell
four percentage points to 46.1, which suggests a contraction of the
industrial economy. Industrial production and the index of leading economic
indicators have also turned down decisively.
The evidence so far suggests that production, although weak, was stronger
than demand in the fourth quarter: inventories rose in both October and
November as companies' sales fell short of expectations. Economists are
divided on whether gross domestic production was flat or slightly down in
the fourth quarter. But the need to bring production and demand into better
balance strongly suggests a drop in gross domestic product (GDP) in the
current quarter. The feared 'double dip' recession thus looks a reality.
Why has sentiment in the financial markets improved so noticeably in spite
of growing evidence that the recession - already the longest since 1945 - is
intensifying again?
The turning point was the announcement late in December by Mr Alan
Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve chairman, of a full point cut in
the discount rate to 3.5 per cent, the lowest level in 27 years. This move -
the boldest in Mr Greenspan's career - convinced markets that the Fed was
determined to revive the economy.
Mr Greenspan testified before Congress on Friday that he hoped the sizeable
monetary stimulus now in the pipeline would prove sufficient. But he added
that he was ready to take whatever steps were necessary to ensure a
sustained economic recovery. Many analysts have interpreted this as a
commitment to further interest rate cuts if growth fails to pick up.
'I'm confident that rates will be cut further,' says Mr Neal Soss, chief
economist at First Boston Corporation, a New York broker. He argues that Mr
Greenspan needs to react not only to renewed weakness of the US economy, but
to gathering evidence of a recession in Europe and Japan that could curb US
export prospects. Few analysts, however, expect another cut in interest
rates before February, and some believe rates are already at, or very near,
the bottom.
The widespread optimism that the long-awaited recovery will materialise in
the second half largely reflects confidence in the efficacy of monetary
policy. The housing market - the sector by tradition most sensitive to
interest rates - has not yet shown convincing signs of recovery, but many
economists believe that it must eventually respond to lower mortgage rates.
In recent weeks, homeowners have rushed to refinance loans at the new, lower
rates. Lower interest rates are also increasing the attractions of
investment in consumer durables such as cars and domestic appliances.
Optimists stress that companies are seizing a golden opportunity to
restructure balance sheets weakened by the debt build-up of the 1980s. Lower
long-term interest rates and strong equity markets prompted record bond and
equity issues last year. In theory this should eventually support increased
capital investment and rehiring of workers.
The problem lies in judging the time needed for adjustment. Each successive
year of economic stagnation increases the likelihood of a recovery. But debt
burdens still remain uncomfortably high throughout the economy, while
consumer confidence languishes at a near-record trough. The Bush
administration, moreover, has done little to address long-term weaknesses
such as the abnormally low US savings rate.
Measures in the President's State of the Union address later this month,
while being promoted as a long-run growth package, may lead in practice to
even higher fiscal deficits, which is precisely the wrong prescription in
the eyes of many economists.
The forward-looking optimism of financial markets is thus more akin to an
act of faith than a considered economic judgment.

The Financial Times


London Page 6 Graph (Omitted). Photograph Alan Greenspan, his boldest move
yet (Omitted).

920116

