FT922-4136

FT  06 JUN 92 / Hoteliers face lengthy wait for recovery: Little room for
optimism


   By PHILIP RAWSTORNE and CHRIS TIGHE


IT WILL take Britain's hoteliers at least another 18 months to climb out of
last year's business trough.
Mid-way through 1992, it is clear that recovery by the year end is unlikely
to restore the industry to the profit levels of 1990. A survey by Expotel
Hotel Reservations this week showed that tariff prices of hotel rooms in
Britain in the year to April fell for the first time for 10 years, with
average room rates 1 per cent lower.
Industry analysts suggest that grossly understates the combined effects on
hotel prices last year of the loss of trade due to the Gulf War, UK
recession and the sterling-dollar exchange rate.
Business travel fell by nearly 11 per cent under the impact of company
cost-cutting. Overseas business demand never recovered from the Gulf War and
was 10.6 per cent lower. Bookings by holidaymakers from abroad were 20 per
cent down as the number of North American visitors during the summer fell by
45 per cent.
The bigger hotel chains recouped some of the losses by developing
short-break leisure packages. The domestic leisure sector grew from less
than 10 per cent to 14 per cent of the total hotel market during the year,
but smaller chains and independent hotels lost market share.
In total, demand for hotel rooms fell by 8.8 per cent - a loss of 2.45m room
nights.
Mr Paul Slattery, of Kleinwort Benson, the merchant bank and securities
group, estimates that average achieved room rates fell by about 25 per cent.
He said that in London, which bore the brunt of the downturn, 'discounts of
50 per cent from the published room rates were not uncommon and in an
attempt to win contract business, such as aircrews, some chains discounted
even further'.
Some hotels held room prices but provided additional services and facilities
free.
Mr Bruce Jones, analyst at Smith New Court, said: 'One of the most notable
developments of the year was that people got into the habit of asking for
discounts.'
Hoteliers are reluctant to admit that room rates will remain under pressure.
'Bargains? I can't see it,' said Mr Norbert Petersen, senior operations
director for Mount Charlotte, which has 105 hotels, with 14,180 bedrooms,
throughout Britain. 'It's always horses for courses. We all have increased
costs - and shareholders.'
Mr Peter Cashman, group general manager of Friendly Hotels, with 21
three-star hotels from Perth to Eastbourne, said his business had held up
because its prices were already very competitive. Like some other chains,
Friendly Hotels had not increased its prices in the last year. It had,
however, stepped up promotion and sales activity.
Mr Martin Marcus, deputy chairman of Queens Moat Houses, with 103 British
hotels, admitted that Gatwick had been a black spot and described the
Expotel report's claim that Gatwick three-star hotel prices had dropped by
15.31 per cent as conservative.
Overall, he said, there was now some optimism. 'I feel it, but I haven't yet
seen the figures to show it.'
Nevertheless, Kleinwort Benson's estimates suggest that average achieved
room rates this year will grow by less than 4 per cent and that it will be
the mid 1990s before they again reach 1990 levels.
Competition will remain fierce. The leisure market has been flat and
business demand for rooms is expected to grow by only 3 per cent this year.
Hotels in London and other big cities that suffered more than those in
Scotland and the English provinces may now fare better. The bigger chains
are expected to squeeze more business out of the smaller operators; and the
attrition of the downmarket, underfunded end of the industry will continue.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920606

