FT921-15314

FT  10 JAN 92 / BA and KLM edge closer to merger: Dutch airline optimistic
of agreement over question of landing rights


   By DANIEL GREEN


THE PROPOSED tie-up between British Airways and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines
came a step closer yesterday as KLM said a solution to one of the more
intractable obstacles to the deal, that of landing rights, had 'probably
been found'.
Landing rights for flights by airlines between two countries are set in
government-to-government talks. A merger between BA and KLM might jeopardise
such rights if it seemed that a carrier's status as the national airline
would be undermined.
The news came as KLM attempted to play down the impact of remarks by Mr
Peter Bouw, KLM president.
He said KLM might abandon its name in the interests of a 'common structure
and identity'. Mr Bouw said: 'A consequence of co-operation talks is that
parts of your independence must be given up.'
KLM later said Mr Bouw had made 'informal' and 'general' comments that were
then reported in the Dutch press. It would give no details of the landing
rights agreement. The company's shares nevertheless rose Fl 1.1 to Fl 41.6
on the Amsterdam stock exchange in the hope that a merger was close.
Mr Bouw also said the airlines, which have been in merger talks since
November, had made progress on the form of the planned deal. 'The financial
structure is exceptionally interesting. It contains many innovative
elements,' Mr Bouw said.
He added that the initial move towards closer ties had come from BA. BA
declined to comment on KLM's statement.
KLM and BA revealed in November 1991 that they were in talks on a possible
merger. The combined company would be the largest carrier in Europe,
although it would remain some way behind US carriers such as American
Airlines and United Airlines.
Competition is stiff and airlines have seen profits fall in the wake of last
year's Gulf war. KLM might eventually give up its name 'because BA is the
stronger brand', said Mr Tim Coombs, an analyst with London broker County
NatWest. BA is about three times the size of KLM.
Even if the two airlines come to an arrangement between themselves on
landing rights, problems might still remain to be solved. 'Individual
governments would still be able to object,' said Mr Ian Wild, an analyst at
London securities house BZW.
Any solutions that received government approval could set a precedent for
other cross-border airline mergers.
Lex, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920110

