FT924-6486

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (6): Advantage of being near US - Stephen
Fidler on prospects for exporters


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


THE Mexican government has moved a long way to improve conditions for
Mexican exporters, not least through its pursuit of a stable macroeconomic
policy. But there is wide agreement that further improvements in the
country's economic structure are needed.
The need for further action by both government and the private sector is
underlined by this year's report from the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development. It comments: 'Observers judge the quality of
Mexican products as comparable with the bottom end of OECD countries and
falling short of the standards achieved by the Dynamic Asian Economies.'
Some of the problems associated with doing business in Mexico are
well-known: poor transport infrastructure, in particular the railways and
difficult telecommunications, although deregulation has allowed larger
companies to surmount some of these problems, by allowing them, for example,
to install their own satellite telecommunications systems. High labour
turnover rates - in some maquilladora industries reaching 100 per cent a
year - are also often cited as a problem.
However, it is clear that manufacturers' experience is varied. As the OECD
report observes, Mexico has in the past demonstrated its capability to
innovate. It cites the glass manufacturer, Vitro, as one with an
international reputation for product improvement and innovation.
Furthermore, the figures suggest exporters are having some success in a
difficult market. Until August, manufactured exports grew 7 1/2 per cent
year-on-year despite the weakness in the economy of the US which buys
two-thirds of Mexico's exports.
Mr Andreas Sperl, head of Mercedes-Benz Mexico, says in the past 18 months
his company has been able to reduce labour turnover from 30 per cent of the
workforce to below 10 per cent. He has also seen a big jump in productivity.
He adds of his new employees: 'I've been very surprised by how fast people
catch up. Many of them were farmworkers and often they can do the job in two
weeks.'
The company, which produces trucks for the Mexican market, is to start
manufacturing around 1,000 cars a year from next year. Mr Sperl says the
evidence suggests the quality of products is as high as anywhere.
Most businessmen emphasise the importance of training. Mr Jose de Jesus
Valdez, director of petrochemicals at Mexico's Alfa conglomerate says: 'If
there was a limiting factor, I would say that we in the petrochemicals
industry face a shortage of technical people.'
According to Mr Jeffrey Gannon, president of the board of GE de Mexico, a
subsidiary of General Electric of the US, in many of its recent investments,
which have mainly been outside metropolitan areas on greenfield sites, 'we
have found the quality and the productivity to be better than in many of our
plants in the United States and around the world.'
Mr Rodrigo Guerra, director general of IBM de Mexico, says the 150 people
who provide the intellectual force for its operation give value for money.
'They earn Dollars 40,000-50,000 a year, probably 40-50 per cent of what
they'd cost in the US, and they are 15-20 per cent more productive than in
the US.'
In gearing up Mexico's formerly closed economy to export, the North American
Free Trade Agreement is expected to play a critical role. One sector where
Mexico is expected particularly to benefit is that of textiles, where
businessmen say all three Nafta members will benefit, mainly over their
Asian competitors. But Mexico should be a particular beneficiary because
wage rates of Dollars 2.20 an hour compare with Dollars 12 in Canada and
Dollars 10 in the US.
Mexico is also seen to have a logistical advantage over south-east Asia; its
proximity to the US should allow for shorter lead times and therefore more
responsiveness to US consumer demand.
In some areas, Mexican business is expected to have a tough time. Small and
medium-sized companies may find it hard to compete, particularly with the
high current cost of credit in Mexico. Furthermore, many of the old import
substitution industries may find it impossible to compete against the US.
Mr Gannon of GE contrasts the success of one of the company's newer
products, manufactured in Mexico, with the difficulties that are likely for
more traditional plants in Mexico. This year, GE will export Dollars 200m of
gas ranges to the US from Mexico which has also added to US employment. 'In
the process of creating jobs in Mexico we also created over 2,000 jobs in
the US supplying the materials and components.
But he goes on: 'There are other businesses created 50 or 60 years ago
principally for the Mexican market; they are not as competitive and we will
have to rationalise manufacturing in these.' In areas such as light bulbs,
for example, there might be economies of scale of 100:1 to the US advantage.
As a rule of thumb, in areas where there is global excess capacity, the
Mexican industry is unlikely to survive. 'We'll have rationalisation of
manufacturing in both directions,' Mr Gannon says.
Mr Sperl of Mercedes-Benz agrees. His company's decision to begin modest car
production in Mexico was made easier by Nafta, which gave the company the
strategic option of selling into the US market from Mexico. Though no
decision had been made to exercise the option, it existed nonetheless. In
the future, there was the possibility of regional specialisationin its US
and Mexican truck operations. 'You can't think about different regions,
because now it's one.'

The Financial Times


London Page III

921120

