FT923-9828

FT  03 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: Latin America


A decade on from the debt crisis, capital is again flowing into Latin
America. The channels are different this time around, with the bond market
and equity offerings in privatised companies taking the place of the banks.
On the debt side, Latin American economies have been the direct
beneficiaries of low US interest rates. Retail savings have flowed into
high-yield bond funds and, since the demise of the domestic US junk bond
market, Latin debt has been a natural destination. The incentive is clear:
last month an Argentinian bank raised one-year money in the Euromarket at a
rate 5.5 percentage points above US treasury paper. It remains to be seen
whether retail dollar inflows will show a reversal in line with the US
interest rate cycle.
Equity investment in Latin American markets still requires a leap of faith.
On conventional methods of equity valuation Latin American equities already
look heavily over-bought. Even after a sharp reversal, the Argentinian
market is trading on a current year multiple of 25 times earnings.
Proponents of the region argue that earnings are artificially depressed
because companies are in a recovery phase following depression in the 1980s.
Still, the 33 per cent fall in Brazilian equities over the last three months
served as a reminder that Latin American stocks are not for the
faint-hearted. Telebras, the telecommunications company which attracts the
bulk of overseas investment in Brazilian equities, has shown a trading range
of Dollars 5.26 to Dollars 36.22 per thousand shares over the last year and
currently stands at around Dollars 18.
The recent volatility of equity markets across the region has stemmed from
the corruption scandal involving President Collor of Brazil. The whole sorry
saga has underlined that the shift towards market-oriented economics and the
hopes for a sharp earnings recovery in the region rest squarely on political
stability. As with so many developing markets, investment in Latin America
is a bet on long-term reform.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920803

