FT923-15531

FT  01 JUL 92 / International Capital Markets: Brazilian crisis drags down
loans in secondary market


   By SIMON LONDON


THE political crisis in Brazil continued to send ripples through the
secondary market in loans to less-developed countries yesterday and is
blocking Latin American borrowers from raising new funds.
Yesterday, benchmark Brazilian debt fell to around 30 per cent of face value
in the secondary market from 34 per cent on Monday. At the start of last
week, before allegations of corruption surfaced against President Collor,
Brazilian debt was trading at 40 per cent of face value.
Political tension in Brazil has dragged down the trading price of loans to
other Latin American countries, including Mexico and Argentina. Bankers said
new issues by borrowers from all Latin America countries were now postponed
until market stability is restored.
Market disruption becomes more serious for potential borrowers as
outstanding bond issues mature. Last week, Petrobras, the Brazilian
state-backed oil company, said it would call a Dollars 250m bond issue. The
issue will have to be refinanced by early August, when the call option is
exercised.
Latin American borrowers have been borrowing at tighter yield spreads and
longer maturities over the past year. This trend has now reversed. Bankers
said even the best Latin American borrowers would find it hard to borrow at
maturities longer than two years.
Yield spreads on mostoutstanding bond issues have widened dramatically. For
example, Telebras, the telecommunications company, launched a Dollars 100m
five-year Eurodollar issue last month at a yield spread of 368 basis points
over US Treasury bonds. Yesterday, the bonds were quoted at a yield spread
of 449 basis points.
Algerian debt stabilised in the secondary market yesterday following the
assassination of President Mohamed Boudiaf on Monday. Algerian floating rate
debt obligations were mostly quoted by traders at around 80 per cent of face
value, down from 87 per cent early on Monday, although dealing activity was
very light.
Moroccan debt, which could face pressure from fundamentalist Islamic
supporters, was trading at around 43 1/2 per cent of face value yesterday,
from 48 per cent on Monday.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920701

