FT924-8077

FT  13 NOV 92 / Clinton aides in defence review


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


   WASHINGTON


AIDES to Governor Bill Clinton are considering ways of restructuring the US
defence establishment to make it readier to engage in multilateral military
action.
Defence analysts close to the president-elect and his advisers say they are
concerned about the current Pentagon stance on the use of military force in
conflicts around the world.
Most senior officers basically seek to rule out US military intervention
except in the rarest of cases where they can see an immediate military goal
that can be quickly achieved by the use of overwhelming force.
Democrats in Congress, led by Congressman Les Aspin, chairman of the House
of Representatives armed services committee, have already opened a debate
over the use of force.
Mr Aspin argues that what he calls the 'all-or-nothing school,' which fears
a repetition of the US's unhappy experiences in Vietnam and Beirut if US
forces are used in all but the most carefully defined of circumstances, has
been weakened because the collapse of the Soviet Union removes some of the
threat that small conflicts could escalate into greater wars.
He also warns that the American people may not be willing to pay Dollars
250bn or Dollars 200bn a year for a military that is not very useful.
'It may be that to maintain a military for the extreme contingencies it will
be necessary to show that it is useful in lesser contingencies, too,' he
said in a recent speech.
Governor Clinton promised, in a Veterans Day speech on Wednesday, to
maintain 'the strongest and most appropriate defence forces' with advanced
technology emphasising air and sea mobility.
But the US media's attention is currently focused on an aspect of Mr
Clinton's defence policy that is of less than burning interest to the US's
allies: the question of whether homosexual men and women may be allowed to
remain in the armed services.
Mr Clinton repeated on Wednesday his pledge to lift the current ban - which
has recently been successfully challenged in federal court - after
discussions with senior military officers who are unhappy at the proposed
policy change.
'I think there are ways we can deal with this that will increase the comfort
level of a lot of the military folks here,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921113

