FT923-10675

FT  29 JUL 92 / Ulster talks adjourn for summer on upbeat note


   By DAVID OWEN


TALKS ON the political future of Northern Ireland adjourned for the summer
on a positive note in Dublin yesterday with British and Irish ministers
optimistic about their progress.
Sir Patrick Mayhew, Northern Ireland secretary, said, after a four-hour
meeting between the two sides: 'The great thing is that this process of
talks is now continuing.'
He added: 'It is hope that is at the top of our agenda - and hopes have been
fulfilled.'
The meeting marked the beginning of 'strand three' of the complex talks
process, which brings together the British and Irish govern-ments as well as
leaders of political parties in Northern Ireland.
Last week the Rev Ian Paisley, Democratic Unionist leader, warned that the
talks would fail if the Republic did not drop its territorial claims to the
province.
Yesterday Mr David Andrews, Irish foreign minister, said he had listened to
Mr Paisley 'more in sorrow than in anger'. Mr Andrews added: 'I look forward
to seeing him on September 2 for 'strand two' of the talks.'
An official statement on yesterday's meeting said that the two sides had
agreed an approach to arrangements for liaison on bilateral 'strand three'
issues with the other participants in the talks. 'Initial consideration' was
given to the 'interaction' of 'strand three' with the other two strands in
the light of progress to date.
British and Irish officials are also examining ways of opening up the
public-sector purchasing process between Northern Ireland and the Irish
Republic to make it more accessible to companies throughout the island, as
part of a fresh initiative to bolster cross-border trade.
Mr Robert Atkins, a junior Northern Ireland minister, said yesterday that
officials were 'exploring the possibilities' for a joint tender information
system that would 'give comprehensive information on forthcoming tenders
rapidly and cheaply to interested firms'.
Opening up public purchasing fully to companies from all parts of Ireland
would be a 'major stimulus' to trade between the two jurisdictions, he said.
He added: 'Industry also needs to be confident that markets are genuinely
open and accessible and that commercial decisions will be taken on purely
commercial grounds.'
In 1991, Northern Ireland provided just 4 per cent of the Republic's
imports, with its largest share in the food, drink and tobacco sector.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920729

