FT922-4080

FT  08 JUN 92 / Management: Spreading the Coke message from Pole to Pole - A
whole new way of work for staff at the Gdynia bottling plant


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


'THE OVERALLS are clean and pressed and waiting for you every morning and
you don't have to sign a chit for them.' This is what strikes the 230 Poles
who have started work at Coca-Cola's new bottling plant in Gdynia.
'We find people who wear them take more pride in their work and it makes
them stand out when they drive out to town,' says Michal Rossa, the
company's manager. Rossa got the job after placing an advertisement seeking
work in the newspaper when he was deputy head of a state-owned shipping
company.
From Rossa down, all employees find the style different, the pace faster and
the pay higher than they had been used to in state companies. 'I didn't do
much where I worked before but I didn't earn much either,' says one employee
on the bottling line in Gdynia.
Many also speak of a friendly team spirit, with management much readier to
delegate responsibility. The new management praises the underlings for their
enthusiasm and readiness to work.
Pay levels at the new factory are not made public, as they were in the old
state sector. Indeed employees are discouraged from talking about how much
they earn.
However, the clash between the old ways of socialist management and the
brash new style that Coca-Cola affects is not as great as might appear at
first sight.
Most skills are still learnt on the job, although there is some training for
the sales people. Even Rossa worked out the management methods he is now
using while he was in his previous job. 'I just couldn't enforce them there
so I left.'
The chief difference is a rigorous staff selection process which includes
repeated interviews. At Gdynia, there are aptitude tests to help pick the
right person from the 10 who apply for each job.
'We wanted young people,' says Rossa, adding that talent and ability to
learn counted more than previous experience. Keeping staff is made easier by
the area's 12 per cent unemployment.
Not all the employees came from the state sector. For instance, Tomasz
Perepeczko, the head of production at Gdynia, worked before at a local,
Swedish-owned fish canning operation.
Coke is concentrating its efforts on marketing and maintaining contact with
the point of sale - and is already breaking ingrained habits among retailers
and competitors alike.
'I have to visit between 15 and 20 shops every day, making friends with the
owners and checking they have the product, are displaying it prominently and
that it looks good,' says one ambitious 30-year-old who previously drove an
inter-city bus. 'I have no complaints.'
Neville Isdell, president of Coke's north-east Europe-Africa division, sees
no theat from trade unions at Gdynia.
'We are present in 185 countries and we work with trade unions in some and
without trade unions in others. We have no rule about that.' So far there is
no sign that the Gdynia plant will have a union. For the moment the
employees seem intent on the prospects of vertical promotion.
'After all,' says one sales representative, 'Donald Keough, the Coca-Cola
president, started as a delivery boy and he made it to the top'.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920608

