FT921-12087

FT  29 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Congress 'could agree on Round this year'


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


CONGRESS could find time to approve a Uruguay Round package this year, but
key members of the coalition favouring trade liberalisation would have to be
satisfied by changes in the draft text, a senior congressional staffer said
yesterday.
However, the draft submitted by Mr Arthur Dunkel, the director-general of
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt), would first have to be
improved, and market access talks would have to produce big incentives if US
business is to sign on.
The coalition expected to lobby for the Round has three parts: businesses
needing rules in the 'new areas' - services, intellectual property rights,
and investment; agriculture; and basic manufacturing, which has submitted
'zero for zero' tariff cut proposals.
Some tariff cuts have been approved, but others remain unfinished.
Meanwhile, the services industry coalition has not taken a definitive
position on the Dunkel draft.
There is considerable worry about getting sufficient market access
commitments on services by April 1 - considered the last possible date for
talks if Congress is to get the package through this year. The US needs
commitments from the Asians, Latin Americans and Japanese, but talks are
being held up by the agriculture negotiations.
Pro-Gatt forces are weakened by dissatisfaction with the intellectual
property rights text, particularly the 10 years given developing countries
to implement patent laws.
Another briefer said the US was a victim of a 'high-tech lynching' in
Geneva, with the rest of the world convinced that US dumping laws were
'outrageous.' He said a big lobbying effort would be required to sell
Congress on the proposed Multilateral Trading Organisation.
The agriculture lobby is pleased with most of the Dunkel draft, but
protected commodity groups - peanuts, dairy, sugar and cotton - will oppose
the final package.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920129

