FT924-939

FT  21 DEC 92 / Nedlloyd board tells Hagen to resign


   By RON VAN DE KROL


   AMSTERDAM


NEDLLOYD, the Netherlands' largest transport group, and its dissident
shareholder Mr Thorsten Hagen, appear poised for another protracted battle.
The company's supervisory board has called for Mr Hagen to vacate his seat
on it immediately.
The highly unusual demand was a direct and swift response to the Norwegian
investor's public request last week for an extraordinary shareholder meeting
to consider radical changes in the way the supervisory board is elected.
Mr Hagen was reluctantly admitted to the supervisory board earlier this year
after a long and celebrated dispute.
Nedlloyd said Mr Hagen's call for the extraordinary shareholder meeting
violated promises he made to support the board and to uphold its strategy
for turning around the loss-making company.
Mr Hagen, who controls 25 per cent of Nedlloyd through shares and options,
was unavailable for comment on his next move.
Under Dutch law, his fellow board members can suspend him from his duties,
but any dismissal will have to be sought through the courts, a procedure
that would take months and would help to fan the animosity between the two
sides.
Ironically, the supervisory board had been forced to go to court earlier
this year to get Mr Hagen admitted to the board in the first place after the
company's works council tried to block his appointment.
Nedlloyd and Mr Hagen have clashed repeatedly over his arguments that the
company should pursue a policy of rapid and heavy divestments.
The latest dispute between Nedlloyd and Mr Hagen was sparked by the
Norwegian investor's surprise call last week for an extraordinary
shareholder meeting to discuss far-reaching changes in the company's
articles of association and the dismantling of various anti-takeover
defences.
His main target was the supervisory board itself, which he describes as an
entrenched body and which he argues should be elected by shareholders.
The board said it will respond to Mr Hagen's request for an extraordinary
shareholders meeting in the first half of January.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921221

