FT923-6357

FT  25 AUG 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Change starts at the top
 -Training managers is the key to improving employee skills


   By LISA WOOD


Ian Went glows with pride as he describes how he stood up in front of his
staff and told them about Total Quality Management  - the practice which
stresses top quality in all an organisation's operations.
Went, who says the only certificate he holds is in swimming, is joint
managing director of L E Went, a London-based company which employs 45
people and supplies paint and equipment to the automotive industry.
Started in 1960 by Ian Went's father, L E Went is a classic small business
run by Ian and his brother John. Although the company had a good reputation
among its customers, it lacked the will to expand as its management were
more inclined to respond than to lead.
Companies like L E Went are among the main targets of government-led
training initiatives to improve the UK's skill base.
The drive to gain their interest in training is being led, with variable
success, by a confusing number of organisations. These include chambers of
commerce, Training and Enterprise Councils (Tecs), local enterprise agencies
and the Department of Trade and Industry.
According to Michael Heseltine, the President of the Board of Trade, the
quality of much of this advice is 'too low', and the various agencies are
still failing to get their message across. Small businesses themselves say
the plethora of advice from the different agencies is muddling. But, getting
through to small businesses is seen by government as vital because these
companies do less training than larger ones. The latest Confederation of
British Industry's (CBI) Quarterly Survey says that companies of less than
200 employees do not expect to increase their spending on training over the
next year by as much as medium to large companies.
Similarly, a recent Department of Employment survey, Skill Needs In Britain,
shows fewer smaller companies have business plans and training budgets than
larger ones.
Ian Peters, deputy director of the CBI's small firms directorate, warns
against over-simplification in interpreting surveys. 'In some small
companies an employee can gain a lot more expertise on the job than it would
be possible in a larger business where there would be more formal training.'
There are several main reasons why small businesses fail to train. They
include:
Owner-managers often do not accept that they need training. But, according
to the CBI's small business council management, training is one of the two
key issues  - along with finance  - for small companies.
According to Peters, management training often has to come first because
unless the management itself is learning, it cannot adopt a professional
approach to the training of employees.
For both employers and employees it is difficult to find the time to train.
A recent survey by the Management Charter Initiative, a body seeking to
improve the training of managers, found this a greater impediment than the
money to fund training.
Small businesses, without the benefit of big human resource departments,
find it hard to select the right training of the right quality in a market
over-supplied with consultants and private providers of training.
It is in this area that Tecs and chambers of commerce and perhaps the
'first-stop shops' mooted by Heseltine should play an important part. The
latter, Heseltine intends, should be umbrella organisations bringing
together all the agencies that provide advice to business.
Events at L E Went over the past ten months bear out many of these themes.
Ian Went says the company had given little thought to government programmes
before customers started asking if the company had BS5750, the British
standard for quality management.
Went says: 'We asked our trade association how much it might cost us to get
the standard and it seemed very expensive. At the time we thought the health
of our business was good.
'Then a leaflet came through the letter box inviting us to a meeting at
Aztec, our local Tec. We went along because we thought Aztec might help us
with BS5750. The Aztec people, however, said they would not help us unless
we did their Business Change Programme.'
Aztec, like the other 81 Tecs in England and Wales, has responsibility for
delivering a variety of help to both new and existing small businesses. Its
training assistance spans several initiatives from basic help in setting up
and running a business to Investors in People (IIP), a Tec-led scheme where
companies' processes of training are assessed. Aztec's services for existing
businesses starts with a help line, free to all, and works up a ladder of
more intensive training options.
Aztec's Business Change Programme is its local interpretation of Business
Growth Training (BGT), a scheme available in all Tecs and similar to some
respects to the Department of Trade and Industry's Enterprise Initiative.
The latter pays half the cost of five to 15 days's consultancy in strategic
planning on topics including marketing, business planning and financial and
information systems. BGT is more holistic and focuses on the business as a
whole and its training and development needs.
The change at L E Went has been radical. 'You name it, we were doing it
wrong,' says Went. The company was growing, he says, but management was more
about 'fire-fighting' than taking a strategic overview and communicating
that to the staff. One unit was making a loss and there were few formal
quality control systems.
Change has started at the top. Ian Went has moved from managing one of the
outlets to becoming the company's operations director, while his brother,
who is joint managing director, has become sales director. One manager was
made redundant: 'It was the worst thing we had to do,' says Went.
All the managers have undergone training  - with one of the most important
spin offs, according to Went, being a new-found confidence. He says: 'Giving
presentations has given me confidence. I have had to become clearer in my
own mind about problems and their solutions. Before I may have identified a
problem but I didn't necessarily know how to go about dealing with it. The
consultants have helped there.'
With their assistance he has put in systems which measure the scale of back
orders, wrong deliveries, transit damage and vehicle damage. 'We want to get
everybody thinking about the quality of their service  - that includes
making the whole staff think of themselves as each other's customers,' says
Went. Staff training, in a small business where it is difficult to find time
off, has sometimes been done at weekends. So far L E Went has spent about
Pounds 9,500 on the consultancy, a sum that has been matched in grants by
Aztec. Went is keen to invest more as needs are identified.
'We have not got as far in changing things as we wanted but I am not upset
by that,' he says. 'We believe we have gone about changing things properly.
It is too early to see any impact on our finances but we do feel more able
to manage the recession.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920825

