FT924-11389

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (1):  Portfolio of
uncertainties - European governments have been given a punishing
demonstration of the power of international capital flows. At the same time,
investors have had to reconsider the importance of currency decisions. Barry
Riley evaluates the lessons learned during a summer of crisis, and considers
the implications of the global economic slowdown


   By BARRY RILEY


THIS SUMMER the fast-growing international portfolio management industry
provided a reminder of its power, but perhaps also of its ultimate political
vulnerability.
Cross-border investment flows have soared in the past decade or so,
reflecting the liberalisation of exchange controls in many countries, and
reflecting also the growth of huge imbalances in the flows of funds around
the world.
By and large, governments have welcomed the appearance of vast international
buying demand for their bonds. Indeed, it is possible to argue that these
global investors may have encouraged fiscal deficits in countries such as
the US and Germany to grow larger than might have been possible, if
long-term financing were available only from domestic sources.
Multinational companies, too, have viewed positively their ability to issue
bonds and shares around the world.
But these huge global portfolios have represented a powerful potential for
currency speculation, when combined with the corporate treasury departments
which are also extremely active in the foreign exchange and currency
deriv-atives markets.
The European currency crisis built up after the Danish 'No' referendum vote
at the beginning of June. It finally erupted in mid-September with the
partial breakdown of the European Community's exch-ange rate mechanism and
the devaluation of sterling, the lira, the peseta and other currencies.
Until June, the international markets had swallowed the idea of European
convergence. German government bonds were still the most highly-regarded,
but investors were buying, for instance, French and British government paper
on narrowing spreads over bunds. Last winter and spring, about half of the
issuance of UK gilts was being absorbed by foreigners, an unprecedented
situation.
But now European governments have been given a punishing demonstration of
the power of international capital flows. For their part, international
investors have been forced to reconsider and upgrade the importance that
currency decisions should play in portfolio management, with the
development, for instance, of systems of currency overlay management.
Presumably, a great many international investors profited from the
willingness of European governments to buy up tens of billions of dollars
worth of their own and their EC partners' currencies to maintain what, by
mid-September, were obviously indefensible fixed parities.
We shall never know accurately, but European taxpayers have probably
bolstered the profits of banks, corporate treasury departments and
international investment institutions by more than Dollars 5bn.
But floating currencies present an entirely different scale of risk.
Moreover, the global economic situation is looking increasingly dangerous as
growth stutters or stops in most of the leading economies.
One consequence could be the loss of momentum of globalisation, a process
which has rapidly changed the face of equity and bond markets around the
world. Global investors have already had to face the Wall Street crash of
1987 and the slower but even more spectacular crash in Tokyo between 1990
and August this year. At that point Japanese equities staged a strong bounce
off the bottom, but only after a 60 per cent price collapse in about 2 1/2
years.
Slightly earlier, a series of international equity issues tested the
robustness of the global market. The Wellcome offering got away, albeit at a
lower price, and in a lower size, than had once been expected, but the
flotation of the Irish aircraft leasing company, GPA, collapsed
ignominiously at the last moment amid loud recriminations.
Perhaps the biggest problem now facing international fund managers is what
to do about their exposure to US equities and bonds. The dollar has been
weak but may well recover. On the other hand Wall Street has looked
overvalued for some time and would probably collapse on any sign of rises in
short-term dollar interest rates. As for US Treasury bonds, they yield less
than DM bonds but the fiscal outlook under a Clinton administration might be
seen as worrying.
At one level this raises the currency problem again. In circumstances
(falling interest rates) in which a country's capital markets are likely to
be buoyant the currency will probably be weak - and vice versa. Thus the
recent strength of the EC core nations' currencies has been accompanied by
sliding prices on the bourses.
At another level the problem of asset allocation is highlighted. The global
manager with an open mandate, in theory, has unlimited access to currencies
and money markets, to stock markets and to bond markets. There are
possibilities in commodities too, and in a variety of derivative markets.
In practice, these choices are usually restricted, often by expressing the
manager's objectives in terms of a benchmark, which can be either an index
of some kind, or the average performance of some group of similar
portfolios.
At the moment, many international equity managers are rather underweight in
US equities, but because the US stock market represents 41 per cent of
global capitalisation (and 46 per cent of, for example, a World ex UK
benchmark) there is still likely to be a substantial exposure.
It is a lesser version of the Japanese problem that developed towards the
end of the 1980s, when eventually the Tokyo market represented 45 per cent
of the global market, and as much as 70 per cent of the World ex US
capitalisation, this being a benchmark much favoured by US clients owning
international equity portfolios. Tokyo, incidentally, now accounts for only
about 26 per cent of global capitalisation.
Global investors prudently stayed underweight in Japan in the late 1980s,
but unwisely decided to move back into Tokyo in 1991. That was after the
first large downward leg in Japanese equities, but before the second one.
According to the forthcoming 1992 report on International Equity Flows,
produced by Baring Securities, as much as Dollars 46.8bn flowed from the US,
UK, France and Switzerland into Japanese stocks last year.
Overall, net cross-border flows reached Dollars 102.2bn last year, fuelled
by a big international diversification drive by US pension funds. According
to the consultants, Greenwich Associates, the average exposure of US pension
funds to international equities rose from 2.7 per cent in 1988 to 4.4 per
cent at the end of last year. Moreover, plan sponsors say that they expect
the figure to rise to 7.2 per cent by the end of 1994, equivalent to an
outflow of more than Dollars 20bn a year.
On the other hand, the big outflows of Japanese money into global markets -
especially bonds but also equities - have largely disappeared as the
Japanese have become preoccupied with the financial crisis at home.
Recently, too, they have been retreating from Europe, which has disappointed
their hopes of financial and political stability.
As for Europe, British pension funds, previously leaders in global
investment, are likely to have their hands full at home financing the
government's soaring fiscal deficit. Some smaller countries, such as the
Netherlands, are developing a new taste for cross-border diversification,
but Germany's big capital outflows of the late 1980s have collapsed under
the impact of unification.
According to International Equity Flows, 1992 could, therefore, be quite a
subdued year overall for cross-border stock market investment, although net
flows could total some Dollars 50bn. At the end of last year 8.1 per cent
(or Dollars 890m) of equities worldwide were held by cross-border investors,
and this could be between 8.5 and 9 per cent by the end of this year.
However, the scope for good performance by equities in a weakening global
economy may be questionable. Many fund managers are more enthused by the
potential in bonds as inflationary pressures subside in many economies and
real interest rates fall.
If the economic picture becomes seriously troubled, however, global
investors may find that the freedoms they came to expect during the
optimistic 1980s may be reduced. Already Europe's ERM crisis has resulted in
the partial reimposition of exchange controls in countries such as Spain and
Ireland.
All too often politicians do not like the message of the market and given
the chance they can be inclined to shoot the messenger.
 ---------------------------------------------
      TOP CENTRES OF PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
 ---------------------------------------------
           Ranked by institutional
               equity holdings
 ---------------------------------------------
City                               Equities
                               (Dollars bn)
 ---------------------------------------------
Tokyo                               1,691.6
New York                              506.9
London                                476.8
Geneva                                253.4
Zurich                                246.2
Boston                                229.9
Paris                                 159.7
Frankfurt                             143.9
San Francisco                         141.2
Los Angeles                           101.1
 ---------------------------------------------
* At December 31, 1991
 ---------------------------------------------
Source: Technimetrics
 ---------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page I

921026

