FT922-13362

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Bank joins market surge with big gilts sale -
Billions pour into government bonds; Unprecedented move as Bank of England
trades at 2.30am; Demand high throughout night


   By RICHARD WATERS


THE Bank of England early yesterday morning joined a huge surge in market
activity, selling between Pounds 3bn and Pounds 5bn of gilts.
The Bank - acting as investors responded to news that a Tory government had
been returned - took a large bite out of what had previously seemed a
dauntingly large projected borrowing requirement of Pounds 28bn for the
current financial year.
Even the Bank's massive sales did not dent prices, leaving room for UK
companies to issue bonds to take advantage of falling long-term interest
rates.
Investors began to buy gilts heavily from 1.30am yesterday as the first
projections of an outright Conservative victory began to appear, gilts
traders said. Demand remained constant during the night and throughout
yesterday.
'It's probably the most business the market has seen on any day since Big
Bang,' said Mr Andy Tweed, head of gilts at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, one of
the biggest gilts firms. 'It's been huge.'
As investors began to buy the Bank sold unofficially at first, but then, at
the unprecedented time of 2.30am, through an official sale of Pounds 800m of
gilts. It repeated the exercise with a further Pounds 800m at 7.30am as
demand continued.
Further unofficial sales, which are not disclosed, were put by gilt
market-makers at anything between Pounds 1.5bn-Pounds 3.5bn.
BZW estimated that the Bank had sold more than Pounds 4bn of gilts in all.
UK institutional investors, which had sat on cash rather than put money into
the gilts market ahead of the election, probably bought more than Pounds
1.5bn of gilts, said Mr David Shaw, head of fixed income investment at Legal
& General, the large UK insurer.
Driving the enthusiasm was a belief that the danger of a devaluation of
sterling - or a need to put up interest rates to defend the pound  - had
passed with the failure of the Labour party to win at the ballot box.
Investors expressed confidence that longer-term UK interest rates will once
again move downwards towards those of Germany, as the UK's chances improve
of hitting the conditions for European economic and monetary union that were
laid down at Maastricht last year.
The difference between 10-year German and UK bond yields fell to around 1.5
per cent, having touched 2 per cent only a week ago.
BAA and Cable & Wireless were the only UK borrowers to move quickly to take
advantage of the fall in longer-term interest rates in the sterling bond
market.
BAA borrowed Pounds 150m at a yield of 10.5 per cent - a full 1.25 per cent
lower than when it last borrowed long-term just over a year ago.
Cable & Wireless issued Pounds 50m of 10-year bonds. The cost: an all-in
yield of around 10.37 per cent, compared with the 10.5 per cent Cable &
Wireless paid for an identical issue of Pounds 150m of bonds at the
beginning of March (before yields on sterling bonds soared ahead of the
election).
The prospect of falling inflation, declining short-term interest rates and a
move by sterling into the narrow band of the Exchange Rate Mechanism all
point towards greater demand by investors for sterling bonds, treasurers
said.
However, the lack of demand for cash could keep companies away from the
markets in the short term. 'If there is no economic upturn, then why will
companies want to invest?' said Mr Arthur Burgess, treasurer of British Gas.
'The demand I will have for cash will come through for next winter. I'm
perfectly relaxed about sitting on my hands for the next six months.'
The Bank announced it would sell a further Pounds 2bn of gilts on April 29,
marking the first extra-long dated issue of bonds since government finances
moved back into deficit. The bonds will have a life of between 23 years and
28 years, the Bank said, compared with usual issues of up to 20 years.
The longer-dated bonds would appeal particularly to life assurance companies
or pension funds.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920411

