FT922-7359

FT  19 MAY 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Coffee chief calls for action
to revive prices


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


THE WORLD coffee industry, hit by the lowest prices for more than 22 years,
has reached a turning point, according to Mr Alexandre Beltrao, executive
director of the International Coffee Organisation.
Calling for speedy action to revive the export quota mechanism which
collapsed in July 1989, Mr Beltrao told a coffee conference in Japan at the
weekend he was convinced that managed trade 'should no longer be seen as the
undesirable concept castigated by the deregulators of the 1980s'.
The value of world coffee trade has fallen from Dollars 12bn a year to
Dollars 7bn since the end of the export quota system. Retail sales of
coffee, including supplies to the catering trade now stand at about Dollars
40bn a year, he said.
Restoring the producers' share of the cake to Dollars 12bn would place no
additional burden on consumers. But if prices continued to fall, 'the good
years of surplus coffee for roasters and caterers sooner or later will come
to an end'.
World producers were taken aback by the rapidity of the market fall which
followed an indecisive ICO meeting early last month. On Monday April 13 the
second position robusta contract on London Fox fell from Dollars 864 a tonne
to Dollars 828 a tonne. The market touched a low of Dollars 676 a tonne on
May 8. Last night the second position contract closed at Dollars 735 a
tonne, up Dollars 1 on the day.
Next week producers will be arriving in London for talks at the ICO on the
format a new agreement should take. They appear increasingly determined to
take action to halt the slide in prices. Last week Costa Rica suspended
exports; over the weekend Colombia suspended the sale of its coffee on the
New York futures market; and Brazil and Colombia, the two biggest producers,
were last night holding high level talks.
Analysts in London agree that there might well be some movement in the
upcoming ICO talks. 'The economic pain is so great that everyone is going to
be forced to agree purely to boost market prices,' said Mr Lawrence Eagles
of GNI, the London futures brokers.
'There has been a sea change,' said Mr Neil Rosser of ED & F. Man, the
London trade house. 'There is a serious crisis in the coffee world. No one
is making any money at these price levels.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920519

