FT924-6353

FT  21 NOV 92 / Foreign Exchanges: ERM rumours boost dollar


   By JAMES BLITZ


SWEDEN'S devaluation of the krona earlier this week continued to cause
ripples across the world's foreign exchange markets yesterday, consolidating
the D-Mark's gains against most European currencies, writes James Blitz.
The latest uncertainty in exchange rates raised increasing speculation that
the Exchange Rate Mechanism was ripe for its second formal realignment in
three months. Late last night, agency reports that a realignment of the ERM
was underway sent the dollar to a level of DM1.61 in US trading.
The devaluation of the Swedish krona triggered a spate of D-Mark buying on
Thursday. Dealers believe that the Spanish peseta, Portuguese escudo and
Irish punt are overvalued against the D-Mark, and will need to be devalue
soon in order to boost badly-needed economic growth in those countries.
Inside the ERM, the Portuguese escudo suffered most yesterday. It plunged
through the psychological barrier of Esc90 per D-Mark despite intervention
from the Bank of Portugal. It later closed at Esc90.63.
The central banks of Belgium and Ireland intervened to support the Irish
punt as it threatened to touch its floor against the Belgian franc, the
strongest currency in the system. The punt later closed at IPounds 2.6243.
The French franc fell to a three-week low against the D-Mark, bottoming out
at FFr3.3910 against the D-Mark. The franc later recovered to a close of
FFr3.386, helped by the announcement of a FFr1.45bn current account surplus
in September, underlining the economy's strong position. It was still down
0.6 centimes on the day.
Outside the ERM, the Italian lira continued to weaken, falling another L4 to
a close of L863.3 against the D-Mark.
Some analysts said that Mr Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank president, had
intensified speculation by approving of Sweden's decision to float the Ecu
yesterday. But there are fundamental differences between the current ERM
tensions and the ones which developed into a full scale currency crisis in
the autumn.
The market is now looking at Germany in a different way. In the previous
crisis, the market chose to ignore the fact that the German economy was
slowing down and teetering on the brink of recession. Now, the D-Mark is not
perceived as the strong currency it was.
The market also saw in the early autumn how resilient the French franc can
be to speculative attack. 'People know that speculating against the French
franc would be a costly blunder,' said Mr Christian Dunis, of Chemical Bank
in London.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921121

