FT924-960

FT  21 DEC 92 / Leading Article: Bonn's example


REUNITED GERMANY'S foreign affairs aim is to follow 'a policy of good
example', according to the well-intentioned though somewhat sanctimonious
slogan coined by Mr Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Bonn's former foreign minister.
In its approach to dispatching Bundeswehr soldiers to help the US-led army
in Somalia, Germany is making heavy weather of meeting that objective.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl wants to send 1,500 troops to east Africa, probably
in February or March, to distribute aid to starving Somalis. This is a
welcome proposal. It illustrates Germany's efforts to play a more active
role in international peace-keeping, and in world affairs in general, by
throwing off some post-war shackles.
The German contingent's duties would be humanitarian: to organise supplies,
transport and communications. The soldiers would be lightly armed, for
self-defence. The plan is relatively modest. Yet it has been attacked by the
opposition Social Democrats (SPD), who say it breaches constitutional limits
on using military force abroad.
The chancellor has been talking for two years about changing the
constitution to allow German armed forces to take part in international
peace operations. There has been intense debate about Bundeswehr deployment
outside Nato since the Gulf war, when Bonn sent Nato-assigned aircraft to
Turkey to help protect it against Iraq. The conflict in former Yugoslavia
has added to the need for clarity about Germany's potential peace-keeping
role - even though memories of German troops' Yugoslav presence in the
second world war would preclude deployment in Bosnia.
The German constitution can be amended only with a two-thirds parliamentary
majority. So Mr Kohl needs the support of the SPD, which wants to restrict
Bundeswehr operations to UN 'blue-helmet' duties. During the summer, the SPD
raised doubts over the legality of the decision to send a destroyer to help
monitor the UN embargo of Serbia and Montenegro.
The question mark over that decision appeared incongruous, given Germany's
interest in peace in the Balkans; obstructing the Somali plan would be still
more difficult to justify. In a region unburdened by Wehrmacht legacies,
dispatch of German solders to feed starving Africans could do nothing but
good.
If, as the SPD intends, the German constitutional court is summoned to give
its verdict on the Somali case, it should do so with all possible speed.
Ultimately, however, decisions such as this hinge not on constitutional
probity, but on political will. Germany, as the pivotal nation in Europe,
must give itself the means to put its defence resources to the service of
the international community. The country is being severely tested by the
domestic challenges of reunification, but it also has wider
responsibilities. Using German soldiers to help alleviate the suffering in
Somalia would show the world that it is living up to them.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921221

