FT924-6292

FT  21 NOV 92 / Travel: Pirate tales from Ireland - Snapshot / Sherkin
Island


   By ANTHONY TOOLE


AS WE stepped onto the pier and turned to watch the boat chug away on its
10-minute journey back to Baltimore, I felt marooned. The feeling became
more acute when I noticed that most of the dozen or so passengers who had
accompanied us on the ferry had vanished.
The Baltimore we had left is the one on the south-west coast of County Cork,
not its illustrious namesake in Maryland, which it resembles not at all.
Ireland's Baltimore is a picturesque little port at the end of a cul-de-sac
from Skibereen. It was never designed with the car in mind, much less the
tourist coach, and makes no concessions to either.
Access and parking are restricted only by the volume of traffic present, so
that on a busy day it may take as long as 30 minutes to enter or leave the
village. The shops, bars, restaurants and houses, painted in brilliant
colours, have been squeezed against the harbour by the surrounding hills,
and have bulged up the slopes and out onto the coastal cliffs.
There is one notable American connection, however, though it may well be
apocryphal. President George Bush claims that his ancestors came from here,
and while this is treated with some scepticism in political circles, the
surname Bushe has been common in the area for several generations.
We had parked the car, with some difficulty, and taken the first ferry of
the day to Sherkin Island. Other ferries would be making the short crossing
roughly every two hours until 9pm. The infrequency of trips, together with
the fact than the ferries cannot carry more than about 15 passengers,
restrict the number of visitors to the island. We were looking forward to a
quiet, relaxing day.
Sherkin Island is about three miles long by a mile wide and lies only just
off the mainland, but it feels like the last outpost. It rises above the
Atlantic in a series of cliffs which act as a bulwark between Baltimore
harbour and the southerly gales.
Constant battering by the sea has hollowed caves out of the rock, and
sculpted deep coves, so that in places the island narrows to no more than a
few hundred yards. Horseshoe Harbour, Kinish Harbour, West Bay - the names
sound as though plucked from a boys' adventure story.
Indeed, piracy was once a major industry here, providing the wealth of the
powerful O'Driscoll clan, which ruled more than 1,000 square miles of west
Cork during Elizabethan times. Dunna Long castle, on the northern peninsula
of Sherkin, was one of nine built around Baltimore and the nearby islands by
the O'Driscolls.
In 1537 the castle was destroyed during an invasion of the island by men
from Waterford, in response to the seizure of one of their ships that had
sought shelter in Baltimore harbour. Also sacked was the Franciscan abbey,
the ruins of which stand on a slight rise above the pier.
We strolled along the narrow road in the direction of the sandy beaches of
West Harbour, passing slopes of dense shrubbery, heather and bracken, and
along the shore of Kinish Harbour, fringed with bladder wrack. Two girls,
also passengers on the ferry, walked ahead of us. A woman stood on a ladder,
painting a house. There was no other sign of human activity.
After 30 minutes, we reached the beaches. Small, sandy and rimmed by low
cliffs, they were deserted, and lapped by clear green water. Only the
peninsulas of Kerry and Cork, and the tiny islets known as Carbery's
Hundred, lie farther west into the Gulf stream. The largest of these, Cape
Clear, hung above the sea, its head hidden in the morning haze.
Throughout the afternoon, small groups joined us on the beach, each arrival
signifying another ferry trip from Baltimore. At no time, however, were
there more than a few dozen.
There was no rowdiness or vulgarity here, only the soft sounds of
well-behaved people enjoying a desert island beach, the beauty of which
would rival anything in the Mediterranean. It is unlikely that Sherkin will
ever be any different.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

921121

