FT921-13989

FT  18 JAN 92 / Yugoslav army 'will stay in Croatia'


   By LAURA SILBER and REUTER


   BELGRADE, ZAGREB


A YUGOSLAV general has insisted the federal army will not withdraw from
Serb-controlled regions in Croatia, in contradiction to the United Nations
plan for the deployment of peacekeepers there.
General Andrija Biorcevic, commander of the Novi Sad corps of the federal
army, swore that Serbs from Croatia would 'lie on the roads' to stop the
army pulling out of Croatia. Leaders of the federal army and Serbia have
backed the peace plan, which calls for the withdrawal of the federal army
troops when the UN forces are deployed.
Teams of UN liaison officers yesterday left Belgrade and Zagreb and headed
for bases across Croatia, where they will establish communication links
between federal and Croat troops. The UN says it will not deploy the planned
force of 10,000 peacekeepers until there is a stable ceasefire. Croatia and
the army yesterday accused each other of violating the 15th ceasefire in the
Yugoslav conflict, brokered two weeks ago by Mr Cyrus Vance, the UN special
envoy.
In an interview published yesterday in Borba, a Belgrade daily, Gen
Biorcevic lashed out at the European Community for 'destroying Yugoslavia,
by recognising its fascist republics'. He said: 'The army is where it is
because of the treason at the top of the state and in the army.'
His remarks address the split in the top army ranks over withdrawal from
Croatia and the demilitarisation of Serb irregular units. Admiral Stane
Brovet, the deputy defence minister, yesterday repeated the army's plans to
disarm paramilitary groups in Croatia. The general blamed Serbia's
opposition leaders for the failure of the army to fill its ranks. The army
and Serbia have denounced the recognition of Croatia and Slovenia.
'The army has no choice but to go on fighting until the victory over
fascism,' Gen Biorcevic said. The Serb-dominated army accuses Croatia of
fascism, comparing it to the Ustashe (pro-Nazi) Independent State of Croatia
set up in 1941, when hundreds of thousands of Serbs, Jews and gypsies were
killed.
Gen Biorcevic pledged that 'the army can fight to the end for the defence of
the rest of Yugoslavia, for which it has the power as well as the support of
the people'.
Italian President Francesco Cossiga yesterday began the first visit to
Croatia by a foreign head of state since the former Yugoslav republic won
international recognition earlier this week, Reuter reports from Zagreb.
Italian officials said his visit was partly aimed at counterbalancing German
influence in newly-independent Slovenia and Croatia.
A British photographer died after being shot by a sniper near the eastern
Croatian town of Osijek yesterday, doctors said, Reuter reports.
Mr Paul Jenks, who worked for the Frankfurt-based European Press-photo
Agency (EPA), died during surgery at Osijek hospital shortly after he was
shot in the head in the village of Josipin Dvor.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920118

