FT921-1131

FT  25 MAR 92 / Labour would delay minimum wage proposals until next year


   By DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


THE LABOUR party would not implement its proposed minimum wage until next
year and would then stick to the rate of Pounds 3.40 an hour rather than the
original policy formula of half of median male earnings.
The delay and the lower rate would mean that the number of people affected
by the minimum wage would be substantially lower, the wage bill cost for
employers markedly down, and the expected job losses from the measure
reduced.
Mr Paul Gregg, senior research fellow at the National Institute of Social
and Economic Research, yesterday calculated that if the Pounds 3.40 rate
were not introduced until April next year, the number of people covered
would be 2.3m compared with nearly 4m if the median male earnings formula
were implemented next month.
He said the corresponding increase on the wages bill would be Pounds 2.2bn
compared with Pounds 3.4bn, and the number of job losses would be 100,000
compared with the 150,000 the institute had originally calculated. Two
Labour frontbench spokesmen have confirmed that, if Labour wins, the minimum
wage is unlikely to be introduced before April 1993.
Mr Neil Kinnock, the party leader, has stated that the initial rate would be
Pounds 3.40, the figure in Labour's manifesto. Sticking to the formula of
half median male earnings would, by April 1993, produce a figure close to
Pounds 3.80.
Labour leaders stress that they remain committed to the formula but have
accepted the argument of economic advisers that the seriousness of the
recession and higher-than-expected unemployment make a short delay in
implementation sensible. Union officials are unlikely to complain publicly
before the election. However, implemention at the lower level could build up
pressure for a large catch-up, to the level of the formula, in 1994.
Workers most affected by the minimum wage are in hotels and catering,
retailing, textiles and clothing, and contract cleaning. The main worry for
many empl-oyers is the knock-on effect if differentials are to be
maintained.
Engineering pay rises at four-year low, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920325

