FT922-7352

FT  19 MAY 92 / Money Markets: Interest rates softer


INTEREST RATES in the sterling cash markets fell slightly yesterday as
traders reacted optimistically to news that a potentially crippling
industrial dispute had been avoided in Germany.
The news that German metalworkers had clinched a 5.8 per cent wage deal with
employers came as a relief to traders who feared that a destructive strike
in Germany might lead to another rise in interest rates. Traders in the
sterling money market believe that the Bank of England will be unable to
engineer another interest rate cut if German short-term rates are raised any
further.
As a result, period rates in London ended slightly lower. 3-month money, a
key indicator of where the markets believe base rates are moving, ended the
day at 10 per cent, down from 10 1/16 per cent on Friday night. But 10 per
cent remained the rate right up to 6-month money, with the 9-month and
1-year periods ending at 9 15/16 per cent. That sloping yield curve suggests
that the market does not see a significant cut in base rates for some time.
The futures markets also reflected the news from Germany. September short
sterling ended the day six points higher, at 90.31, suggesting that base
rates four months from now will be at 9.69 per cent. Volumes for June short
sterling were also significantly higher than those for last week, and the
contract ended four ticks up on the day at 89.99.
The Bank of England's operations in the money market were extremely quiet.
The Bank forecast a shortage of Pounds 400m at the start of the day, but
little paper was offered during the day. The forecast was later revised to a
shortage of around Pounds 450m. The Bank did not operate in the market in
the morning and in the afternoon, and provided late assistance of around
Pounds 50m.
One trader suggested that the Bank may have been reluctant to buy paper,
perhaps signalling that it would not like to see rates fall in the wake of
the German pay settlement. That interpretation was scotched by many other
traders. 'There is any number of reasons why there would be a lack of paper
offered now,' said one. 'There is the usual reluctance to offer paper in the
wake of a base rate cut, and the simple fact that people don't borrow so
much money in a recession.'

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920519

