FT924-11479

FT  26 OCT 92 / People: Barclays' forex change


Barclays Bank has reshuffled the top management of its global foreign
exchange operation, bringing in Humphrey Percy, previously European managing
director for swaps and options, to replace Steve Mazloumian, who had been
doing the job for about a year.
Percy, who is just 35, has a different background from his predecessor.
Mazloumian was imbued with the traditional Barclays foreign exchange
culture, unlike Percy, who decided, in the early 1980s, that the emerging
futures and options markets were the most exciting place to be.
He acknowledges that 'senior management wanted a different approach', and
says his principal task is to accelerate the integration of Barclays'
200-strong global foreign exchange team by getting 'a more co-ordinated
approach'.
'If we are watching a particular level of the pound against the dollar for a
customer in London, it is important that we should be comfortable passing
this on to New York and to Tokyo round the clock,' he explains.
There are plans as well to place a greater emphasis on 'product development'
acknowledging that Barclays has not, for example, been in the forefront of
foreign currency option development.
'I want us to be able to deliver foreign currency options on a global
basis,' he says.
Overall, the bank was rated number three by foreign exchange customers in
this year's Euromoney's customer approval survey, behind Citibank, and
Chemical which has merged with Manufacturers Hanover.
When Percy left school, which was Winchester, he went straight to Schroders,
where he spent six years principally in the foreign exchange division,
including trading spot and forward forex.
He then moved, in 1980, to Barclays Merchant Bank, where he began to
familiarise himself with the range of off-balance sheet products.
In 1989 he was made European managing director of the global swaps and
options group.
He replaces Mazloumian, an experienced foreign exchange hand, who set up the
bank's dealing operation in Bahrain in 1978, and moved to Tokyo as chief
dealer a year later.
After a spell back in London in the mid 1980s he returned to Tokyo as
treasurer in 1987, coming back to London just over a year ago. Mazloumian is
now moved to head up the central bank liaison team.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921026

