FT922-7453

FT  19 MAY 92 / OECD Annual Meeting: Governments aim their subsidies at
narrower targets


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Correspondent


GOVERNMENTS are cutting the subsidies they give to industry but are becoming
more sophisticated about how they subsidise, according to the findings of a
large international investigation by the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development.
It has built up a data base of subsidies in 22 of its 24 member countries
(the exceptions are Luxembourg and Greece) and the European Community as a
first step to developing guidelines that would help policy makers avoid
unfair and trade distorting subsidies. These guidelines would be subject to
monitoring through a process of 'peer review' in the OECD's industry
committee.
The OECD looked at subsidy policies between 1986 and 1989. It found that the
total net cost to governments of the 879 subsidy programmes reported to it
averaged Dollars 66bn a year in the period, representing about 2.5 per cent
of the annual value-added in manufacturing in its 24-nation area. This, it
said, represented 'a sizeable macroeconomic sum'.
However, the total amount of support dropped from Dollars 74.6bn in 1986 to
Dollars 53bn in 1989, or by about a third in real terms. While the amount of
subsidy given through tax breaks almost halved from Dollars 49.3bn to
Dollars 25.7bn, governments gave more to industry through direct subsidies.
Direct financing of subsidies such as aids for investment, research and
development, regional development and export promotion rose sharply from
Dollars 25.3bn in 1986 to Dollars 36.1 bn in 1988 before falling to Dollars
27.4bn in 1989.
The OECD warns that these figures fall short of the total level of
industrial subsidy in its member states. There are gaps in its data base,
reflecting such problems as measuring subsidies given by public sector
entities other than central government. The subsidy element in government
procurement of civil and military goods and services is obscure. There is
also no national breakdown of subsidy totals.
But certain trends have emerged from the study. Tax reforms have led to a
shift away from general purpose subsidies such as general investment support
through such instruments as capital allowances, to more focused measures.
The share of general investment support in the net cost of subsidies to
governments fell from 71 per cent of the total in 1986 to 49 per cent in
1989. In the same period, the share of R&D support increased to 13 per cent
from 10 per cent, while export related support rose to 20 per cent from 8
per cent respectively in 1986.
It appears that regional development expenditure has played a bigger role in
investment support. Industrial subsidies to help regions accounted for 22
per cent of total subsidy costs in 1989 against 14 per cent in 1986.
The OECD found that subsidy policies varied considerably among countries.
General investment aid was the dominant policy objective in the US, although
export-related and R&D spending also was high. Japan targeted its subsidies
mainly on R&D and small and medium-sized companies. In Germany, regional
policy was the main reason for subsidy in the period under review which
preceded the fall of the Berlin Wall and unification. In the UK, regional
development and export promotion were the main subsidy objectives although
R&D and small and medium-sized concerns received considerable support.
The organisation says its investigation has improved understanding among
governments of the structure and mechanisms of industrial support. It has
also led to a 'substantial leap forward towards transparency'.
But the Paris-based organisation says more has to be done, including the
gathering of more up-to-date data, if proper international discipline is to
be brought to the complex world of industrial subsidies.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920519

