FT922-7231

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (15): The time of their life -
Richard Lapper on the banks' increasing sale of insurance


   By RICHARD LAPPER


BANKS FROM Belgium and Switzerland are the latest European entrants into the
booming field of bancassurance or Allfinanz - the French and German terms
which describe the way banks are increasingly selling insurance to their
customers.
Belgium's Banque Bruxelles Lambert, the country's second largest bank, which
has been courted by insurers such as Royal Belge and Internationale
Nederlanden Groep, announced in March that it would establish a new
subsidiary to sell motor and household insurance; while, in January, Swiss
Bank Corporation (SBC) unveiled a joint venture with Zurich Insurance, in
which each company will sell products and services of the other through
their existing branches and offices.
The launches are the latest of a string of ventures in which banks and
insurers are taking advantage of the deregulation of the continent's
financial services industry to tread on each other's turf.
The pace of rationalisation has been remarkable in some countries, including
the Netherlands. Nationale Nederlanden and NMB Postbank created one of
Europe's biggest bank insurers following their merger early in 1991.
The ventures have not been entirely trouble-free, but bankers in the US and
Japan - where regulations preventing link-ups are still very much in place -
are casting envious glances in the direction of Europe. Increasingly,
commentators are recognising that, from a banking point of view, the logic
of bancassurance is inexorable.
Allfinanz, or the 'integration of banking and insurance at the customer
level', is one of 'the most striking developments to have hit the financial
industry worldwide in modern times,' said a recent survey by the Lafferty
Group, the Dublin-based research group (The Allfinanz Revolution - winning
strategies for the 1990s).
Lafferty believes that European banks are now positioned to take between 20
per cent and 40 per cent of the market.
'There can no longer be debate about whether banks have a role to play in
the provision of life assurance,' Lafferty concluded decisively. 'Evidence
from around the world points to the fact that banks are now not merely
marginal participants in the sector, but are becoming increasingly important
in both the manufacture and distribution of life assurance.'
Salomon Brothers, the securities house, agrees. Citing the examples of
Credit Agricole, TSB, Deutsche Bank, Rabobank and Monte dei Paschi, Salomon
says: 'The big winners in the European distribution sweepstakes are a
limited number of major banks that have found the right management formula
for success.'
In the UK, National Westminster and Abbey National opted to form bank
insurance subsidiaries last year. NatWest, which had developed links with a
number of companies as an independent intermediary, has formed a new joint
venture with Clerical Medical, in which it owns a 92.5 per cent stake. Abbey
National, which had linked up in a joint venture with Friends Provident,
took over Scottish Mutual.
Salomon says in a recent note, European Insurance Distribution, that a
standard formula for success is 'a captive insurer staffed by recruited
professionals (which) provides product, training and support while the bank
network exploits the active or arm customer portion of its customer
population.'
Underpinning the rationale is increasing competition within the financial
services sector. European banks have seen operating margins get much tighter
over the last 10 years. In particular, as interest-bearing current accounts
have become more common, banks have faced a sharp increase in the cost of
their deposits.
Banks have also had to respond to the impact of the gradual ageing of
Europe's population, which has seen a greater proportion of the continent's
savings invested in the longer-term investments in which life insurers
specialise, at the expense of bank accounts.
Competitive pressures - in part, stemming from deregulation - have also
pegged back the rate at which banks can make profits from their core lending
activities, forcing banks to seek ways to increase productivity by making
greater use of their networks of bank branches.
Banks have also realised, however, that their branch networks represented an
opportunity. Early examples of bank assurance showed that life assurance
salesforces could achieve many more sales by working with a bank's captive
customer base. While insurers convert on average one out of 15 sales
prospects - what the industry calls 'warm leads' - into a policy, banks are
now converting into policies as many as five out of 20 prospects.
The successful experience of bank-owned life assurance subsidiaries - such
as Lifetime, the Bank of Ireland subsidiary, which converts one out of two
referrals into a policy, and Deutsche Leben, the subsidiary of Deutsche
Bank, which claims a one-in-four conversion rate - have underlined the value
of the bank customer base.
'Banks have found that branch-based customers represent an extraordinary
asset - of warm prospects for life insurance products,' says Lafferty. 'Life
insurers, on the other hand, have been forced to the shocking realisation
that their policyholders have more of a relationship with the intermediary
than with the company whose products they are buying.'
The development poses some awkward dilemmas for insurers, While banks have
proved to be adept at selling simpler insurance products, in France and
Germany - where insurers Union des Assurances de Paris and Allianz have
entered into joint-venture deals with BNP and Dresdner Bank - insurance
agents have been less successful at selling motor loans and mortgages.
Increasingly aware of the value of their distribution networks, banks are
unlikely to cede control of joint ventures established with insurers.
Indeed, talks between BAT Industries - which has two insurance subsidiaries,
Eagle Star and Allied Dunbar - broke down over this issue.
Spain's largest insurer, Mapfre, has addressed the problem by setting up its
bank from scratch and offering banking services from its hundreds of small
insurance agency offices.
But few European insurers have such a dense network of branches, and
ultimately acquisition may their only option - though, on cost grounds, that
could rule out all but the continent's biggest insurers.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920520

