FT923-6480

FT  24 AUG 92 / International Company News: Uni chief to propose share plan


   By KAREN FOSSLI


   OSLO


MR ANDERS Eckhoff, the chairman of Uni Storebrand, the beleagured Norwegian
insurer, is today expected to seek board approval to expand the company's
share capital by at least NKr2bn (Dollars 347m).
The plan will include some form of state participation although Mr Sigbjoern
Johnsen, finance minister, has ruled out direct state cash transfers. The
state is expected to provide a guarantee for a rights issue and, as the main
owner of Norway's top three banks, will order participation in the issue by
Den norske Bank (DnB) and Christiania Bank, Norway's two biggest banks, who
are experiencing financial difficulties.
Uni has been working on details for a rights issue for several weeks but
turbulence within the company and volatility of its share price has slowed
the work.
A nominal value of NKr20 per share has been set for the issue but last week
Uni's A-share price plunged to new lows ending the week 40 per cent down at
NKr13.30 per share on the Oslo bourse, putting its market capitalisation at
an estimated NKr1bn.
The board and the state is seeking to avoid writing down below the share's
nominal value.
Uni's problems stem from a misguided NKr4.7bn investment to acquire a 28.3
per cent stake in Skandia Forsakrings, Sweden's biggest insurer. Together
with Hafnia Holding, the troubled Danish insurer, Uni sought to create a
pan-Nordic insurance alliance with Skandia, but failed.
Because of Skandia's limited voting rights Uni's strategy could not be
forced on the company which saw the move as hostile and unwelcome. Skandia's
share price has been extremely volatile in recent weeks causing the value of
Uni's original investment, made at NKr200 a share, to be cut by more than
half.
Adding to Uni's woes are demands by some dissident shareholders that the
company sell off non-core assets, reduce operating costs by NKr500m annually
and return its attention to domestic life and non-life insurance business.
Moody's, the US-based international rating agency, downgraded to 'Not Prime'
from 'Prime-3' the short-term debt rating of Uni Storebrand A/S, the group's
holding company, affecting about Dollars 250m in its Eurocommercial paper
programme.
Moody's said the cut stemmed from continued holding company losses,
especially those tied to the Skandia investment and volatility in
Scandinavia financial markets.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920824

