FT923-10833

FT  28 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Reform in Algeria


ONE MONTH after the assassination of the acting head of state, Mohammed
Boudiaf, the Algerian authorities have yet to provide any clues as to how
they plan to break the country's spiral of violence and economic decline.
Some of the appointments made since his death suggest that the five-member
collective presidency wishes to respect Mr Boudiaf's commitment to serious
reform. But the continuing crackdown on militants of the banned Islamic
Salvation Front (FIS) has not stopped repeated acts of sabotage, and the
12-year prison sentence handed out to the two main FIS leaders, Mr Abassi
Madani and Mr Ali Benhadj, has done nothing to calm their more extreme
supporters. Unless the government sets out a convincing new political and
economic direction for Algeria, civil war is a real possibility.
The new prime minister, Mr Belaid Abdesslam, was a respected adviser to the
late President Boumediene in the 1970s. But he is also reputed to be an
obstinate man, still attached to the old dogmas of the state command
economy. He recently criticised the abolition of subsidies and the
devaluation of the dinar, suggesting that Algeria should live on a war
footing, on the Dollars 3bn (Pounds 1.6bn) of its Dollars 12bn annual
foreign income left after foreign debt service.
Since the riots of 1988, Algeria has embarked on a programme of reform and
is currently negotiating a third standby credit with the IMF. Will Mr
Abdesslam follow the traditional 'Algerian' way of pushing blindly ahead in
the belief that he is right, or will he take the advice of the IMF and EC,
and accept that Algeria is not immune to global market forces?
Agreement with the IMF, which as recently as last month commended Algeria's
policy of refinancing rather than rescheduling its Dollars 25bn foreign
debt, is vital. Without it other loans, notably from the EC, will not be
forthcoming. Nor will Algeria be able to attract foreign investment outside
the field of hydrocarbons. More than 100 joint ventures have been signed,
often by private Algerian entrepreneurs, with foreign companies in sectors
such as pharmaceuticals, building materials and computers. The prime
minister will have to negotiate with France, which - unlike Italy and
international commercial banks - has refused to refinance its Dollars 6bn of
state-guaranteed export credits.
Dialogue with its foreign economic and financial partners would be in
Algeria's best interests, and a measure of support from western countries,
whose oil companies have signed exploration agreements following last year's
liberalisation, will be forthcoming. But obtaining greater sacrifices from a
population, part of which tacitly or overtly supports the FIS, may prove
impossible, unless the collegiate presidency can establish a dialogue with
the FIS and other opposition parties. In the absence of such a dialogue the
violence at home seems certain to worsen.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920728

