FT921-4012

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): Import system to be
revised - Single Market


THE CHANCELLOR proposes changes in VAT necessary for the introduction of the
Single Market from January 1, 1993.
Import procedures will be abolished for intra-Community movements of goods
from January 1 1993. They will be replaced with the concept of
'acquisition'.
Supplies of goods between persons registered for VAT purposes in different
member states will continue to be zero-rated by the seller in the member
state of departure.
However, under the new system, the acquirer of the goods will have to
account for VAT in the member state to which the goods are transported.
VAT control of intra-EC trade will be carried out using a system of
administrative co-operation between the fiscal authorities of EC member
states.
Auditing will be based on lists, produced by businesses, of their aggregate
sales to taxable persons in other member states. There are special
arrangements for:
mail order to private individuals;
private purchases of new motor vehicles, motor cycles, boats and aircraft;
and supplies to non-VAT registered businesses and non-taxable institutions.
Under these arrangements VAT will have to be accounted for in the member
state of the purchaser at the rate applicable there. All other purchases by
private individuals will bear VAT, at the appropriate rate, in the member
state of the supplier.
Baggage regulation
THE chancellor intends to legislate to enable Customs to exercise their
powers in relation to transfer and transit passengers travelling by air when
they reach their eventual UK airport of destination.
This is a technical provision to implement a European Community measure  -
the Baggage Regulation - which sets out the procedures to be followed post
1992 on Customs control of baggage for both intra-EC traffic and traffic
from outside the EC.
Limitation of Customs' powers at EC frontier
THE chancellor intends to limit certain HM Customs & Excise powers,
exercisable at the frontier in relation to EC traffic, to the purposes of
protection of the EC external frontier and the enforcement of prohibitions
and restrictions such as the illicit traffic in drugs.
As the law currently stands, Customs' powers are too widely cast to be
compatible with the abolition of fiscal frontiers and the resulting free
movement of goods and persons which the Single Market will herald on January
1 1993.
Customs are making very considerable changes in controls for the Single
Market. Formalities, forms and fiscal frontiers will all go on intra-EC
traffic.
What will remain in the Single Market are targeted spot checks - which will
affect only a very small proportion of travellers and foreign freight - to
identify illicit traffic in drugs, terrorist weapons, pornography and other
threats to society.
The chancellor intends to legislate to give legal effect to these changes.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

920311

