FT922-13405

FT  11 APR 92 / Property: Brief relief - as long as the price is right: The
Tory victory will lift the market but cost still calls the shots


   By MICHAEL HANSON


NOW THE outcome of the election is known, the uncertainty and inactivity in
the property market should begin to evaporate, with housebuyers starting to
appear again over the Easter weekend. However, many sellers whose properties
have been on the market for some time are expected to review their asking
prices to achieve a quick sale.
Andrew Hay, of Knight Frank and Rutley, expects a surge of properties to
come on to the market as vendors who had hung on until the election come
under pressure from their banks to reduce their borrowings. He thinks
property prices have bottomed out, or are close to doing so. 'But if the
banks cause large volumes of property to be released too suddenly, values
will fall dramatically,' he warns.
Anticipating a Labour victory, several sales took place before the election.
Property developer Ian Pollard, of Flaxyard, sold Hazlebury Manor, his Grade
I listed Elizabethan mansion in Wiltshire, for more than Pounds 2m to a
Dutch businessman who will now be selling his 35-acre Garinish Island, off
the south-west coast of Ireland.
Peter de Savary, who has just put his Devon country home, Waddeton Court, on
the market for sale at Pounds 2.3m with 152 acres of land, is expected to
review the asking price of Littlecote, his Grade I listed Elizabethan
mansion in Wiltshire, which has been on the market quietly for 18 months. He
paid Sir Seton Wills Pounds 7.5m for Littlecote in 1985 but he will be lucky
to get Pounds 6m for it now.
Janet Holmes a Court, widow of the Australian tycoon Robert Holmes a Court,
may have to review the Pounds 17.5m asking price for her magnificently
restored Grove House in Regent's Park, London, once the headquarters of the
Nuffield Foundation, which has been on the market since January.
At this level of the market, much depends on the continued confidence of
overseas buyers. Only a week ago, for example, Knight Frank and Rutley,
acting jointly with Debenham Tewson and Chinnocks, completed the sale of
Brook House in Park Lane to a consortium of overseas investors for Pounds
9.1m. The building, which was MEPC's headquarters, has planning permission
for redevelopment as 17 luxury flats.
Peter Braithwaite, a director of Debenham Tewson and Chinnocks, expects the
steady stream of overseas buyers to continue because London is seen to be a
safe place and prices are low, though he would not be surprised if some
buyers hang back waiting for prices to drift even lower.
'We held a two-day property exhibition in Hong Kong recently,' he says. 'A
few potential buyers asked about the likely effect of a Labour government,
but most seem to think that prices are low enough, whereas in Hong Kong the
market is at an all-time high. We sold a house in Earls Court a week ago to
a Hong Kong buyer for about Pounds 600,000.'
Sir Glenn Hickman, marketing director of Humberts, says: 'The signals are
not good. We had an offer of Pounds 1m on a house immediately before the
election, but were told that if Labour won the buyer would have to
withdraw.'
Housebuilders have been hard hit by the recession, being forced to make
provisions against the values of their land banks, to reduce the prices of
houses and to give all sorts of incentives to achieve sales.
Charles Church, regarded as up-market developers, realigned themselves well
ahead of the election. Chief executive Stewart Baseley says: 'We have
virtually sold everything over Pounds 150,000, and for the past four months
we have concentrated on building for first-time buyers with an average
selling price of Pounds 100,000 in the south east.'
Geoffrey van Cutsem, a director of Savills, advises vendors to review their
asking prices immediately, or take their houses off the market if they do
not need to sell.
'Vendors have not yet accepted that prices of properties over Pounds 500,000
have dropped a further 10 per cent this year already,' he says. 'I don't
expect values to increase before 1993, and it will be four years before we
get back to the peak of early 1989.'
Having been seeking Pounds 1.95m for Hinwick House in Bedfordshire, which
has been the home of the Orlebar family for 500 years, Savills has just been
instructed to offer the house at Pounds 1m by the mortgagees.
Guy Galbraith, who runs the Edinburgh office of Savills, says that Philip
Byam-Cook, the former senior partner of City solicitors Macfarlanes, has
reduced the price of his 23,000-acre Ben Alder sporting estate in the
Highlands from Pounds 2.5m to Pounds 1.75m.
As for the beautiful 3,400-acre island of Gigha, three miles off the Mull of
Kintyre, which Savills is selling for the Swiss bank Interallianz, the
heritable creditors of Malcolm Potier's Tanap Investments, it is unlikely to
approach the Pounds 5.25m paid for it in 1989.
Anthony Cane, the partner of Strutt and Parker, who is about to bring the
late Jim Joel's 450-acre Childwick Bury Stud in Hertfordshire to the market,
and is currently seeking Pounds 3.75m for the 1,500-acre Roadnight Farms at
Britwell Salome, Oxfordshire, says: 'People have got to lower their prices
if they want to sell.'
Andrew Grant, who has just celebrated 21 years as an estate agent in
Hereford and Worcester, has been selling higher-priced properties where
vendors have reduced their prices in recent weeks. 'People have got so fed
up with waiting,' he says. 'In the end you have to forget about politicians
and get on with your life.'
But Guy Galbraith of Savills has another tip for investors: 'Forestry is
going to be the thing,' he predicts. 'Where else can you protect your
investment in a tax-free environment?'

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920411

