FT922-13447

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Slimline Next is back from the brink -
The Bottom Line


   By MAGGIE URRY


DAVID JONES, chief executive of Next, has lost 2 1/2 stone on a diet. When
reporting results earlier this week he was worried that analysts would think
his new lean look meant that the fashion retailer was still suffering.
In fact, the results he announced were greeted in the City with gasps of
amazement. Analysts confessed to being surprised, even speechless, when they
saw the pre-tax profit of Pounds 12.3m, compared with their estimates of
about Pounds 8m to Pounds 9m.
They were all the more impressed when they discovered that the figure was
struck after a depreciation charge Pounds 4 1/2 m higher than normal. Given
that a year earlier the group had reported a Pounds 40.7m pre-tax loss, the
recovery was sharp.
However, Next, like Jones, is a shadow of its former self. In the year ended
January 1988 it made a pre-tax profit of Pounds 92.4m. Before the October
1987 crash it had a market capitalisation of Pounds 1.3bn and was a
constituent of the FT-SE 100 index.
In many ways Next epitomised the rise and fall of the stores sector in the
late 1980s - rapid expansion in UK high streets, acquisitions, share issues,
and above all a high profile chairman and chief executive in George Davies.
Profits rose; the share price followed.
But 1988 marked the turning point. By December of that year Next was warning
of a 'significant' drop in profits. a few days later, Davies was sacked.
As the consumer boom slackened and the financial consequences of
over-expansion in high-rent shops with expensive fittings became apparent,
Next and many of its retail compatriots found profits turning to losses. In
the 1990-91 financial year the group reported a net loss of Pounds 222.8m.
The company's story over the last year has been one of climbing out of the
abyss. It had one lifeline to cling to. One of Next's most ambitious moves
had been the Pounds 300m purchase of Grattan, the mail order group, in 1986.
Although Grattan's value had fallen, Next was able to sell it in March last
year for Pounds 167.5m in cash.
That deal secured Next's balance sheet, so that it was able to meet the
redemption of two convertible Eurobonds this year with cash to spare. The
group also set up provisions to cover the costs of rationalising the
business.
Then it was a matter of revitalising the company's brand name. New designers
have improved the product range - and their success in enticing customers to
buy was seen in sales which rose by 12 per cent in the second half of the
financial year. That was achieved without resorting to pre-Christmas price
cuts.
Over-expansion had spread the Next name too thinly, with too many different
fascias - such as Next Originals, Next Too, and Next for Men. So far 100 of
the 414 shops have been closed. Lord Wolfson, chairman, says that soon all
the shops will have one standard fascia.
At the same time the group had to cut the high level of occupancy costs it
suffered when shop rents rose sharply in the late 1980s as retailers vied
for new stores. Lord Wolfson says that the group's rent as a proportion of
sales including VAT were now 11 per cent, compared with a 'very high' level
before.
He believes that the group has completed more than a third of the task of
rebuilding. It gets harder from here, but there is a momentum running in
Next's favour.
However, the remaining question is how far can Next recover. One analyst
says: 'I now believe Next does have potential.' Another remarks that 'it
shows how operational gearing really works and how cash generative retailers
are'.
Lord Wolfson believes a company such as Next should be able to make an
operating margin of perhaps 7 or 8 per cent. If the company's sales can
recover to Pounds 500m, from the Pounds 392.9m its continuing businesses
reported, the profit target could be about Pounds 37.5m. That may take a few
years to achieve.
On forecasts of pre-tax profits of between Pounds 18m and Pounds 22m for the
current year, and the shares closing the week at 82p, up from its 63p
opening on Monday morning, the rating is rapidly catching up with events.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920411

