FT924-8282

FT  12 NOV 92 / Foreign Exchanges: A decisive day for sterling


   By JAMES BLITZ


ON THE EVE of the UK chancellor's Autumn Statement, sterling traded quietly
on the foreign exchanges. But some dealers believe that the pound will soon
fall below its current levels against the dollar and the D-Mark whatever Mr
Norman Lamont announces to parliament today, writes James Blitz.
It is 10 weeks since sterling was forced out of the European exchange rate
mechanism, and the currency closed unchanged last night at DM2.4175, some 13
per cent below its former ERM floor against the D-Mark.
Against the dollar it ended at Dollars 1.5260, up 1 1/4 cents but some 48
cents below this year's record high, reached on September 2. The pound's
trade-weighted index closed near its all-time low, at 77.9. In New York it
finished at Dollars 1.5250.
Sterling's fall has been triggered by economic gloom in the UK and
uncertainty over the direction of the government's economic policy. Today's
statement on spending plans for 1993-94 is seen as Mr Lamont's best
opportunity to salvage his chancellorship and rebalance economic policy
after two months in which its direction has been unclear.
A 2 percentage-point cut in UK base rates before the new calendar year has
been priced into the value of short-dated sterling futures in the belief
that the government will 'go for growth'.
Mr Steven Hannah, head of research at IBJ International in London, believes
this is a realistic forecast, but warns that sterling will fall sharply if
200 basis points are taken off base rates today or tomorrow. He considers
that a 1 percentage-point cut will have little effect on the currency.
'The government is facing more instability, having to push through public
expenditure cutbacks, the introduction of the council tax and a tough public
pay round,' he said. But he believes the growing German recession and the
D-Mark's incipient weakness will keep sterling above DM2.40, if UK base
rates are lowered gradually.
Mr Ian Beauchamp, chief economist at Hambros Bank in London, strongly
emphasises the downside risk for sterling. He believes Mr Lamont is caught
in a Catch-22: 'The tougher his stance on fiscal tightening, the greater the
scope for thinking that there will be more base rate cuts,' he said. The
announcement of a weaker fiscal package, however, will not dispel the belief
that rates are coming down anyway.
Mr Beauchamp thinks DM2.30 and Dollars 1.40 are possible targets for
sterling before the new year. The economics team at UBS Phillips& Drew
forecasts a breach of the record closing low of DM2.3675 within three
months.
There is a worry here for British visitors to France and French exporters to
the UK. The pound finished little changed last night at FFr8.172. The franc
continues to appreciate, leaving every chance that the all-time sterling low
of FFr8.03 will soon be broken.

The Financial Times


London Page 37

921112

