FT924-6008

FT  24 NOV 92 / Iran may be owed arms payments


   By RICHARD DONKIN and JIMMY BURNS


BRITAIN MAY owe Iran Pounds 200m or more for payments made by the Shah's
regime in 1979 for Chieftain tanks, spares and other military supplies that
were embargoed after the revolution brought Ayatollah Khomeini to power.
Negotiations between the governments over the contracts are referred to in a
July 1990 government briefing document prepared when ministers were
considering relaxing the 1984 export guidelines that prohibited approval of
defence equipment exports to Iraq or Iran while they were at war.
The document - released during the Matrix Churchill trial - says dropping
the guidelines would be 'a very useful factor in the negotiations enabling
the further release of items the Iranians have already paid for and with the
possibility of at least limited resupply likely to affect Iranian
attitudes'.
The document says that if the negotiations with Iran 'go badly and the
Iranians force us to arbitration, it could cost us up to Pounds 200m or
more'.
The Iranian deal was handled almost entirely by International Military
Services, the government defence sales company. The company's shares are
vested with the Ministry of Defence but the MoD gives it almost autonomous
status. The MoD refers inquiries about IMS to the company, which does not
respond to press inquiries. The MoD confirmed talks were continuing and said
the matter was in IMS's hands.
Throughout the Iran-Iraq war IMS maintained an office in Tehran and another
in Amman in Jordan, which maintained close military co-operation with Iraq.
The Iranian Military Procurement Office in London stayed open until
September 1987 in spite of evidence that Iran was conducting a worldwide
arms buying network from there.
The office was opened in 1982 and worked actively until it was closed,
according to officials of the National Iranian Oil Company, whose building
the procurement office used.
Officials said contracts handled by the office between 1982 and 1987
included British-made military spare parts. Officials said the office's
activity was curtailed only in response to political pressure. 'The
government knew 100 per cent what was going on here,' said one.
In answer to a parliamentary question last week Mr Douglas Hogg, Foreign
Office minister, denied the government had given approval for the
procurement office to be reopened in the UK.
Parliament, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921124

