FT923-6531

FT  24 AUG 92 / Economics: Better news on UK deficit


   By EMMA TUCKER


THE UK's visible trade deficit deteriorated only marginally in June and
mainly because of a reduced oil surplus. But the small change masked a sharp
fall of 3.5 per cent in the value of exports which was mostly, but not
entirely, offset by weaker imports.
Today's figures from the Central Statistical Office are forecast to show a
small narrowing of the visible trade deficit even though the recent trend
has been for imports to grow faster than exports.
In France, second quarter GDP figures are out on Friday. The forecast is for
almost flat growth after a 1.1 per cent rise in output in the first quarter,
when France was one of Europe's fastest growing economies.
This week could be difficult for the US authorities if the dollar continues
to come under pressure. Although there are relatively few sensitive
statistics out this week, the Conference Board's consumer confidence survey
out tomorrow is important.
If it does not show signs of life the dollar could suffer further losses and
the forecast is for only a marginal increase from 61.0 in July to 61.9 in
August.
The following are some of the other economic events of the week. The figures
in brackets are the median of analysts forecasts and come from MMS
International, a financial information company.
Today: UK, July current account (Pounds 700m deficit), July visible trade
(Pounds 900m deficit); Canada, July department store sales (flat); New
Zealand, July trade balance.
Tomorrow: US, July existing home sales, August consumer confidence (61.9),
car sales August 11-20 (6.2m); Canada, June wholesale trade (up 0.6 per
cent), June employment earnings (up 3.1 per cent); Australia, skilled
vacancies in the second quarter.
Wednesday: US, July durable orders (up 0.5 per cent), July durable
shipments; France, July trade balance (FFr1.5bn surplus); UK, July net new
mortgage commitments (3.2bn); Australia, July manufacturing production
statistics, July motor vehicle registrations (down 5.5 per cent).
Thursday: US, preliminary GDP figures Q2 (up 1.6 per cent), preliminary GDP
deflator Q2 (up 2.4 per cent), after tax corporation profit Q2 (up 6 per
cent), initial claims for week ended august 15 (403,000), July export price
index, July import price index, money supply data for week ended August 17;
Australia, Q2 earnings; Japan, July retail sales (down 2.4 per cent on
year), July industrial production (up 1.7 per cent).
Friday: US, July personal income (up 0.3 per cent), merchandise trade Q2,
July bank credit; UK, Confederation of British Industry monthly trends
survey; France GDP Q2 (up 0.1 per cent); Australia, net foreign debts Q2,
company profits Q2, private sector stocks Q2; Japan, July unemployment rate,
August consumer prices index - Tokyo (up 1.9 per cent on year), excluding
perishables (up 2.2 per cent on year), July CPI - nation (up 2 per cent on
year), excluding perishables (up 2.3 per cent on year).
During the week: Germany, preliminary figures for August cost of living (up
0.1 per cent on month, up 3.4 per cent on year), July import prices (down
0.5 per cent on month, down 3.4 per cent on year); France, July unemployment
rate (10.3 per cent); Belgium, August CPI (up 2.5 per cent); Italy, July
hourly earnings (up 3.6 per cent), July bank lending (up 14.5 per cent),
June PSBR, July trade balance (L0.5trillion deficit); Switzerland, August
Geneva CPI, August Basel CPI.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920824

