FT923-6602

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: Mixed week on the stage


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


   THIS festival has three main themes


the composer Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, and the playwrights Harley
Granville-Barker and CP Taylor. One is endlessly rewarding, one is a flawed
delight, and one is very patchy indeed. So it seems at the end of this first
week.
The one big CP Taylor success so far has been the Greenwich Theatre Company
production of Schippel, already reviewed in these pages this summer, and
playing in Edinburgh at the Church Hill Theatre. It is possible to find some
fault with the play, with its direction, with the cast - with everything
except the hilariously perfect David Bamber as Hiketier - but only when the
high level of the entire achievement has been recognised.
The play's mixture of farce and social satire, the slick polish and impish
wit of the production, and the verve and flair of all on stage have made
this one of the strongest theatre events this festival.
It does not prepare you for Walter or for The Ballachulish Beat. As Malcolm
Rutherford observed in Thursday's Financial Times, Walter is a bore, both
rambling and monotonous. The Ballachulish Beat, published in 1967 but never
performed before, tells a predictable tale about a failed political crusade
 -a Scottish rock group, the Keelies, innocently, sincerely and radically
left-wing, who are variously manipulated by corrupt or soulless management
and who then find themselves leading a radical youth revolution they can't
handle.
Unfortunately, Taylor's writing is crude, gimmicky, devoid of suspense or
subtlety. The many rock songs are all pastiche, but they're the one lively
element in the show.
No doubt that Taylor was a good idea as a theme playwright. His Scottish
origins, the Scottish themes in several of his plays, both make him
suitable; and the anti-highbrow manner of several of his plays must make him
appealing to those locals who find that the Edinburgh festival is
excessively genteel and intellectual. And Fifth Estate performs The
Ballachulish Beat in the Corn Exchange (next to some sheep pens and the
abattoir), a novel venue for the Festival but good for a show with so much
rock music.
One hopes, though, that the Taylor plays of this festival's second and third
weeks will show more sheer stagecraft. Walter and The Ballachulish Beat had
me wondering if the wit and command of Schippel are largely derived from the
Sternheim play on which Taylor based his.
Those in search of a well-made play have so far fared much better with
Harley Granville-Barker. There are parallels between the two playwrights -
both attended to the corrupting influence of capitalism, and neither was a
master of sheer stagecraft - but Barker is much the more absorbing.
There have been excellent five o'clock play-readings of Rococo and Farewell
to the Theatre, directed by William Gaskill, at the Lyceum. I think
Gaskill's staging of The Voysey Inheritance reveals Barker's incidental
weaknesses as a dramatist - so much exposition - but he has shown the range
and depth of Barker's mind. Both readings have included extensive narration
(spoken by Christopher Good), in prose that places Barker midway between
Dickens and PG Wodehouse.
Rococo is an engaging and impish trifle about the follies of a family feud:
who should inherit this repulsive but valuable vase?
Farewell to the Theatre, a duet between a leading actress on the brink of
retirement and a lawyer who has wooed her on and off for 30 years, is
something else. It opens window upon window: the relation of life and art;
theatre as imitation of life or as self-projection; a woman's independence;
a woman advancing through middle age. Susan Engel played the actress with
wisdom, charm and authority, her dancing eyes and constantly fresh pacing
animating the reading into theatrical life.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920822

