FT923-10707

FT  29 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: EC wheat stock now exceeds that
of US


   By NANCY DUNNE


   WASHINGTON


THE EUROPEAN Community has overtaken the US to become the world's 'residual'
wheat supplier this year, according to the US Department of Agriculture.
For the first time in recent memory, wheat stocks held by the community
exceed those held by the US government. Traders attribute the reversal to
reduced US crops in the past few years because of poor weather and continued
bountiful harvests in the EC.
Community wheat production for 1992-93 has expanded, in terms of both
acreage planted and yields, according to the USDA. Output is projected at
90.1m tonnes, slightly above last year's. US wheat production is running
well ahead of last year's poor crop - 59.5m tonnes is projected - but it is
still below earlier expectations.
While the US has been steadily subsiding wheat exports through the Export
Enhancement Program, EC export restitutions have been reduced. USDA
officials say they do not know why the EC has slowed its export subsidies,
but believe it to be related to world trade talks.
Even while American traders are taking note of slower EC exports, US sales
overseas have been brisk. Some of this has been attributed to election-year
assistance. US Wheat Associates, a market promotion group, recently noted in
its newsletter that congressmen and senators are preparing to face their
farmer constituents in the autumn campaign.
'Administration and other government agencies involved in export decisions
may be getting added pressure from legislators regarding the past months'
wheat export initiatives,' it said.
There is widespread speculation that the administration may have other good
news for US farmers before the election. According to Ms Kai Mander, of the
Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy in Minnesota, these actions could
include: retaliation against the EC over disagreements surrounding US maize
gluten feed shipments to Europe; USDA plans to spend Dollars 1bn of Export
Enhancement Program (export subsidy) funds in October to 'empty the bins'
and drive up cash farm prices; a delay in the Uruguay Round talks until next
year and a proposal to agree a two year extension of the Multi-Fibre
Agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920729

