FT921-1219

FT  25 MAR 92 / World Stock Markets: Searching for a longer-term strategy -
Tokyo's need for a change of tactics to revitalise its market


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


WHILE last week's fall of the Nikkei average to below the psychologically
important 20,000 level shook investor confidence, some short-term traders
and brokers still seem to be hoping old tactics will push up share prices.
A swirl of speculative activity during the past month has boosted shares of
bio-technology companies as Japanese brokers, eager to lift faltering
commission revenue, have turned to 'thematic trading' by promoting drug and
food companies which are developing new 'miracle' drugs. Amid a slowing
economy, brokers also hailed the drug sector's defensive qualities,
unaffected by the economic cycle or currency movements.
A recent announcement by the Tokyo Stock Exchange to put Okamoto Industries,
a leading condom maker, on its watch list due to the stock's volatility has
dampened the enthusiasm. Okamoto had been one of the leading stocks in the
Aids theme, and some brokers criticised the TSE's action as harming the
market. Okamoto rose to Y1,370 on March 12, 58.7 per cent above its 1992 low
of Y863 on January 27, but it has since retreated, closing at Y1,170
yesterday.
Last month the share price of Ono Pharmaceutical, a medium-sized drug
company based in Osaka, surged on reports that sales from its new diabetes
drug 'Kinedak', to be launched in April, would reach an annual Y25bn. Ono's
warrant bond expiring in August has given another reason for brokers to
promote the stock, on the back of speculation that its main underwriter will
try to lift the share price.
Thematic trading has been a driving force in the Tokyo market in the past.
Themes were frequently generated by the Big Four brokerages - Nomura
Securities, Daiwa Securities, Nikko Securities and Yamaichi Securities -
trying to promote shares of companies of which they are the main
underwriters.
The themes provided a basis for brokers to recommend stocks. The
orchestrated move would prompt short-term trading by institutional
investors, and convince individuals to commit funds to the market. A
consensus would be made in the market as second and third-tier brokers
would, in turn, promote the theme stocks put forward by the Big Four.
For example, the news that Earvin 'Magic' Johnson, the American basketball
star, was infected by the HIV virus, triggered the 'Aids theme'.
Thematic trading briefly subsided after the revelation of last year's stock
scandals, where brokers allegedly manipulated share prices of Tokyu, a
leading department store.
Japanese brokers claim they have now changed their strategy to promotion of
middle to long-term investments and advising clients on their 'portfolios',
rather than trying to increase turnover by urging them to quickly take
profits.
Mr Yoshinobu Isokawa, managing director of Yamaichi Securities' market
planning department, says most branch managers, who had been used to
recommending stocks with prospects of rising within a month, were initially
shocked by such methods. 'Both client and sales people were too obsessed
with short-term gains. That has to change.'
However, analysts say that without trading themes brokers are at a loss
about how to do business. Now some brokers are complaining that the main
cause of the current slump is the Big Four not coming up with scenarios and
themes, says Mr Kiyoshi Nikami, senior economist at Japan Securities
Research Institute.
Daily average volume on the Tokyo market's first section dropped to 172m
shares in February, the lowest since June 1982. Mr Minoru Nagaoka, president
of the Tokyo Stock Exchange, expressed his frustration about the trading
conditions by sending out letters urging brokerages to step up sales
activities. Mr Nagaoka said investors needed information to make investment
decisions.
Brokers, desperate for themes, have tried to revive old stories such as the
Aids theme. Along with Okamoto, Meiji Milk Products, a dairy company which
is developing an Aids cure, has seen volatile share price movements.
Mr Nikami says that unless brokers break off from thematic trading and learn
the basics of stock sales, the market will not recover from its current
slump. Until then, the Tokyo stock market will probably remain its obscure
self.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

920325

