FT924-8232

FT  12 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Electrocomponents leaps 33%


   By PAUL TAYLOR


ELECTROCOMPONENTS, the distributor of electronic, electrical and mechanical
components, yesterday reported a 33 per cent jump in interim profits.
Pre-tax profits in the six months to September 30, increased to Pounds 27m
from a depressed Pounds 20.3m in the same period last year when profits were
hit by poor trading conditions and high start-up costs in Europe.
Turnover from continuing operations grew by 9.5 per cent to Pounds 161.4m
(Pounds 147.4m) while gross margins were maintained and operating profits
from continuing operations increased by 6.5 per cent to Pounds 26.1m (Pounds
24.5m).
Earnings per share increased by 34 per cent to 8.42p (6.3p) and the interim
dividend is raised by 5 per cent to 2p (1.9p) to reflect the group's 'sound
trading performance and positive cash flow'.
Despite the continuing weakness of the UK economy, the group's core RS
Components business managed to increase sales by 7.5 per cent. Net margins
were maintained despite payment of rates for a full half year as a result of
the ending of the Corby Enterprise Zone, completion of phase 2 of the Corby
expansion programme and additional investment in computer systems.
In Europe the launch of new operations in Germany, Denmark and Italy during
the past 18 months helped RS International achieve a sales increase. These
new operations will incur losses for their first three years of trading.
Pact, which supplies pre-packed electrical accessories to all large DIY
retailers in the UK, 'had a difficult half year', with sales below the
corresponding period. However, Mr Robert Lawson, group chief executive, said
September was stronger and this trend continued in October.
As a result of 'stringent economies' made in overheads and operating costs,
Pact made only a marginal loss in the seasonally weaker first half.
Group operating results excluded losses at the Misco computer supplies
catalogue business, which has been reorganised and is up for sale. Mr Lawson
said negotiations on the sale of the business were continuing and he was
hopeful that they would be completed shortly.
COMMENT
Even allowing for last year's profits being depressed, figures for the
latest half are impressive. Revenues in the core UK business expanded by 7.5
per cent despite the state of the economy, while net margins rose in spite
of higher costs. The gains mostly reflect the group's success of splitting
the catalogue and introducing a substantial number of new products while
keeping a tight lid on costs. As expected, the new international operations
in Europe are losing money, but their revenues are in line with budget and
form a key part of the strategy to refocus the group and further exploit the
RS distribution network. Remaining Misco operations will be sold shortly and
Pact should strike profit in the second half. The balance sheet is strong,
with net cash to Pounds 20.6m at the end of the first half, up from Pounds
5.1m at the end of March. Full-year profits of about Pounds 58m look
possible and earnings of 18p per share put the stock on a prospective
multiple of 18.2. This is a stock to hold, or buy on signs of weakness.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921112

