FT921-14332

FT  16 JAN 92 / The Lloyd's Report - Analysis: Insurance companies might
join syndicates - Long-term plans


   By TIM DICKSON


THE TASK force report contains three important proposals that would require
detailed changes to the Lloyd's Act or further debate. If carried out, the
introduction of limited-liability capital, the restructuring of the agency
system and the creation of a secondary market for syndicate participation
would change Lloyd's more than all the short-term reforms put together.
Limited-liability capital is seen as a sort of back-stop in case too few
Names return to the market. It would be admitted in the form of 'corporate
members', structured as authorised insurance companies, who would have to
meet very high minimum-solvency levels and size qualifications. They would
participate alongside Names on syndicates.
If corporate members - which could be owned by corporate or institutional
bodies - went into liquidation, the Lloyd's central fund would meet
outstanding liabilities on valid claims.
Significantly, the report points out that changes to the Lloyd's Act would
also offer the option of moving to a fully incorporated basis of trading if
the present capital structure failed to sustain growth.
This implicitly recognizes that Lloyd's needs to boost its profitability to
attract significant levels of corporate capital. That is certainly a key
part of the aim behind the second long-term proposal: a restructuring of the
agency system.
All individual Names would be required to spread the first Pounds 500,000 of
their premium income limit via a Members' Agent Pooling Arrangement (Mapa),
which would diversify risk more effectively than at present. Corporate
members and wealthier individuals writing business above that limit, or
'Super' Names, could have direct agreements with syndicate managers.
The members' agency system would be divided into three different functions,
performed either separately or by specialist firms. Fund managers would act
as agents for Names in respect of Mapas. Licensed advisers would advise
Super Names on agency participation and others on the choice of fund
managers. Administrative utilities would carry out administration. The
syndicate manager's role would be largely unchanged from that of today's
managing agent. Syndicate managers, moreover, could be part of wider
groupings.
Probably the most radical element is the proposal for a market in syndicate
participations. Names, in other words, would have to pay to join a
syndicate, buying capacity from a Name seeking to leave on a matched bargain
basis.
The report says the idea could resolve some of the structural difficulties
arising from the fact that syndicates are 'annual ventures' and have no
legal identity in themselves. Names' returns would no longer depend on a
single profit contribution. In addition, the returns would be based on the
appreciation or depreciation in the value of their participation.
Apart from legal obstacles, the report admits to doubts about the
feasibility of creating an efficient capital market with adequate
information and sufficient liquidity.
Increased volatility would also change the nature of Lloyd's. For those
reasons, it suggests that the case for a market in syndicates should be
re-examined in three years.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920116

