FT921-508

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Tips for tipplers - Advice on London's pubs


   By TONY JACKSON


THERE is a curious tendency for drinking establishments to call up a mental
picture of what they ought to look like. Thus, the French cafe has stripey
awnings and Pernod on the pavement. The Bavarian beer hall has blonde
waitresses and men in funny hats. So it is with the London pub. Inside are
the cheery Cockneys, singing along with old Lil on the piano. Beer is
fourpence a pint and everyone is on first-name terms. Outside, it is foggy
and there is a distant shriek as Jack the Ripper strikes again.
The vexing thing about such images is that they are not so much wholly wrong
as misleading in practice. There is such a thing as the sociable London pub,
where families and friends get together, the bar staff know the customers
and conversation is general. Statistically, such establishments are
outnumbered heavily - in the city centre, especially - by pubs where the
social life is reminiscent of a motorway cafe halfway up the M1. The
clientele is transient and largely solitary; the decor is unvarying; the
prices are extortionate; and the absence of conversation is masked by the
juke box.
In seeking out pubs of the first category, I suggest applying what I will
call the law of negatives. I cannot claim to have invented this. Some years
ago, the head of one of the big UK brewers remarked to me that all its
market research showed people defining the kind of pub they liked in purely
negative terms. A good pub is not too noisy or, alternatively, too quiet. It
does not have live music, pop videos or exotic dancers. It does not have too
many old men in flat hats playing cribbage and dominoes.
For our purposes, the same principle can be expressed in a few simple rules.
Avoid pubs with a view of the Thames. These are gold mines for their owners
and, generally, run accordingly. The typical clientele consists of
coachloads of Continental tourists clutching tickets entitling them to a
half-pint of genuine English bitter. The bar staff are harried Australian
juveniles who will always serve you last - unless you are female, in which
case they will not serve you at all.
Avoid pubs near railway stations, especially the main line termini. Some
very odd people travel to the metropolis, and some even odder ones are there
to meet them. Be careful of any pub with a piano: someone might start to
play it. The days of the competent pub pianist are long gone. What you will
get now is either a piano bar pianist, which is a very different thing, or a
self-taught enthusiast who believes every known melody can be fitted to the
harmonic structure of Pop Goes the Weasel.
Watch out for pubs offering karaoke nights, live sport coverage by
satellite, or bottles of Mexican beer with a chunk of lime wedged in the
neck. Their presence argues that the pub round the corner will be reasonably
free from the kind of people who actually like karaoke, Mexican beer and so
forth.
Positive ways of identifying the right kind of pub are harder to come by.
There are large tracts of 19th century London where the only worthwhile
architectural features are their pubs and warehouses. South London, in
particular, still has a number of vast old Victorian gin palaces with gilt
mirrors, red plush curtains and ebony elephants on either side of the
fireplaces. The snag is that they are mostly in remote regions like
Wandsworth and Tooting Bec.
Above all, it is worth remembering that even the sociable kind of London pub
is not at its best during the week. Conceivably, there was a time when
cheery Cockneys did go with their families to the pub on weekday evenings,
If so, they stopped when television arrived.
Weekends - Sunday lunchtimes, especially - are another matter. All that is
needed is the kind of pub with a varied and interesting population living
around it, where at least a reasonable number of the regulars know each
other and women - preferably children, too - feel at home. As it happens, I
know such a pub not far from where I live in North London. I shall probably
be popping in there this weekend. But, to borrow a line from Jerome K.
Jerome, I am not going to be idiot enough to advertise it.

The Financial Times


London Page XV

920328

