FT923-15619

FT  01 JUL 92 / World Trade News: KLM poised for right to operate within the
US


   By DANIEL GREEN


KLM, the Dutch national airline, is poised to be the first European airline
to be granted the right to operate within the US. The deal could open the
way for other European countries to strike similar deals and, as part of a
quid pro quo, give US airlines increased rights to operate between European
cities.
'The first round of talks (between the US and the Netherlands) is expected
to take place in late August,' Mr Pieter Bouw, KLM president, said
yesterday. 'This could well lead to the signing of an agreement between the
US and the Netherlands before the American presidential elections in
November.'
Washington hopes other European governments could be pressed by the move to
open up their own skies, so that their national airlines could follow KLM
into the US domestic market.
Mr Jeffrey Shane, US assistant transportation secretary , said this week:
'There needs to be a competitive prod in the form of a carrier establishing
a much larger foothold in North America and forcing everyone else to
catch-up ball'.
In the US magazine Aviation Week, he said KLM would be the most likely
European carrier to fulfil this role. It could be followed by Singapore
Airlines if the US government's planned 'open skies' policy were extended to
the Pacific Basin.
KLM and Singapore Airlines would benefit from the main plank of that policy:
introduction of 'cabotage', the right for foreign airlines to fly in the US.
August's talks between the US and the Netherlands will include the question
of foreign ownership of US airlines.
KLM has a 20 per cent stake in the parent company of Northwest Airlines, the
fourth biggest US carrier by turnover. US law prevents foreign ownership of
airlines. Mr Bouw wants 'substantially simplified regulation of non-citizen
ownership of airlines'.
No plans existed to raise KLM's stake in Northwest, but rule changes would
'open almost limitless opportunities for co-operation with Northwest.' This
could mean improving links between the two airlines' networks, and in areas
such as maintenance, where work can be shared. Mr Bouw will press for an
increase in the number of US cities from which KLM can fly to Europe, an
important step in setting up a global airline network. This was a project
KLM could not complete on its own.
But KLM and British Airways had not re-started talks on a strategic
alliance. However, 'we are not ruling out a BA deal yet'.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920701

