FT924-11390

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (20): Arts subsidy cuts now restored -
East German cultural scene


   By LESLIE COLITT


   BERLIN


THEATRE, opera houses and orchestras in east Germany which until 1989 served
as heavily-subsidised showpieces of the Communist leadership in Berlin are
being forced to adjust to a somewhat less profligate patron in far-off Bonn.
Cries of betrayal arose from Rostock to Gera when the German government
announced in its planned budget for 1993 that subsidies for culture in east
Germany would be slashed to DM350m from DM780m this year, (DM900m in 1991).
Mr Hans-Joachim Meyer, the CDU minister of arts in Saxony, the most populous
east German Land which receives nearly 40 per cent of the subsidies, warned
that if such cuts took place his state could not support its museums,
theatres and orchestras of which even the smallest towns boast.
'Even the existence of the opera houses in Leipzig and Chemnitz would be
threatened,' he said. Leipzig has one of the leading opera houses in Germany
and Chemnitz has only just rebuilt its bombed-out opera house which is to be
re-opened in December.
Already under severe attack in east Germany for allowing the region's
industry to collapse, Chancellor Helmut Kohl had second thoughts about
opening himself to criticism that he was about to devastate the cultural
landscape of east Germany.
After hearing the complaints of the five east German Lander chiefs - all but
one from his own CDU - Chancellor Kohl agreed to restore many of the cuts.
The cultural allotment for east Germany was raised to DM650m next year.
This figure does not include additional subsidies to the performing arts in
east Berlin which come out of special cultural allotments in the Berlin and
Federal budgets.
The German taxpayer has been spared the cost of rescuing the east German
film industry located at the pre-war UFA studios at Babelsberg outside
Berlin.
CGE of France and Bertelsmann, the German media giant, combined to purchase
the DEFA studios at Babelsberg from the Treuhand privatisation company and
plan to build a media city housing two German television networks, a film
academy and the renovated DEFA studios now headed by Volker Schlondorff, the
film-maker, and the French businessman, Pierre Couveinhes.
East German theatres in particular have been hit by the dramatic fall in
purchases of tickets by citizens whose priorities have shifted to durable
consumer goods, travel and, in the case of the unemployed, sheer survival.
Fewer than half the number of tickets were sold in the past year (a total of
4.2m), compared with 1989.
In order to reduce costs, several towns such as Halberstadt and Quedlinburg
in the Harz Mountains have decided to amalgamate their theatres along with
Freiburg and Dobeln in Saxony.
East German theatre, opera and orchestra personnel have agreed to a
relatively modest 5.4 per cent increase in pay this year and to delay until
next January 1 receiving 74 per cent of the pay of their west German
counterparts.
But the axe is expected to fall in 1994 when Federal subsidies for culture
in the east are to be slashed to virtually zero and the full brunt of
subsidising the performing arts will fall on the impoverished east German
Lander and communities.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921026

