FT921-15500

FT  09 JAN 92 / London Stock Exchange: Share prices rally from early setback


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


THE DIVERSE pressures at present acting on UK equities were clearly
displayed in the market's performance yesterday. A firm, if uncertain,
opening by Wall Street, after President Bush's collapse in Tokyo was
ascribed to nothing more serious than gastric influenza, prompted a
substantial recovery in UK shares, which had been falling heavily on
sterling's weakness.
The Footsie, already down by around 30 points, initially extended its loss
as the news from Tokyo seemed to open the way for a heavy fall on Wall
Street. At worst, the Footsie was down 41.6 at 2,441.3, although trading
volume at this stage was fairly modest.
The UK market rallied abruptly in late afternoon but traders were cautious
of giving all the credit to Wall Street, although the Dow was up by 18
points in UK trading hours. Further details of President Bush's illness came
just as a substantial trading programme, weighted to the buy side, unrolled
across the range of Footsie stocks.
By the close, the FT-SE Index had recovered to 2,467.1, with the day's loss
reduced to 15.8 points. Equity strategists pointed out that the pound was
still challenging its ERM lows at the close, and that a sudden increase in
equity business volume in the final two hours could be put down to the
trading programme. Seaq turnover finally totalled 505.3m shares for the
session, against 478.3m on Tuesday.
The first half of the session presented a universally bleak appearance, with
sterling's weakness accompanied by wider concerns over the recession in the
UK economy. The depressive mood was set by confirmation that British Steel
is closing its steelmaking plant in Ravenscraig, Scotland.
However, there was slightly better news on the retail front from Dixons, the
consumer electronics retailer, which said that, while US business had
disappointed, domestic trade over the crucial Christmas selling season and
in the early weeks of that month had been 'well above' last year's.
This helped retailers, and some bank shares also tried to steady from recent
losses. But across the broad range of the market, shares were weak again,
with oil and insurance stocks extending this week's losses.
Some profits were being taken yesterday ahead of the close tomorrow of the
equity market trading account. This week's slide in the market had trimmed
the gain on the account to around 20 Footsie points at yesterday's lowest
levels. Traders were a little wary of the rapid recovery in share prices in
late trading and will be watching keenly to see how Wall Street behaves
overnight, since this will probably set the tone for this morning's opening
in the London stock market.
At Kleinwort Benson Securities, Mr Trevor Laugharne remained very cautious
about the market in the near term, commenting that domestic forces remain
weak.
Trading remained stock selective, and the FT-SE Index was helped by sharp
rises in British Aerospace and Glaxo, two stocks which moved in opposite
directions last year. Glaxo, the star of the London market, continues to
attract US as well as European buyers. In British Aerospace, which suffered
heavily last year for its rights issue move, investors have begun to refocus
on prospects for the Pounds 2.5bn defence contract with Saudi Arabia.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920109

