FT921-499

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Drama in strange places - The London theatre
scene


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


LONDON theatre is not just the traditional West End. If you want a
comprehensive view, you will have to be prepared to move around, often to
unlikely places.
There are three broad categories and an ideal visit would take in something
from each. First, the great subsidised theatres: the Royal Shakespeare
Company at its London home in the Barbican, and the Royal National Theatre
on the South Bank. Second, the West End which still accounts for around 50
theatres; then the fringe.
Not everything at the RSC and the RNT is good. The RNT, in particular, can
go overboard in putting too many resources into unworthy material. What you
will find, however, is an impeccable standard of acting, staging and
production.
The National, which is really international, began 1992 in spectacular form.
Declan Donnellan's direction of Tony Kushner's Angels in America on the
small stage at the Cottesloe is an intense a production of a play about
homosexuality and AIDS. Subtitled A Gay Fantasia on National Themes/Part
One: Millennium Approaches, it is also political and witty. On the same
small stage is Uncle Vanya, with Sir Ian McKellen in the title role. It was
sold out before it started, but you can sometimes get tickets on the day of
the performance.
On the bigger stage of the Lyttelton is a new production of The Night of the
Iguana, Tennessee Williams's last good play and, on this evidence, one of
his best. It is worth seeing for the staging alone - sub-tropical rain
falling in the theatre - and again for the performance of Eileen Atkins as
the east coast spinster.
The RSC's new season at the Barbican is just beginning with imports from its
other home in Stratford-upon-Avon. The production to look out for is the the
two parts of Shakespeare's King Henry IV. Without seeing Part Two, you will
never appreciate why the play is called Henry IV and not Prince Hal or
Falstaff. The dying of the king, the passing of an era, is magnificently
performed by Julian Glover.
You could quite happily spend a week moving between the National Theatre and
the Barbican: only purists would do that, however. The old West End is much
maligned by some. A group of musicals like The Phantom of the Opera have
become landmarks, though in longevity none of them are likely to match
Agatha Christie's The Mousetrap, now in its 40th year.
Recently there has been a trend to smaller, cheaper musicals - derivatives
rather than the real thing. Visitors from New York or Paris will scarcely
recognise the London version of Sophisticated Ladies in celebration of Duke
Ellington. The musical Moby Dick at the Piccadilly has been the talk of the
town, but was almost universally panned. Based on Herman Melville's novel
and performed by the equivalent of Ronald Searle's girls of St Trinian's, it
has been hailed as the downfall of Cameron Mackintosh, the impresario. I
recommend it as sheer fun. The music is not sensational, but the stage
effects are multi-dimensional.
The West End still has its straight plays. A new production of George
Bernard Shaw's Heartbreak House opened at the Haymarket last week with a
cast of stars including Vanessa Redgrave and Paul Scofield, directed by
Trevor Nunn. If you want the luxuriance of the old London theatre, this is
it (though you may notice that the standard of dress in the audience has
declined).
There is sterner, shorter stuff at the Duke of York's in Arnold Dorfman's
Death and the Maiden, a play about the transition from dictatorship to
democracy in Chile. That description should not deter; the underlying theme
is about nuances, compromises and adjustments in personal and professional
life.
Dorfman's play brings us towards the fringe. Death and the Maiden's first
London performance was at the tiny Theatre Upstairs at the Royal Court,
Sloane Square. It moved downstairs to the main theatre, then to the West
End. It is part of the unpredictability of the London scene that it has been
such a success. Juliet Stevenson, now of screen fame as well, is
outstanding.
The fringe has its subdivisions. The Almeida in Islington is closer in style
and spirit to to the Royal Court than to the pub theatres, where some of the
most exciting productions now take place. Recent performances at the Almeida
have been Diana Rigg as Cleopatra in Dryden's All for Love and revivals of,
and even a new play, by Harold Pinter. At its best, it is superb.
The most prominent of the pub theatres are The Gate at Notting Hill, the
King's Head, Islington and The Bush at Shepherd's Bush, the latter with an
excellent record of bringing new Irish plays to London. Others keep
springing up. I like especially the Duke's Head in Richmond, a place which
like Hampstead and Greenwich has several theatres. Pick up a copy of a
magazine like Time Out for the details.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920328

