FT924-11466

FT  26 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Why the Gatt talks matter


WHOM THE Gods wish to destroy, they first make mad. A half a million tonnes
of soyabeans is - so the world is informed - all that now obstructs an
agreement of the greatest importance both to the global economy and to
harmonious relations among the great trading powers. If so, this is lunacy.
The Gatt talks are too important and the need for agreement too urgent to
permit such folly.
Huge sums are being bandied about as the potential benefits from trade
liberalisation. Such calculations must be tentative. But economic
integration has been the engine of world prosperity throughout the post-war
era. There is, for example, much talk of the large 'home markets' that the
EC's single market programme or the North American Free Trade Agreement will
secure for those within them. But the more successful the Gatt becomes, the
more producers, wherever located, will be able to look on the world as a
whole as their home market.
As striking as the potential rewards for success is the price of failure.
Roughly half of world trade is among, not within, the world's main regions.
If such trade is to survive, let alone grow still further, it needs to be
put on a liberal and, as important, a predictable basis. There is a serious
danger, however, that the failure of the Uruguay round talks would lead to
progressive unravelling of the benefits for global trade of what has already
been achieved under the Gatt.
Agreement matters as much for global politics as for economics. This is
partly because prosperity provides the underpinning of political stability.
It is also because diplomatic relations both between developing and
developed countries and among developed countries focus ever more on
economic matters. Trade is already at the head of any agenda for discussions
between the EC and the US. But such disputes can no longer be held in check
by cold war security relationships. They must be handled on their own terms,
which only a rule-based system like the Gatt can hope to ensure.
If a successful Uruguay round is important, no less important is an outline
agreement before the US election. Mr Clinton is unlikely to repudiate a
successful deal. But if there is no outline agreement, the entire Uruguay
round will go into abeyance, while the new administration tries to renew its
fast track legislative authority and sort out its priorities. There is, in
addition, no reason to suppose it will be easier to reach an agreement with
a Clinton administration and, given the protectionist tendencies of many in
the Democratic party, good reason to believe it may be still more difficult.
This may be precisely what those who oppose agreement, notably the French
government, may hope. If so, it should consider the implications for an
already quite unstable world economy of a breakdown in these talks,
especially when the EC's failure to give the US satisfaction over soyabeans
is likely to lead to a tit-for-tat protectionist war as well.
A half a million tonnes of soyabeans is the ostensible reason for failure to
complete the deal. But the French government probably does not want one at
all, for domestic electoral reasons, preferring the tawdry comforts of
failure over the risky politics of success. There is even sotto voce
questioning in Paris of the painfully achieved deal for reform of the Common
Agricultural Policy, which forms the basis of the EC's position in these
talks. The German government is internally divided, but part of it is quite
happy to hide behind French reluctance to agree export limits on cereals, in
order to protect its own production of cereal substitutes. Mr Delors appears
tempted by the delusion of an adolescent EC standing up to a bullying
American big brother. Meanwhile, in Washington an enfeebled administration
is under pressure from its domestic farm lobbies.
Notwithstanding all obstacles, an agreement is needed now, partly to show
the EC is capable of effective action. Both sets of negotiators should be
instructed to reach the best deal they can this week. Let the obstructive
forces in the EC and the US then dare to vote the deal down. Let the French
or German governments dare to scupper the Uruguay round over their right to
dump cereals in world markets or protect their soyabeans. Both sides must
now be put to the only true test: acceptance or rejection of a negotiated
package.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921026

