FT924-6110

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (6): Eyes on Europe -
Profile of ERF


   By JOHN GRIFFITHS


BY NORMAL motor industry criteria, ERF should have been one of the early
casualties of what is the deepest UK truck market slump since the Second
World War.
It is small. It achieved an output of 4,319 trucks in its peak year of 1989
and expects to make and sell only around 2,000 this year, during what now
appears to be the trough of the recession. It thus enjoys few of the
economies of scale of far larger rivals such as Daimler-Benz and Iveco.
Its sole manufacturing plant is at Sandbach, Cheshire, in the far north-west
corner of England. It has been heavily dependent on the UK for its sales -
and the UK has been by far the most badly hit of all European truck markets.
ERF is also the UK's last publicly-quoted independent truck company, still
family-controlled but nevertheless having recession-rattled banks and
shareholders to satisfy and no group parent to draw on for support.
Ten years ago, when the last severe truck sales downturn occurred, it did
indeed look as if ERF would not survive. The company was then what chairman
Peter Foden describes as a 'fruit salad' truck maker, employing large
numbers of people to produce tailor-made vehicles fitted with almost any
type of engine, transmission or axle dictated by the whim of customers.
It was an inefficient way of producing trucks and for which ERF could
command little premium. It was also unsustainable. ERF's debts rose; output
plummeted; overheads swung.
The action taken by Mr Foden then, underpins its survival now.
The model range was streamlined, and standardised around Cummins engines,
Eaton gearboxes and Rockwell axles. It retained its own cab design and
manufacturing - having pioneered the non-rusting plastic composite, rather
than metal cab - and with the recovery of the mid-80s reaped the benefits.
By the time it became evident, in mid-1990, that the present UK sales slump
was deadly serious ERF had achieved four years of sustained profitability
culminating with a record pre-tax profit of Pounds 7.83m in 1989.
Since then, it has been sharply downhill all the way for the entire
industry.
Even so, after 18 months of losses, and with the market still sliding
downwards, ERF managed a small profit in the first half of its financial
year to September 1991. Four months ago, Mr Foden was able to report that
the full-year 1990/91 loss of Pounds 4.47m had been cut to Pounds 563,000 in
1991/92.
That is a function of a work force almost halved once more to around 750,
production pared to nine trucks a day on only four days a week, with ERF no
longer building for stock.
Because ERF buys in key driveline components, lowering output is primarily a
question of turning off the suppliers' taps - done quickly and relatively
easily. There is little scope left for reducing overheads further.
With all truck makers still bleeding, such considerations would still be
almost irrelevant if ERF were highly geared and running out of cash
resoures. But it is not. Gearing at mid-June was 17 per cent, up from 6 per
cent the previous year, and is probably still rising.
But this largely reflects increased on-balance sheet leased assets to bring
ERF's Pounds 6m new product range to fruition - an ambitious project,
involving another all-new cab, which will see the renewal of the range over
the two years following the 1993 launch.
To compensate for the UK downturn, ERF has been putting extra effort into
its traditional overseas markets - largest of which is South Africa - and
which in the past year or so have been accounting for about 30 per cent of
unit sales, although trucks and bus chassis are mainly despatched in kit
form.
This year, however, ERF has decided to take the plunge into Europe, in what
Mr Foden describes as 'one of the most important steps ERF has taken for
many years'.
Two wholly-owned distribution subsidiaries have been set up, ERF France and
ERF Espana - with a third to follow in Portugal - to act as liaison with
fledgling dealer networks.
The first truck destined for sale in continental Europe was shipped in
mid-November. Final contracts with an initial two dealerships in France and
four in Spain were being signed at around the same time.
According to Rod England, ERF's sales and marketing director, eight French
dealerships, covering the main conurbations from Paris to Marseilles, should
be in place by the end of the year, with five in eastern and central Spain.
All are independently owned, most with other commercial vehicle franchises.
Once sales have become established, ERF plans then to turn its attention to
Portugal, followed by the Benelux countries.
Mr England says he believes ERF can capture around 2 per cent of Continental
Europe's market for trucks of 16 tonnes and over - equivalent to around
1,500 units annually - within the next two to three years.
In theory at least, ERF's timing is fortuitous - it is entering the
Continental market helped by a 'windfall' devaluation of sterling after its
departure from the ERM, although its fall against the franc and peseta is
much less than against the D-Mark.
'But it's not helped us as much as we would like', observes Mr England,
'because markets have been turning down in Europe. What it does provide is
the flexibility to counter heavy discounting by the big guys in Europe.'
To the obvious question of why should any Continental truck operator want to
buy from a small, in European terms, relatively unknown UK producer, Mr
England retorts that 'there are always people looking for something
different.
'Within any country there are people dissatisfied with the reduction in
choice that has gone on as the industry has rationalised, such as Volvo
getting together with Renault. So we're saying to people there is a choice -
that we're a maker of high quality products that does things just a little
differently, with a low cost of ownership because parts are cheap and the
vehicles last a long time.'

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921123

