FT921-14383

FT  16 JAN 92 / Business Law: Programmes to keep trade fair


   By CLIVE DAVIES


The failure in recent years of the centrally planned economies of central
and eastern Europe to fulfil the expectations of their peoples, and the
re-emergence of societies based on free competition, support Thomas
Jefferson's philosophy that free trade is the foundation of commerce.
The law in a number of countries attempts by regulation to preserve fair
competition and thus enforce this underlying principle of free trade. While
there may be some paradox in regulating for freedom, these laws have a
practical impact on most businesses operating within their jurisdictions.
The laws can be traced back in many cases to the English common law doctrine
that contracts 'in restraint of trade' are against the public interest.
American antitrust law developed this original concept when the so-called
'trust busters' in the early part of this century broke up huge business
conglomerates such as Rockefeller's Standard Oil because they were perceived
to be strangling commerce by their widespread interests.
English legislation after the Second World War regulated monopolies,
restrictive trade practices, resale price maintenance and anti-competitive
practices.
The European Community (EC) has competition law rules aimed at prohibiting
agreements or concerted practices which prevent, restrict or distort
competition and the abuse of dominant positions which could threaten the
creation of a single European market.
The EC legislation is enforced by the European Commission and cases can be
brought before the Court of Justice in Luxembourg or, more precisely, before
the Court of First Instance, which took over jurisdiction for all
competition cases from the senior court in September 1989.
The Commission can fine offenders up to 10 per cent of their worldwide
annual turnover for breaches of the competition rules in articles 85 and 86
of the Treaty of Rome. In December 1990 it fined ICI and Solvay more than
Pounds 33m for operating a cartel in soda ash, a key ingredient of glass,
and in July this year it fined Tetra Pak, the Swiss liquid packaging group,
Pounds 52m for abuse of a dominant position.
American companies have been exposed for a longer period of time to
potential investigations by the Federal Trade Commission or the Department
of Justice, with the possibility of treble damages being awarded in the
courts, and have consequently taken competition law compliance seriously for
many years.
As part of ensuring compliance within their organisations, and also
minimising the consequences if they do infringe any of the antitrust laws,
many US companies operate effective antitrust compliance programmes.
In Europe such programmes seem to be a rarity, even among large companies
trading internationally which, it would be reasonable to assume, would be at
some risk if they were in breach of the law.
The advantages afforded by an effective competition compliance programme
should have been clear to European companies for some time. As long ago as
1982, in a case involving National Panasonic, the European Commission made
its views on the subject abundantly clear:
'Regard must however also be taken of the fact that (the company) has taken
urgent steps to regulate the overall marketing policies of its subsidiaries
in the EEC . . . (The company) has also conducted an audit of its legal
practices in the Community and has issued Codes of Conduct to all its
subsidiaries in the EEC which have the authority of the parent company.
'This constructive attitude adopted by the management . . . has been taken
into account in assessing the amount of the fine. The undertakings concerned
have adopted a comprehensive practical detailed and carefully considered
antitrust compliance programme, with appropriate legal advice. Such action
must be considered a positive step which contributes to an awareness at all
levels of the group of the daily impact of competition policy.'
In the UK the House of Lords has also indirectly provided support for
compliance programmes in a recent restrictive trade practices case. It
involved Smiths Concrete, which successfully appealed to the Law Lords
against a fine imposed by the Restrictive Trade Practices Court for
participating in a price fixing cartel. The Law Lords ruled that the company
had taken all reasonable steps to dissuade its staff from entering into
unlawful agreements.
A compliance programme should take full account of the industry in which the
company operates and be run by in-house or external lawyers who have a good
working knowledge of the company's business methods, with assistance from
the company's training department.
This gives the lawyers the opportunity to participate in preventative legal
measures, and enables commercial managers better to understand the
contribution they can make.
It is essential, however, that the programme is understood and endorsed by
the company's senior management. Otherwise it may be considered time
consuming and even a nuisance, as it lacks any authority or commitment from
those who make the key decisions within the organisation.
Such a programme would need proper planning and involve some form of
compliance audit to determine the current understanding of competition law
within the company and the extent of any non-compliance.
This would be followed by an education programme aimed at creating awareness
and an understanding of the reason for the programme among relevant managers
and employees. Any offending business practices should be changed.
Even informal arrangements among competitors must be avoided.
Take as an example, a sales managers' conference attended by a number of
European companies that all trade in similar products throughout the
Community, but only one company that has invested in a competition
compliance programme.
At a post-conference social gathering, somebody suggests that their common
problems are associated with customers negotiating different prices for the
respective products. Another representative agrees and adds that it would be
simpler if they could all agree what discounts to offer. A third says they
should also agree which parts of the Community would be served by each
company.
The representative of the company which has a compliance programme points
out that what they are proposing amounts to an illegal price fixing and
market sharing cartel and states that he wants nothing to do with it.
Later, however, he mentions the conversation to a colleague at a company
which is having considerable difficulty in obtaining any market share owing
to price cutting activities by competitors, prompting a complaint to the
Office of Fair Trading (OFT) in the UK and the European Commission in
Brussels.
An industry investigation would inevitably follow. Some of the companies
would be subjected to dawn raids by Commission representatives, followed by
a protracted investigation by the two competition authorities, with the
likelihood of substantial fines and enforced changes to their business
practices.
The company with a compliance programme would also be investigated, but it
would be able to avoid any fine by using its compliance programme to
demonstrate that it had avoided participation in any anti-competitive
practices.
Are there any disadvantages in establishing a competition compliance
programme? Such an exercise may cause some resentment among business
managers, who could see it as undue interference in their work with no
positive benefits.
This can be overcome by senior management endorsement and sensitive
training, designed to emphasise the overall value of the programme to the
company.
If a company were found to be in breach of competition law, after
establishing a compliance programme, the competition authorities could be
adversely influenced by the company's failure to meet its own standards.
However, the proper implementation of such a programme would be more likely
to impress the OFT or the Commission than otherwise, particularly if it is
seen as a continuing process which is followed through and reviewed year by
year.
Business lawyers and their clients are now realising the benefits of
identifying potential problem areas and dealing with them before they become
big issues. Competition law compliance programmes are a timely and sensible
way of furthering such practices, while endorsing the economic and legal
systems which should enable companies to flourish in their chosen fields of
business.
The author is a partner with City solicitors D J Freeman & Co.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920116

