FT922-4360

FT  05 JUN 92 / Business school row fuelled


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


THE BUSINESSMAN who chairs Manchester University's council yesterday accused
the 14 private-sector leaders who resigned last week from Manchester
Business School's council of betrayal. He claimed they had been 'led astray'
about their role by Professor Tom Cannon, the school director.
Mr Chris Kenyon said a new business school executive board would be formed,
with the chairman and a majority of lay members from industry and commerce.
That would give 'practical effect' to a better partnership with the private
sector.
The school council's lay members resigned over an alleged lack of plans for
such a partnership. They wanted the school to become autonomous and not
federated with management education and research in the University of
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (Umist) and the university's
department of accounting.
Mr Kenyon, chairman of William Kenyon & Sons, a Cheshire ropes and webbing
manufacturer, formerly chaired the business school's finance and general
purposes committee for seven years.
He said an advisory body was actually in charge rather than the old school
council. 'Members of the school council were led astray by the director, who
saw himself as chief executive of an independent organisation,' he added.
'Lay members with little or no sympathy for academic processes found this
simple 'business-like' concept attractive.'
That led the council to assume a more executive style, although it met only
three times a year. The school was run by its director, dean and professors.
The new board would have executive powers, with defined responsibility to
the university, which was legally and financially accountable for the
school. 'It is the nearest thing to autonomy a university can offer,' Mr
Kenyon said.
Many business school members have privately complained this week of a
breakdown in communications during negotiations over the new structure. They
say there is now broad support for it - as well as widespread belief that
many school council members misunderstood what was on offer.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920605

