FT921-11976

FT  29 JAN 92 / World Stock Markets: Portugal puts its faith in recent
reforms - High interest rates and privatisation have hit the equity market


   By PATRICK BLUM


The Portuguese stock market fell to its lowest level since March 1987 this
week, suggesting that an upturn remains some way off in spite of reforms to
make the market more attractive.
The Banco Totta & Acores (BTA) index, which reached an all-time high of
6,753.30 in October 1987, fell below 1,900 on Monday and closed at 1,894.5
yesterday.
The latest fall confirms a trend already apparent last year, during which
trading in shares on the Lisbon and Oporto exchanges declined by more than 6
per cent, while the turnover in bonds and government securities quadrupled
to record levels.
Commentators say that government policy to maintain high interest rates and
provide extra fiscal benefits for purchasers of shares in companies being
privatised effectively favours investment in government-influenced stocks at
the expense of the broader market. As long as this remains the case,
'investors will continue to leave the market', said Publico, a respected
daily newspaper, yesterday.
Last year's developments appear to support that verdict. Domestic and
foreign investors rushed into government bonds and the value of transactions
in government paper rose from Es341bn (Dollars 2.5bn) in 1990 to Es1,460bn.
In sharp contrast, the value of shares traded on the official market, not
including initial share flotations for privatisations, nor over-the-counter
trading on the secondary market, fell from Es260.2bn in 1990 to Es255.1bn.
The BTA index lost 8.8 per cent in 1991 to 1,953.8, and so far this year it
has fallen a further 3 per cent.
Analysts pin their hopes on recent reforms and the introduction of a
three-tier market. 'It is a question of confidence, and the reforms will
help,' says one analyst, but opinions are more cautious over prospects for a
recovery. 'Until interest rates come down, I do not see a strong recovery
for the market, though some individual stocks may rise,' comments another
analyst.
The market was split into three in January in an effort to make transactions
more efficient and transparent. The first tier, or 'official market',
includes a small group of 'top' companies listed on a new national
computerised continuous pricing system linking Lisbon and Oporto, and a
larger group of up to 50 companies which are quoted twice a day under the
old system in Lisbon and Oporto.
Continuous trading was launched last September with three companies to test
the system. Since then it has grown to 11 companies, and up to 30 companies
could eventually be included, provided they have a minimum market
capitalisation of Es500m.
The second tier, or 'second market', is for small and medium-sized companies
with a market capitalisation of between Es125m and Es500m. Those in this
tier will be quoted daily, but only on one of the two exchanges. At present
it consists of three stocks.
The third tier, or 'market without quotations', will be for companies which
do not meet the stock exchange's criteria on liquidity or financial
position. Earlier this month, 51 companies were relegated from the official
market to this tier. Companies in this tier can be traded on either of the
two stock exchanges.
The changes were welcomed by analysts. A leading fund manager says: 'These
measures are important because they clarify the importance of the different
markets and the degree of risk. Companies in the official market, for
example, will also have to provide better information.'
Other reforms should also help. A new independent securities exchange
commission was established last year to regulate and supervise the market.
The exchanges are now managed by two private companies which will ultimately
merge. The number of authorised brokers will be doubled to 20 in Lisbon and
from 10 to 14 in Oporto to encourage greater competition and better service.
Mr John Ferreira of brokers Carnegie International says: 'These reforms will
add credibility to the market and set the scene for the emergence of a much
more serious stock exchange.' But for now, bargain hunters with a long-term
view could take advantage of the current low prices.

The Financial Times


London Page 35

920129

