FT922-7128

FT  20 MAY 92 / International Equities: Investors expect steady flow of
share offers from France


   By SARA WEBB


INTERNATIONAL equity investors expect to see a steady flow of global share
offerings from France following last week's surprise announcement that the
French government plans to raise FFr9.5bn from selling its 19 per cent stake
in Total, the French oil group.
Analysts predict the French government may raise up to FFr15bn this year and
a further FFr20bn-FFr30bn from partial privatisations in 1993, depending on
which party wins the general election. Given the large size of the deals,
the government may need to raise up to 25 per cent of the total from
international investors.
Ms Sophie Blanpain, French analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers, says
attention will focus initially on Total's equity offering, adding that if
this is well-received and takes place soon, it could pave the way for
another privatisation later this year.
No date has been given for the Total offering, which is the biggest of the
partial privatisations so far, although market participants expect it to
take place within the next two months, probably in June. Ms Blanpain
believes the international tranche could represent up to 25 per cent of the
issue.
The state has already raised FFr2bn from the sale of its 2.3 per cent stake
in the oil group Elf Aquitaine, and is expected to sell shares in the Caisse
Nationale de Prevoyance (CNP), a life insurance company, raising an
estimated FFr2bn.
Ms Blanpain points out that the state is likely to sell shares in companies
which have completed their restructuring. She believes the next candidate
for partial privatisation is likely to be either Rhone Poulenc, the
chemicals and pharmaceuticals group, or Pechiney, the state-owned aluminium
producer.
Shearson Lehman forecast that if the Conservative Party wins the general
election next year, it would probably introduce a large-scale privatisation
programme, raising about FFr30bn in 1993 and up to FFr60bn a year thereafter
 -equivalent to 0.8 per cent of GDP. Most of the proceeds would be used to
repay government debt or reduce its net issuance.
Recent opinion polls and the results of the regional elections earlier this
year have suggested that the ruling Socialist Party is unlikely to form the
government.
Reliance, the Indian petrochemical group controlled by the Ambani family,
looks set to push ahead with its international equity offering, despite the
recent financial scandal in India which has hit stock prices on the local
stock market.
Morgan Stanley, lead manager for the Dollars 100m equity issue, said pricing
is expected to take place 'within the next few days' provided market
conditions were favourable.
The deal, which marks the first time an Indian private sector company has
issued an international share offering, is to help finance a gas cracker.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920520

