FT923-15597

FT  01 JUL 92 / Businesses face the crunch over filing accounts: Andrew Jack
on new fines introduced by Companies House


   By ANDREW JACK


FROM today, thousands of companies across Britain will start receiving
letters saying they are to be fined because they have not filed their
accounts.
Any limited company that is late in lodging its annual accounts at Companies
House, the government's central company information point, will be subject
to fines of up to Pounds 5,000.
Not surprisingly, officials have reported a sudden surge in the postbag over
the last few days in advance of the new penalty regime.
Mrs Lynne Beale, assistant director of compliance, has some simple advice
for those who may have missed the campaign, which culminates today: 'File.'
she says. 'It's in your own interest.'
The new penalty regime follows the most intensive marketing campaign ever by
Companies House, which is an executive agency under the government's Next
Steps init-iative.
Advertisements and posters have been warning the business community for
several months not to be late for a very important date - July 1 - in a
programme costing more than Pounds 300,000.
From today, thousands of companies will start to receive letters notifying
them that they are subject to mandatory fines for failing to meet the
deadlines - which are 10 months after their financial year-end for private
companies and seven months for public companies.
The fines operate on a sliding scale from a minimum of Pounds 100 for a
private company and Pounds 500 for a public company that files within three
months after deadline, up to Pounds 1,000 and Pounds 5,000 respectively for
those filing more than 12 months late.
Since 1984, when the Commons public accounts committee criticised Companies
House for inadequate compliance, more than 1,300 company directors have been
fined and given a criminal record for failing to file accounts.
Companies House is responsible for collecting two sets of documents from
every company each year - the accounts, and the annual return, which
includes information on directors, the registered office and shareholders.
In the mid 1980s, only about 40 per cent of accounts were being received on
time. Now filings of both documents are running at nearly 82 per cent,
against a target of 85 per cent for June this year, and 86 per cent in 12
months' time.
Returns for the accounts alone - on which the fines are to be levied - are
at about 88.1 per cent. With a total of 1.1m companies, that means that
nearly 131,000 are liable to be penalised.
The recent campaign is clearly having an effect. Compliance for accounts has
shot up rapidly, from 85.3 per cent just a month ago.
Mrs Beale lists a number of excuses companies often recite for filing late:
that they have not been cleared with the tax authorities or that the annual
general meeting has not yet been held (those are not preconditions for
filing), that their accountant is responsible (he is not) or that it is too
much red tape to bother with.
She has little sympathy for those arguments. 'Disclosure of the accounts is
the price companies pay for limited liability,' she says. 'Everyone has a
right to know this information. Would you do business with a company that
fails to file its accounts on time?'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920701

