FT923-15360

FT  02 JUL 92 / Accountancy Column: East meets West as auditing history is
made


   By HASHI SYEDAIN


A PIECE of accounting history was made recently when the signature dried on
the audit report of AKP Sovcomflot, a Russian shipping company, believed to
be the first former Soviet enterprise outside banking to be fully audited to
international standards.
It may come as a surprise that it has taken this long. But in the chaotic
dash towards market economics in the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS), accounting reform has not been a top priority. Although the big
accountants were some of the first western firms to tap into the Soviet
Union, much of their work has been with joint ventures - mostly through the
western partner - or as consultants. Apart from Sovcomflot, only joint
ventures and one or two banks have so far managed - or deemed it necessary -
to produce audited accounts in a meaningful form.
The practicalities of the Soviet accounting system were as much shaped by
communist rule and the needs of a command economy as any other aspect of
economic or social life. Mr Andrew Cunningham, a partner at Moore Stephens
and part of a UN task force on accounting reform in the former Soviet Union,
says the raison d'etre of accountants was entirely different to their role
in the West.
'In the West the chief accountant is usually the most knowledgeable person
about the state of a company's affairs,' he says. 'He will know everything
going on in the business. That's the last thing you want in a centralised
system - you want your accountants to be thick and unimaginative.
'It used to be that all accounting records needed to show was whether
production targets had been met and what resources were used in the process.
If you were a tractor factory, all the centre wanted to know is did you
produce your 2,000 tractors and what materials did you use, end of story.'
He says there was no concept of profit, no concept of bad debt (or indeed of
security, since all debts were effectively backed by the government) and no
concept of return on capital. In short, the basic measures of performance in
a market economy were irrelevant and unavailable. Everything that was
recorded was done so on a purely cash basis. If an enterprise owed money,
but had not paid it, it was simply ignored.
Cunningham believes that the contrast with western accounting is so great
that without reform, the former Soviet Union 'hasn't got a prayer'. Any
company wanting to borrow in western financial markets will get short shrift
from banks if it cannot provide meaningful information about the state of
its business, he points out.
For companies wishing to privatise, audited accounts are even more
important. More basic still, says Cunningham, how can any company introduce
basic financial disciplines or plan for the future without meaningful
accounting records set up to measure performance and profitability?
It is Mr Cunningham's signature which lies on Sovcomflot's audit report. The
company was set up by the Soviet government six years ago as a vehicle for
modernising the huge but ageing merchant fleet. It is owned by the Russian
Ministry of Merchant Marine and various ship operators in the CIS states.
Head office is in Moscow with international subsidiaries scattered around
the globe.
Sovcomflot's decision to be audited was taken for two reasons: to speed its
path to becoming fully westernised, and to show the creditors of the
offshore subsidiaries the state of the parent company. There is no
requirement for an international audit in the CIS and the accounts are not
publicly available. But they will not be entirely comfortable reading. They
show a net worth of Dollars 800m, a fleet worth Dollars 2bn, and a loss of
Dollars 53.4m after extraordinary items. They have also been qualified,
because of the company's exposure to possible bad debts from its creditors.
Moore Stephens, which specialises in shipping, has been working for
Sovcomflot for several years. In 1990 it produced a set of western-style
accounts for the company as a first step to a full-blown audit. But despite
the groundwork that had gone into the company - and the fact that parts of
Sovcomflot were used to western business methods  - it was still a big leap
from drawing up accounts to auditing them.
One example concerns currency. Most of Sovcomflot's transactions were in
dollars, so it made sense to produce a dollar audit. But at which exchange
rate? Until the beginning of this year, there were two kinds of roubles, one
which was notionally convertible and another totally non-convertible. The
accounting records were not set up to identify them separately, but the two
differ by a factor of more than 60. On top of that, the non-convertible
rouble was devalued by Boris Yeltsin's government on January 2 this year,
two days after the end of Sovcomflot's accounting period. The auditors chose
the devalued rate for the non-convertible, and the December 31 date for the
convertible currency.
Hard and soft roubles also featured in disentangling the web of loans and
debts between Sovcomflot, the Ministry and the various state shipping
companies. When all were part of one giant central machine, it did not
matter. Now that Sovcomflot is acquiring an identity in its own right -
separate from the Ministry and with independent shareholders - it has become
a central issue.
On a more practical level, Sovcomflot's location in a ministry building
meant a standard government day from 9am to 5pm that threatened to double
the time required for the audit.
'There's a totally different work culture,' says Mr Christopher Chasty,
partner in charge of the Sovcomflot job. 'Office workers aren't used to
overtime. But with four Moore Stephens staff in the Moscow Savoy at room
rates of Dollars 340 a night, Sovcomflot was keen to press on.'
Special permission was granted for the auditors to stay late. Even then they
ended up on one occasion discovered at midnight by the Ministry's ominously
titled Head of Protocol, who presented his business card, handed round
Russian brandy, and then politely but firmly escorted the foreigners from
the building.
In spite of the problems faced by Sovcomflot, auditing accounts for a
shipping company is relatively straightforward. The enterprise's main assets
are ships - 90 complete, and another 40 in the process of being built -
which are international commodities and easy to value. A manufacturer making
products for the local market, by contrast, would be far more difficult to
audit, Chasty argues. No one has yet seriously tried to put a value on
stock, work-in-progress or machinery in old CIS enterprises.
To make matters even more complicated, accountancy as a profession doesn't
really exist, Cunningham says. There are economists, who are academics, and
there are accounts staff who are basically clerks and bookkeepers. In a very
status-conscious society, the accounts staff are well down the social
ladder, and generally not a company's high fliers.
'Gleaning information which they are not used to providing is very
difficult,' says Chasty. 'You have to explain exactly the reason you want
certain information. If your questions aren't specific, they can't answer.'
Training a new breed of accountants is a mammoth task. At the beginning of
this year Russia adopted a new Chart of Accounts, a basic accounting
document drawn up by the UN task force. But events have moved so fast that
the task force is already working on its replacement.
'If they want a market economy,' says Cunningham, 'they have to have market
accounting.'

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920702

