FT924-8090

FT  13 NOV 92 / Thessaloniki invests in future as a transit centre for
Balkans: Greece's largest cargo-handling terminal is taking a long-term view
in undertaking a big development programme


   By KERIN HOPE


BULLDOZERS are churning up quaysides at the port of Thessaloniki,
manoeuvring around steel plates bound for the former Yugoslav republic of
Macedonia and containers from Bulgaria. A Dr30bn (Dollars 144m) development
programme, the largest infrastructure project in northern Greece, is under
way to make the port a transit centre for the Balkans.
However, Thessaloniki accepts that it must take a long-term view of the
region's prospects. UN sanctions against trade with Serbia have wiped out a
sizeable amount of business since July, while the former communist Balkan
countries are trading less as they apply market reforms.
'It could take till the end of the 1990s for this area to recover. But by
then, Thessaloniki will be in a position to handle a large percentage of
transit trade in south-east Europe,' says Mr John Maronidis, the director of
port operations.
Thessaloniki, Greece's largest cargo-handling terminal, lies at the centre
of the Thermaic Gulf in the north Aegean. Only a few hours' drive from
Bulgaria and Macedonia, it is a more convenient outlet for both countries
than ports on the Black Sea.
Last year, Thessaloniki handled 13.9m tonnes of dry and liquid cargo. For
the first seven months of 1992, dry cargo volume increased by 15 per cent
and and liquid cargo, mostly oil, by 11 per cent.
Despite a sharp fall in Bulgaria's foreign trade, with exports down last
year by 70 per cent and imports by 40 per cent, Thessaloniki's free zone is
handling an increasing amount of Bulgarian cargo in transit. Last year's
total of 57,000 tonnes was matched in the first eight months of 1992.
Yugoslav goods - mainly Macedonian - totalled 698,138 tonnes last year,
compared with 677,837 tonnes for the first eight months of this year.
Trade with Macedonia is not affected by Greece's refusal to recognise its
northern neighbour under that name, though oil shipments have been held up
since August following accusations that oil was reaching Serbia from Greece
through Macedonia. Greek sensitivities over nomenclature are assuaged by
stamping transport documents from Macedonia as 'unrecognised' by Greek
authorities.
Thessaloniki has benefited from the lifting of transport restrictions in
Yugoslavia and Bulgaria in the past two years. The obligation on exporters
to use state-owned enterprises meant goods followed round-about itineraries
imposed by the government.
Although Bulgarian and Romanian ports are now trying to attract more trade
by offering tariff discounts, they suffer from labour problems and severe
shortages of equipment.
However, Thessaloniki, a state-controlled port, is not without labour
difficulties of its own. The 1,000 stevedores still work only one daily
shift, although the container terminal operates on a 24-hour basis.
This will change as the development programme advances. As one of the few
profitable state enterprises, with annual earnings of some Dr1bn,
Thessaloniki port is scheduled for privatisation by 1995.
By that time, the harbour will be two metres deeper and the main quay will
have been extended by 500 metres. A Dr5.2bn landfill project will expand
warehouse space in the free zone, and a new railhead, the overland link with
western Europe, is being built within the port precinct.

The Financial Times


International Page 5

921113

