FT924-978

FT  21 DEC 92 / Management: A bumper year in store for books about business


Judging the most internationally influential business books of any
particular year is always a hazardous exercise.
But in 1990 they were probably George Stalk and Tom Hout's Competing Against
Time, plus Richard Pascale's Managing on the Edge, which dealt with the
challenging task of revitalising companies by making them 'engines of
inquiry'.
In 1991 Peter Senge's The Fifth Discipline almost certainly took the prize;
this focused on the formidable topic of systems thinking, as part of the
broader concept of how to turn one's company into a learning organisation
capable of adapting to - and even anticipating - all the changes in its
competitive environment.
Ripples from Senge's work have continued to spread this year, especially in
Europe, where it was published only last winter. A similar delayed impact
has occurred in the US over the past 18 months with Charles Handy's The Age
of Unreason, which first appeared in Europe in 1989.
Apart from the latest works of Drucker, Peters and Moss Kanter (with The
Challenge of Organisational Change), one of the most internationally
influential books published in 1992 was Corporate Culture and Performance,
by Kotter and Heskett of Harvard, which shows how companies can be made more
adaptive.
The new year promises to be a real cracker. Apart from the continuing impact
of Peters (with his Liberation Management), and the new Drucker and Porter,
the 1993 schedule includes Handy's The Age of Paradox, a new Stalk & Hout on
Gaining Time, and a Henry Mintzberg attack on strategic planning.
One book awaited with special eagerness in the trade is Competing for the
Future, by C. K. Prahalad and Gary Hamel. This will be the first book
co-authored by these two professors, but as authors of a string of
influential articles in the Harvard Business Review over the past few years,
they have built an exciting reputation, which sparked an energetic
publishers' auction for their signatures. It was won by Harvard.
With Mintzberg in support, the book will bring strategy back to centre stage
after almost a decade. It will set the cat among the pigeons in two senses:
by attacking the west's allegedly unimaginative strategic thinking over the
past 20 years; and by challenging the current American obsession with
're-engineering' and operational improvement. It could also catapult the duo
towards popular guru status.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921221

