FT924-6297

FT  21 NOV 92 / Arts: VAT to hit London - Art is put in the same pigeon hole
as second hand cars for tax purposes


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


AFTER 20 years of deliberation and delay a decision could be taken next week
in Brussels which will deliver a hefty blow to London's precarious position
as the twin centre, with New York, of the international art market.
Rather ignominiously, the talk will mainly revolve around the movement
within the single European market of second hand cars, for, as far as the
bureaucrats are concerned, works of art are just second hand goods:
paintings by Rubens and furniture by Boulle will be treated alongside
Mercedes and hi-fi equipment.
At the moment works of art can flow in and out of London free of tax. It is
this unrestricted movement which makes London the great entrepot. Under the
proposals the UK will have to levy VAT at around 5 per cent on goods coming
for sale from outside the EC.
This is no marginal matter. In 1991 art valued at around Pounds 700m, or
just about 50 per cent of all imports, came into the UK from the US, Japan,
Switzerland, etc. Potential vendors like the fact that there is no hassle in
London, especially in the auction houses. When Sotheby's and Christie's hold
their sales of important Impressionist pictures in 10 days time around 90
per cent of the lots will come from abroad, many from outside the EC, and
will depart thither. If the regulations come into force, sellers in Japan or
Switzerland might take the safe and easy option and dispose of their art
through New York or Geneva.
This will not be a crippling blow to Sotheby's and Christie's, which are
well organised in both those cities, but the down grading of London would be
much regretted, especially by the British owned Christie's. The dealers,
too, although arch rivals of the auction houses, know that on this issue
they sink or swim together. All the stops are being pulled out to influence
Monday's decision.
But there is a resignation that, after a doughty rearguard action, some time
in 1993 the new tax will be implemented. The antiques trade is already
congratulating itself on keeping the tax down to 5 per cent and on securing
zero rating for exports. Dealers also believe that they have gained an
amendment that if they sell a work of art outside the EC within a short
time, say six months, of importing it, they will escape the paper work
involved in reclaiming the tax. This could cover half their turnover.
In theory an extra 5 per cent on a trade dealing in margins of up to 50 per
cent does not sound too burdensome. But it is the psychological damage to
London that is most feared. Sellers, especially those with multi-million
pound collections, will opt for the simple, more profitable, life, and
consign goods to New York. The auction houses cringe at the thought that in
their London catalogues they will have to draw attention to the lots that
will be liable for VAT.
The 5 per cent matters to London because it comes on top of worrying trends.
New York, with its mass of big domestic buyers, has taken a growing
percentage of the global business in recent years and at last Paris shows
signs of throwing off restrictive practices and becoming a major centre
again.
It also follows quickly on last week's EC decision on the movement of goods
and the restitution of smuggled items. This seems bound to make life more
complicated. Auction houses and dealers will have to apply for many more
export licences: on prints and drawings for example licences were previously
required on goods valued at over Pounds 35,000. This has been reduced to
around Pounds 10,500.
There will also have to be more research into the background of goods for
sale. Bureaucrats in Italy, for example, could have a happy time querying
the origins of Attic vases in an auction house or dealer catalogue, causing
endless delays. And with no licences required on movements inside the EC
British treasures could slip quickly to countries like Belgium, which has an
easy going attitude towards the export of works of art.
The Government could use its veto on any decisions taken on Monday; but this
is regarded as unlikely. The meeting could decide that the entire EC art
trade benefits from London being a free market; but this is perhaps over
optimistic. Some delay is possible, but in the end the tax is likely to
arrive - with the hidden danger of future increases in its burden. It will
not have an immediate impact, but it will mark the end of the British
antique trades impressive ability to operate with minimal restriction.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

921121

