FT923-15638

FT  01 JUL 92 / Inquiry clears Lloyd's of fraud


   By ANDREW JACK


LLOYD'S of London has been cleared of any suggestion of fraud or malpractice
by the committee of inquiry set up under the chairmanship of Sir David
Walker.
However, in a report to be submitted to the insurance market's governing
council this morning, Sir David criticises the standards of some market
professionals.
He says the care and diligence of a number of members' agents, managing
agents and underwriters fell 'materially below best practice'.
He calls for those working in the market to monitor constantly one another's
standards of practice and for new regulations to ensure fairness in the
allocation of Names - individuals whose wealth backs the market - on
syndicates.
Sir David stresses that the existing weaknesses in the market are not
significantly caused by the regulations under which Lloyd's is governed.
The Walker committee was established in mid-February to examine allegations
particularly concerning whether so-called external Names were
disproportionately placed on syndicates which made the greatest losses.
The report says that the 'catastrophic losses' sustained in the 1988 and
1989 underwriting years can be wholly explained in commercial terms and
judgments.
It says the losses sustained on so-called LMX - London market excess -
business were not confined to Lloyd's syndicates during that period and were
also experienced by a number of corporate re-insurers.
The report concludes: 'We do not find the developments of the LMX spiral to
have been improper or to have been distorted by conspiracy or mis-feasance.'
It adds that confidence in the Lloyd's market can be rebuilt, and recommends
reforms which could be taken within the existing framework of self
regulation.
Last night Lloyd's said: 'The council will consider these matters today but
must broadly be in agreement with the findings of Sir David's committee.
There is obviously much to be learned from his committee and we will apply
these lessons vigorously.'

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920701

