FT922-507

FT  27 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Peter Scott resigns from Aegis


   By GARY MEAD, Marketing Correspondent


AEGIS, the London-based holding company for Carat, which dominates the
media-buying scene in Europe, yesterday announced that its chairman, Mr
Peter Scott, is to leave at the end of the year. Mr Scott, 44, will also
step down as Carat's chief executive.
Mr Scott was a founder in 1979 of the London-based WCRS group, which renamed
itself Aegis in 1990.
Yesterday some of Aegis's competitors said Mr Scott's departure was a blow
to Carat, arguing that it could disrupt client relationships.
According to Aegis, Mr Scott's decision stems from his unwillingness to move
to Paris, where Aegis plans to relocate. Much of Aegis's pan-European
activity is already focused in Paris. Thirty-five staff are to lose their
jobs at Aegis's London base; another 15 are likely to stay on, the majority
moving to Paris by the end of the year.
Aegis said the move will enhance management control over its commercial
operations and produce savings of between Pounds 4m-Pounds 5m annually, in
addition to planned savings of Pounds 10m - by reducing overheads and
staffing levels - announced in May.
Last year Aegis recorded pre-tax profits of Pounds 55.16m on turnover of
Pounds 2.1bn, and payed a dividend of 5.85p.
Mr Scott is believed to have resisted the board's decision to shift
management power to Paris but was overruled. Aegis said that following a
spate of recent acquisitions across west Europe it needed to slim down its
management structure and concentrate its operations.
Mr David Reich, Carat's joint operating officer and an Aegis director, has
also decided not to relocate to Paris.
Aegis's deputy chairman, Mr Charles Hochman, 64, has been appointed
executive vice president and chief executive of Carat with effect from July
1 this year. Mr Gilbert Gross, who has a stake of almost 30 per cent, is to
become honorary president of Aegis.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920627

