FT922-7306

FT  19 MAY 92 / ITV's squad outgunned by tough competition: Premier soccer
deal breaks new ground


   By RAYMOND SNODDY


TELEVISION football entered a much tougher, more commercial division
yesterday with the BSkyB-BBC Pounds 304m deal for exclusive rights to show
live games from the Premier League.
Mr Greg Dyke, chief executive of LWT, who four years ago held back the
advance of satellite television with a Pounds 44m Football League deal, was
simply outgunned this time.
Even spending the weekend ringing round his ITV colleagues persuading them
to add another Pounds 5m a year to their bid was not enough.
Mr Dyke's bid, Pounds 49m short over five years, was the highest he thought
he could justify. It was the equivalent of 50 to 60 hours of high-quality
drama or buying the rights to a year's worth of Hollywood films.
For BSkyB it is a calculated gamble that exclusive rights to top-class
football is just what is needed to increase the rate at which British
consumers acquire satellite dishes.
There is already some evidence that exclusive sport works. There was a
marked surge in satellite dish sales when Sky Television won the rights to
World Cup Cricket.
In February, sales of dishes were estimated by Continental Research to have
exceeded 78,000, compared with 41,000 in the same month last year. In March
the monthly increase was 78,000.
Attracting new dish owners is only one part of the equation for Sky. Its
strategy will almost certainly be to allow all dish owners to see the live
games initially before moving on to showing the games on a subscription
channel and then charging for each game viewed. The technology for
pay-per-view already exists.
According to Continental Research, there are 2.4m satellite homes in Britain
 -although some specialists believe that overstates the market.
If live football increases the rate of dish installation and a sizeable
proportion of that audience is prepared to pay to watch each game, large
sums of money would flow towards the satellite company, which has recently
broken even at an operational level.
Once a new stream of subscription or pay-per-view cash is established, the
dominance of the satellite consortium in buying sports rights would be
reinforced and traditional broadcasters might have to be content with
crumbs.
Sky has been astute in taking the BBC with it in return for a contribution
of Pounds 4.5m a year. Edited highlights for the BBC will reduce the impact
of any political row over live football being taken off the screens of the
vast majority of viewers.
ITV is both surprised and angry that the BBC has decided to join Sky. Senior
ITV executives point out that BBC viewing figures are particularly poor in
satellite homes.
It is believed that until two weeks ago the BBC was prepared to pay for
highlights, whoever was the winner. But in the past two weeks Mr Marmaduke
Hussey, the BBC chairman, and Sir Michael Checkland, the BBC
director-general, made clear that they wanted to do a deal with Sky.
The final irony for ITV is that the Premier League was advised by Mr David
Plowright, who was forced earlier this year to resign as chairman of Granada
Television.
Mr Plowright's advice was that by 1995 the present 15 ITV regions would have
come down to five and that satellite television was a better bet financially
in the long term.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920519

