FT923-9544

FT  05 AUG 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Sterling dips on new rate fears


   By JAMES BLITZ


STERLING lost ground against the D-Mark on the foreign exchanges yesterday
as dealers grew more nervous that the Bundesbank will raise rates at its
council meeting tomorrow, writes James Blitz.
There are plenty of reasons to believe that the Bundesbank will not raise
the Lombard rate tomorrow. Germany's central bank needs more time to gauge
the effects of the recent discount rate rise on money supply before making a
decision to tighten further. Moreover, the Bundesbank would probably want to
wait until France votes in its referendum on the Maastricht treaty on
September 20, for fear of exacerbating the 'No' vote there.
However, one London dealer said the market engaged in short-covering of
D-Mark positions yesterday 'just in case'. Another factor unnerving the
markets is today's Paris Match poll on how the French will vote in their
referendum. One London trader talked of fears that the poll, due out at 1400
GMT today, will be close, or even show the 'No' voters in the lead.
The pound may also have been weakened by increasing calls from British
political and business figures for emergency action to stimulate the housing
market. The growing argument for a temporary cut in VAT to try and boost the
economy has unnerved some traders, who fear this will lead to a worsening
trade balance. They believe that consumers will purchase more goods from
abroad at reduced VAT rates rather than British ones.
Sterling, therefore, declined to DM2.8350 from a previous close of DM2.8400.
In late New York trading it was down further to DM2.8325.
The Italian lira came under renewed pressure from fears over European union.
Compounding this was the Bank of Italy's decision to cut  1/2 percentage
point off its discount rate on Monday night, bringing the cost of one-month
lira cash down by 1 3/8 percentage points to 13 1/2 per cent.
However, the Italian central bank doubtless calculated that the market feels
well disposed towards Mr Giuliano's Amato's government after the
ratification of his plans to reduce the budget deficit. The lira closed
against the D-Mark at L755.9, after a previous L755.5.
The dollar was sidelined in Europe yesterday, trading within a tight range
between DM1.4730 and DM1.4789. The currency drifted lower after the US index
of leading indicators, the government's chief economic forecasting gauge,
weakened in June for the first time in six months. It fell 0.2 per cent, in
line with economists' forecasts.
The US currency finished against the D-Mark in London at DM1.4750, down
slightly from a previous close of DM1.4760. In New York the dollar showed
some improvement to finish at DM1.4772.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920805

