FT924-8183

FT  12 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Independence for the Bank


'WE ARE at a critical juncture for economic policy in this country', says
the governor of the Bank of England, Mr Robin Leigh-Pemberton. He is right.
The need for careful consideration of where UK economic policy should be
going is only a little less pressing than that for radical institutional
change. In yesterday's admirable lecture at the London School of Economics,
the governor provided the former and allowed others to draw conclusions for
the latter. The governor calls for price stability but does not advocate the
central bank independence needed to achieve it.
The analytical heart of the governor's speech is the case for price
stability. This he defines as has the chairman of the Federal Reserve. 'For
all practical purposes,' argued Mr Greenspan, 'price stability means that
expected changes in the average price level are small enough and gradual
enough that they do not materially enter business and household decisions.'
The governor says that 0-2 per cent inflation would be low enough.
What is clear is that inflation does not lower unemployment in the long
term. Over the last 20 years, for example, British retail prices have risen
six and a half times, while unemployment has risen in the successive
cyclical troughs from half a million in 1973 to 1.2m in 1979 and 1.6m in
1990.
Many agree that inflation serves no purpose and imposes significant costs,
but they also argue that lowering it would be too costly. Yet accepting
inflation at, say, 5 per cent seems ridiculous. Who would want a metre to
become 5 per cent shorter every year? Why should the pound?
Choice
Also, a policy of accepting a particular rate of inflation is likely to mean
in practice accepting the latest rate of inflation. This is a road to ruin.
In the governor's words, 'the simple choice is . . . between a variable and
unpredictable inflation rate caused by instability in monetary policy, and a
more stable monetary policy that delivers price stability.'
The question facing the UK authorities is how to achieve that goal. The
government needs to tie itself, like Ulysses, to the mast. But the UK had
precisely such a strategy, ERM membership, which collapsed because
disinflation was 'unduly rapid', given the asset price inflation that
preceded it. Can any alternative be credible?
The chancellor has announced a target for underlying inflation of 1-4 per
cent. Meanwhile, the governor promises to make the Bank's quarterly
inflation report 'a wholly objective and comprehensive analysis of
inflationary trends and pressures'. This is, as he says, 'a giant leap for
the authorities'. But it is not big enough for Britain.
Possible
The argument for central bank independence, combined with accountability for
the achievement of inflation targets, appears overwhelming. Some economists
object, because they envisage, instead, disinterested policy makers
manipulating all the policy levers for the greatest good of the greatest
number. They are naive. Some politicians object because they know they
cannot deliver what they have promised without the surreptitious
redistribution of income. They are dangerous.
Central bank independence is tricky in a Westminster-style democracy. But
the New Zealand example shows it is possible. What is needed is a contract,
to which the Bank can be held accountable. How this can be made to work is
discussed by Peter Nicoll and David Archer, of the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand, in one of the prize essays published this week by the American
Express Bank. The key, they claim, is discretion in achieving pre-announced
targets for inflation.
This is the kind of arrangement the UK needs. It is particularly important
when credibility is very low and the announced goal remains price stability,
but by implication stability at a significantly higher price level than
today's.
Reculer pour mieux sauter is what the governor wants the UK to do. But an
enduring failure is far more likely. Even radical institutional change may
not be enough. But with it the UK would have a chance of combining higher
prices now, with stability in the not too distant future. Without it, the UK
will have higher prices now and, almost certainly, still higher prices
later.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921112

