FT921-3772

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: European banks curb hopes for interest rate
cut


   By DAVID BUCHAN, TOM BURNS, WILL DAWKINS, RON VAN DE KROL, DAVID MARSH
and IAN RODGER


   BRUSSELS, MADRID, PARIS, AMSTERDAM, LONDON, ZURICH


HOPES that the UK would be able to cut interest rates during the election
campaign as the result of co-ordinated credit easing by European central
banks were firmly quashed yesterday.
Mr Alfons Verplaetse, the governor of the National Bank of Belgium - on
which speculation of an early cut in rates had centred - said yesterday that
no change was imminent.
The Bank of Spain, which has most room to cut rates in view of the strength
of the peseta within the exchange rate mechanism, also dampened predictions
of any significant easing. The Swiss, French and Dutch central banks all
look likely to wait for the German Bundesbank to ease policy before risking
independent action to lower lending rates.
The Bundesbank prompted an unpopular round of rises in European interest
rates with an increase in official lending rates before Christmas. It
indicated yesterday that it would keep monetary policy tight at least for
several months to counter inflationary pressures. Mr Karl Thomas, a member
of the German central bank's policy-making council, said in London that high
interest rates were 'not a pleasure'. Germany had, however, to give priority
to bringing down its 4 per cent-plus inflation rate.
Forecasts of an early cut in European interest rates, which would have given
the Bank of England leeway to reduce base rates, were sparked earlier this
week by Mr Philippe Maystadt, Belgian finance minister. He said 'informal
talks' between the German, Dutch and Belgian central banks were under way,
which might permit Belgian rates to go 'slightly lower' than German rates.
His remarks prompted a slight drop in Belgian rates for three-month Treasury
bills. But they appeared based on a wish to improve the debut of the
government in Brussels.
After exchanging views with his German and Dutch counterparts at this week's
Basle meeting of central bank governors, Mr Verplaetse played down the idea
of any action. However, he added: 'Obviously, if the situation improves in
the Netherlands and Germany, then we could think again about lowering our
interest rates.'
Dutch officials backed up the cautious message. The central bank in
Amsterdam is reluctant to risk sacrificing confidence in the financial
market by taking an interest rate stance independent of Germany. With Dutch
inflation above 4 per cent, they said an interest-rate decline engineered by
the Nederlandsche Bank would send the wrong signals.
Mr Markus Lusser, president of the Swiss National Bank, also drew attention
yesterday to the link with German interest rates. He warned that high German
interest rates limited the scope for reduction of Swiss rates, even though
Switzerland has been in recession for more than a year.
The position in Madrid is more complex, in view of the peseta's strength in
the ERM. But the Bank of Spain said yesterday that room for easing interest
rates would be determined by inflation and consumption.
Some indication of the Bank of Spain's room for manoeuvre will come today
with publication of Spain's February inflation rate. The markets expect a
rise of between 0.1 points and 0.3 points. A rise of 0.2 points would lift
the annual inflation rate to 6.2 per cent - making it hard to justify an
interest rate cut.
With 10 days to go before important French regional elections, the Bank of
France is in an even more uncomfortable position. It is thought unlikely to
stage a unilateral interest rate cut in the near future. The economy is
unable to support such a move without a marked weakening in the franc.
Reports: David Buchan in Brussels, Tom Burns in Madrid, Will Dawkins in
Paris, Ron van de Krol in Amsterdam, David Marsh in London and Ian Rodger in
Zurich.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920312

