FT922-456

FT  27 JUN 92 / Gardening: Geraniums improve their status - A look at the
increase in hardy varieties


   By ARTHUR HELLYER


HARDY geraniums have increased quite remarkably in public favour over the
past few years. It seems only a short time ago that they were regarded
widely as second-class herbaceous perennials and rock plants, useful for
their reliability and for the good ground-covering qualities of some
varieties but attracting scarcely any specialist attention.
Now, it is quite different. There are four national collections of
geraniums, the largest in the lovely garden that Marjorie Fish made at East
Lambrook Manor, South Petherton, Somerset. This has been maintained by
Andrew Norton and his wife, who have enlarged the nursery which has been
attached to the garden for many years. Their collection has 250 species and
garden varieties.
This is 100 more than the second-largest, which belongs to Rosemary Lee at
Coombland Gardens, Coneyhurst, Billingshurst, West Sussex. She also runs a
nursery, but that is open by appointment only. There are plenty of other
nurseries, both specialist and general, that hold good stocks of geraniums
and they seem to be increasing all the time as demand grows.
Hardy geraniums are related to pelargoniums, much used in conservatories and
for summer bedding outdoors. They are commonly, but wrongly, called
geraniums; pelargoniums are not hardy. A few geraniums are genuine native
plants. Some have been introduced to gardens and have produced useful
varieties which have been given distinguishing names. There are also a
number of species, introduced from other countries, that have liked British
conditions so well that they have jumped the garden fence and established
themselves in the wild.
One of these is G. sanguineum, which grows wild on sand dunes where it makes
prostrate carpets of dark green, deeply-divided leaves studded with magenta
flowers. It is a fine plant in its own right although rather a harsh colour;
but in gardens it has produced several varieties, including one named
lancastriense which is a delicate pink. Another, less-prostrate variety,
with bright pink flowers, is called Shepherd's Warning. All these are small
enough to be planted in rock gardens, or they can be used as edgings to
borders where they can be kept under control easily.
Very different is G. macrorhizum, a foot-high rambler with clammy, aromatic
leaves and clusters of small pink flowers which vary quite a lot in shade.
The best, I think, is Ingwersen's Variety, and it is widely available. The
leaves turn bronzy-red in the autumn - and it has leaves all year, so that
it makes excellent ground cover. Although it spreads rapidly, it can be
pulled out very easily if it strays too far.
Another fine native species is the Meadow Cranesbill, G. pratense. In the
wild it is always found on chalk or limestone; in the garden it does not
seem to mind if the soil is alkaline or moderately acid. It is 2 ft or more
in height with deeply-divided, very attractive leaves and loose sprays of
violet-blue flowers. But the colour is variable, and I have grown one with
pearl-grey flowers, which I find very attractive.
Johnson's Blue is much like G. pratense and is, in fact, a seedling from it,
probably pollinated accidentally from another species. The flowers are a
particularly fine deep violet-blue; but there is obviously some confusion
about this variety as, in trying to buy plants of it, I have collected three
quite different things from different nurseries.
Cranesbill is a popular name that can be used for all the hardy geraniums.
It refers to the seed vessels, which are long and pointed like a beak. They
remain decorative long after the flowers fade.
There are several middle-height geraniums for the centre of the border. Two
of the best are G. ibericum and G. magnificum, but I find them so alike that
I actually cannot be sure of the difference. Both have deeply-divided leaves
and large, violet-blue flowers.
G. himalayense is a little shorter and also has large violet-blue flowers,
but with a deeper centre. There is an excellent double-flowered variety of
this. G. renardii is worth growing for its foliage which is rounded,
deeply-veined and sage-green. The flower colour is off-white with purple
veining.
Two eye-catchers that can reach 3 ft are G. phaeum which, in its most
popular form, has very deep maroon flowers and is known as Mourning Widow;
and G. psilotstemon, which is a gay magenta with a darker centre. G.
endressii is a cheerful ramper which makes ideal ground cover up to 18
inches thick and is covered for much of the summer with rather small, clear
pink flowers.
The best form for colour is Wargrave. Like G. macrorhizum, it is pulled out
readily if it strays too far and it is one of the easiest plants to increase
by division.
For the rock garden, or for growing on a dry wall made with plenty of soil
in place of mortar, several varieties of G. cinereum are ideal. These have
grey-green leaves, greyer in some varieties than others. The best forms, all
called subcaulescens, have abundant magenta flowers.
If you want the very brightest of the lot, look for the additional name
Splendens. This really is a splendid plant for establishing on a grey stone
wall. Look also for Ballerina, which has grey leaves and pale lilac,
purple-veined flowers.
Yet another pretty, creeping kind is G. Buxton's Blue, the which has light
blue flowers with white centres. Unfortunately, this is one of the very few
that can be a little difficult to grow, and it should be put in a place
where the drainage is first class.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920627

