FT923-9773

FT  03 AUG 92 / Industrialists raise pressure for realignment: FT writers
report on the continuing economic difficulties and the rising volume of
voices offering solutions


THE GOVERNMENT is under growing pressure from senior directors of depressed
British companies to use its presidency of the European Community to press
for a realignment of currencies in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM).
Executives emphasised the need for European countries to cut interest rates
to boost faltering economies and forestall further company failures.
That would be best achieved, according to many directors, either by a
revaluation of the D-Mark or by a devaluation of a range of European
currencies against the D-Mark. They recognised that neither move could rely
on the support of the Bonn government, which has raised interest rates to
help to pay for German reunification and to curb inflation.
Mr Ken Schofield, chief executive of MTM, the chemicals group, said: 'We are
paying real interest rates of about 10 per cent and we will never get out of
recession at that sort of rate. We really need real rates of about 6 per
cent.
'There are two things that need doing. First there should be a realignment
of all the currencies in the ERM apart from the D-Mark. That might allow
interest rates to come down to 7 or 8 per cent.
'Secondly we need to move forward as quickly as possible to a single
European currency . . . Otherwise, as the German economy recovers, the
D-Mark will have an ever-increasing distorting effect on the European
economy.'
He said recent returns from his own group and from motor manufacturers
Chrysler and Ford suggested that lower interest rates were helping growth in
the US.
Mr Ian McAllister, chairman of Ford of Britain, said: 'The government has
closed off so many avenues if they want to stimulate the economy.
'They are not going to increase public expenditure, they are talking of
reducing it. They don't want to devalue nor leave the ERM. I believe we
should stay in the ERM. We went in at too high a level, but devaluation
raises too many questions about whether they have gone far enough.
'There may be an argument for a revaluation of the D-Mark. The Bundesbank is
damping German inflation with high interest rates and is dictating to the
rest of Europe . . . In the UK we need to lower interest rates.
'There is a lack of consumer confidence, people are uncertain about the
future. The housing market needs lower interest rates and sectoral help is
needed for the construction industry.'
Mr Stanley Kalms, chairman of Dixons, the electronics retailer, opposed
unilateral devaluation but said Britain should use its presidency of the EC
to initiate discussions on the subject of realignment.
Mr Fred Hadfield, chairman of Ingersoll-Rand UK, the industrial and
construction equipment group, said that a cut in interest rates would be the
best stimulus for the UK economy, but that might require a withdrawal from
the ERM, which might undermine the concept of a united Europe.
Unilateral devaluation of sterling would not work, either, because the
benefits of previous devaluations had proven only transient. As for a
realignment of the ERM, Mr Hadfield said most of the parities were
reasonable except that of the D-Mark.
In the machine tool industry, Mr Stan Vaughan, managing director of Hahn &
Kolb Great Britain, agreed that withdrawal from the ERM would be a
retrograde move. He said: 'The D-Mark should be revalued - that's the one
that's out of step.'
Mr Vaughan advocated a cut of about 2 points in UK interest rates to
stimulate the economy. While conceding that would be difficult for the
government with its ERM commitments, he said Britain could not 'sit around
waiting for something to happen'.
Mr Colin Gaskell, managing director of 600 Group, the machine tool and
mechanical handling equipment producer, proposed a different solution. 'The
mistake we have always made in this country is to defend the pound at too
high a level, whereas the Japanese and the Germans do the opposite.
'We should be setting up our fiscal and economic policies to maximise our
industrial potential, and let the markets decide the level of the pound in
the ERM.'
Meanwhile Mr Andrew Harrison, finance director of Courtaulds Textiles, said:
'A realignment to a new parity will not lead to an interest rate cut because
the government will have to defend the new level. It might help exports, but
demand overseas is slow. Realignment might import inflation too.
'The only way to get interest rates down is to float sterling like the
dollar, which would import a lot of inflation.'
He concluded: 'The government should try to persuade the Germans to increase
taxes rather than interest rates, and I don't see that happening.'
Mr Donald Parr, chairman of William Baird, Britain's third-largest textiles
company, said: 'The greatest problem for clothing and textiles is the
dollar. With US interest rates at 3 per cent, UK base rates at 10 per cent
and the exchange rate Dollars 1.92, you have cheap imports from the whole of
south-east Asia and the US and exporting is very difficult.'
Reporting by: Andrew Taylor, Paul Abrahams, Andrew Baxter, Daniel Green and
Kevin Done

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920803

