FT922-3923

FT  09 JUN 92 / When the talk turns to trade: Mexico, Canada and the US are
set to clinch a Nafta deal


   By DAVID DODWELL


A month of intensive negotiations in Mexico City, Toronto and Washington has
brought a North American Free Trade Agreement to the brink of settlement.
Mexico's President Salinas told the FT last week that talks could be over
'in a matter of weeks'. Officials talk not of whether, but of when, a deal
will be struck.
Even though many details of the agreement have not been disclosed, both
Mexico and the US are now confident of net gains from such a regional trade
pact. It would integrate the trade of 350m people in Canada, the US and
Mexico in a region boasting a total gross national product of Dollars
6,000bn. This would make it almost identical to the European Community both
in population and in the size of the economy. A recent study by the
Washington-based Institute for International Economics (IIE) estimates that
it would add an annual Dollars 24bn to trade between Mexico and the US by
1995. It would also provide an estimated 600,000 jobs in Mexico, and give
the US a net employment gain of 130,000, mainly in the services,
distribution and farming sectors.
Unlike Mexico or the US, Canada is equivocal. Its bilateral trade with
Mexico is not large enough for the Nafta to make any significant impact on
its economy. It already has its own free trade agreement with the US, and if
the Nafta in any way erodes the terms of that agreement, there is a
possibility that Canada could walk away. In an attempt to avert this danger,
negotiators agreed last week to seek bilateral deals where three-way
agreement appeared impossible.
For the rest of the world - particularly Asia's fast-growing exporters  -
the Nafta may give cause for concern as US purchases and corporate
investment, are transferred from their economies to Mexico.
Among the most enthusiastic supporters of the Nafta are business leaders in
US states which border Mexico: 'The North American Free Trade Agreement is a
match made in heaven,' says Arizona's Republican congressman Jim Kolbe.
Viewed from Arizona, such a reaction is easily explained: the Nafta would
significantly boost the Dollars 2bn a year trade flows between Mexico and
Arizona, generating jobs in professional and financial services, creating
markets for farm products, and boosting the state's importance as a freight
centre.
Reservations about an agreement exist in northern car industry states like
Michigan and Ohio, and in textile producing states. Both fear that jobs will
be lost to Mexico as companies relocate south of the border. They also fear
that Mexico could be used by exporters in Asia as a springboard into the US
market.
In spite of this north-south division of opinion over Nafta, recent polls
indicate that the economic boost it provides and the jobs created are likely
to be a vote winner for President Bush in the presidential election
campaign. As a result, negotiations have been brought to the front burner,
and lawyers closely involved with the drafting process say few parts of the
agreement remain unsettled.
After the recent bout of negotiations, officials say that several chapters
of the negotiating text have been 'locked up'. These include customs
regulations, industrial standards, principles underpinning financial
services, intellectual property rights, textiles, food safety regulations
and rules controlling land transport.
Close to agreement are tariffs, rules of origin, safeguards intended to
protect domestic industries from import surges and insurance and
telecommunications. There also appears to have been a breakthrough on
Canadian worries about local-content rules for car production.
The main problem areas remain farm trade, government procurement,
particularly at state level and in the construction industry, and energy. On
farm trade, it appears four categories of products have been identified,
with the least sensitive to be freely traded as soon as the agreement is in
place, and the most sensitive retaining protection for between 15 and 20
years. The ultra-sensitive goods - grouped in 'Kika's list' in deference to
Kika de la Garza, the powerful head of the House of Representatives'
Agriculture Committee - are thought to include citrus products, tomatoes,
cucumbers, asparagus and cotton.
On the question of Mexico's reluctance to open its energy sector to foreign
investment, advisers to the negotiators say Mexico has signalled a
willingness to compromise by opening its petrochemical sector, pipelines and
petrol stations to foreign investment.
Depending on the pace of progress on resolving these outstanding issues,
officials are aiming for a ministerial meeting before the end of June that
would initial a final agreement: 'It is within the art of the possible to
have an agreement this summer,' Mrs Carla Hills, the US trade
representative, told the FT in Washington last month.
While the US administration believes an agreement is now within reach there
is still a question about how best to put the deal through congress. There
are not enough days left in the congressional calendar for President Bush to
be able to force a final agreement through before November. He has two
options: either to initial an agreement before the election, and submit it
for congressional ratification in January; or to keep agreement on ice and
push everything through after the election.
The first course would give him more time in the new year to get an
agreement through Congress, but would leave its terms exposed to attack from
political opponents and industrial lobbyists. The second course would avert
the danger of Democrat opponents making political capital out of the
agreement in some states during the election campaign, but would leave the
administration with a rush to present a finalised agreement to Congress
before March 1, when its power of 'fast track' approval of the Nafta
expires.
Mexico's President Salinas, who has been as powerful as President Bush in
pushing the Nafta, has different reasons for wishing to see a deal completed
quickly. It would lock in the economic reforms of the past seven years.
Perhaps more important, the agreement is expected to be a magnet for
urgently needed inward investment. President Salinas's conversion to a Nafta
followed a disappointing tour of Europe at the end of 1989. His ministerial
team received congratulations for the economic reforms they had initiated,
but few pledges of investment. His first overtures to President Bush on a
Nafta came days after he returned to Mexico from his European tour.
The fear of lost export opportunities, and of being starved of investment
funds, have been the main driving forces behind other liberalising countries
in Latin America, who are forming a queue behind Mexico for their own free
trade agreements with the US. Chile, Venezuela and Colombia are close behind
Mexico. Caricom, which groups the Caribbean states, is keen to join the
Nafta. Mercosur, which groups Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay, and
the Andean Pact, which groups Bolivia, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador and Peru,
are close behind.
Mr Sam Laird, an economist at the World Bank, has forecast that a Nafta
agreement without multilateral trade liberalisation would cost Latin
American countries outside Nafta annual exports to the US market of Dollars
222m, as Latin exports to the US would be replaced by those from Mexico.
With wider trade liberalisation, this loss falls to Dollars 21m.
The issue of whether the Nafta would benefit the world trading system or
would divert trade and investment from Asia and Europe is a fraught one.
Economists insist that regional trade agreements do not necessarily threaten
the world's multilateral trading system. But the idea that Nafta might
provide a model for any multilateral trade agreement is overstated, they
say. On the contrary, there are protectionist aspects of the agreement which
will be hard to swallow for countries outside North America:
in textiles, the US and Mexico have agreed a 'yarn forward' deal which means
that all textiles and apparel from yarn through to the finished product must
be of North American origin if they are to win duty free access to the
market.
in the auto industry, vehicles will have to have between 50-70 per cent
local content to avoid tariffs.
while Mexico will drop most tariffs on US imports to zero, it is being
pressed by Washington to maintain its average 9 per cent duties on imports
from other countries. This could make Mexico captive to US suppliers by
giving them an effective 9 per cent price advantage over competitors from
outside North America.
Such protectionist elements could sour the international trading
environment, particularly if the deadlock in the Uruguay Round of world
trade talks is not broken. Nafta could thus become a weapon of regionalised
trade war. In the face of the EC's 'Fortress Europe', Nafta would then draw
the ring fence for 'Fortress America'.
'The risk that regional trade arrangements may turn hostile towards each
other cannot be discounted,' says a recent World Bank report, adding that
this would damage world trade.
Even in Mexico, where the Nafta is important in locking in reforms and
securing access to the US market, there is awareness that a regional trade
agreement is likely to be second best to global trade liberalisation.
In a wider negotiating forum, such as the Gatt, it can join with other
developing countries to maximise negotiating leverage on industrial powers
like the US, Japan or the EC. Alone, and heavily dependent on the US
economy, its negotiating clout is limited.
'It is not easy to have a neighbour in the US,' said President Salinas last
week:
Such concerns are echoed by the IIE report. 'As a smaller trading power,
(Mexico) gains the most from the protection offered by multilateral rules,
and has most to lose if confidence in the multilateral system erodes.'
The US also stands to lose if regionalism undermines the multilateral
trading system. More than 55 per cent of US exports in 1990, totalling
Dollars 393bn, went to Europe or Asia, while less than 8 per cent of exports
went to Mexico. Wider global trading interests mean that the US government
sees Nafta reform as a complement to multilateral trade reforms rather than
an alternative.
While officials are buoyed by progress concerning a Nafta, their ultimate
objective remains a successful conclusion to a stalled Uruguay Round.
Without that, the gains from a regional trade agreement will be compromised
by the prospect of instability, insecurity and possibly global trade
conflict.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
How they shape up                       US        Canada        Mexico
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
GDP per capita, 1988 (USdollars)      19,678      18,747         2,116
Population, mid-1988 (million)        246.33       25.95         82.73
Employment (million), 1988             118.0        12.4           7.4
  per cent in services                  69.6        69.8          31.3
  per cent in agriculture                3.0         4.9          33.1
Industrial production as per cent         30          35            34
of GDP, 1987
Capital goods as per cent of              35          25            14
industrial production, 1987
Labour compensation per employee       13.92       13.58          1.57
(wages plus fringes), 1988
(USdollars)
Per capita public expenditure on       1,126       1,171            59
education (USdollars)
Productivity, GDP/employee, 1988      42,161      39,733         7,935
(USdollars)
Gross domestic investment as per        17.3        20.9          19.1
cent of GDP, 1986-88
Expenditure on R&D as per cent of        2.7         1.3           0.5
GDP, 1988
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Institute for International Economics
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920609

