FT921-15540

FT  09 JAN 92 / Leading Article: Raven croaks at Motherwell


EVER SINCE Mr Harold Macmillan announced, in 1959, that a major steel
industry investment should be divided between Scotland and Wales on regional
policy grounds, the position of the Ravenscraig steel works has been a
matter of controversy and doubt. In the 1960s, the steel industry needed
consolidation on appropriate sites, not further politically motivated
fragmentation.
To most observers in the last two decades, the plant, near Motherwell in
central Scotland, has appeared doomed. With the loss of the nearby Linwood
and Bathgate vehicle manufacturing industries, central Scotland could offer
neither local raw materials nor local markets. British Steel, privatised in
the 1980s, and chasing world-class costs and productivity, has in recent
years not bothered to conceal its ultimate intention for Ravenscraig.
Although none of this has quietened Scottish political passions on the
subject, even influential voices in Lanarkshire have in the last year urged
recognition of reality, since a government-commissioned report by management
consultants Arthur D Little underscored the weakness of Scotland's claim to
a place in world steelmaking.
None of this alters the fact that the loss of thousands more jobs in
Ravenscraig represents a local economic catastrophe. To some extent, those
Scottish politicians who have done most to overstate Ravenscraig's claims to
a future have made the problems of transition worse.
No duplicity
Equally, British Steel has not helped in the last two or three years by
refusing to make more explicit the economic case against Ravenscraig. The
company cannot, however, fairly be accused of duplicity over the timing of
yesterday's announcement. It had long said that its preferred closure date
of 1994 was subject to market conditions; the faltering UK economic recovery
is presumably precisely what British Steel feared when it entered the
caveat. It should go without saying that there is no case for compelling
British Steel to act against its own commercial best judgment.
The main lesson of Ravenscraig, therefore, is that neither a country's nor a
local community's long-term interests are served by politically inspired
investment decisions. With a Labour government possible by July (or
earlier), the point is worth re-stating.
Blind eye
The point is also depressingly germane in the context of a European
Community which continues, for all the most persuasive but self-destructive
political reasons, to turn a blind eye to steel industry subventions in a
number of member countries. Last year's EC approval of a FFr2.5bn (Pounds
260m) injection by the state-controlled bank, Credit Lyonnais, to Usinor
Sacilor, is but the latest and most blatant example. The fact that it
cleared the commission's competition directorate only demonstrates the
institutional weakness of EC competition policy.
Sacked Ravenscraig workers can therefore justly resent not only the chronic
misjudgments and shiftiness of UK politicians, but also the double standards
which are too easily tolerated in Brussels. German steelworkers displaced by
the current merger wave running through their industry are in the same boat.
The Community evidently needs to rationalise production in big industries
such as steel, motors and airlines on the basis of performance and
competitive advantage if powerful competitive challenges from outside the
community are to be met. But the Twelve have yet to discover the political
will to construct a de-politicised competition policy of the kind needed to
ensure that market forces are allowed to work.
The only other thing to be written in the Ravenscraig epitaph is that there
was never a community more deserving of EC and UK government help in
rebuilding its local economy. Ravenscraig's workforce has been loyal,
hardworking and as efficient as the plant permitted. It has every right to
expect politicians to move whatever bureaucratic obstacles stand in the way
of measures to stimulate the creation of jobs in industries more suited to
the periphery of Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920109

