FT923-10850

FT  28 JUL 92 / Leader with 'first-class honours degree in Lloyd's'


   By RICHARD LAPPER


IN MANY ways Mr David Rowland, the 59-year-old chief of Sedgwick, might have
seemed an obvious choice for the chairmanship of the Lloyd's of London
insurance market. But the succession was no foregone conclusion.
Mr Rowland has worked for more than 30 years in the London insurance market
and has been a Name at Lloyd's since 1973.
As head of the task force which carried out a root-and-branch investigation
of the Lloyd's market last year, Mr Rowland is an enthusiastic advocate of
reform and believes Lloyd's must cut its costs, secure its capital base and
improve its competitiveness.
And as the market moves to implement the 70 reforms recommended by the task
force, Mr Rowland seems a logical choice to an outsider.
However, Mr Rowland is coming to the end of his career and earlier this year
was unenthusiastic about taking on the stressful post.
Sedgwick, the UK's second biggest insurance broker, which Mr Rowland has
chaired since 1989, has recently completed an extensive internal
reorganisation. Mr Rowland, who remarried last year, might well have been
expected to spend more time at his Islington home.
As a broker Mr Rowland has had a 'semi-detached' relationship with the
market. His 36 years working on it have been entirely with insurance brokers
 -first, after medical school in Cambridge, with Matthews Wrightson, then
with Stewart Wrightson, one of the most successful brokers of the 1980s, and
finally, from 1988, with Sedgwick. During his period at Lloyd's brokers have
moved to diversify their dependence on Lloyd's. Mr Rowland himself has
argued forcefully that underwriters - rather than brokers - should take a
more active role in the market's management.
Although Mr Rowland also admits a passionate concern for Lloyd's, his most
recent experience in the senior ranks of the institution was not entirely a
happy one. Between 1986 and 1989 he was a working member of the council, the
market's governing body. One close colleague says: 'It was at a time when
nobody admitted there was very much wrong. David made himself very
unpopular. He could not understand why nobody wanted to change anything and
made himself very unpopular by refusing to attend lunches.'
Since then, though, the mood at Lloyd's has changed radically, as the market
has plunged into record losses and unprecedented political turmoil.
Mr Rowland's authorship of the task force report clearly proved decisive. It
gives him a 'first-class honours degree in Lloyd's. He's up to speed' - in
the words of Mr Robert Hiscox, a former chairman of the Lloyd's Underwriting
Agents Association and a member of the task force.
Supporters argue that Rowland's personality also equips him to lead a market
full of divergent and sometimes conflicting interests. He has none of the
brashness and agression typical of the London insurance broker. 'He can work
with anybody, deal with anybody. That is his great strength,' says Mr
Michael Wade, chairman of brokers Holman Wade.
Above all, Mr Rowland's experience at the head of a large listed company is
seen as invaluable at Lloyd's, which is dominated by small underwriting
agencies. As the market looks to develop a more sophisticated approach to
its business and strengthens its links with corporate capital that
experience could prove to be vital.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920728

