FT924-6070

FT  24 NOV 92 / International Company News: Peru in talks with US banks


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN and BERNARD SIMON


   NEW YORK, TORONTO


PERU has taken an important step towards settling a series of US lawsuits
filed by international bank creditors more than two years ago, paving the
way for restructuring about Dollars 10bn of outstanding external debt and
interest, writes Alan Friedman in New York.
The lawsuits, launched by more than 200 banks, and seeking to recover more
than Dollars 2bn of debts,were filed to meet a US statute of limitations
deadline.
Yesterday Citibank, which chairs Peru's debt advisory committee, announced
an agreement under which the banks would withdraw their lawsuits if the
Peruvian government drops its concerns about the statute of limitations on
legal claims by the creditor banks. Both sides said they will try to resolve
the dispute by next April 15.
*****
Olympia & York's US subsidiary yesterday gained further breathing space from
two creditors threatening to enforce claims against the ailing real estate
developer, writes Bernard Simon in Toronto.
*****
Battery Park Holdings, a company linked to Toronto's Bronfman family, agreed
to suspend a lawsuit against O&Y until next April, subject to certain
unspecified conditions. BPH launched proceedings last week to recover
Dollars 75.4m which it alleges O&Y misappropriated from the World Financial
Centre in lower Manhattan. BPH is also claiming Dollars 8.5m in cash flow
from the project.
Separately, Swiss Bank Corporation and O&Y extended for 24 hours yesterday's
5pm deadline set by SBC for compliance with a judgment related to payment on
an Dollars 8m line of credit. The payment relates to one of O&Y's troubled
New York properties.
O&Y had indicated that action by either BPH or Swiss Bank to enforce their
claims would lead it to file for protection under Chapter 11 of the US
bankrutpcy code. The company's US operations are the only ones which so far
remain outside court protection.
*****
The Walt Disney Company, the entertainment group, and Nestle, the
Swiss-based foods company, are to enter a long-term alliance for licensing,
sponsorship and marketing purposes, writes Alan Friedman.
The new accord calls for Nestle to sponsor a pavillion at Disney's Epcot
Center in Florida as well as a sponsor at Disneyland Park and the Walt
Disney World Resort.
The two companies will also co-operate on licensing, marketing and tie-in
promotions.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

921124

