FT924-12137

FT  22 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Mr Major goes for growth


ECONOMIC RECOVERY is not just around the corner. That fact, at least,
appears finally to have been acknowledged by the government. But does Mr
John Major's apparent late afternoon conversion to growth-oriented economic
management represent a shift in policy or a presentational stunt before
yesterday's parliamentary debate? And if policy is changing, will it change
in a way which promotes sustained non-inflationary growth rather than yet
another boom-bust cycle? The government has realised it needs a strategy.
But it still has not got one.
Mr Major's shift in focus from the threat of inflation to the dangers of
deflation was a well executed piece of political management. 'Most people
today,' the prime minister said on Tuesday's TV news, 'believe it is right
to look at a strategy that will bring recovery, bring growth and put back in
work those of our fellow citizens who are not in work.' In a sentence, Mr
Major encapsulated the national mood.
Yet his words, while strong on aspiration, were bare of detail. The Treasury
spent yesterday explaining that policy has not, in fact, changed. The
government remains committed to achieving low inflationary growth. The next
interest rate cut will come 'only when it is safe to do so'.
Mr Major clearly has some additional ideas. He hinted on Tuesday at the need
for increased capital spending on infrastructure, a ceiling on public sector
wages in order to retain the impression of a tough public spending round
and, most important, lower interest rates soon. Yesterday's stock market
rally, the pound's slide, and an initial fall in interest rate futures, all
suggest the markets are expecting interest rates to fall further.
Politically, Mr Major's change of emphasis makes sense. The prospect of
returning to the subject of colliery closures in the new year and driving
the Maastricht treaty through Parliament this year against a recessionary
background is as dismal as could be. In any case, the economy needs lower
interest rates: retail sales in September were flat while recent bleak news
from the corporate sector and bad debts in the banking industry mean the
squeeze will get worse before it gets better, regardless of any actions the
government takes.
Yet large rate cuts now outside a credible and transparent institutional and
policy framework, carry very great risks that the same inflationary errors
will be made all over again.
Mr Major needs to do much more than merely acknowledge that the economy is
in trouble. He must also accept that the Treasury policymaking establishment
has failed and needs to be overhauled. For now, the Bank of England must be
asked to provide a detailed and independent monthly economic analysis.
The Treasury could then be relieved of its monetary policymaking powers to
concentrate on the equally important task of restoring order to fiscal
policy. More capital spending is desirable. But overall, a looser monetary
policy should be balanced by fiscal tightening.
In short, the government needs a crafted reform package rather than policy
fragments delivered in TV soundbites. Britain needs policies which can
deliver recovery now, while nurturing stable growth in the medium term. It
does not need an ill-judged dash for growth followed by yet another damaging
recession.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921022

