FT923-6641

FT  22 AUG 92 / Markets: BICC begins to bounce back - The Bottom Line


   By JANE FULLER


WHEN BICC's share price hit a low of 239p on August 11, a dividend cut
seemed on the horizon and there was some alarm about possible property
write-downs.
Not surprisingly, when the cables and construction group announced its
interim results this week, explanation of the property portfolio came high
on the agenda, closely followed by mention of 'the best cash performance for
five years'.
The share price, which had already returned to 262p, gained another 10p by
yesterday. The case for crediting the group with recovery potential,
alongside its high yield, was at least being mentioned even if trepidation
about the economy dictated hold rather than buy.
But how is it that a group that owns one of the world's three largest cables
businesses and a premier name in contracting, in Balfour Beatty, has seen
its share price halved in three years? Having helped to restore BICC's image
from sleeping giant to world-class cables company in the late 1980s, Robin
Biggam, now the chairman, faces another uphill struggle.
BICC's pre-tax profit peaked in 1989 at Pounds 201m on turnover of Pounds
3.79bn. Although it went on to achieve a record interim result of Pounds
100m in 1990 - compared with the Pounds 58m announced this week - doubts had
already crept in.
The group had spent heavily not only to expand its cables business on the
continent and in the US, but also on property development and house
building, leading to a build-up of on- and off-balance-sheet debt.
By June 1990, the chance to start buying into Spain's biggest cables maker
led to an issue of Pounds 177m of convertible capital bonds. As the Spanish
acquisition (complete with Pounds 100m debt) was to be phased in over two
years, the fund-raising looked premature and sparked off much gnashing of
teeth over BICC's gearing and cash flow.
The balance sheet was put into shape this year with post-election
opportunism, via a Pounds 154m rights issue at 285p a share.
Part of the justification for the issue was the acquisition of cables
companies in the US and the former East Germany. But put alongside a stated
intention to maintain the 19.25p dividend, it was clear that something would
have had to give without the injection from shareholders.
What has emerged is a group freshly determined to focus on its core
businesses of energy and communications cables and civil and power
contracting. What holds it back, apart from recession, is the backlog of
property development and houses.
Balfour Beatty, which accounted for nearly half the group's Pounds 1.77bn
interim turnover and a fifth of the Pounds 75m operating profit, is
undergoing a shake-up under the new leadership of Sir Robert Davidson,
chairman, and Peter Mason, chief executive. Job losses include half of the
head office staff.
In cables, the pace of acquisition is being matched by rationalisation. In
the last five years, turnover from the European business has doubled, but
the headcount has hardly changed. Biggam pointed out that the latest US
acquisition would provide a further opportunity to streamline the north
American operation.
Reduced interest costs, profit improvements in north America, Spain and
Australasia, plus a seasonal boost from Balfour Beatty, have been included
in forecasts of around Pounds 130m pre-tax for the full year. About 22p of
earnings would give a prospective p/e of less than 13, a small discount to
the market, while the 9 per cent yield is roughly 75 per cent above the
average.
The sting in the tail of last year's results was a Pounds 42m exceptional
charge for property write-downs and losses on the Channel Tunnel contract.
Will the sting be repeated? The answer is yes, probably, but to a smaller
extent. This time concern focuses on Spitalfields, a long-term joint venture
valued at Pounds 65m in the portfolio.
So long as the charges do not represent a cash drain, the renewed faith in
dividend maintenance is unlikely to be shaken. As for hopes of earnings
recovery, the impression is one of a long haul. This was the case after the
last recession when it took until 1986 to regain the 1981 level of just over
Pounds 100m pre-tax. However, with two quality businesses and yield support,
the arguments look strong for the long-term investor.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920822

