FT922-4195

FT  06 JUN 92 / Books: Promoting 'la gloire' of the sun-king - Anthony
Curtis admires Louis XIV's publicity machine in an age when history was a
literary genre


   By ANTHONY CURTIS


THE FABRICATION OF LOUIS XIV by Peter Burke Yale Pounds 19.95, 242 pages
NEXT TIME you stand beside the carousel at Heathrow or Houston, anxiously
waiting to be re-united with your baggage, spare a thought for Louis XIV. He
too spent much time at carousels but in the earlier sense of the word.
Originally it denoted an equestrian contest involving running at the ring
and other feats of skill on horseback.
Carousels were popular spectacles throughout the Renaissance, by which time
they had come to resemble elaborate equestrian ballets. Louis XIV loved them
not just as a spectator but as a participant. He used the carousel,
Cambridge historian Peter Burke tells us in this fascinating study, as one
means of imposing his image upon the French people and the world.
There was a famous carousel opposite the Tuileries in 1662 to celebrate the
recovery of Dunkirk by the French. The King dressed as emperor of the Romans
was the star of the show. The five teams of courtiers represented Romans,
Persians, Turks, Indians and Americans. Each of them had a device on his
shield. The king's was a sun-emblem with the inscription 'ut vidi vici' (as
I saw I conquered). This extravagant carousel was one of the major public
spectacles of his reign.
Louis would frequently appear on horseback to enhance his stature. Being
quite a small man, five foot three in fact, it helped to perpetuate his
image of ascendancy as the sun-king. So did high-heeled shoes he invariably
wore when not riding and the full-bottomed wig he used after an illness
caused his hair to fall out.
Burke goes over much ground already familiar in histories of this monarch
who carried the art of self-assertion to new heights but it has never been
documented so systematically before. Burke shows in fascinating detail how
the royal public relations machine actually worked, how craftsmen in all the
media - painters, sculptors, coin and medal engravers, poets, playwrights,
composers, ballet-masters - were all pressed into service to promote la
gloire . Louis never tired of the representation of his own public face, a
technique of royal self-promotion later monarchs like Queen Victoria
followed. Like her, one of his ploys was to have places named after him;
these survive today as far afield as Saarlouis in Germany and Louisiana in
America.
Among the many idealised illustrations of Louis, Burke reproduces a large
painting in 1673 by Pierre Mignard. The king is galloping across the low
countries; an angel flying above his steed is crowning him with a laurel
wreath. The painting celebrates 'Louis (victorious) at Maastricht'. Plus ca
change . . .
As a young monarch Louis sought advice on how to present himself from his
astute minister, Mazarin. But he was soon writing his own script. By the
time Mazarin died, he had a whole Department of Glory at work headed by
Colbert with people like Le Brun in charge of portraiture, the Perrault
brothers to write eulogies in prose and verse, Lully to compose celebratory
paeans in music. Royal processions, triumphal arches, firework displays,
medals commemorating victories and diplomatic successes, were all carefully
monitored and generously funded.
The praise-poem celebrating Louis's victories was not just an opportunity
for poetic hacks to advance their standing at court; it became an art-form
essayed by men of the highest genius such as Boileau and Racine. Both of
them held the post of historiographer royal and, as Burke points out,
history was at that period a literary genre.
'A work of history was expected to include a number of literary set-pieces
such as the 'character' or moral portrait of a ruler, minister or commander,
the vivid narrative of a battle, and the presentation of debates through
speeches attributed to leading participants (but frequently invented by the
historian).'
The best writers learnt how to accommodate a royal request without
compromising the integrity of their work. Moliere would sometimes have to
add a ballet onto a comedy, so that the king and his courtiers could dance
in it at the end of the performance. Racine's tragedy Alexandre contains a
flattering portrait of Louis as Alexander the Great, but it nonetheless
remains a good play revealing the politics of sexual passion.
Even with talents of this calibre to promote his image, Louis could not hope
to fool all of the people all of the time. Towards the end of the reign
there developed a fierce backlash against him. Discrepancies between the
official version of events and the realities had become all too apparent.
After the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, Holland was an active centre of
counter-propaganda, fuelled by Huguenot refugees putting out scabrous
anti-Louis material.
Even in Versailles, which during Louis' reign assumed its position as the
monarch's principal place of residence and the epicentre from which his
sun's rays shone on those currently in his good graces, there were
dissenters, as we discover in the Historical Memoirs of the Duc de
Saint-Simon. Burke does full justice to the believers and the sceptics in
his study - a valuable contribution to the history of public relations.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920606

