FT924-785

FT  22 DEC 92 / Groups face tax rise under new treaty


   By ANDREW JACK


MANY BRITISH multinational companies will be forced to restructure their
operations or face substantial tax rises under a draft treaty between the US
and the Netherlands.
Tax on dividends and interest payments from US-based businesses owned
through a Dutch holding company could increase sharply. Foreign investors in
the US who channel funds through Dutch companies to reduce the tax burden
are also likely to be affected.
The details are contained in the revised US-Dutch tax treaty negotiated over
11 years, which was approved by both governments last week and could be
ratified by the US Senate and the Dutch parliament for implementation as
soon as January 1994.
It comes after pressure for reform of the existing treaty by the US
government, which has been concerned at the use of Dutch holding companies
to avoid US tax liabilities.
Mr Bruce Lassman, head of the US tax desk at accountants Ernst & Young in
London, said: 'Many, many companies will be forced to restructure their
operations.'
Mr Duncan Bratschell, group tax manager at Thorn-EMI which has a series of
Dutch companies, said: 'We have done certain things to mitigate the effect
(of the treaty) in the past. But this is one they have kept very close to
their chests.'
Royal Dutch Shell said its lawyers were still studying the agreement but
believed it would not have much impact on the company.
The treaty will increase US withholding taxes on dividends to Dutch
companies from 5 per cent to 30 per cent, and on interest payments from zero
to 30 per cent unless the Dutch company can satisfy new requirements.
That will substantially reduce the scope for UK and other investors to use
Dutch companies to take advantage of differences in international tax
regimes and offset or 'blend' tax liabilities against each other before
remitting them home.
The treaty is particularly important for UK multinationals, because there is
no facility for them to offset these taxes once they have been remitted to
the companies in the UK. It will also affect investors from many countries
without US tax treaties, such as Hong Kong, the Middle East, South Africa,
and Central and South America.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921222

