FT924-8018

FT  13 NOV 92 / Arts: Gateway to the Orient - The new Hotung Gallery at the
British Museum


   By PATRICIA MORISON


The story of the Joseph E. Hotung Gallery of Oriental Antiquities, unveiled
this week at the British Museum, has already entered museum folklore.
Hotung, an international businessman from Hongkong, collects Chinese
antiquities, particularly jades. On every trip to London Hotung would go to
peer at the BM's exceptional collection of oriental antiquities on the first
floor gallery of the King Edward VII wing.
In this vast, gloomy space, following the path of stray sunbeams used to be
the only way to get a good view of the objects. Finally, Hotung told Jessica
Rawson, Keeper of Oriental Antiquities, he would like to pay for new
lighting. Rawson's opportunistic reply was, why not a total face-lift?
Thanks to Hotung's gift of Pounds 2m, the process is complete whereby the
unfrequented north entrance to the Museum has become a true gateway to the
East. On the ground floor, Islamic art occupies the intimate, ravishing John
Addis Gallery; two floors up is the sparsely elegant Japanese gallery. In
between is the Joseph E. Hotung Gallery of Oriental Antiquities, a survey of
the arts of China, South and Southeastern Asia from Neolithic times to the
modern day.
Few galleries in the world can hold a candle to the new Hotung gallery for
visual impact - quite apart from the inexhaustible fascination of its
contents. Sir John James Burnet's original design, completed in 1914, was
very grand although savaged by decades of vandalism. Now again visitors see
a clear vista down the centre of this immense pillared room, 110 metres
long. Natural light enters each side through tall windows of frosted glass.
A colour scheme of white and gold may sound rather de trop, but the Japanese
trick of not burnishing the squares of gold leaf means the walls provide a
discreetly shimmering background for the gold and brass treasures from a
thousand temples. The original mahogany cases still frame each bay, only now
they are superbly lit so that one sees from one case through to another, the
objects seeming to float in space.
There are even more objects on view than before. Around 30 per cent of the
display comes out of storage. For curators of earlier generations (and in
some museums the attitude still prevails) gaudily jewelled trumpets from
Tibet would seem out of place beside the classically construed excellences
of oriental art.
Labelling in the Hotung Gallery is enormously kind to beginners, yet not
condescending. The logic of the arrangement is strong, otherwise such
quantities of stuff, ranging from jade hair-pins to temple doors, could only
give the most infernal indigestion. Extending through the eastern half is
China, presided over by the famous glazed statues of temple guardians and
virtuous monks. Around the walls, a chronological display emphasises the
immense antiquity of Chinese civilisation and the sophistication of its
artifacts, but also points to the underlying philosophical and religious
ideas. In an inspired stroke, we are given extracts from love poems and
laws. In 1050 BC, a Zhou emperor is reminded that 'being king, he must not
use extermination as a punishment to control the people.'
In the second half of the gallery the single greatest theme must, of course,
be the exploration of Buddhism and Hinduism. A sense of order and
intellectual rigour is abruptly displaced by the swaying forms of incredibly
sensual beings, those 'much maligned monsters' who so shocked and baffled
Europeans in their early encounters with the temple art of Southern Asia.
And that leads to the extraordinary finale. Through glass doors, we glimpse
great carved rosettes, the stylised lotus-flowers so ubiquitous in oriental
art from India to China. These once stood as railings to a vast, now
devastated Buddhist stupa (a monumental shrine housing relics of the Buddha)
in Andrha Pradesh which was embellished with the most elaborate and
accomplished sculpture of its age.
For the first time in 40 years, the sculptures of Amaravati can be seen.
Pollution was eating into these extraordinary limestone carved slabs, 100 of
them which were brought to this country in the last century. A gift from the
Asahi Shimbun newspaper, already a generous benefactor to the BM, has paid
for an air-conditioned room so that these massive reliefs could be raised
from the basement - no small feat.
We now discover Indian sculpture from the 1st and 2nd centuries AD so
powerfully inventive that these carvings must rank beside the Assyrian
reliefs and even the Parthenon frieze, as one of the British Museum's
greatest possessions. Of course, one visit will not be enough to work out
what is going on in these scenes. Yet even one visit is enough to reveal the
skill of these sculptors, above all, their ability to convey a narrative of
the life of Buddha even in the most crowded scenes.
In languid courtly entertainments, large-breasted women strike postures
which to this day are learnt by Indian classical dancers. What pleasure
Ingres would have derived from the half-naked female musicians who, seated
cross-legged with their lutes, are straight out of his harem fantasies. The
opening of the Hotung gallery is an event truly worth trumpetting. Nothing
less than a new vision of the arts of the Orient awaits the British Museum's
admiring public.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921113

