FT924-11325

FT  27 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Aiming to shake the shabby out of Habitat -
The history and future of a sixties trendsetter which lost its way in the
eighties


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


NOBODY WHO grew up in the post-Habitat era can possibly imagine what it was
like to try to furnish a house before the youthful Terence Conran opened his
very first Habitat store in Fulham Road, London in the dazzling spring of
1964.
If middle-class Britain had a furnishing style in those post-war years, it
was either hand-me-down Brideshead or department store repro.
In the late eighties it became fashionable to mock it, to make jolly little
jokes about Shabitat, and to avow one never went near the place.
But its arrival marked a turning point in the tastes and life-styles of the
middle-classes. For the first time there was somewhere where they could go
where nothing jarred, where the salad bowls were perfectly turned, the
casseroles were authentic peasant ware from Provence, and where even the
wooden spoons seemed to evoke a simpler, better, more sun-filled way of
life.
Sir Terence's peculiar talent was for turning his own tastes and life-style,
his nostalgia for French rustic life, into a highly commercial operation so
that middle-class urban dwellers in Islington and Chelsea came to fill their
homes with chicken bricks and tangines, with pale pine tables and petits
pots a la creme.
The single store blossomed into a chain, the chain prospered but, as Ian
Renwick, head of corporate communications at Habitat, puts it: 'Three years
ago we fell off a precipice.' Profits plunged leading to losses of Pounds
8.8m in 1989 and Pounds 11.9m in 1990. Somewhere along the road the dream
had gone wrong.
In recent months it has been no secret that Storehouse, the parent company,
had been looking for a buyer. Now we know that Stichting Ingka Foundation,
the trust started by Ingvar Kamprad, founder of Ikea, the Swedish furnishing
chain, has bought it.
At Habitat headquarters the mood is buoyant.
'We can now get on with running the business,' says Vittorio Radice,
recently installed as managing director, after two years with the group
first as merchandise manager and then as buying director. 'Without any
politics, with no looking at short-term profit. The Foundation sees the
future of Habitat very much as we do and is prepared to invest in the
future.
'The Foundation sees Habitat and Ikea as two completely separate brands and
we will be run quite separately from Ikea. Whereas Ikea goes in for 200,000
sq ft self-service style stores, eventually I want all our stores to revert
to being smaller, fully serviced stores with high quality sales staff.'
Out has gone the mail order (too down-market), out the polyester bedlinen
(nothing but 100% cotton bedlinen from now on), out the melamine and the
self-assembly furniture ('unless a piece of furniture is born to be
self-assembly').
'Already,' says Mr Radice, 'we have turned the corner. Sometime around May
last year it seemed to happen.'
He waves yesterday's figures jubilantly. 'Just look at this - yesterday we
were 26 per cent ahead of the same Sunday last year whilst for the whole
week we are 7.4 per cent ahead of the equivalent week last year. Habitat is
in line to return to profit.'
Quite why and how the chain lost its way, or more accurately, failed to
evolve, is a matter of some dispute.
Mr Radice is in no doubt. 'Habitat today could be the best home furnishings
chain in the world if the original concept hadn't been murdered. When
Terence Conran first opened stores they were in beautiful buildings - a
restored church in Tunbridge Wells, a 1920s cinema in London's King's Road,
a grand hotel in Bristol, an old Spitfire factory in Manchester - all these
were wonderful, individual, special to their towns.
'Then they started opening in huge sheds in edge of town sites, next door to
B&Q, MFI, Do-It-All. They even opened seven Habitat stores in BhS. All this
diluted the image, took it down-market. I think that was a tremendous
mistake.
'When I arrived I asked whom they saw as their competition. The Reject Shop,
MFI and John Lewis I was told. I knew at once I had to do something.'
What Vittorio Radice is determined to do it is to win back the market it
should never have lost in the first place.
'We aim to have 50 stores in this country, of which 20 will be new and
another 10 of the existing stores will be relocated. It will be an
evolutionary process with, I hope, no redundancies. In fact we hope to
create jobs.
'I want the stores to be no bigger than 10,000 sq ft, small enough to retain
an individual, characterful mood, with each store listening closely to the
needs of its own customers.'
Habitat is, if you like, returning to its roots, going back, after a painful
detour, to where it all began. Those who remember the original Habitat store
in the Fulham Road, where Joseph stands today, remember one really terrific
shop showing what it could be like if everything was all of a piece, if one
consistent, sure taste lay behind it all.
Times have moved on, tastes have changed, but the original blueprint is
still Mr Radice's guiding light. 'I remember when I was with AMC Milan (a
large Italian furniture buying organisation where Mr Radice worked for seven
years) I used to come from Italy just to see Habitat because it was the
retailing phenomenon of its time. Then in the mid 1980s I stopped coming.
Well, I want people like me to feel they have to come and see what Habitat
is up to again.'

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921027

