FT922-7233

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (13): Still towering above the rest
 -Profile: Deutsche Bank, whose 'feel good' factor has been under strain


   By DAVID WALLER


THE TWIN towers of the Deutsche Bank headquarters are no longer the tallest
buildings in Frankfurt. They are eclipsed by the recently built Messeturm
nearby. But metaphorically speaking, the bank still towers over the German
financial and industrial establishment.
This is despite the fact that Deutsche Bank's profits grew more slowly than
those of Germany's other big banks last year, and that analysts were
disappointed with an 18 per cent rise in total operating expenses. Trading
results alone helped the bank report total operating profits up 17 per cent
to DM5.97bn (Pounds 2bn) - strip out these, and underlying profits only rose
by 6 per cent.
Other banks - notably Commerzbank, which increased its non-trading profits
by 30 per cent last year - may have achieved better growth rates. But this
hides the fact that Deutsche and its subsidiaries managed to transfer to
their reserves more than the total transfers made by Commerzbank, Dresdner
Bank and the two big Bavarian banks (Vereinsbank and Hypobank) altogether.
The figure exceeded DM1bn, compared with the total sum of DM800m put away by
its four nearest competitors.
These transfers feed directly through to a bank's ability to take on board
new lending, meaning that the Deutsche Bank, unlike its smaller competitors,
has no current need to hold an expensive rights issue. It beats the other
big German banks hands down in terms of capital strength, too, with around 6
per cent of Tier 1 equity capital and 11 per cent capital altogether. Of the
big three banks, it was the only one to increase its dividend for last year.
Add in its network of shareholdings in Germany's largest companies
(including a 28 per cent stake in Daimler Benz, Germany's biggest industrial
group, and 10 per cent of Allianz, Europe's largest financial services
institution) and a market capitalisation of in excess of DM30bn. It is, in
the words of Mr Keith Brown, at Morgan Stanley, in London 'an animal all on
its own, a major industrial holding company, with immense financial
strength.'
It is also, as Mr Brown puts it, 'the ultimate feel-good bank.' There is
wide respect for the quality of the bank's management among international
investors 'who feel good whatever the bank does,' says Mr Brown, even if
this is at the expense of reported profits, as in 1990 when profits fell as
the bank made aggressive provisions against its exposure to the former
Soviet Union. The following year the competitors were obliged to follow
suit.
Mr Brown notes that, on a two-year view, net profits have shown only modest
growth, and earnings per share have actually declined. But investors appear
unconcerned and the shares still sit on a premium rating, yielding 60 per
cent of the market yield and sitting on an earnings multiple of 20 per cent
more than the market. This makes the shares expensive by comparison with
those of the other big banks, but investors appear willing to pay the price
of greater quality earnings.
It is true that the bank did not induce its usual 'feel-good' response when
it reported its figures for 1991 at the beginning of April: close
examination of the results revealed a sharp and unexpected increase in
costs, predominantly in connection with the bank's aggressive expansion in
the eastern part of Germany. The disappointment felt by investors was not
keen enough to make a dent in the bank's rating.
Like the other German banks, Deutsche seems set to benefit from another year
of strong loan demand at home, mainly tied to recovery and investment in the
east of the country.
Overseas markets already account for a quarter of Deutsche's total business
 -a share which is likely to show as the bank takes advantage of the
weakness of its American and Japanese rivals. North America, watch out - at
a press conference in New York this month, Deutsche declared its intention
to expand aggressively in the US capital markets and private banking.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920520

