FT923-9730

FT  04 AUG 92 / Sejm strengthens Polish PM's hand


   By ANTHONY ROBINSON, East Europe Editor


THE Polish parliament (Sejm) has voted to strengthen the hand of government
and tackle the long-standing conflict with President Lech Walesa which led
to political instability and delayed economic reforms and foreign
investment.
Under constitutional amendments which received the required two-thirds
parliamentary majority at the weekend, Ms Hanna Suchocka's government will
be able to bypass lengthy parliamentary procedures and make economic policy
decisions by decree.
President Lech Walesa is expected to approve this shortly although he is not
entirely happy with changes which could improve government efficiency but
diminish his own freedom of manoeuvre.
The latest amendments give Mr Walesa greater say in forming new governments
but make it much harder to dismiss them. The president is recognised as the
highest representative of the state in both internal and external relations,
but the amendments included in the so-called 'small constitution' make it
possible for the government to rule by decree.
Parliament's willingness to give greater powers to the government reflects
awareness of public disapproval of the government's inability to react
quickly to economic problems and frequent government crises. The latter have
been exacerbated by the ill-defined division of powers between the president
and governments proposed by him.
The strictly constitutional aspects are only part of a wide-ranging effort
to improve the efficiency of government and reform the military and security
structures inherited from the communist era.
At a meeting with provincial governors at the weekend Mrs Suchocka said she
wanted to set up a professional, apolitical civil service and improve the
management of the many enterprises still in state hands. The government was
also looking at ways of increasing workers' share of enterprise ownership
but had decided against any automatic debt relief for beleaguered state
enterprises.
Meanwhile the National Defence Committee, the top level defence planning
body chaired by Mr Walesa but including the prime minister and the ministers
of foreign affairs, internal affairs and finance, has worked out a new draft
defence doctrine.
This has at its heart an apolitical, smaller army of 250,000 distributed
around the country. It will have far fewer generals, 150 instead of 450, and
professional staff officers. Poland will also create a rapid deployment
force from which Polish contingents to future international peace keeping
operations will be drawn. Mr Walesa stressed that Poland's long term aim is
'full integration with the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union'.
Apart from its defence functions, the armed forces must also be able to cope
with internal threats which may emerge during the transition to a market
economy, Mr Walesa said.
There are strikes over pay in the Polish copper industry and at the
small-car plant recently bought by Fiat. Overall however the Polish economy
appears to be recovering after three years of steep recession in the public
sector, accompanied by rapid small scale privatisation, with rising exports
helping to create a nearly Dollars 1bn current account surplus over the
first half of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920804

