FT921-14387

FT  16 JAN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Fox tries to make up lost
ground - London's troubled commodity futures exchange


   By DAVID BLACKWELL


LONDON'S RAW sugar market moves from screen trading back to floor trading
tomorrow as the troubled London Futures and Options Exchange (Fox) embarks
on a year of readjustment after its property futures debacle.
Traders around the world will be watching closely what happens to the raw
sugar market, which only 12 months ago was switched to screen trading in a
move to boost rapidly fading volumes. The decision to move it back to the
floor was taken in September, a month before Mr Mark Blundell, then chief
executive, resigned after having initiated trades in the screen-traded
property futures market.
In December the Securities and Futures Association fined five brokers
between Pounds 60,000 and Pounds 80,000 for creating a false impression of
investor interest in the market.
Fox has been a pioneer of screen trading, but its experience has not been
happy. The white sugar market, launched in 1987, was the first market to be
put on screens and has remained relatively successful. But since then
contracts in rubber, rice and property have been launched and closed. The
base metals index contract was trading reasonably well until the property
futures scandal, when volumes collapsed, while an arabica coffee contract
has attracted little attention.
One of the first actions of Mr Phillip Thorpe, the new chief executive, was
to order a review of the exchange by Arthur Andersen, the accountancy group,
and he expects the results shortly. 'It will be an audit of where we are and
a blueprint of where we want to be,' he said this week.
But he is clear that Fox will be concentrating on its core agricultural
contracts in the short to medium term. He also insists that he has no
preconceptions as to how they should be traded - floor or screen.
The exchange is very much the creation of a succession of mergers. It was
not until 1986 that the coffee, cocoa and sugar markets merged in order to
defray the costs of regulation under the Financial Services Act. In 1990 the
exchange merged with the Baltic Futures Exchange, taking over contracts in
grains, potatoes, meat and freight futures.
The degree of merging, however, has been limited by the individuality of the
markets. Mr Piers Fletcher, a director of both London Fox and GNI, the
futures broker, believes the hearts of the original three individual markets
have not been in co-operation. 'The merger was never fully consummated,' he
says.
For several years GNI, a member of all the Fox markets, has consistently
pushed the idea that all the markets should be traded on a single floor
using a pit system, like the London International Financial Futures Exchange
or the big US commodity markets. This would enable traders to cross from one
pit to another, following the active markets.
However,the sugar, coffee and cocoa market committees have retained their
autonomy at Fox, and Mr Fletcher concedes that the cocoa committee, which
runs Fox's most successful market, would point to recent events as a good
reason for hanging on to control.
Mr Thorpe agrees that one of the key issues Fox has to address is whether
members want a strong central authority or an umbrella over individual
markets. 'We have to decide what the exchange is for,' he said. 'Is it to
introduce new contracts? To service markets? Or is it just a regulatory
umbrella?'
He is also certain that Fox will have to organise itself in order to
maximise the benefits of the mergers. 'Only the most efficient markets will
survive, and Fox has got to be competitive.'
Mr Michael Overlander, chairman of the exchange's sugar market committee,
does not underestimate the difficulty of re-establishing London's raw sugar
market.
'We know we have an uphill task. We also recognise that this is a last ditch
attempt at success,' he said this week. There was no clear single reason why
the volume had disappeared from London, although the trading world had
changed drastically, and the number of players was far smaller than five
years ago.
Several companies and assorted locals (traders who operate on their own
account) will staff the raw sugar floor, which will trade on a pit system
between the coffee ring and the agricultural contracts. The companies
include Sucden (UK), Refco Overseas, Credit Lyonnais Rouse, Pierson ICS and
GNI.
Fox also points out that about 70 traders attended a registration meeting
last week, indicating a strong interest in the new market.
However, Czarnikow, one of London's biggest physical sugar traders, will not
be manning the new floor. Mr John Barnaby, managing director of Czarnikow
Sugar, said the group simply did not have the business to justify a presence
on the trading floor. He did not rule out using the London market, via local
traders, if his clients wanted to use it, but 'very few of our clients want
to use it. The major users of raw sugar - the big producers and buyers - now
use New York as the medium for raw sugar pricing,' he said.
Mr John Darling, a director of ED & F. Man, said that as a major
international sugar house his company was committed to the market as far as
it could be, with three registered traders based at the nearby coffee ring
and freight futures pit. 'We are well disposed to act quickly,' he said
yesterday, but there were no indications that volumes were going to leap.
The company would man the sugar floor full time 'as soon as it became
economically viable'.
Mr Overlander is convinced there is still a desire to trade raw sugar in
London, pointing out that there are basic differences between the London and
New York contracts offering opportunities for arbitrage. Mr Fletcher
believes the market stands a good chance of survival if the big players use
it.
Mr Fletcher is also optimistic about Fox's future, pointing out that while
all three soft commodities have been in the doldrums together, there is good
reason to believe cocoa and coffee are heading for better times. 'We ought
to see the present circumstances as an opportunity to build up the
exchange,' he said.
Mr Thorpe believes the freeing up of agricultural policies will greatly
boost the potential of the exchange's grain contracts, and research will
continue into a European grain contract. But the exchange will be very
careful about launching contracts in future. Adding a new market may not be
complicated or expensive, but that is not a reason to put it on the screen,
he said.
Meanwhile Fox would be concentrating on the products it already has, which
people want to trade, he said. 'We are very conscious that we need to show
that we run well as an organisation. We want the exchange to be approaching
1992-93 with a very strong foundation.'

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920116

