FT922-4554

FT  05 JUN 92 / World Trade News: Japanese agree to buy more US
semiconductors


   By STEVEN BUTLER and REUTER


   TOKYO


JAPANESE electronics companies yesterday agreed to buy more US-made
semiconductor chips in an attempt to head off a damaging trade row and the
threat of US sanctions.
Japan's 10 largest semiconductor users, who account for half of the Dollars
20bn market, committed themselves to a plan to increase dramatically
purchases of foreign semiconductors during the next six months.
Foreign semiconductor sales in Japan have stagnated at just over 14 per cent
of the market for the past two years.
The US and Japanese governments agreed last year that foreign semiconductor
sales in Japan should reach 20 per cent of the market by the end of this
year, but it is feared that first quarter figures to be unveiled on June 12
will show a decline from the 14.4 per cent registered at the end of 1991.
Under the plan, the ten companies will provide US suppliers with
confidential semiconductor purchase plans in order to aid marketing efforts.
The companies agreed to issue internal company memoranda to all employees
expressing commitment to boost foreign purchases, and would provide copies
of the letters to the US industry.
The Electronic Industries Association of Japan (EIAJ), the industry
association, said yesterday its members would boost foreign suppliers'
market share by increasing purchases from foreign companies at a rate faster
than the expected growth of the market in the second half of the year.
The Semiconductor Industry Association, the US trade association, said it
would publish for the first time a monthly 'flash report' covering monthly
bookings data.
'We want to see action (toward increased orders) in the next 30 days,' said
Mr Wilfred Corrigan, chairman of LSI Logic, the US semi-conductor maker.
Action will have to be taken quickly in order to influence an investigation
of the US-Japan semiconductor pact launched recently by Mrs Carla Hills, the
US trade representative, and due for publication in August. A finding by Mrs
Hills that the Japanese were not living up to their side of the agreement
could be politically explosive during the US election campaign.
Mr Jim Nordling, head of semiconductor operations at Motorola, said: 'I
believe the Japanese companies are convinced that sanctions are right
behind.
'We have high confidence that the extraordinary measures that have been
agreed on today will result in significant increases in market share.'
Mr Nordling said the agreement was unusual because of the concrete nature of
the plan, and he expressed confidence that Japanese companies were committed
to it.
It remains to be seen, however, whether the Japanese users are capable of
favouring foreign suppliers at the expense of their traditional Japanese
suppliers, who are suffering from a downturn in the market and are desperate
to increase sales.
Mr Shin-ichi Itoh, of the EIAJ, said he expected market access would also be
improved for European companies, which have criticised bilateral US-Japanese
deals.
Stefan Wagstyl adds from Tokyo: Japan has asked Gatt to intervene in a
dispute with the European Community over EC anti-dumping duties on Japanese
audio cassettes.
The EC imposed duties of 14.7 per cent to 22.3 per cent on five Japanese
companies after concluding they were selling cassettes at unfairly low
prices.
Miti argues that the commission did not prove that European producers had
been hurt by low-priced imports. It also claims the commission has not
properly explained the levels of duty it imposed.
If arbitration fails to end the dispute, Miti could take the issue to a Gatt
dispute panel - the ultimate arbiter of such cases.
However, it is rare for Japan to resort to a Gatt panel since Japanese
officials prefer to settle arguments by negotiation.
The Commission said yesterday it was imposing provisional anti-dumping
duties of up to 75 per cent on imports of large electrolytic capacitors made
with aluminium from Japan, Reuter reports from Tokyo.
An EC inquiry found that Japanese producers were offering their product,
which is used in the electronics industry, at prices between 14.1 per cent
and 43.1 per cent lower than in Japan.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920605

