FT922-7411

FT  19 MAY 92 / Letter: Appropriate safeguards and reforms for pensions (1)


   From Mr DAVID A RICE


Sir, As a personnel manager and pension fund trustee, I noted with interest
your leader headed 'Reform of the pension funds' (May 11). Increasingly, I
think that schemes such as ours represent the silent majority of
well-managed and well-funded occupational final salary schemes.
Ours is a relatively small scheme which has never found itself in the
position of having to argue the ownership of surplus. In spite of this, we
have successfully coped with the effect of the Barber judgment and the
changes resulting from the Social Security Act 1990.
We have had no problems in recruiting the new members essential for the
long-term stability of the scheme. Where others fail, one can only point the
finger at poor communication on the part of the corporate provider and
misleading and optimistic misinformation of the private sector.
All the pension scheme trustees within Tunnel Refineries are also employees,
potential beneficiaries of the scheme and capable of influencing the
sponsoring employer. The recommendations of the recent Commons select
committee report hold no fears for our scheme.
The judgment as to whether a scheme should be final salary or money purchase
is one which must be made with reference to the age and service profile of
the workforce if it is to be a benefit. administrative convenience or
otherwise has limited, or no bearing. What is appropriate for a software
house is not appropriate for a factory with a mature and ageing population.
Changes are necessary within the occupational pension scheme sector and I
would welcome changes which increase the confidence of pension scheme
members in the security of those arrangements which will see them well into
old age. In spite of Maxwell and legislation, there are many schemes
valiantly preserving final salary arrangements.
David A Rice,
personnel manager
and pension fund trustee,
Tunnel Refineries,
Thames Bank House,
Tunnel Avenue, London SE10

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920519

