FT924-6269

FT  21 NOV 92 / The FT Goes Shopping (10: The good times are back - Watch
snobbery is an art almost as exacting as that of watch-making


   By LUCIA VAN DER POST


OF COURSE, if all you want to do is tell the time, then Pounds 10 should do
it nicely. You could pick up a perfectly accurate matt black little number
with a quartz movement and never have an excuse for being late again . . .
But once you pay more than that, you are buying more than a simple
time-telling device. You are buying a look, an image, an aura, an accessory,
a classic piece of craftsmanship, status, a virility symbol . . . take your
choice. Watch snobbery is as diverse, as subtle, as exclusive, as any other
sort.
In Italy, where watchology has almost become an art form, they say any
Italian waiter worth his pasta can read a bank balance from a wrist. But who
would have guessed that George Bush would wear a cheapo Timex on a fabric
strap, that John Major would sport a Pounds 700 Swiss Rado (and, if you have
not heard of Rado, you might like to know that more Swiss francs change
hands buying Rado than any other brand) or that Mr and Mrs Gorbachev and the
Pope all sport gold Day-Date Rolexes - at about Pounds 8,000 each?
If selling watches were simply about time-keeping then it would be a doddle
. . . and a lot duller. As it is, watches have joined that great band of
personal appurtenances that tell the world as much about you as you want it
to know.
Watch-buying has not come to a full stop even in this grim recession. Sales
of women's watches have fallen off - when a woman needs a pick-me-up, or
what a friend calls some 'retail therapy', she may buy a lipstick or a
designer jacket - but a chap is very likely to cheer himself up with a
watch.
Chaps have become very knowledgeable, too. At Watches of Switzerland, Tania
Foster-Brown says that they can almost spot the watch-buyer as he walks
through the door. He knows exactly what he wants and what he wants is a full
explanation of every knob, bezel, catch and fancy function the watch has to
offer. Men, it seems, do not buy on look alone - image and function count.
Today watch-buying falls into three categories. First, there is the
disposable watch, the sort you buy on impulse and wear on the beach, doing
the washing-up, looking after the children. Then there is the style-watch -
the watch that exists for what it conveys, the Tag-Heuer or Ebel for the
sportsman, the Omega or Longines for the classicist, the Dunhill or the
Gucci for the fashion-conscious. You choose your image and you take your
choice, and the price would range between Pounds 300 and Pounds 500.
Finally, there is the classic watch, the hand-crafted piece with a
mechanical movement made in Switzerland by a skilled watchmaker - Blancpain
(which survives nicely by just making a few hundred watches a year), Patek
Philippe, IWC, Jaeger-LeCoultre, Vacherin Constantin, Ulysse-Nardin. They
offer the wearer character, craftsmanship, tradition, exclusivity - and the
highest of prices.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, when Tokyo was ticking ahead producing
inexpensive, technically perfect watches, quartz models looked as if they
might largely replace mechanical movements. These days those fears have
gone, as more and more people seem to want real mechanisms. Given that even
the finest mechanical movement cannot compete with the precision of a quartz
crystal for accuracy - the best mechanical movement can be tuned to be no
more than three to four seconds out a day, whereas quartz is accurate to
within three to four seconds a month - it is yet more proof that technical
precision alone is not what watch-buying is about.
The man who rescued the Swiss watch industry and transformed the market is
Nicholas Hayek who, when he developed the low-cost, design-driven Swatch,
took on and beat the Japanese at their own game: the low-margin,
price-sensitive mass market. Until he came up with Swatch, exports of Swiss
watches and watch movements had crashed from 91m units in 1974 to just 43m
in 1983.
The supreme irony of the Swatch is that although it was meant to be cheap
and disposable, it has ended up a collectors' item, a cult product. Some of
the more esoteric designs now sell for many times their original face value
in the world's auction rooms.
More than that, Swatch changed the whole industry. It became a catalyst for
change. The first models were relatively sober and proficient, many with
plain matt black straps and classic faces, all selling at less than Pounds
20. However, SMH (producer of Swatch) quickly began to behave much more like
a fashion house and to produce two collections a year - the fact that once a
line was sold out and those models were no longer available only increased
their desirability.
Word began to get around and people rushed to buy the latest design.
Well-known artists were recruited to design them - some Swatches looked like
demented sea urchins, others sported flaky faeries, yet another was bedecked
with golden tulle, others swathed in net, embellished with crystal . . .
wild, witty and fun, they attracted attention everywhere. Today some of the
most sought-after models, such as Hocus-Pocus, the jelly-fish, and Alfred
Hofkunst's kitsch vegetables, have buyers queueing to pay huge sums for them
 -if only they can be found.
The innovation goes on. This year has seen lots of new designs, including
Vivienne Westwood's in romantic post-modernist mood (but naturally; Swatch
is never one to be left out of a trend) and - a real innovation - a fully
automatic watch for just Pounds 42.
But the remarkable thing is that the success of Swatch does not seem to have
been at the expense of the rest of the trade. Last year Swiss watch and
movement exports surpassed their 1974 peak level and the Swiss watch
industry seems back in confident form. Top-quality gold watches have ridden
out the recession more successfully than most and the fad for sports watches
has brought in lots of new customers. Today, there are watches that stand up
to all manner of macho tests - they can survive being submerged hundreds of
feet under water and come with such 'necessities' as luminous dials,
breathing-tank measuring attachments and pressure resistance to a depth of
thousands of feet. They will survive being hit on the face by a polo stick,
they have climbed Alps, crossed Tundras . . . but most are worn by those who
only battle with the office files.
Rado, too, homes in on a rugged, futuristic image - it makes much play of
the fact that its bracelets and cases are made from high-tech ceramic, said
to be rugged enough to survive a journey to the moon next time you buy a day
return.
Cults develop around certain watches which are not always easy to explain.
Anybody lucky enough, for instance, to lay their hands on a The Rolex
Daytona Chronograph (chronographs - models with built-in stop-watches - are
a current rage), would be able to sell it almost immediately for twice the
price. At Garrards they tell me some eight or ten people come in every day
asking for it, but the shop only gets one every six months.
Chronographs - awesomely chunky, aggressively functional - are one of the
huge successes of the watch market, in tune with our sports-obsessed times.
It has become the new executive toy. According to Count Franz La Rosee, the
director of The Watch Gallery: 'It is a way of saying, I'm young, fit and
healthy.'
At Tag-Heuer (formed in 1985 when Tag bought into Heuer), the only watch
company that specialises in professional sports watches, worldwide sales
increased nine times between 1985 and 1992.
Tania Foster Brown says Watches of Switzerland customers see a Tag-Heuer as
the ultimate sporting watch. 'Don't crack under pressure' is the company's
marketing line and the real skier, deep-sea diver or racing driver wants a
watch that performs.
Whereas Tag-Heuer may be the watch for the real action-man, Breitling has
captured a large slice of the lucrative market for those who merely want to
look like action-man - and woman. Many of the fashions in watches come from
Italy and a saunter down Milan's Monte Napoleone will quickly reveal that
Breitling is a sought-after name.
Alfred Dunhill, which was making pocket watches back in 1906 and by the mid
1920s was putting timepieces into lighters (the Unique), silver belt buckles
(the Reversible) and travelling cases (the Captive), seems to see two strong
trends in watches: nostalgia and sports. In time for Christmas Alfred
Dunhill will be selling a few carefully made small editions of some of these
old pieces.
Its Millennium Sports watch range is water-resistant to withstand depths of
up to 200 metres, has a strengthened case reinforced with screws on the case
back, a strong sapphire glass and luminous markings - vital, of course, to
survive the rigours of a chic metropolitan lunch.
A quieter cult watch is the Jaeger-LeCoultre Reverso. Originally designed in
the 1930s for polo players whose watch-glasses kept being broken, it sports
an ingenious design with a hinge which allows the wearer to turn the watch
face over so it is protected. It is made to the same design today and, it
goes without saying, is worn by those who could not tell a polo stick from a
croquet mallet.
Finally, if you are interested in the nuances of which watches carry real
clout, you may be interested to know that when The Watch Gallery in Jermyn
Street was burgled recently only two makes were taken - Breguet and
Breitling. Patek Philippe, Jaeger-LeCoultre, IWC - all were left
ignominiously on the shelf.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

921121

