FT924-8334

FT  11 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Tax changes for Mexican oil
company


   By DAMIAN FRASER and STEPHEN FIDLER


   MEXICO CITY


THE MEXICAN government is to make sweeping changes to the way it taxes
Petroleos Mexicanos, the Mexican state oil company and the fifth largest in
the world. The reforms are intended to enable Pemex to operate more as if it
was a private, international oil company.
The new scheme will not alter the amount of tax Pemex pays but will
reorganise the way in which it is levied. At present Pemex simply pays
around 90 per cent of its profits to the finance ministry; under the new
rules it will pay a special tax linked to the amount of oil it extracts from
the ground, but in all other ways will be treated as private company for tax
purposes. Any residual profits will be paid back to the government in the
form of dividends.
The difference between the retail price of petrol and the international
market price will be captured by the government in the form of an excise
tax.
Mr Francisco Rojas, the head of Pemex, hopes the changes will be made by the
end of the year. 'Pemex cannot analyse itself internally as a business when
the tax scheme is not related to its activities but only to collection,' he
says. 'In this sense I believe that we are going to take an important step
this year, perhaps not specifically in the amount we pay but in the
philosophy with respect to the taxes that Pemex owes.'
Officials familiar with the proposed changes say the government has been
influenced by the system used in the UK oil industry, where taxes on the
economic rent implied by extracting oil are isolated from taxes on the
company's ordinary operations.
Pemex was recently divided into four subsidiaries: exploration and
production; gas and basic petrochemicals; secondary petrochemicals; and
refining. The tax changes will enable the company to evaluate the economic
profitability of the subsidiaries. Mr Rojas emphasises that at the beginning
of next year transactions between these subsidiaries will be conducted
according to commercial prices, and full results of each subsidiary will be
published.
Once the proposed tax scheme is in place it will be relatively easy to allow
private equity investment in exploration and drilling, although this is
still prohibited by the constitution. The government says it has no plans to
relax that restriction.
Mr Rojas says Pemex will form alliances with the private sector and
encourage co-investments where it is convenient, sell off assets where it
suits the company and where the private sector can add value, and close down
plants that are not profitable and cannot be modernised. He will pay special
attention to the international side of Pemex, forging more international
strategic alliances, and extending its futures operations.
Pemex is facing pressure from the tight government budget next year, and is
thus intending to finance some investments - in particular refining -
off-budget. It is looking for foreign partners to build a refinery and lease
it to Pemex, which would be another break with tradition.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921111

