FT924-11270

FT  27 OCT 92 / Parliament and Politics: John Major in crisis - The people
he turns to


MR GUS O'DONNELL, 40, the prime minster's press secretary.  Injects advice
on policy presentation and news management.  Worked with Mr Major when he
was Chancellor.  Sees prime minster daily but has faced increasing
difficulties in justifying 'U turns' and apparent ministerial indecision.
LORD ARCHER, 52, Novelist and former deputy Conservative party chairman. Is
a personal friend of Mr Major but not a political heavyweight.  Can be over
gung-ho, without the political sensitivities of a former or current
government minister.  Takes prominent role in acting as cheerleader for
Conservative party.
MR CHRIS PATTEN, 47, governor of Hong Kong.  Once a daily confidant, close
friend and reliable political adviser.  Is regarded as a safe and
experienced pair of hands but now on other side of world and contactable
only by telephone.  This has not stopped the conversations continuing.
SIR NORMAN FOWLER, 54, party chairman.  Worked as minder for Mr Major during
the general election where he struck up a personal rapport.  Has eschewed
ministerial responsibilities so as to concentrate on strengthening Tory
campaigning efforts.  Sees the prime minister at least once a week.
MR DOUGLAS HURD, 62, foreign secretary.  Contested the Conservative party
leadership at the same time as Mr Major but now takes the role of an elder
statesman within the cabinet.  Is cautious and respected for his political
judgment.  But his work often means he is far from Westminster.
MRS SARAH HOGG, 46, head of Number 10 policy unit.  Regarded as a powerful
force withing Downing Stree but subject to increasing attacks from Tory
critics for lacking a sufficiently acute political nose that is able to
judge what will be possible in Westminster, as opposed to Whitehall.
LORD WAKEHAM, 60, leader of the Lords.  Supposed to be Mr Fix-it - a role he
developed during the last years of Lady Thatcher's reign.  Has experience as
former leader of the Commons and energy spokesman.  Is not a close political
ally of Mr Major but is trusted enough to be included on the cabinet public
spending committee.
MR RICHARD RYDER, 43, chief whip.  Has responsibility for controlling Tory
MPs and reporting on strength of feeling in Westminster.  Suffered from the
lack of contact with Conservatives over the long summer recess. Worked
frantically hard to save government over coal pit closures.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921027

