FT922-7181

FT  20 MAY 92 / Arts: The feel-good factor - Television


   By CHRISTOPHER DUNKLEY


Following the reactions of the American gay lobby to the movie Basic
Instinct and now RAF widows in Britain to the BBC1 drama Friday On My Mind
we can, presumably, expect the formation of an organisation dedicated to the
banning of Coronation Street and EastEnders because they fail to show
publicans as saints. No doubt Danish aristocrats will get together and
agitate for the suppression of Hamlet on the grounds that it portrays a
Danish prince as verging on the barmy. The American homosexuals condemned
Basic Instinct because, they said, it depicted the supposed murderer as a
lesbian. Actually the whole point was that she was bisexual, hence the
torrid affair with the cop, but never mind that. Must all fiction henceforth
portray all lesbians (or bisexuals) as angelic upholders of the law? The
widows of four RAF aircrew killed in the Gulf have, we are told, 'bitterly
condemned' Friday On My Mind because it shows the widow of an RAF pilot,
killed in Wales, having an affair with the married man appointed as her
'effects officer'.
The widows complain that the drama is 'over dramatised and inaccurate' and
there were, indeed, some pretty silly scenes in the opening episode, notably
the widow's hysterical attack on the air traffic control officer and her
tearful night time run across the aerodrome, arms outstretched against
luscious blue backlighting, into the path of a taxi-ing jet fighter. It did
look as though someone had failed to get beyond the opening chapter of Teach
Yourself Psychiatry. Nevertheless, it is time that special interest groups
gave the general public credit for some imagination and common sense.
Everybody belongs to one group or another - rich, poor, black, white,
doctors, hairdressers - and if every group succeeded in demands to have its
members always portrayed in a flattering light, drama would cease
altogether. We do know the meaning of 'drama' and 'fiction'.
Today at Lucknam Park near Bath BBC governors and members of management
begin a three day conference on the future of the corporation. A deluge of
speculation has already inundated us, thanks largely to the inept handling
of the reports from 15 internal task forces set up to ponder the future of
the BBC from many points of view prior to the renewal of the corporation's
charter in 1996. Much of this speculation has been malicious, coming from
mass media organisations which are in competition with the BBC, and several
facts are notable for their absence from the deluge. First, compared with
almost any other major British undertaking in the past 50 years - from
education to textiles, from publishing to the motor industry - British
public service broadcasting has been an extraordinary success.
Internationally it has the very highest reputation, and nationally it is
immensely popular. Second, whatever form BBC financing takes, the viewers
and listeners will always pay for programmes, whether via the licence fee,
at the supermarket checkout, or through subscriptions. The licence fee has
so far proved much the cheapest way of financing a remarkable diversity.
Third, although it must be possible to make heavy cuts in BBC bureaucracy,
if you go further and reduce the organisation much more you will lose that
critical mass of talent and experience (and also the possibility of internal
cross subsidies) which have led to so many programme successes. To destroy
the BBC just for the sake of reinforcing the anti-collectivist dogma of
current political fashion would be a tragedy.
Which does not mean that the BBC should remain unchanged. In its staff, and
consequently its outlook and programmes, it has always been steeply inclined
towards the arts and humanities and away from science, industry and
technology. Since the BBC is much concerned with entertainment a bias of
some degree is inevitable, but it has always gone too far. Last week The
Late Show on BBC2 took up the once again topical subject of 'the two
cultures', and one of the scientists present pointed out that it had, as
ever, taken a major controversy before broadcasters invited scientists into
the studio. Admittedly there was, shortly after that Late Show, a splendid
Open University programme called This True Book Of Ours - The Human Body on
the history of human anatomy and especially the work of Vesalius. However,
this was the exception, not the rule, and the programme did not begin until
midnight.
It is significant that the funniest moments in the opening episode of ITV's
Root Into Europe came at the beginning when George Cole in the title role
was found writing some of the blimpish letters to celebrities which gave
rise to William Donaldson's book in the first place. Once away from that
pretence and into the realities of the Channel ferry and then Paris, nothing
was quite as laughable. It all seemed awfully dated. It is 26 years since
Johnny Speight brought us that unforgettable xenophobic male chauvinist Alf
Garnett, and even then the character seemed like something left over from
the thirties. Root is a middle class version of Garnett but today, with
millions of Britons having become seasoned Continental travellers, it feels
terribly old fashioned to be going through the 'frightful froggies' and
'randy Eyeties' routine again.
Does anybody understand why programmes about the environment are not subject
to the same requirements of evidence, balance, and journalistic rigour as
other current affairs programmes? Presumably it must be because, consciously
or sub-consciously, broadcasters regard environmentalism as more to do with
faith than facts; religion rather than science. That must be why you are not
allowed to point out on television that nobody knows how long the famous
hole in the ozone layer has been there, five years or five million.
Presumably it is why you are not allowed to say that one day's volcanic
eruption sends as much dangerous chemical matter into the atmosphere as a
whole year of aerosol use by the entire human race. No doubt it is why you
cannot tell viewers that 80 per cent (or is it now 90?) of those newspapers
driven to the dump in fossil-fuel guzzling motors is used for landfill
because the re-cycling industry only has the capacity to use 20 per cent.
Such revelations would offend against the faith; what matters is not facts
but the feel-good factor. How else can you explain the proud display of a
compost box to re-cycle organic waste in BBC2's Happy Families which must
have taken several trees-worth of timber to construct? How explain the
absence in Channel 4's How To Save The Earth of any evidence from the
millions who would, presumably, benefit from the water and power to be
provided by the Danube dam, and the monopolisation of airtime by the few who
opposed its building in their back yard?
The BBC's director-general in waiting, John Birt, is widely reputed to
favour more serious analysis and less trivial human interest material in
current affairs programmes. Maybe that why it is becoming standard practice
for any BBC programme which wants to do a story about the royal family to
present it in the form of analysis of the tabloid press as though television
itself would never stoop to such things. This is now habitual on Newsnight,
where Jeremy Paxman's snootiness about the tabloids is deeply comic, given
that he is reduced to feeding not from the same trough but secondhand from
others after they have done so. In last week's Public Eye on BBC2 the
reporter talked superciliously of 'gossip columnists and hacks feeding off
royalty' as though she believed herself to be working for god's gift to
intellectuals. This from someone whose own script told us that 'The family's
image has backfired'.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920520

