FT923-9496

FT  05 AUG 92 / Leading Article: A surfeit of quick fixes


WITH THE British economy in an increasingly desperate state, the government
finds itself besieged by interest groups with handy nostrums to help promote
economic recovery. Foremost among the would-be helpers are the banks and
building societies, which want to see tax reliefs to alleviate the problems
of homeowners whose mortgages exceed the value of their houses. The
temptation to deploy taxpayers' money in this particular direction should
nonetheless be firmly resisted. There are better ways of dealing with
problem at hand.
At first sight the case advanced by the banks and building societies is not
wholly implausible. Consumer confidence has proved more fragile than
expected since the election, which in part reflects the continuing decline
in house prices and the low volume of housing transactions. There has been a
powerful negative wealth effect since the market peaked in 1988; and the
resulting dampener on market expectations has been reinforced by the
phenomenon of negative equity, whereby homeowners cannot sell their houses
without having to make a repayment to the building societies. The natural
way out of this debt trap is to spend less and save more. Yet the last thing
the economy needs, now that the household savings ratio is a nearly three
times its level when the economy was overheating, is an outbreak of
Victorian values.
Lower rates
The obvious response to the debt overhang in housing is a sharp reduction in
short-term interest rates. Yet the government's monetary policy is in the
hands of the Germans, who can safely be relied on to deliver too little, too
late, to satisfy Britain's domestic requirements. In the meantime membership
of the exchange rate mechanism has contributed to a continuing decline in
the inflation rate. But this merely makes the problem worse, because with
nominal interest rates stable and inflation going down, real rates of
interest are rising. Over the past two years the real rate on mortgage debt,
after allowing for movements in house prices, has been running at a punitive
15-20 per cent.
So far, the government's response to this situation has been to hold the
line, hoping that eventually something will turn up to spur economic growth.
An event which might change everything is a 'no' vote in September's French
referendum on Maastricht. That would be a potentially lethal blow to
monetary union (among other things); and should the government feel by then
that the pursuit of disinflationary gains is outweighed by other factors, it
might conceivably be ready to contemplate a different approach.
Housing subsidies
Should the French decline to use the referendum to pass a vote of no
confidence in Mr Mitterrand, new housing subsidies might appear more
tempting to hard-pressed ministers searching desperately for 'green shoots'.
Yet it is hard to see that tax subsidies for loss-making homeowners would do
the trick. For a start, tax relief for losses on the sale of the home would
not become available in time to help repay the building society in full.
Assuming that some further nostrum could be cooked up to bridge this
financing gap, there is a risk that the resulting wave of sales might
actually cause house prices to fall further - scarcely the way to mitigate
the pain in the period before German interest rates finally come down.
The only plausible case for expensive subsidies to loss-making homeowners
would arise if the banking system were on the brink of a financial crisis.
Yet the banks and building societies are not, as yet, seriously threatened,
largely because so much of the losses in housing have been borne by the
insurance sector. If the government is to increase its already huge
subsidies to housing, it would do better to acknowledge that the economy is
suffering from an excessive level of homeownership and accelerate the
revival of the private rented sector. It should eliminate the tax
discrimination against private landlords, for example by exempting them from
capital gains tax, while directing more money towards badly needed social
housing. Creating yet more subsidies for homeowners is an idea whose time
should not be allowed to come.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920805

