FT922-4460

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Company News: Egyptian bankers baulk at fund
levy for BCCI unit


   By TONY WALKER


   CAIRO


EGYPT this week initiated a Dollars 300m bailout of the local subsidiary of
the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International, but bankers in Cairo
have reacted testily to demands they foot part of the bill.
Dr Atef Sedki, the prime minister, announced in parliament that the
government planned to re-float Bank of Credit of Commerce Egypt (BCCM) with
an interest-free loan, part of which would come from a levy on bank
deposits.
A number of banks have yielded to demands for the payment of one-quarter of
1 per cent of their deposits to what the central bank is describing as a
'solidarity' fund to save BCCM, but the general manager of a large joint
venture bank said his institution had baulked. 'We are not running a
charity,' he declared.
Banks, which have reluctantly fallen into line, say they are still arguing
with the central bank over how the 'solidarity' payment should be
classified. Mr Hazem Beblawi, chairman of Export Development Bank of Egypt,
said he considered his bank's contribution 'a refundable deposit' with the
central bank.
BCCM activities were frozen last year after BCCI's collapse. The Egyptian
subsidiary, 49 per cent owned by BCCI, had some Dollars 375m of total
deposits of Dollars 600m with its parent. Egyptian shareholders held a 51
per cent stake in the bank.
The government has indicated that it plans to offer BCCI's stake for sale,
but local bankers are sceptical about BCCM's recovery. One senior Egyptian
banker said it was more likely that it would be taken over by an existing
institution.
Liquidators responsible for salvaging something from the BCCI wreckage - the
bank collapsed owing Dollars 14bn - say that depositors may receive a
payment of 30 to 40 per cent of their funds.
The government's attempts to unravel the BCCM tangle coincides with
parliament's approval this week of a new banking law that notionally
strengthens the central bank's regulatory capabilities.
But the original draft has been considerably watered down, and bankers doubt
that the central bank supervisory capabilities will be much changed by the
new law. The central bank had argued for a stronger hand at a time when
Egypt has entered a transition to a market-oriented economy in which local
financial institutions are expected to play a more adventurous role.
The banking law's main features include provision for a new deposit
insurance scheme and foreign currency branches of international banks will
be empowered to deal in local currency as a further step towards bolstering
the Egyptian pound's claims to be regarded as a freely-convertible currency
internationally.
Foreign currency branches would be obliged, however, to incorporate
themselves as fully-fledged banks locally if they wish to extend their
activities.
As one Egyptian official said: 'Branches cannot open additional branches.'
Mr Mohammed Hafez, chairman of Banque Misr, one of Egypt's 'big four' public
sector commercial banks, said it was hoped that the new banking law would
help facilitate mergers and acquisitions among Egypt's banks, some of which
have been struggling.
Bankers have long believed that Egypt is 'overbanked', and that a reduction
in the number of local financial institutions is desirable.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920605

