FT923-9601

FT  04 AUG 92 / Delta calls for block on BA's Dollars 750m share deal


   By PAUL BETTS, Aerospace Correspondent


DELTA AIR LINES, the third largest US carrier, yesterday called for British
Airways' proposed Dollars 750m (Pounds 390m) equity investment in USAir, the
sixth largest US carrier, to be blocked.
The request to the US Transport Department coincides with mounting pressure
by the three largest US airlines - Delta, American Airlines and United
Airlines - to be given greater access into the UK and other European markets
through a revision of the existing aviation agreement between the UK and the
US.
American Airlines, the biggest US carrier, said yesterday that the US
government should not approve the investment deal unless the US secured
'equal opportunities for US carriers'.
However, the strongest attack came from Delta which called on the US
Transport Department to take action to stop the deal 'as a matter of law'.
Mr Ronald Allen, Delta's chairman, claimed the BA-USAir deal involved 'a
foreign carrier cloaked in the protection of one of the most restrictive and
anti-competitive international aviation regimes in the world seeking control
over a US carrier in violation of our government's current law and policy'.
Mr Allen also claimed BA would exercise control 'over virtually every
significant business activity of USAir'. Even if BA control of USAir was
eliminated, Delta argued, the US government was obligated to protect US
interests by requiring as a precondition to any deal a revised US-UK
agreement giving US carriers free and open access to and from British
cities.
BA yesterday said its agreement with USAir complied with US regulations and
had no implications for the aviation regime between the two countries.
Under the deal negotiated at the end of last month, BA is proposing to
acquire a 44 per cent equity stake in USAir which would give it 21 per cent
of the voting rights in the airline.
US regulations restrict foreign ownership in US airlines to 25 per cent of
voting rights and 49 per cent of equity. BA also said the US Transport
Department had promised a rapid review of its proposed deal with USAir.
With its demand that the US authorities block the deal, Delta is adopting a
far more aggressive and extreme position than the two other big US carriers.
It claimed that if the deal was approved, the US industry's competitive edge
in the world market would be 'sacrificed'. Mr Allen warned that 'the jobs of
an entire US industry are at stake'.
In contrast, both American Airlines and United Airlines have indicated there
could be opportunities for the US airline industry if the proposed
transaction led to more open skies between the US and the UK.
BA strike called off, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920804

