FT924-6280

FT  21 NOV 92 / Hard man warms to his latest battle: Jocelyn Stevens tells
Antony Thorncroft how he quelled print unions and art professors and what he
plans for the archaeologists


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


JOCELYN Stevens is a happy man. Just over six months after arriving as
chairman of English Heritage he is reaping the anticipated whirlwind. He
sits surrounded by his blistering press coverage. 'Terminator 3 arrives at
English Heritage' he comments. The academics on his advisory boards are
shrill in their opposition. 'I was told 'watch out for the archaeologists:
they will bury you',' he jokes.
There is one piece of good news. Stevens asked for 180 voluntary
redundancies from among English Heritage's 1,600 workforce; he has had 600
applicants.
This is all meat and drink to Stevens. As the man who saw off the hot metal
print unions at Express Newspapers in the 1970s ('my worst moment was
closing down the Glasgow plant with 2,200 jobs') Stevens reckons he can cope
with anything 'this Quango' (he spits out the word) of conservationists
throws at him.
He was given the job by David Mellor. 'Somebody had it in for us. He read me
out a very clear brief. No more money for two years and sort out the place.'
Then Stevens said something surprising. 'I was under no illusions that
English Heritage was popular. Everyone has an English Heritage horror
story.' Stevens has his own. In his previous job as Rector of the Royal
College of Art he wanted to modernise a listed building, now the Stevens
Wing. Delays by the conservationists at English Heritage added Pounds 2m to
the cost.
You realise that while most people regard English Heritage as a group of
cosy traditionalists, rather like morris dancers, Jocelyn Stevens, and his
friends, live in listed houses and object to the way that it can intervene
if they want to change the knocker on their front doors
Retribution was swift. Since April, Stevens has gone through English
Heritage like a dose of salts. As a one time journalist he wrote the policy
document on its future himself. It suggests finding new owners for most of
the properties it administers; contracting out the specialist labour force
and cutting HQ staff - and running down English Heritage's authority in
London.
'I have no apologies to make. I'd do it again the same way. You've got to
use your first 100 days.' Now he is coping with the vociferous reaction of
the advisory committees that he ignored. The second stage in his plan is to
be emollient. Negotiations have started. Now that it is in place the
strategy will be discussed. Already he can dangle benefits. 'In January I
will be able to announce that another Pounds 6m will go directly in grants
to priority cases'.
Somehow you cannot help warming to Stevens. You can also agree with much of
his thinking. If the National Trust owns the downland at Avebury why should
it not look after the stones, too; local authorities and local interest
groups make better guardians of remote dolmens or crumbling medieval castles
than English Heritage in London. Stevens wants to concentrate on his stars,
on Stonehenge, on Dover castle, and (his particular favourite) Richard III's
castle at Middleham, as well as churches and conservation areas in cities.
It is hard to believe that he will not get his way.
Typically he is enthusiastic. 'This job is thrilling'. In theory he need
give three days a week to English Heritage. He is there all the time and
spends his evenings getting to know local conservation officers. This
constant activity is the only life he knows. At Express Newspapers he often
worked from 9.30 in the morning to 11.30 at night seven days a week. 'The
unions came to respect me because I was always there, always trying to get
the papers out. When I left they gave me a dinner; the management did not.'
At Express Newspapers he turned round the ailing Evening Standard and helped
to keep the Express afloat.
He never worked harder. It cost him his marriage and the closeness of his
children. It was also ultimately in vain. There was a row with Lord
Matthews, the new proprietor, over who should be chairman, and Stevens lost.
'I know what it is like to be sacked; to be told to clear your desk', he
sighs, although his pay-off financed a lavish party at Gstaad. Skiing is his
suitably energetic leisure alternative to work.
After his dismissal Stevens did what he is good at - making money. He has
that disregard for money that can only be enjoyed by the very rich. His
mother died at his birth but his connections, the Hulton press barons, were
wealthy enough to put Pounds 750,000 into the orphan's bank account. He
enjoyed the ease of Eton and Cambridge (he is undoubtedly bright) but little
parental attention. His subsequent career as a hard-nosed businessman who
get results by trampling on the weak is too glibly explained by a need to
prove himself, to get attention.
Stevens might have made a career in television, but one of his rumbustious
interviews as a reporter on Panorama caused such a public outcry that he was
not asked back. Instead he merged his social life with money-making and
founded Queen magazine, the style journal of the 1960s. 'I got bored with my
readers and sold it for Pounds 500,000 to the man sitting at the next table
at Claridges'. After his dismissal from the Express group he made another
fortune out of Centaur Publishing. He sold that for Pounds 2m.
Then came the call to public service, the call that changed Stevens, and the
nation's life. 'I was asked by George Howard, who I'd never met, to become
rector of the Royal College. It was out of control.' He now thinks that
Margaret Thatcher might have been behind the call. He knew nothing about
art; had no academic experience. So he talked to the students - 'some had
never seen their professors in two years' - and committed himself to turning
the Royal College from an ivory tower into a stepping stone towards a good
job in art and design.
He quickly decided four departments should be closed down. 'One was
environmental media where the students were working with no discipline,
painters fiddling with televisions and so on. I called a meeting of the
senate and locked the doors. I told them that they would not be released
until the reforms had been agreed unanimously. We got out at four in the
morning, a time which, with my experience of the unions, I was quite used
to.
By the time he left the Royal College, (and he is proud of the fact), only
three of the 20 professors he inherited were still in place. The carnage was
terrible; the suffering immense; but he got the college Pounds 20m in
building grants from the government, raised its reputation, and slanted it
towards the needs of industry.
He has brought little from the college to English Heritage, just one large
plaster cast of a dog which he bought from a student, and which stands by
his desk. It is like Stevens in that it has a rather dopey, love me,
expression; but unlike him in that it neither barks nor bites. He plays down
his famous rages - 'I can't remember whether I was born in a filing cabinet
and threw my father out the window or the other way round' - but it is easy
to see how the intense energy of the man, whose body is always mobile as he
shifts papers, stretches, chases words and arguments, could erupt into
shouting matches.
He is at English Heritage until 1997, when he will be 65. 'I was the rogue
choice. Michael Heseltine gave me five minutes to make up my mind. I like
these five year assignments. I wish I'd come across them earlier in my
career.' He hopes for more. 'Perhaps I could run London. I'd like that. I'll
never retire.' His private life is now happy (he lives with Vivien Duffield,
one of the richest women in the country) and they share houses in Hampshire
and Scotland. He seems unable to show any enthusiasm for hobbies, outside
the next obstacle to be overcome.
Like many hard men Stevens seems to need to be liked. He chooses unlikely
groups to identify with - in newspapers it was the unions (although he broke
their power); at the Royal College it was the students; at English Heritage
it is the guardian of Middleham Castle, a woman who keeps a lonely vigil
over the ruins. His interest in her solitary life suggests that, after all
his battles, Stevens is at last confident enough of his identity to strike
out on his own.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

921121

