FT923-6543

FT  24 AUG 92 / Anger over N Ireland's energy costs


   By DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor


LARGE ENERGY users in Northern Ireland have condemned electricity price
rises that have been agreed by the authorities shortly before the planned
privatisation of the province's electricity supply industry.
The Action Group on Northern Ireland Electricity Prices, which includes many
of the larger industries in the province, says the tariff will mean
increases of 15 per cent to 20 per cent, in addition to the 18 per cent
price differential which exists between Northern Ireland and the mainland.
Mr Michael Oliver, manager of Blue Circle's Northern Ireland operations,
said: 'We're incensed by this. We cannot understand it in a recession. It
can only mean that we shall have to lay people off.' Mr Oliver said he was
taking the matter up with the government.
The new tariff was approved by Offer, the electricity regulator, as part of
the approach to the privatisation of Northern Ireland Electricity in
November. It was designed to give NIE a sufficient rate of return to reflect
the higher cost of power in the province.
Electricity has traditionally been more expensive in Northern Ireland
because of the shortage of locally produced fuels and its heavy dependence
on imported oil. The new pricing formula will, however, oblige NIE to raise
its prices at less than the rate of inflation in future.
The province's Department of Economic Development said the new tariff would
be introduced gradually and would not result in price rises for all
consumers. It said some companies, which it declined to name, might see
prices fall.
Following the sale of Northern Ireland's four power generators earlier this
year the forthcoming privatisation will consist of Northern Ireland's power
distribution network. It will be sold in one piece and the intention is to
introduce more competition in time by linking the province's grid to those
of the Irish republic and Scotland.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920824

