FT921-14048

FT  17 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Kinnock ponders dilemma of an
illogical 'tax'


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


THE confusion in the Labour party over the timing of its plan to restructure
National Insurance contributions could not be more painfully ironic for Mr
Neil Kinnock.
It has underlined how a proposal conceived nearly four years ago to
demonstrate that the party's public spending plans would be prudently
financed is now regarded as a serious threat to Mr Kinnock's general
election prospects.
No one can argue that the plan to abolish the ceiling on National Insurance
contributions is an example of unreconstructed socialism.
One of the principal - if undeclared - critics of the system under which
employees pay 9 per cent of their earnings up to Pounds 20,280 a year and
then nothing after that was Mr Nigel Lawson.
The former chancellor saw the illogicality of a tax - and, despite the
notional distinction with income tax, that is how the Treasury regards the
contributions - which is progressive most of the way up the income scale and
then becomes regressive.
The system means that, when income tax and National Insurance contributions
are taken together, someone earning say, Pounds 40,000 a year, starts off
with an combined effective tax rate of 34p in the pound. That rate then
drops to 25p after the National Insurance ceiling is reached, jumping again
to 40p when the top rate income tax threshold is reached at Pounds 23,700 of
taxable (or between Pounds 27,000 and Pounds 30,000 of gross) earnings.
Mr Lawson wanted to abolish the ceiling in his 1988 Budget, offsetting the
change with the reductions in the top and basic rates of income tax which he
eventually announced.
But after exhaustive pre-Budget studies, Mr Lawson changed his mind. His
reasoning was precisely the same as that behind the present confusion in the
Labour party: the Treasury told him that he could not avoid creating losers
across a swathe of middle-to-high-income earners in southern England.
But for Labour the change had a strong attraction. Abolition offered the
prospect of demonstrating how it would fund its key spending pledges without
raising the tax burden on the vast majority of taxpayers.
A transfer from higher-income brackets - both from National Insurance
contribution payments and the party's commitment to increase the top rate of
tax - to pay for higher pensions and child benefit could be presented as a
discrete package.
Other spending commitments would be less firm. Labour would pledge to pay
for the fruits of economic growth and by forgoing future tax cuts. That was
how the position was generally understood until this week.
But the intensification of the election campaign and the concentrated
Conservative attack on Labour's tax and spending policies have reminded Mr
Kinnock just why Mr Lawson dropped the baton.
Around 3m employees and 0.4m self-employed would be worse off if the ceiling
were abolished.
That represents some 14 per cent of all taxpayers. Others whose incomes move
over the weekly National Insurance contributions threshold only occasionally
would also face higher bills.
But much more alarming for Labour was the growing understanding that in
London and the south-east, where Pounds 20,000 a year is not much higher
than the average income, there would be a much deeper concentration of
losers.
In some areas well over a third of employed households would be affected.
Those households are in the constituencies - such as Dulwich, Slough and
Battersea - that Labour must win if it is to form a government.
Put simply, Pounds 20,000 a year does not seem a lot of money in much of the
south-east.
The average male white-collar worker in London earns closer to Pounds 25,000
and would be nearly Pounds 7 a week worse off under the change.
So this week Mr Kinnock let it be known that the child benefit and pension
pledges could be comfortably funded if the change were phased in rather than
announced in Labour's first Budget.
There was talk also of the compensating gains from child benefit and,
perhaps, from a lower starting rate of income tax that those just above the
threshold might expect.
It was not a complete U-turn. Mr Kinnock could argue that his party's policy
documents had consistently stated that big changes would be phased in to
avoid wrecking family budgets.
And no-one could find a specific commitment to abolish the National
Insurance contributions ceiling immediately.
But, in private at least, senior members of the party admit that the
possibility of phasing was being raised now only because of the heightened
appreciation of the electoral threat. Previously Labour had never challenged
the general assumption of a one-off change.
Some of Mr Kinnock's colleagues were arguing last night that if the timing
of the change of heart had looked awkward and defensive, it was better that
it came sooner rather than later.
But as the Conservatives plan a new onslaught on Labour's spending pledges
it is the government rather than the Opposition which has the initiative.

The Financial Times


London Page 10 Photograph Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader could argue that
policy documents have stated significant changes would be phased in
(Omitted).

920117

