FT924-12108

FT  22 OCT 92 / Yeltsin call to delay congress rejected by parliament


   By JOHN LLOYD and DMITRI VOLKOV


   MOSCOW


TENSION between reformists and hardliners brought upheavals in the Russian
parliament yesterday, as evidence grew of an approaching showdown between
the antagonistic groups.
The parliament yesterday heavily rejected, by 114 votes to 59, a request
made last week by President Boris Yeltsin to postpone the session of the
Congress of Peoples' Deputies, set for December 1, until the spring.
Mr Yeltsin wanted to avoid a clash between the more than 1,000-strong
legislative body, heavily dominated by Communists and nationalists, and the
reformist government - whose programme is deeply unpopular.
The rejection makes a clash apparently certain, with the likelihood that the
government will be voted out. Mr Sergei Kovalyev, a pro-government deputy,
said after the vote that the government's resignation was 'almost
inevitable'.
The parliament also called before it ministers and senior officials -
including Mr Anatoly Chubais, a deputy prime minister, Mr Andrei Kozyrev,
foreign minister, and Mr Gennady Burbulis, the senior presidential aide -
who had briefed foreign correspondents last Friday on the threat of a
reactionary coup against the president. They had also warned of the
formation of armed gangs by hardline forces including Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov,
the parliamentary speaker and a critic of the government.
None of the ministers and officials appeared, but a statement from Mr
Kozyrev was read in which he said that 'we warned the journalists, and we
are warning now about an attempt at revanchism (reaction) on the part of
some members of parliament'.
The angry deputies then voted to create a 13-member commission, dominated by
hardliners, to investigate the ministers' actions and recommend what action
should be taken against them.
Mr Khasbulatov later summoned a press conference to allege that he was under
constant surveillance, that his life was threatened and that the government
was becoming 'totalitarian'. He was later led from parliament, looking pale,
by Mr Yuri Yarov, one of his deputies.
In an intervention in parliament, Ms Bela Denisenko, the assistant health
minister, said she had seen Mr Khasbulatov and had told him that 'in my
opinion, according to external evidence, you are in a state of narcotic or
alcoholic intoxication', to which he had responded, she said, with
'ungentlemanly behaviour'.
Ukraine spending, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921022

