FT924-989

FT  21 DEC 92 / BR chief criticises sell-off plan


   By ALISON SMITH


SIR BOB REID, the chairman of British Rail, yesterday gave his strongest
warning so far about plans for privatising BR. He urged ministers to build
on BR's achievements instead of breaking it up.
While Sir Bob has been known for some time to be anxious about aspects of
the plans to split the railway into a track authority and privately owned
companies running competing services, his call yesterday for privatisation
to 'evolve' rather than be introduced with disruption is his most open
attack yet on the proposals.
'If you start to break it up and you disrupt it you will break the momentum,
you will give yourself major safety validation problems . . . and you will
not get a better service for some long time to come,' he said on BBC radio's
The World This Weekend.
He was particularly concerned about the effect of privatisation plans on
rolling-stock manufacturers. BR had no new orders at present, and people
would start being made redundant within 12-18 months at the latest.
Apart from the difficulties that would be caused in re-assembling expertise
when there were fresh orders, he said, an opportunity to build up an export
industry was being lost.
Sir Bob believed that the railway should meet the social needs of the
country as well as the economic needs, and expressed doubts about whether
the best way to involve the private sector was 'in a total structure which
covers the whole country and divides the railway up and radically breaks it
up'.
Sir Bob said that the critical issue for the government was to decide what
mix of commercial and social railway it wanted. He also forecast that BR's
service next year would be poorer as difficulties from the tightness of the
public-spending settlement and the fall in revenues worked their way through
into the railway's performance. He renewed his call for annual investment of
Pounds 1.2bn-Pounds 4bn in BR.
His remarks stung the Department of Transport to emphasise that it had
detailed and regular meetings with BR on privatisation, and prompted Labour
to call on ministers to abandon their 'unworkable' privatisation plans.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921221

