FT924-12224

FT  22 OCT 92 / Autumn Statement to pave way for interest rate cut


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, EMMA TUCKER and PETER NORMAN


THE GOVERNMENT underlined yesterday its determination to present next
month's Autumn Statement as a springboard for economic recovery, paving the
way for a further cut in interest rates.
Mr Michael Portillo, the chief secretary to the Treasury, said the 'tight'
spending package being thrashed out by cabinet ministers would underpin
market confidence in the government's approach while preserving its priority
capital spending programmes.
That stance was echoed by Mr Kenneth Clarke, home secretary, who responded
to last night's narrow government victory over coal closures with the
comment that the government's policy was to 'go for growth and recovery out
of this recession'.
But Mr John Major's decision to switch the emphasis of his strategy towards
ending the recession brought a mixed reaction on financial markets. The
pound fell sharply while share prices were boosted by the prospect of lower
borrowing costs.
The Confederation of British Industry welcomed the priority given to
recovery but demanded a more 'coherent' economic policy. It called for lower
interest rates and 'stringent' controls on public spending. The Institute of
Directors welcomed Mr Major's stance for providing 'fresh hope for
recovery'.
News of another small rise in the volume of retail sales last month left
financial markets uncertain about the short-term direction of the economy.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, said sales on Britain's high streets were
now 'on a clear, upward trend'. But many economists continued to predict
that weak consumer confidence would hinder recovery.
The government's policy shift - announced by the prime minister on Tuesday
night and underlined yesterday by senior officials in his Downing Street
office - led to confusion in Whitehall.
Mr Lamont bluntly denied there had been any U-turn. Treasury officials
sought to dismiss suggestions that the government was taking a more relaxed
view of the inflation outlook in favour of a further easing of monetary
policy.
However, senior Downing Street officials repeatedly emphasised the strong
disinflationary pressures already apparent in the economy, pointing to the
weak employment market, unprecedented falls in house prices and depressed
consumer confidence.
This background would do much to offset the inflationary pressures from the
sharp devaluation of the pound since its departure from the European
exchange rate mechanism, Mr Major's aides suggested.
They disclosed that the prime minister had discussed the rebalancing of
policy with Mr Lamont last week and the broad outlines had been set out to
the cabinet earlier this week.
Senior ministers said the Autumn Statement - with the prospect of a further
cut in German interest rates - should provide scope for another reduction in
British interest rates in the second half of next month.
Prospects of a lowering of base rates sent the pound sharply lower on the
foreign exchanges.
The pound lost 3 3/4 pfennigs in London to DM2.4325, although it picked up
in New York to DM2.4449. Against the dollar it was more than a cent lower at
Dollars 1.6145 in London and eased further to Dollars 1.6060 in New York.
Share prices were boosted by hopes of further monetary relaxation, with the
FT-SE 100 index gaining 28.7 to 2,645.7, helped by rate cuts on the
continent.
Retail sales rise, Page 8; Editorial Comment, Page 18; SamuelBrittan, Page
19; Lex, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921022

