FT923-15754

FT  01 JUL 92 / France hit by wave of unrest


   By ALICE RAWSTHORN and IAN DAVIDSON


   PARIS


FRANCE was yesterday hit by a series of strikes and demonstrations as
farmers, dockers, airline pilots and lorry drivers stepped up campaigns of
industrial unrest.
Traffic ground to a halt on a number of roads and motorways when lorry
drivers protesting against changes in the driving licence system set up
dozens of road blocks. Under the new system which comes into force today a
driver can lose his licence by accumulating penalties for traffic offences.
The Nord/Pas de Calais and Rhone-Alpes regions were badly affected. Tourists
arriving from Britain and Belgium found most of the roads to Paris from the
south blocked.
Farmers, who have for the past fortnight been demonstrating against the
European Community's agricultural reforms, yesterday staged another day of
protest. The town centre at Bourg-en-Bresse, north of Lyon, was brought to a
halt by 200 demonstrators. A high speed train was forced to stop for 30
minutes on the Toulouse to Paris line. Nearly 200 farmers cemented up the
entrance to the Saone-et-Loire police headquarters at Macon.
Elsewhere there were protests against the Maastricht treaty. Coachloads of
French dockers joined Spanish and Italian counterparts to seal off the
customs post at Perthus in the Pyrenees. More than 1,500 dockers arrived at
the scene as part of a 24-hour strike.
French air travel was disrupted by the start of a two day strike by pilots
and mechanics at Air Inter, the French domestic airline. Air Inter said a
quarter of its 416 scheduled flights were cancelled because of the strike.
This industrial unrest is taking place against the background of a steady
rise in French unemployment, adds Ian Davidson.
It reached a new peak of just over 2.9m last month in seasonally adjusted
figures, the Labour Ministry announced. The total, equal to 10 per cent of
the active population, is an increase of 0.5 per cent on the previous month
and 8.6 per cent on the year.
The stricter definition of the Geneva-based International Labour Office,
however, produces a smaller figure of just under 2.5m.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920701

