FT923-10945

FT  28 JUL 92 / The Lex Column: Too little, too late


The Japanese authorities have fallen into a classic trap facing governments
in their dealings with financial markets. Having raised false expectations
ahead of last Friday's emergency government meeting on the equity market,
they belatedly cut the discount rate to offset that disappointment. Had the
action come out of the blue it would have stood a better chance of
stabilising the market. Instead, it looked like a reluctant afterthought.
The Nikkei duly fell 1 per cent to another six-year low. It could have some
way further to fall before the authorities are ready to launch the more
vigorous support which investors demand.
The Japanese market is in a rather different situation from Wall Street's
last December, when the Fed rate cut prompted a stampede into equities. The
outlook for corporate earnings is bleaker, equities yield little more than 1
per cent and short-term money market rates are 4 per cent. Much lower
interest rates will be needed to restore confidence in the financial sector.
The government may even have to take on some of the burden of bad debts,
especially in the housing market.
Unfortunately, the yen has begun to fall in anticipation of yet lower
interest rates. This may be counterproductive for equities because it will
further weaken bank capital ratios and may well worsen protectionist
pressure against Japanese companies ahead of the US election. But continued
Bank of Japan intervention in support of the yen suggests ambivalence over
further interest rate cuts. A more serious mood of alarm may be necessary to
goad it into decisive action.
The message for the outside world is twofold. There is still plenty of room
for a little local difficulty in Japan to spill into the international
arena. But the Nikkei may be so low once corrective action is finally taken
that it will then rebound strongly, especially if Japanese companies have
also begun to understand that profit matters more than market share.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920728

