FT922-4019

FT  08 JUN 92 / Standard Chartered hopes rise for missing Pounds 200m:
Indian government takes powers to seize assets of fraud suspects


   By RICHARD WATERS and R C MURTHY


   BOMBAY


THE Indian government has given itself power to seize assets of brokers and
others suspected of fraud, boosting the chances of Standard Chartered and
other banks recovering much of the large sums owed to them.
On Saturday, the government passed an ordinance giving it power to seize
money diverted from the banking system as far back as April 1 1991. That
period covers dealings involving Standard Chartered, which the Indian
central bank says is owed Rs10.55bn (Pounds 202m).
The order will save the UK-based bank from having to pursue its claims
through the courts, which could take years.
The government also took powers to set up a special court to try allegations
of fraud and corruption in the Bombay stock market scandal. Irregular
securities trading, in which Mr Harshad Mehta, the Bombay broker, and others
raised large sums from banks for stock market manipulation, is at the heart
of India's worst financial scandal.
The 10 so far charged appeared in court in Bombay on Saturday and were
remanded in custody.
Mr S Venkitaraman, governor of India's central bank, said the scandal would
not slow the pace of liberalisation of India's financial markets, though it
had given ammunition to opponents of reform.
He said there was nothing he could have done to have prevented the Rs30.8bn
(Pounds 600m) fraud on the country's banking system, which has led to calls
for his resignation.
There had been frauds in several banks, including Standard Chartered, with
many deals not being reported to the bank's managers, he said.
'No central bank in the world has a policing system for that.'
Mr Venkitaraman said he had been aware of similar abuses a year ago, though
on a smaller scale, and had told banks then to make sure there were adequate
controls.
The governor has been criticised because two banks at the centre of the
fraud - State Bank of India and National Housing Bank - are owned by the
Reserve (central) Bank and have bank representatives on their boards. Mr
Venkitaraman said he had no direct control over the banks, but that the
government was responsible for appointing their top managers. 'I can neither
hire nor fire the management.'
The central bank's ownership of banks apparently involved in fraud has
caused concern in some quarters about its objectivity in investigating and
apportioning blame in the affair. It has put pressure on ANZ Grindlays,
through which some of the money was diverted, to set aside funds to repay
Rs4bn to the National Housing Bank.
While he denied that the Reserve Bank's main aim was to recover money for
its subsidiaries, Mr Venkitaraman said: 'There is a conflict because we put
in share capital. It is unfortunate.'
The central bank should not be represented on the boards of commercial banks
and there should be complete separation of ownership and regulation, he
said.
In the meantime, the Reserve Bank was confident that it would trace much of
the missing money.
'We know where the money has gone. We are acting on some leads, and are
still confident we will be able to recover assets.' He refused to say
whether provision made by Standard Chartered, which has set aside Pounds
50m, was adequate.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920608

