FT922-4541

FT  05 JUN 92 / Manx tax change planned to lift international appeal


   By SUE STUART


THE ISLE of Man plans to reform the taxation of companies owned by
non-residents that conduct business outside the island, in an attempt to
attract international holding companies.
About 4,000 companies are registered on the island as exempt companies. They
are owned and carry on business outside the island; they pay an annual fee
of Pounds 250 and are not taxed on profits. No island resident may have a
shareholding in such a company, but each company must have a Manx-resident
director and company secretary.
New legislation will extend the range of exempt companies to include
Manx-registered public companies. The Isle of Man treasury said that would
allow island residents to hold a limited number of shares, but emphasised:
'We will not allow any Manx resident to shelter income in these companies.'
The new category of international companies will pay a minimum tax charge
equivalent to the current annual fee. There will be flexibility to have a
specific rate of tax applied, up to 20 per cent, which the island's
authorities say may be more appropriate for an international corporation
with a fixed global tax policy.
The new laws will link with a reduction, announced in April, in maximum
capital duty from Pounds 50,000 to Pounds 5,000. The government hopes the
measures will increase the island's appeal to large international companies.
The government also hopes the measures will encourage Manx-registered
non-residents' companies to change status and become international
companies. The annual fee for the island's 9,500 non-resident companies was
increased by Pounds 50 to Pounds 500 last month.
Non-resident companies do not need local directors and company secretaries,
therefore they have little accountability to Manx authorities.
The new measures will be contained in an international companies bill which
is expected to be in force before the start of the next tax year.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920605

