FT921-15211

FT  11 JAN 92 / Travel: Why customers end up paying more - Does London offer
a fair deal on accommodation? Nicholas Lander and Michael Skapinker study
the controversy over room rates and VAT


   By MICHAEL SKAPINKER


THE Lanesborough, London's newest hotel, opened for business just before the
New Year, promising guests personal fax numbers and up to seven butlers on
each of the four floors to do everything from shopping to answering the
phone, writes Michael Skapinker.
The hotel, on the site of the old St George's hospital on Hyde Park Corner,
says it will charge Pounds 190 a night for a single room and Pounds 220 for
a double. In fact, guests (who can ask to be given the same fax number every
time they stay at the Lanesborough) will end up paying 17 1/2 per cent more
than that.
The Lanesborough, owned by the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and run by the
Rosewood Corporation of the US, does not include VAT in its quoted rates,
something which irritates hotels like those in the Savoy Group. The group,
which includes the Savoy, Claridge's and the Connaught, includes VAT and
service when telling guests how much they will be paying.
Peter Bates, the Savoy's sales and marketing director, admits there is
nothing illegal about companies excluding VAT from their quoted rates, but
he thinks customers have a right to know what the final bill will be. He
does not want to see London hotels going the way of those in US cities. He
recently stayed in a New York hotel which says it charges Dollars 200
(Pounds 109.80) a room. An innocent traveller, he says, would be upset to
discover that after the addition of Dollars 26.50 sales tax, Dollars 12 room
tax and Dollars 4 city room occupancy tax, the real cost per night, before
room service and phone calls, was Dollars 242.50.
The number of luxury hotels in London excluding VAT from quoted rates has
increased in the past year, Bates believes. The reason hotels exclude VAT,
he says, is so that they can persuade straitened companies that business
travel is cheaper than they think.
'People are trying to make their rates look more reasonable than they are,'
he says, adding that part of the reason for doing so is the recession and
the drop in the number of business travellers. In addition, the opening of
new London hotels such as the Lanesborough and the Langham Hilton has
boosted competition.
The Lanesborough denied it had anything so devious in mind. It claimed not
to be aware that other hotels quoted rates which included VAT. It said it
had 'no specific reason' for leaving VAT out.
Other luxury hotels in London have given the matter more thought and deny
there is an element of sharp practice in excluding VAT. Indeed, some argue
that it is the hotels which exclude VAT from the quoted rates which are
treating their guests more honestly. Customers have a right to know exactly
how much their rooms cost before the British taxman adds his 17 1/2 per
cent.
Ladbroke, which owns Hilton International, says that in the US it is common
to quote rates exclusive of local taxes. For that reason, when marketing the
Langham Hilton and the Hilton on Park Lane in the US, rates quoted are
VAT-exclusive. In the UK, customers are used to inclusive prices and
Ladbroke says that it includes VAT when quoting rates to British guests.
The Inn on the Park excludes VAT both for foreign and domestic customers. It
says this helps its predominantly foreign clientele in reclaiming the VAT
element in their bills. If customers want to know what the bill will be
after VAT, they can always work it out for themselves, the hotel says.
Paul Dicken, head of policy at the British Tourist Authority, sides with the
Savoy. 'The BTA would prefer it to be very clear to the consumer exactly
what he or she will end up paying,' he says.

The Financial Times


London Page XII Photograph A Japanese businessman in his London hotel room.
But is the VAT included or not? (Omitted).

920111

