FT923-15623

FT  01 JUL 92 / Collor rules out resignation over corruption claims


   By CHRISTINA LAMB


   BRASLIA


PRESIDENT Fernando Collor of Brazil made a desperate bid to hang on to power
last night with an impassioned address to the nation denying the mounting
charges of corruption which threaten to end his political career.
Appearing tearful but controlled, Mr Collor insisted: 'I will stay to the
end of my mandate, and those who think they can intimidate me with unjust
accusations are fooling themselves.'
His address was his third and most critical since the wave of allegations
against him was initiated by his younger brother a month ago. Yesterday's
20-minute speech came in response to claims that his household expenses are
being paid by Mr Paulo Cesar Farias, his campaign treasurer who is currently
under congressional inquiry for alleged extortion.
Mr Collor strongly denied the charges and insisted he had neither met nor
spoken to Mr Farias for almost two years.
'My government has nothing to hide,' he said, showing a statement from his
private secretary testifying that he had paid his own bills.
The president hit out at political opponents and 'vested interests' whose
privileges, he said, had been harmed by his modernisation programme. 'I was
elected by 35m votes and will not accept a fabricated crisis by those who
want power through non-democratic means.'
He warned 'with each rumour, each allegation, the dollar rises, the stock
market falls, people increase prices and the country loses. Those who lose
most are those with least.'
But with almost all his aides and family now named in the country's worst
corruption scandal, Mr Collor's position is becoming increasingly untenable.
Early reaction to his speech suggested it would not save him.
Folha de Sao Paulo, the leading opposition newspaper, carried yesterday a
front-page editorial demanding his resignation. Mr Eduardo Suplicy, a
senator from the Workers' party, said the country's stability depended on Mr
Collor quitting.
Several ministers are threatening to abandon the president. Mr Jose
Goldemberg, education minister, told reporters: 'The documents which are
appearing require an explanation.' Mr Pedro Luis Rodrigues, the presidential
spokesman, admitted Mr Collor's speech was mainly aimed at convincing the
ministers to stay.
The financial markets were calmer yesterday after Monday's 14.7 per cent
drop, rising 6.2 per cent by the close. However, one trader warned: 'This
does not indicate stability, but simply how much stocks have already
fallen.'
The central bank has had to sell more than Dollars 500m (Pounds 270.2m) in
reserves to prevent an explosion in the dollar rate.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920701

