FT924-11975

FT  23 OCT 92 / UK still out to lure Euro-bank: London's undimmed ambition


   By DAVID MARSH and PETER BRUCE


THE British government is maintaining its battle to bring the mooted
European central bank to London, in spite of sterling's exit last month from
the European exchange rate mechanism.
A plan to establish the European Monetary Institute (EMI) as the forerunner
to a European central bank will be high on the agenda today when EC treasury
and central bank officials meet in Berlin.
However, it was not clear last night whether the officials, gathering for an
informal session of the European monetary committee, will discuss the site
of the EMI. Under the Maastricht treaty, European governments intended to
decide the venue of the EMI by the end of this year, ready for it to come
into operation in 1994 in the second stage of economic and monetary union
(Emu).
This timetable has since been thrown into doubt by the uncertainties over
the fate of the treaty.
A spokesman for the British Treasury said last night that the UK was
sticking to its view that London would be the best possible site for the
operation of the EMI and, later, for the central bank itself. 'This remains
our view. . . We shall put it forward in all the appropriate fora,' the
spokesman said.
Britain will continue to play a part in discussions on Emu, despite its
forced departure from the ERM on September 16. But maintenance of the
Treasury's line backing London as the site for the EMI may attract growing
opposition, and possibly ridicule, from other EC countries.
Spain is expected to use today's meeting to make an active call for the EMI
to go into operation on time. It also wants the mooted institute to play a
stronger role in co-ordinating intervention in support of weaker currencies
in the ERM - a key part of overall Spanish arguments for reforms of the
exchange mechanism.
Mr Carlos Solchaga, the Spanish finance minister, proposed earlier this
month that ERM central banks pool their foreign exchange reserves to marshal
greater ammunition against currency speculators.
Other countries such as France have proposed in the past that the EMI manage
these reserves. This idea is, however, opposed by Germany and the
Netherlands, which want reserves to remain fundamentally under national
control.
Spain also wants agreement on intramarginal intervention - a pact between
ERM members that forces central banks to begin intervening before currencies
reach their ceilings or floors.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921023

