FT921-14257

FT  16 JAN 92 / Verdict in Papandreou corruption case today


   By KERIN HOPE


   ATHENS


MR Andreas Papandreou, the former socialist prime minister accused of
corruption, will not be in court today when a 13-member tribunal delivers a
verdict in what the Greeks call 'the mother of trials.'
Like the rest of the nation, Mr Papandreou will watch the proceedings live
on television. However, his main co-defendant, Mr Dimitris Tsovolas, the
former finance minister, has threatened to barricade himself inside
parliament and put up violent resistance if convicted.
According to legal analysts, there is little likelihood of Mr Papandreou
being found guilty of taking a bribe and receiving the proceeds of a crime.
The bribery charge collapsed early in the 10-month-long hearing when it was
revealed that a bank foreign exchange transfer of DM250,000 (Pounds 88,000),
allegedly used by Mr Papandreou to cover expenses arising from his
open-heart surgery in London in 1988, had no connection with the socialist
leader.
The second charge, that Mr Papandreou funded his Panhellenic Socialist
Movement (Pasok) with some of the Dollars 200m embezzled from the Bank of
Crete by its owner, Mr George Koskotas, was based on a document rejected as
a forgery by a team of graphologists.
However, a breach of faith charge against Mr Papandreou, holding him
responsible for the scandalous state of public finances during his
government's final days, could be upheld. Nobody in Greek political life
expects the 72-year-old ex-prime minister, whose health is frail, to be
jailed. But even a suspended sentence could revive the bitter political
divisions of the 1980s.
Mr Akis Tsochatzopoulos, Pasok's secretary general, yesterday ruled out the
possibility of violent political confrontation if the decision goes against
Mr Papandreou. He said: 'Pasok will voice its reaction in parliament and in
society in a constitutional way.'
Some prominent conservatives now admit the rush to prosecute Mr Papandreou
and three socialist former cabinet ministers was over-hasty. 'After eight
years of high-handed socialist rule, the conservative grass-roots were
baying for revenge,' said one.
Mr Papandreou's political future may be decided today. If convicted on
charges he steadfastly denies, Pasok supporters will forget their criticism
of his autocratic style of leadership and rally behind him. An acquittal,
even for lack of evidence, would close a chapter of Greek political life,
allowing a succession battle in Pasok to begin in earnest.

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Photograph Papandreou, denials (Omitted).

920116

