FT921-14341

FT  16 JAN 92 / UK News (Employment): Ex-offenders body poised to call in
receivers


   By LISA WOOD, Labour Staff


APEX TRUST, the training organisation for ex-offenders, announced yesterday
that it would have to call in receivers this week unless the government
stepped in to give it financial assistance.
Government intervention is unlikely because Mr Michael Howard, the
employment secretary, announced in the Commons yesterday that he had
instructed officials to contact those Training and Enterprise Councils which
had contracts with Apex to make alternative arrangements for Apex trainees.
Another voluntary training organisation, Fullemploy, which provides training
mainly for ethnic minorities, announced earlier this month that it was going
into liquidation.
Apex was set up 27 years ago and employs 150 staff in eight locations in the
UK. Each year it helps about 8,000 ex-offenders. Its difficulties have been
caused by a combination of cashflow shortfalls after the setting-up of Tecs,
which pay training providers in arrears, and muddles over government
payments.
The move by Tecs to arrears funding last year meant that Apex received no
funding from Tecs in April or May on contracts worth Pounds 700,000.
Then in January the Department of Employment asked for repayment of Pounds
250,000 which it said it had paid to Apex last year.
Apex had believed this money to be ex gratia, to tide it over contractual
changes in the number of training places it provided. The department said
the payment was made in error.
The crisis deepened when the Home Office cancelled its promise of core
funding of Pounds 250,000, as it could not be certain of Apex's solvency.
Since then, grants of a further Pounds 20,000 have been stopped by the Home
Office.
Mr Howard insisted that the decision to recover the Pounds 250,000 paid to
the Apex Trust 'in error' was not the critical element in its financial
difficulties. Mr Howard said the government had been prepared to consider
the repayment of the Pounds 250,000 'over a substantial period of time'.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920116

