FT923-10761

FT  29 JUL 92 / Arts: Don Giovanni - Festival d'Aix-en-Provence


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


TWO NEW productions and a revival provide the operatic fare at
Aix-en-Provence this summer, all three cast with singers of the first rank.
I will report later on Alfredo Arias' staging of The Rake's Progress as well
as on Robert Carsen's much lauded A Midsummer's Night Dream, brought back
from last year. The third offering is a Don Giovanni conducted by Armin
Jordan and expensively produced by Giorgio Marini, with Andreas Schmidt in
the title role.
An Aix regular assured me that there is always one safe production in the
repertory each year, something calculated not to shock or outrage any of the
local patrons; this year that is reckoned to be the Giovanni. To me it seems
not entirely inoffensive; but those with a low tolerance of dramatic boredom
or a dislike of bland musical superficiality would certainly have an
uncomfortable experience. Marini's direction plays the action absolutely
straight, with glossy 18th-century costumes and a minimum of extraneous
stage business.
The sets by Arduino Cantafora are the central interest: elaborately painted
flats of the buildings and grounds of a country estate ascend and descend
not only between scenes but regularly during them. There is much play with
beautifully detailed trompe l'oeil, a succession of false prosceniums and
with mysteriously divisive half-curtains, providing plentiful opportunities
for irrelevant peekaboo. The graveyard scene is presented behind a gauze
framed like a canvas on which is emblazoned a Magritte-style clockface,
which then retreats upstage for the final drama and its painfully tame
climax.
It is all innocuous enough, and in the end perfectly unobtrusive; there is
no imperative to worry at what it all means. But neither is there anything
in the direction of the singers that illuminates or informs. Certainly the
performances give no impression of detailed interpretation or a hint of
cogent dramatic planning - most of the protagonists could well have imported
their stock performances - and in the process the opera's strongest flavours
have been leached away.
First and foremost it is a determinedly unsexy Giovanni, so much so that
wonders what on earth he was doing with all those women listed in
Leporello's book - playing whist with them, perhaps? - and what he could
possibly have done to deserve his ultimate fate. Also it is a version of the
opera in which the element of class distinction has been totally obscured.
Zerlina and Masetto seem all of a piece with the others; even if he has some
oddly dressed friends, she appears all elegance and grace, at least the
social equal of the Anna and Elvira.
In part that all is a consequence of the casting, for though it is sung with
firm, solid tone and technique, Schmidt's Giovanni at the opera's heart is a
woefully uncharismatic figure, lacking humour, charm and even a flicker of
sensual appeal. The character exudes no qualities at all, even negative
ones, and against that utterly neutral background a Leporello as engaging as
Anton Scharinger's emerges all the sharper, providing the wit and quick
intelligence his master appears to lack. With the Anna (Hillevi Martinpelto)
and Ottavio (Herbet Lippert) costumed and bewigged like a rococo Tweedledum
and Tweedledee, and an Elvira (Patricia Schuman) much given to scarlet gowns
and obsessional wandering across the stage, the Zerlina of Marianne Roerholm
has much more chance to carve her own niche. She does it beautifully; though
the others sing with care and precision she is the only one to invest her
lines with any meaning, to synthesise personality and music point.
But none of the singers could have been helped by the conducting. Though
Jordan was very careful to make the English Chamber Orchestra in the pit
articulate every phrase with great precision, he did so at the expense of
any forward momentum or variation in dynamics. Some arias (Ottavio's pair
especially) almost ground to a halt; others were drilled out when they
should have at least hinted at sweet persuasion. It epitomised the whole
approach to the opera, a Don Giovanni lacking light and shade, any genuine
feeling of perspective rather than the succession of false ones paraded on
the stage.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920729

