FT923-10968

FT  28 JUL 92 / Management (The Growing Business): Problems pile up for
ageing owners / Investigation into the difficulties facing Mittelstand
companies


   By DAVID WALLER


The German Mittelstand - the 10,000 small- to medium-size businesses which
account for half of Germany's GNP - is in difficulties. Sales are likely to
shrink this year, the workforce is going to have to be reduced, wages are
too high, environmental regulations are too tough and, most serious of all,
they face succession problems as their owner-managers approach retirement
age.
These, at least, are the conclusions of a recent poll of 206 Mittelstand
companies conducted by the German arm of 3i, the UK investment capital
group.
Of these industrial companies, 44 per cent are predicting a fall in sales
during the present business year, compared to more than 70 per cent which
increased sales in 1991-92. More than half are planning to reduce the number
of employees, 44 per cent are going to cut back their capital investment and
a third expect a decline in profit.
Nearly half the managers polled were more than 50 years old and 13 per cent
were older than 60. In addition more than half had been running the business
for more than 10 years. The chief long-term worry of more than 90 per cent
of the total poll is management succession.
More than half of those polled do not have a stake in the business,
indicating that the owners have already moved on from day-to-day management.
The survey does not attempt to look at some of the more fundamental reasons
for the Mittelstand's troubles, which reflect, inter alia, increased
competition in certain sectors because of the single European market
programme (for example, in the transport sector) and the difficulties being
experienced by motor components manufacturers, many of which are coming
under intense pressure as car manufacturers strive to reduce their costs.
But from the venture capital industry's point of view, the results of the
survey are encouraging. The survey identifies a pool of experienced managers
who put a greater value on independence than on job security and money.
Surprisingly, given the conservatism of Germany in financial matters, many
of these managers are prepared to consider participating in a management
buy-out of the company at which they work - or even in a buy-in, buying
another company with the help of a financial institution such as 3i.
On the other side of the equation, owner-managers are increasingly prepared
to consider selling to management.
As Thomas Schlytter-Henrichsen, joint head of 3i's Frankfurt office, puts
it: 'The managers have achieved everything they want to achieve as managers
and want to become owners. The owners are prepared to sell to them.' There
is, though, a 'communications deficit', because the managers do not realise
that the owners may be prepared to sell. Hence a role for 3i in putting the
two parties together and financing the transaction.
It is not just 3i which is eager to participate in this potentially enormous
market: the German banks have their own venture capital subsidiaries and
increasing numbers of overseas venture capital houses are setting up in
Germany.
The trouble is that - in spite of the satisfactory results of the poll  - it
is a very slow process persuading the owner of a Mittelstand company to sell
to anyone, let alone his management. 3i has been in Frankfurt since the
middle of 1986 and has done only 23 deals in that time - fewer than five a
year.
In the meantime, the survey has picked out a new breed of German manager:
the relative youngster whose background is in finance rather than in
production and engineering.
Those rich inheritors who decided to work rather than going shopping are
showing signs of not wanting to get their hands dirty.
Copies of the report, Der Mittelstand und die Nachfolgeproblematik, can be
obtained from 3i Gesellschaft fur Industriebeteiligungen, Bockenheimer
Landstrasse 55, 6000 Frankfurt 1, Germany. Tel Frankfurt (069) 710000-0.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920728

