FT922-4137

FT  06 JUN 92 / Canary Wharf sale is prepared


   By VANESSA HOULDER, Property Correspondent


NO MORE than 'half a dozen serious players worldwide' would be interested in
rescuing Canary Wharf, according to the administrators of the Pounds 1.5bn
project in the London Docklands.
The administrators are putting together information needed by potential
purchasers about leases, construction contracts, the project's financial
structure and the costs of the promised contribution to the Jubilee Line
extension.
They were non-committal about the prospects of finding investors for the
project, which may face liquidation unless new funds are provided to pay
creditors and complete vital construction work.
'It is too early to say it will definitely go into liquidation,' said Mr
Nigel Hamilton, one of three administrators from Ernst & Young, the
accountancy firm appointed nine days ago. The decision to seek protection
against the project's creditors followed similar action in Canada by Olympia
& York, its parent company.
The administrators declined to discuss the nature, price or timing of
potential deals. Mr Hamilton said: 'It would be invidious to put a timescale
on negotiations.'
Unsecured creditors, including building contractors, are owed Pounds 50m,
the administrators disclosed. They put the total cost of the project at
Pounds 1.5bn.
At a meeting with the administrators on Thursday night, Lord Wakeham, who is
co-ordinating the government's response to Canary Wharf's administration,
told the administrators to negotiate directly with individual departments
about potential lettings to civil servants.
Lord Wakeham also confirmed the government's position that Olympia & York or
a purchaser of Canary Wharf should honour the agreement to contribute Pounds
400m to the extension of the Jubilee Line. Mr Stephen Adamson, one of the
administrators, said the meeting had been 'helpful'.
Mr Adamson said the importance of civil servants' to the project depended on
the amount and price of the space taken. 'It might be important; it might
not be,' he said.
In Canary Wharf's bank borrowings of just over Pounds 1.1bn, there are two
main facilities, a Pounds 570m loan from 11 international banks which is
secured on the project, and a Pounds 400m loan from four Canadian banks:
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Royal Bank of Canada, National Bank of
Canada and the Bank of Nova Scotia.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920606

