FT921-1308

FT  25 MAR 92 / Arts: Complete Works of William Shakespeare (Abridged)


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


This RSC production is so gloriously, relaxingly funny that it is especially
to be recommended during the British election campaign, from which it is so
different. It takes you through Shakespeare in two hours on the trot.
The RSC in question is not the Royal but the Reduced Shakespeare Company and
comes from California. Its abridged version of the complete works of the
bard has been around at the Edinburgh Festival and was seen briefly in
London at the Lilian Baylis Theatre in 1990. It looks better than ever at
the Arts.
The Complete Works (Abridged) is a pardonable title. Romeo and Juliet gets a
good 25 minutes: Hamlet occupies almost the whole of the second act. Between
them you have 16 comedies reduced to a five minute goulash and the history
plays treated as an American football match. As a famous historian wrote,
the crown of England in the pre-Tudor period had become a football, so the
analogy is apt: 'the quarterback passes to the hunchback'.
Antony and Cleopatra is set aside as one of Shakespeare's 'geopolitical'
plays. Troilus and Cressida is dismissed as obscure but, unlike Two Noble
Kinsmen, not bad. Titus Andronicus is cooked up as Titus Androgynous and
Coriolanus passed over because of dislike of the anus. There is a brief
reference to the 154 sonnets, a summary of which is threatened to be passed
round the entire audience. In one way or another, most of Shakespeare is
there.
Some of the jokes are not so much schoolboy ('Act 2' - 'Gesundheit') as
positively PhD - like the cutting of one of Hamlet's central soliloquies
'because it only shows the central weakness of the character'. Also, some
neat American playing with language - 'when the cock crew' (not crowed).
These clowns have erudition to their fingertips and can (and do) play Hamlet
backwards.
Apart from the wit, the triumph is in the exuberance of the playing. There
are only three performers: Jess Borgeson, Adam Long and Reed Martin.
Borgeson plays Hamlet and also the Shakespearean scholar whose ambition is
to see a copy of the complete works of the bard in every hotel room. Long
plays the girls' parts, like Juliet, with pantomime grace. Martin used to
work in a circus, does a genuine fire-eating act and plays a tune by tapping
his fingers on his jaw while the others are offstage.
The American ability to induce audience participation goes beyond the
English. Without the slightest hesitation, the right side of the stalls
agrees to incant 'Get thee to a nunnery', the left side 'Paint an inch
thick', while the people in the 'cheap seats' (ie the circle) let loose in
unison with 'Cut the crap, Hamlet. My biological clock is ticking and I want
babies now' as an answer to Ophelia's problems.
As one of the performers says on the second go of the audience joining in:
'That is much less than totally pathetic'. Typical Californian
understatement. I think it's terrific.
Arts Theatre W1 Box Office 071-836-2132

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920325

