FT924-6559

FT  20 NOV 92 / International Company News: A besieged industry draws up
plans for survival - Japanese houses have stopped hoping for a rapid return
to the free-spending of the late 1980s


   By ROBERT THOMSON


Daiwa Securities announced a net profit of zero for the first six months of
1992, cut its graduate intake by 40 per cent and launched a campaign for
staff to 'Do My Best' in encouraging investors to use the broker's services.
The reforms at Daiwa, one of the big four Japanese securities houses which
has just closed three sales offices, reflects the upheaval in a securities
industry which has begun to give up hopes for a rapid return to the
free-spending days of the late 1980s.
Instead, the pressure for branch closures and mergers of brokers intensifies
with each bad trading day.
Daily turnover of stocks on the Tokyo exchange this month is an average
180m, far below the 450m that marks whether most brokers make a profit or
loss.
The listless trading has added to woes of a first half in which not one of
the largest 14 brokers reported a net profit. Dramatic revival aside, the
figures for the full year will be far worse, as brokers will be forced to
write-off mounting losses on their stock portfolios.
In common with Daiwa, most companies are trimming workforces and pruning
executive salaries, but these cuts do not go deep enough, and over the next
two years, the crowded ranks of Japanese brokers will almost certainly be
thinned by mergers and closures.
Japanese houses are already lowering their international profile. Nomura,
the largest broker, has recently cut 35 staff from its London operations and
closed three European offices. The list of branch closures lengthens each
day: Okasan Securities has just shut its Frankfurt office; Sanyo Securities
has closed a Los Angeles operation; and Dai-Ichi Securities is leaving
Milan.
With so many brokers unable to lift themselves out of the red, the industry
wants a slowing of financial deregulation. Debate continues on an end to
fixed commissions and banks' entry into the investment trust market, both of
which would increase competition and put added pressure on weaker brokers.
'Slimming is our aim at the moment,' explained Mr Satoshi Matsumoto, head of
corporate planning at Kankaku Securities, which lost Y18.6bn (Dollars
149.6m) in the first half, following a Y18bn loss last year. 'We have to
accept that the market is not the same and try to make money at the new,
lower levels.'
In explaining the industry's plight, brokers agree they badly miscalculated
in the late 1980s, when daily stock turnover was an average 1.02bn. The
financial bubble was pumped ever larger, and brokers concluded that the
biggest problem was expanding rapidly enough to keep pace with the
irrepressible demand.
In the four years until the market peaked in December 1989, personnel at
Japanese brokers rose by 41.6 per cent. Desperate to open new branches, but
restricted by the Ministry of Finance, the brokers turned to now
unprofitable sub-branches or 'boutiques' in shopping malls, train stations
and department stores - these were limited in products offered but still
required heavy outlays in computer systems and rent.
Applications for full branches rose as rapidly as the Nikkei index - Kankaku
had nine approved by the ministry that will not open - and were still being
filed when the market began a 'temporary readjustment'. Three years later,
the brokers' most important sources of income are still evaporating and
their resources are nearing exhaustion.
A telling sign of the brokers' income shortage is the turnaround in public
share offerings. In 1989, there were 261 public offerings which raised a
total of Y6,257bn - so far this year, two companies have raised Y1.25bn, and
no public offerings were made during the fiscal first half from April to
September.
Stock and bond commissions, down 30 per cent in the first half, account for
about 60 per cent of income at the big four brokers, Nomura, Daiwa, Nikko
and Yamaichi. At the 10 second-tier companies, which reported first-half
losses ranging from Y3.8bn to Y18.9bn, commissions account for around 80 per
cent of revenue and as much as 95 per cent.
Brokers had hoped that a revival of the corporate bond market would increase
earnings. New issues rose from 33 in the second half last year to 40 in the
first half, but the market is still heavily regulated. There are strict
limits on the types of companies able to issue bonds and on the trading of
those bonds, and the only real relief for leading brokers has been increased
income from trading stocks on their own accounts.
Behind the falls in price and turnover on the Tokyo Stock Exchange is the
simple fact that few Japanese institutions or individuals have an incentive
to buy stocks. Life insurance companies and banks have their own financial
problems and are not keen to pump more money into low-yielding stocks,
particularly as many companies are cutting their dividends this year.
Individual investors are also shunning the market because scandals last year
raised doubts about the integrity of leading brokers, which admitted to
compensating corporate investors for stock losses. The TSE insists that the
industry has reformed, but brokers announced two weeks ago that they
compensated clients even after the spate of confessions, apologies and
resignations last summer.
In an attempt to stir interest in stocks, the TSE and finance ministry have
urged industrial companies to increase their dividend payments, and
discussed tax breaks for dividends and capital gains. The ministry this week
announced a relaxation of limits on employee share ownership programmes, but
the Nikkei market average was unmoved.
Mr Yukio Aida, chairman of Nomura Securities, said: 'These are very
difficult times,' and companies are restructuring for 'survival'. He said
'even Nomura' may not have the resources to bail out stricken smaller
brokers, which were heavily reliant on business from individual investors
and were particularly aggressive in expanding.
Comparisons are being drawn between the industry's reform and the
restructuring of Japanese banks, which are establishing a land and loan
purchase company to ease the heavy burden of non-performing assets. Banks
also have an understanding from the government that public funds may be used
if the crisis worsens, but the securities industry can expect no such public
assistance.
Just as the finance ministry is encouraging mergers to streamline the
banking system, ministry officials believe that the 264 brokers registered
with the Japan Securities Dealers' Association are far more than the country
can support. The difficulty is finding brokers wanting to expand their
networks through mergers and acquisitions of the more vulnerable houses.
For some brokers, traditional bank patrons are offering assistance. Dai-Ichi
Kangyo Bank, Japan's largest, is helping to overhaul Kankaku Securities,
while Sakura Bank has renegotiated loans at Yamatane Securities, which is
planning to cut management staff by 40 per cent.
If deregulation stays on track, the banks could use these connections to
expand their role in the securities industry, but little money will be made
in the near future. Kankaku 'hopes' to make a profit by March 1994, but says
much depends on the timing and strength of an economic recovery.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

921120

