FT921-15198

FT  11 JAN 92 / Books: Paris through Moslem eyes - From Nabokov to Tolkien,
the FT critics review the most interesting of the recently published volumes
of biography and memoir


   By GILLIAN TETT


A GIRL IN PARIS by Shusha Guppy Heinemann Pounds 14.99, 256 pages
BOOKS WHICH portray the Islamic world through the eyes of a Western
traveller are abundant. Books which do the reverse - looking at the West
through the eyes of a Moslem, Middle Eastern visitor - unfortunately are
not. So Susha Guppy's intriguing memoirs, A Girl In Paris, which tell of her
arrival in Paris in the 1950's as an Iranian student, provide a welcome and
fascinating read.
Torn from a strict Moslem home in Iran - a world vividly described in her
first book, The Blindfold Horse - Susha Guppy arrived alone in Paris at the
age of 17, speaking little French and painfully naive. The culture shock
must have been daunting. As she was thrown into the world of Parisian
student life, Communist politics, French theatre, and then, through a chance
encounter with Jacques Prevert, into a singing career, the Paris she
encountered was swirling with political, sexual and artistic freedoms.
Her accounts of these experiences remain deceptively self-effacing, written
with vividness and a welcome lack of pretension. Her observations on Paris
are not, in themselves, particularly novel, but it is the tales of the
people she encounters, many of whom, like her, are fellow 'wanderers' caught
between a range of cultures, which remain most compelling. A fluent story
teller, she travels through her memories as if she was flicking through a
family photo album, pausing as each new character is introduced to relate
their tale. We hear about the Jordanian Jamila's rejection of her society's
sexual code; her communist friend Jeanette's suicide over an ill-starred
love affair; the Iranian Miriam's secret drinking; her French singing
teacher's attempts to build a fantasy operatic world; her encounters with
Camus and Prevert.
It is a collection shot through with both humour and melancholy. One is left
with the feeling that Susha Guppy is The One Who Got Away - escaping
unscathed not only from the repressions of Iranian life but also from the
West's political and moral confusions. The fact that she has managed to
write of her 'escape' with such humour and wisdom is a commendable
achievement.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920111

