FT924-8036

FT  13 NOV 92 / Management: Juggling careers in the jobs circus - Why
skilled 'knowledge' workers are best placed to succeed in the 1990s


   By CATHERINE MILTON


Highly skilled 'knowledge' workers will be well-placed to win the small
number of new jobs with prospects in the UK during the rest of this decade.
They will be the survivors as people struggle to avoid seeping into the pool
of temporary and less-skilled workers in the labour market of the 1990s.
The research, conducted by Professor Amin Rajan and published by the
Institute of Careers Guidance and the Create employment consultancy,
concludes that the scale of new job creation after the recession will be
small. About 1.9m new jobs will be created in value-added service
occupations, at a time when 1.2m blue-collar jobs will go.
The report* suggests the trend for employers to retain a small core
workforce complemented by a temporary periphery staff with limited prospects
will become even more pronounced.
Skilled knowledge workers at all levels in workplace hierarchies will
benefit from this shift at the expense of the less-well trained.
But knowledge workers, the product of the second industrial revolution, are
far from ideal employees. Their typically attractive higher-level
qualifications and impressive work experience will be frequently offset by
'a high sense of self-worth, individualism, autonomy and enterprise - almost
prima donnas - that make them difficult to manage'.
Worse still for employers, these people are unlikely to consider loyalty to
an organisation as important as loyalty to their 'craft' and will move jobs
without compunction in search of greater job satisfaction or more money.
Even the most skilled worker is, however, unlikely to survive in the
workplace of the 1990s without a talent for juggling 'multiple careers' and
a commitment to continuous training.
This is because of the link between flexible working and competitiveness.
The trend towards teams providing customised services for particular markets
will mean those who cannot offer multiple skills will be marginalised in the
labour market.
The new jobs are expected to be created in four groups of service
industries: more than 240,000 will come from hotel and catering; 400,000
from business services; 650,000 from other services and 670,000-plus from
health, education and other public services.
About 200,000 jobs are likely to be shed in primary industries and utilities
(for example, agriculture, oil and gas) and about 1m across manufacturing,
except motor vehicles. Engineering is expected to lose about 250,000 jobs
from a base of 2.4m in 1990.
The shift towards white-collar work will favour women in particular, as will
the increase expected in part-time working. Self-employment among both sexes
is expected to increase slightly. But the report says: 'This does not
necessarily imply that the constraints that have hitherto hindered the
upward mobility of women in managerial and professional work will weaken.'
The research suggests employers will keep alive gender stereotypes which
have contributed to the segregation of women into jobs with relatively low
pay and status, at least in industries providing 'personal services' such as
hairdressing and hotels.
The report says that five broad occupational groups will grow: technicians,
multi-skilled craftworkers, secretarial (part-time), junior clericals
(part-time) as well as health and welfare professionals.
Above all, success means staying one step ahead of the market because 'the
expanding occupations in this decade may well be the contracting ones in the
next: who knows]'
*1990s: Where Will the New Jobs Be? Institute of Careers Guidance, 27A Lower
High Street, Stourbridge, West Midlands, DY8 1TA; and Centre for Research in
Employment and Technology in Europe, 2 Holly Hill, Vauxhall Lane,
Southborough, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, TN4 OXD. Price Pounds 12.50.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921113

