FT921-3800

FT  12 MAR 92 / Terms agreed in sale of BTG to managers


   By CLIVE COOKSON, Science Editor


THE government yesterday concluded one of the final privatisation deals
before the general election by agreeing as expected to sell the British
Technology Group to a management-led consortium.
The group is paying an initial Pounds 27.75m for the technology-transfer
organisation. It will make further payments over the next five years if
BTG's net income from patent royalties exceeds a base level agreed with the
Department of Trade and Industry.
The deferred payments could reach several million pounds if some of the
inventions in BTG's portfolio - ranging from drugs to a continuously
variable transmission system for cars - are successful.
BTG management and staff will participate in the company directly through
individual share subscriptions and indirectly through an employee trust
which will acquire up to 26 per cent of the share capital.
Apart from the trust, no member of the consortium will own more than 15 per
cent.
The consortium includes 10 UK financial institutions, with CIN Venture
Managers, the venture-capital arm of the British Coal pension fund, as lead
investor.
In addition, 12 UK universities will take a stake of up to 5 per cent in BTG
under the aegis of the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals. The
only non-UK investor is Anvar, a technology-transfer organisation owned by
the French government.
Announcing the sale, Mr Peter Lilley, trade and industry secretary, said:
'The government is convinced that the consortium offers the best prospect
that BTG's present activities will be continued as an independent
organisation.'
The government had also negotiated with a UK-US group chaired by Mr John
Ashworth, director of the London School of Economics, with Research
Corporation Technologies of the US as lead investor.
It is believed that the rival consortia offered similar initial payments,
with the UK-US group promising larger performance-related payments for the
future.
But the government rejected the rival bid largely because it was not
satisfied that it would keep BTG independent in the long run.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920312

