FT922-13380

FT  11 APR 92 / PM plans radical reshuffle


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR will today radically reshape his government in the wake of a
spectacular general election victory which gave him a personal mandate from
the voters and guaranteed the Conservatives an historic fourth term in
office.
As the final results confounded all the predictions of the opinion polls to
give him a 21-seat overall majority, the prime minister prepared to put his
personal stamp on the new administration with a large-scale cabinet
reshuffle.
The Conservative victory celebrations were mirrored by the an agonising
post-mortem by Labour which is expected to lead to Mr Neil Kinnock's
resignation as party leader. Mr Paddy Ashdown blamed a slump in support for
the Liberal Democrats on a last-minute flight of supporters to the
Conservatives because of their fear of a Labour government.
Senior figures on all sides agreed that the key to Mr Major's victory had
been his strong personal standing alongside powerful fears among voters that
Labour's tax and economic policies would hit incomes and prolong the
recession.
Mr Kenneth Baker, home secretary, Mr Tom King, defence secretary, and Mr
Peter Lilley, trade and industry secretary, were among those tipped last
night to be among the casualties of a reshuffle.
Among those likely to be rewarded with a more prominent role were Mr Michael
Heseltine, environment secretary, Mr Kenneth Clarke, education secretary and
Mr David Mellor, chief secretary to the Treasury. Mr Major is expected to
promote a woman to the cabinet, giving the department of employment to Mrs
Gillian Shepherd or Baroness Emily Blatch. There was uncertainty over
whether Mr Norman Lamont would remain as chancellor or whether he would be
offered another senior post at the Home Office or defence.
Mr Major's task was complicated by the defeat in Bath of Mr Chris Patten,
the Conservative party chairman. The prime minister is determined that Mr
Patten - the most senior of eight ministers to lose their seats - should
retain a prominent role in shaping his government's programme.
The reshuffle, which will underline the prime minister's break with Mrs
Margaret Thatcher, will be accompanied by the most radical shake-up of
Whitehall responsibilities since the early 1970s. Two cabinet posts are to
be created, the department of energy abolished and several departments will
see some of their responsibilities transferred. The Treasury will take over
the Trade and Industry Department's responsibility for regulation of the
financial services industry.
Speaking at a victory celebration in Downing Street, Mr Major repeated a
promise, first given when he replaced Mrs Thatcher as party leader, to work
towards the creation of a classless society 'at ease with itself'.
ELECTION 1992
Personal mandate delights Major
Voters follow same pattern across country Pages 4-9
Results in full Pages 10-13
Features Pages 16-17
Editorial comment Page 16

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920411

