FT922-4260

FT  06 JUN 92 / International Company News: BP of America to sell assets


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN and NEIL BUCKLEY


   LONDON


BP OF America plans to sell more than 300 petrol stations and two
distribution terminals in California and Florida as the company continues to
dispose of North American assets.
The US subsidiary of the UK energy group - which is based in Cleveland, Ohio
 -cited poor industry conditions and a lower-than-expected market share in
Florida and California as reasons for its withdrawal from these states.
Analysts in London said the move represented an important turnround in
British Petroleum's US strategy of building up its west coast network of
filling stations.
At the group level, where total debt amounts to Pounds 8.56bn (Dollars
15.5bn), BP has embarked on a wide-ranging series of cost reduction
measures.
The company did not disclose the expected value of proceeds from it US
disposals, which come less than a month after BP raised Dollars 314m by
selling off its 56.94 per cent shareholding in BP Canada.
Bid packages for the Florida and California assets were distributed to
potential buyers last month.
BP's US operations still include five refineries, 7,500 petrol stations and
a number of truck stop outlets. BP America had 1991 revenues of Pounds 9.3bn
and a total workforce of 35,600 as of the end of 1991.
The assets being sold include 152 owned and leased petrol stations in
Florida plus one distribution terminal there. In California some 158 petrol
stations and another distribution terminal are to be sold.
Among those who will be affected by the BP withdrawal are independent
dealers and jobbers who operate under the BP brand name in the areas.
BP stressed that the move did not mean it would 'absolutely withdraw from
these markets'. It said the assets had been identified as non-core to BP's
marketing business.
In a separate development, BP Oil, the Cleveland-based company that is
selling the Florida and California assets, yesterday said Mr John McDonald,
president, would resign on September 1 to concentrate on charity work and
'to pursue an interest in higher education'.
Mr McDonald will be succeeded by Mr Steven Percy, a 16-year veteran of the
parent who is presently group treasurer of British Petroleum and chief
executive of BP Finance International in London.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920606

