FT923-6600

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: Going Dutch in the Gallery - Low Countries paintings


   By PATRICIA MORISON


IN past times, 'Seventy-Six Notable Paintings of the Dutch Golden Age' could
have served as the title for the National Gallery of Scotland's beautiful
exhibition. What you will see - hung rather too densely for comfort - is a
feast of paintings by Rembrandt, Hals, Cuyp, Saenredam, Ruisdael, Steen, and
de Hooch, plus a host of other Dutch 17th Century masters.
Such an over-stuffed exhibition demands several visits. Upstairs, too, there
is a subsidiary display showing Dutch artists' influence on Scottish
painters such as Sir David Wilkie and on miscellaneous other artists in the
Gallery.
But however many visits you make, it would surely be impossible to part
without a pang from two inexpressibly poetic late landscapes by Jacob van
Ruisdael, A View of Haarlem from the Bleaching Grounds and A Distant View of
Alkmaar. They belong to the Earl of Wemyss and March and have not been
publicly exhibited since 1957.
Given all that, one might ask whether there could be anything much wrong
with Dutch Art and Scotland: A Reflection of Taste. But the flabby title
hints at a fundamental problem with the way the show has been conceived -
even though visitors can perfectly well ignore it and simply concentrate on
enjoying the pictures.
The difficulty comes from the so-called relevance of these masterpieces to
Scotland. Plugging Scotland obviously makes sense politically and as a
marketing ploy. Edinburgh must be one of the only public galleries in the
world where guards wear national costume, namely those fetching tartan trews
 -also sported at the show's opening by the director, Mr Timothy Clifford.
But who can really think it matters that all these masterpieces have at one
time or another been owned by Scots? Or rather, to be absolutely accurate,
nearly all of them. One that was not, Domenicus Van Wijnen's hallucinatory
Temptation of St Anthony was for a period kept in Scotland by Arthur Kay, an
English Edwardian collector with a passion for Scotland. Eventually, he gave
this exceedingly peculiar picture to the National Gallery of Ireland.
Almost the first painting in the exhibition is Daniel Mytens's full-length
portrait of the third Marquis of Hamilton, resplendent in silver-grey silk,
painted in the 1620s when Mytens was in England. Tracing the many
connections between wealthy Scottish connoisseurs and contemporary Dutch art
of the 17th and 18th Century really does add up to something.
In fact, it could be the beginnings of a rather fascinating sideline to the
Festival if you tracked down other Dutch artists active in independent
Scotland, for example at Holyrood Palace in Edinburgh and Hopetoun House,
the spectacular house just outside the city which Festival-goers ought to
put on their maps.
A diligent catalogue points out that in the 17th and 18th centuries there
were particularly close and fruitful links between Scotland and the
Netherlands. Here were two small countries with an expertise in banking, an
intellectual passion for Roman law, shared Calvinist convictions (hence, it
is claimed, Scottish patrons particularly appreciated moralising Dutch
pictures), and a passion for golf.
For that period, at least, the theme of Scots-Dutch cultural relations works
fine. But things become far more tenuous in the case of figures who did not
buy Dutch art, but merely inherited it.
One notable case is the Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry, who in the
late-18th century acquired superb Dutch paintings by marriage to the heiress
of the Northamptonshire family of Montagu. (By the way, another outing well
worth making is to Boughton House at Kettering, the superb house and
art-collection of the Dukes of Buccleuch, open on August afternoons.)
From another Buccleuch house, Drumlanrig Castle, comes the most beautiful of
the cabinet paintings in the exhibition, a Wooded Landscape by Moonlight by
Van der Neer, and also two paintings which were sold this century:
Rembrandt's celebrated Flora, lent by the National Gallery in London, and
the late Self-Portrait of 1659, now in Washington.
But do such ins and outs of provenance really add up to very much?
Sometimes, admittedly, they can be piquant. One of my favourite paintings in
the exhibition is a large Cuyp, The Riding Lesson, which shows gentlemen
schooling their horses on a golden afternoon. Now in Toledo, Ohio, it was
looted from the Rothschilds for that assiduous non-Scottish collector,
Hermann Goering.
There are 10 Rembrandts - or nearly Rembrandts depending on your view of
recent de-attributions - in the exhibition, including Titus at his Desk from
Rotterdam and the Queen's An Old Woman, both recently exhibited in London,
so it is nice they have now travelled north.
Five of these great paintings belong to Scottish public collections; the
famous Self Portrait aged 51 has been on loan from the Dukes of Sutherland
to the Gallery in Edinburgh since 1946. The famous Woman in Bed came to the
Gallery thanks to William MacEwan of the brewing dynasty. In the 1880s,
depressed that Scotland could boast no Rembrandt on public view, he
presented the Trustees with Pounds 5,000 and told them to buy the first
decent Rembrandt which came on the market. Now there is a case of patriotism
and taste - a moral example to modern magnates, north and south of the
Border.
Sponsored by Scottish Equitable, at the National Gallery of Scotland until
October 18 1992

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920822

