FT922-4318

FT  05 JUN 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Golden Road back on Uzbekistan
trade map - One of the former Soviet Union's leading gold producing regions


   By LAURA LE CORNU


THE ANCIENT Golden Road, one of the east-west trade routes across Central
Asia until the 16th century, is back on the trade map for profit takers.
Competition for gold reserves buried under the dusty steppes of the
Zerafshan valley in the former Soviet Republic of Uzbekistan has begun.
The Central Asian republic is supplying nearly a third of all production
since the collapse of the union. Uzbekistan assumed control of its own gold
in September last year, ending Russian domination of its rich mineral
resources since the 18th century.
The republic signed a joint venture agreement for gold production with the
US Newmont Mining Corporation in March.
The Dollars 75m venture marks the first foreign investment in its gold
industry, which produces about 70 tonnes annually. The Denver-based US
mining company aims to process about 10 tonnes of gold this year.
'We are highly developed in the field of mining, foreign investment has not
been necessary before,' said Mr Sadiq Safayev, first deputy at the Foreign
Affairs Ministry. 'But we have sought Western assistance for this particular
field of extraction.'
The republic is moving to encourage Western investment in order to develop
its backward industrial base. Under legislation introduced last year,
foreign investors are entitled to a two-year tax holiday, and free
repatriation of hard currency.
Gold is not the only resource the republic possesses; it is poised to make a
major impact on world commodity markets with its cotton production, and
following a large oil blow-out in March, will soon have its own crude.
Gold, however, tops the list and is far more easily transported from the
land-locked republic, which is at the mercy of the freight problems plaguing
the Commonwealth of Independent States following the breakdown of the old
Soviet networks.
'Uzbekistan's richest resource is gold', says Mr Valeri Nicholayaivich,
director of the republic's gold refinery at Zerafshan, where the ore
extracted from the nearby Besapan mine is processed. 'It will definitely
help Uzbekistan to pull out of the economic chaos now paralysing the former
Soviet republics.'
Yet a life-size portrait of Lenin still stands tall at the 25-year-old
refinery complex, located in the Kyzyl Kum (Red Sand) desert, 25 km (15
miles) outside the town, where the modern quarter, predominantly populated
by ethnic Russians, was created in the early 1960s to support the gold
mining industry.
More than 3,000 employees, an ethnic mix of nearly 70 nationalities,
including Uzbeks, Russians, Kazaks and Khirgiz, are employed at the
refinery.
'Under the Soviets, high salaries were offered to people to work here. This
is why I came,' said Mr Nicholayaivich, a Ukranian mining engineer, who
began working at the refinery almost as soon as it was commissioned.
'If you work hard, then the economy will thrive', reads a Russian language
sign, which hangs outside the building, sealed off to outsiders, where the
final stage of gold refining process takes place.
Pointing to a conveyor belt sprawling up the hillside of the mine, Mr
Nicholayaivich says modern Soviet-made technology and equipment are utilised
at Besapan. Moscow paid about 5 roubles for a gram of gold, compared with
about Dollars 12 on the world market.
Mr Nicholayaivich says gold reserves have been discovered in three nearby
areas in Murutau valley. 'I am sure if the government provides the necessary
technology, we shall be one of the greatest gold producers in the world,' he
claims.
Indeed, Uzbek officials are reluctant to reveal statistics of total gold
reserves, which they say are 'state secrets'. Yet, the authorities stress
the high quality of the republic's output. According to Mr Nicholayaivich:
'It is the purest, consisting of 99.999 per cent pure gold.'

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920605

