FT921-3733

FT  12 MAR 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: Brazilian coffee exporters
favour return of quotas


   By CHRISTINA LAMB and DAVID BLACKWELL


   RIO DE JANEIRO, LONDON


WORLD COFFEE markets rose sharply yesterday in response to the radical
reversal of position by Brazil's coffee exporters, who late on Tuesday night
ended their opposition to export quotas, paving the way for a new
international coffee agreement.
The May robusta contract on the London Futures and Options Exchange (Fox)
touched a high of Dollars 875 in early trading before closing at Dollars
858, up Dollars 26 on the day. Two weeks ago the May contract plumbed a
17-year low of Dollars 787 a tonne.
The May arabica contract in New York opened more than 3 cents ahead before
easing to 72.70 cents a lb, up 1.85 cents, at midday.
The Brazilian decision - taken after a tense meeting of 40 leading exporters
 -comes after intense diplomatic pressure on the country to come up with a
proposal before the next meeting of the International Coffee Organisation in
London on April 3. Last week a meeting of other Latin American producers
claimed they had lost Dollars 6bn in export revenues since the ICO export
quota system collapsed in July 1989; they said they would be seeking support
from Brazil, the world's biggest exporter.
Mr Oswaldo Aranha Neto, President of the Brazilian Coffee Exporters
Federation (Febec), said yesterday that Febec had decided to examine various
mechanisms for lifting prices and these might include a return to quotas.
Febec had decided to drop its steadfast resistance to quotas and a new
international agreement after seeing the worsening situation of growers,
many of whom are abandoning coffee cultivation because of falling prices.
Coffee prices have almost halved since the last agreement was broken in
1989. 'Our absolute priority is an increase in international prices and for
this Febec has to sacrifice some ideals,' he explained.
Mr Aranha played down the shift in Febec's position, stressing that
willingness to negotiate did not necessarily mean an acceptance of the quota
system, which he said 'had never benefited Brazil in the past'. But one
local trader described it as 'the demolition of the Berlin Wall of the
coffee world'.
The Brazilian Coffee Council, which brings together growers and exporters,
will now meet to agree on a joint position to be presented to the Brazilian
government. It will then decide whether to formulate a specific proposal at
next month's ICO meeting.
It is not yet clear whether the government will drop its resistance to
quotas. One Rio-based coffee trader commented: 'Febec has finally accepted
that Brazil was gaining nothing by sitting on the fence and refusing to
negotiate. It will be hard for the government to ignore such a clear
signal'.
Mr Lawrence Eagles, analyst with GNI, the London futures brokers, said the
exporters had been forced to reverse their position. 'They realised that
given the level of prices and the political climate they could no longer
resist.'
The news was 'very positive' for a coffee agreement, he said. 'It removes
the last major obstacle to negotiate an accord.'

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920312

