FT921-14203

FT  17 JAN 92 / Health care gaffe shows up Buchanan


   By LIONEL BARBER


   CONCORD, NEW HAMPSHIRE


MR PATRICK Buchanan, the right-wing challenger to President George Bush for
the Republican presidential nomination this year, made a big gaffe on health
care policy yesterday, telling a group of pensioners he was so wealthy he
did not have to bother about health insurance.
The television commentator and former speechwriter to presidents Nixon and
Reagan, complained that the present US health-care system was suffering from
excessive bureaucracy, waste and form-filling. 'When I go to the doctor -
and I am a wealthy man - these (insurance) forms are so complex I can't fill
them out. I just tell my wife: 'Send them a cheque'.'
Mr Buchanan was addressing more than 150 members of the American Association
of Retired Persons in an event billed as a chance for him to outline his
policy for health care reform.
The response in the audience was hostile. Several pensioners said Mr
Buchanan had confused private insurance company forms with federal
government programmes such as Medicare.
Earlier, he had delivered a blistering attack on Mr Bush for having broken
his pledge to impose no new taxes, which rescued the president's faltering
for election campaign in 1988. Mr Bush faces his first campaign test in the
New Hampshire primary contest against Mr Buchanan next month.
The president, who had visited New Hampshire on Wednesday, said he would
unveil a wide-ranging health care plan in his State of the Union address
this month. One proposal under review is to offer health care tax credits to
low-income groups and the uninsured.
Mr Buchanan said he favoured tax credits and opposed a nationalised health
system, such as that in Britain. 'The doctor-patient relationship
disappears,' he said, referring to the UK. 'You have bureaucrats dealing
with bureaucrats.' He also said US medical technology was far superior to
Britain's.
His main theme is 'America first'. He repeated his attacks on foreign aid
and on defence spending abroad, saying countries such as Germany should
defend themselves. 'Can't the Germans defend Munich? I mean, their tradition
is not wholly pacifist.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7 Photograph Pat Buchanan (left), a self-confessed wealthy man
on the stump, meets one of the older New Hampshire voters (Omitted).

920117

