FT922-557

FT  26 JUN 92 / When toughness is not enough: The background to the
resignation of Bob Horton, BP chairman


   By IAN HARGREAVES


From his earliest days as a senior British Petroleum manager, Mr Bob Horton
talked tough and acted tougher. His tenures in charge, first of oil tankers,
chemicals and then Standard Oil of Ohio, BP's biggest US investment, all
involved ambitious reshapings, loud communication and fewer jobs.
Yesterday Mr Horton found that toughness was not enough to ensure a
continued hold on his lifetime's ambition - the chair of BP.
Mr Horton joined the company as a sponsored student at university in 1957 -
four years before his quieter, more tactful arch-rival, Mr David Simon, who
is as understated as Mr Horton is larger than life. It was Mr Simon who
yesterday carried off the chief executive's title.
Throughout his career, Mr Horton succeeded in some extremely difficult jobs.
His already abrasive style was given further edge during his period at the
head of BP's North American operations. When he first arrived in Cleveland
in 1986, at what was the headquarters of Standard Oil of Ohio, Mr Horton
called a meeting of senior staff and told them that times were hard and that
some would lose their jobs.
He then drastically changed the senior management, bringing on younger and
more vigorous men, something which was a Horton hallmark throughout his
career. In spite of these extensive sackings, Mr Horton was respected and
even liked by many of the old Standard men - at least those who survived the
purge.
His straight talking, his unconcealed ambition and determination to shake a
moribund organisation back into life appealed to the American sense of what
a big company chairman should be like.
Always keenly interested in politics - Mr Horton has been known to suggest
that an alternative career path might have taken in 10 Downing Street - he
was also assiduous in cultivating American civic leaders. He wanted to show
that under new management Standard would be a 'good citizen' and that he
would be a social asset.
He was clever too in cultivating the investment community, with frequent
visits to Wall Street, where his relative openness and feisty good humour
were well received.
On his return to the UK, however, these qualities were less welcomed among
British colleagues. Even in a company which cultivates and prizes ambition,
Mr Horton was seen as pushy and insensitive.
In judging Mr Horton's leadership of BP, it is impossible to avoid these
questions of personality, because Mr Horton made them an issue.
As someone who had spent more than three decades inside one of the most
bureaucratic industrial corporations in the world, Mr Horton came to the top
job in 1990 with a revolutionary manifesto in hand.
Project 1990 contained his proposals to transform a sluggish,
committee-driven corporate system into one capable of discovering and
releasing the entrepreneurial talents of BP's managers - what he called 'the
corporate equivalent of perestroika and glasnost'.
His aim was to shake a culture born in the happy alliance of British
imperial greatness and the handsome fortunes of the oil industry in most of
the four decades which followed the war.
There were many, both inside and outside the company, who agreed that this
was indeed the necessary and urgent focus for BP. It had spent its way
foolishly into copper, coal and some other non-oil businesses in the 1970s,
until Mr Horton's predecessor Sir Peter Walters had, with Mr Horton's close
support, forced BP to lurch back to base.
The BP Mr Horton inherited in 1990 was built around oil exploration, oil
refining, chemicals and animal feeds. Since then BP has indicated its
willingness to sell the feeds business and would probably, in the unlikely
eventuality of there being a bidder, pull back in chemicals too.
But essentially, Mr Horton was able to take the view that the big sectoral
adjustments had been made. What he said he wanted was a company capable of
responding more sharply and flexibly to the marketing challenges in
downstream oil and chemicals and executives more capable of delivering that
most elusive but indispensable of oil company assets: the ability to find
oil.
As it has turned out, all of this has taken place against the background of
weak demand, anaemic oil prices and high real interest rates. These were
particularly onerous because BP's debt has risen steeply - partly because,
just before Mr Horton took over, it bought back shares which the Kuwait
Investment Office had acquired in 1987 when the UK government's sale of its
BP stake coincided with the stock market crash.
It has been against this trying background that Mr Horton has launched
Project 1990 and tried to make it work.
Project 1990 was spurred by a questionnaire sent to 150 top managers in 1989
and later to 4,000 lower-level employees. It revealed widespread ignorance
of BP's strategy and some fierce criticism of the multi-tiered committee and
review system, which many felt institutionalised second-guessing in a
damaging way. BP head office alone had 86 committees. Mr Horton told his
colleagues: 'You have one principal task - remove them] If in doubt,
eliminate.'
The executive power of the old divisional managing directors was to be shorn
away and the corporate centre scaled back from 540 people to 380. BP's
payroll, down from 128,000 to 115,000 between 1988 and 1991, would shrink
further.
At the same time the company would concentrate on fewer geographical
groupings, building 'a truly transnational corporation', he told his first
shareholders' meeting. 'People will be expected to take decisions themselves
rather than through committees.
All of this was accompanied by a proclamation of values, such as 'openness,
care, teamwork, empowerment and trust'. Sceptics charged that Mr Horton had
merely swallowed the avant-garde manager's dictionary. Others argued that he
was bringing the latest business school thinking to bear on the toughest
kind of management problem.
It was an expensive programme - thought to have cost more than Pounds 20m -
with its workshops, communications and training programmes and transformed
view of 'human resource' management in the company. The theory was that
information would flow, managers would feel compelled to 'own' problems and
be 'empowered' to do something about them. BP summed up the aim as: 'to cut
the cost of complexity'.
Inevitably, an attack on corporate baronies, revised job descriptions and
job losses produced resistance and bitterness. This reflected itself in an
outbreak of samizdat anti-Horton satire within the company, of a kind
familiar to other bureaucracies facing rapid and unwelcome change.
Last December, the FT profiled Mr Horton in his new office in BP's
splendidly refurbished headquarters. Before long, photocopies of the
article, with completely rewritten text, were circulating. 'The centrepiece
is a huge chair' it said, 'raised on a stepped platform. Horton greets me
and motions me to a seat on one of the lowers steps. 'I designed it myself.
It's modelled on Napoleon's throne.''
Before that, an un-named senior executive had expressed doubts about whether
the autocratic and quick-tempered Mr Horton himself could live by the value
system he had proclaimed. 'Do we really think Bob is going to stop
second-guessing his top colleagues? That's the only way all this change will
work.'
Or to quote another executive: 'The character of the man is to direct
strongly - he instinctively wants to be seen as hands-on. But he also wants
to be seen as an innovative leader.'
The word from the palace revolutionaries yesterday was that Project 1990 and
the trek towards a new culture continues. BP has decided that Mr Horton was
part of the problem, not part of the solution.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920626

