FT923-10765

FT  29 JUL 92 / Business and the Environment: Mosquito Coast bites
developers back - How secrecy and lack of guarantees sabotaged a Honduran
forest project


   By IAN WALKER


Want a lesson on how not to manage an environmentally sensitive investment
in the American tropics? Take a leaf out of Stone Container's Honduras
casebook.
At the end of February, the head of the Honduran Forestry Corporation,
Porfirio Lobo, abandoned a controversial plan to cede 216,000 hectares of
pine forest bordering the River Platano Reserve in La Mosquitia (of
'Mosquito Coast' fame) to the big Chicago-based paper company.
For Gustavo Morales, Stone's Honduran representative, formerly a senior
adviser to Lobo, the cancellation brought a mixture of disappointment and
relief. 'It saddens me, because the opposition told a lot of lies, and it
was a good deal for Honduras.' On the other hand, after he appeared on
television supporting the proposal, he received death threats from a
guerrilla group, and had to have his children escorted to school by armed
guards.
The architects of the deal - originally conceived in mid-1991 with the
personal support of Honduran president, Rafael Callejas - had been taken by
surprise by the passion and scope of local opposition to it.
The opposition was led by environmentalists, who were concerned about the
deforestation and erosion linked to logging. They were worried too about the
future of the River Platano Reserve, an area of broad-leaved forest defined
as a site of world importance. They had support from US and European
campaigners, who picketed Stone's offices, aiming to mar the company's
promotion of a clean image which was largely based on its recycling activity
in the US.
Although no industrial plant was planned for La Mosquitia, reports that
Stone's Florida paper plants had been fined for effluent violations set
heads nodding in Honduras, where plans to dispose of toxic waste from the US
have made the headlines several times in the last year.
Local opponents also included the Association of Sawmill Operators, which
said that the agreement flouted a 1974 law requiring 51 per cent local
participation in forest enterprises. The opposition, however, extended far
beyond the usual range of interest groups and lobbyists, providing a rare
victory for popular activism in Honduran government decision-making.
The company launched a publicity campaign in January, but it came too late
to save a project that was seen as a vehicle to dig the company out of debt
problems. Stone had negotiated too good a deal. As it carried a presidential
imprimatur, a quick deal was seen by Honduran officials as likely to yield
more favours at the top than an agreement more fiercely negotiated.
The proposed 40-year term of the agreement, though chosen essentially as the
period needed to regenerate the pine forest, was particularly damaging,
because it evoked timber concessions ceded by corrupt military governments
early in the century.
Amid the furore, the details of the proposal were easily lost from sight:
the more so, because the government never authorised the publication of a
Master Agreement signed in September. A clumsy draft version which suggested
incorrectly that the government would itself undertake most of the
infrastructure work associated with the project was widely leaked. Most of
this was already built and the company itself was financing what extra
infrastructure was needed.
By the agreement, Stone was to supervise local sawmills, applying
sustainable exploitation techniques developed in the US. Stone would buy the
residues unsuitable for board production and ship them to a new chip-mill to
be built at the northern port of Puerto Castilla. The proposal did not
involve logging in the hardwood forest.
The company, which needs woodchip to supply its US paper plants, was to
invest Dollars 25m in the chip mill and a barge port. The plan involved the
creation of 3,000 jobs, mainly waste collection and firewatching.
Unemployment in the region is estimated at 80 per cent, and most Mosquitians
welcomed the deal.
The agreement also proposed that Stone buy wood unsuitable for board
production throughout Honduras. An estimated 40 per cent of the potential of
the forest is wasted at present. Finally, Stone was to give technical advice
to private landowners throughout the country on reforestation for commercial
harvesting in areas destroyed by marginal agriculture and ranching.
'Honduras has tremendous forestry potential,' says Morales, 'but if it isn't
used it will be destroyed.' The country has seen its forest area decline
from 7.4m hectares in 1974 to 4.5m in the late 1980s, largely as the result
of 'slash and burn' agriculture on the forest margins.
In the Mosquitia, Nicaraguan migrants fleeing the Contra war in the 1980s
added to the pressure. Also, the national logging industry has a poor record
on reforestation. In parallel with the decline in the forest stock, wood
exports (almost entirely pine) have declined from 114,000 board feet in 1980
to 31,250 board feet in 1991.
Many Honduran ecologists accept the principle of sustainable economic
exploitation of the forest. Their opposition to Stone was based on the
suspicion, fuelled by the secrecy surrounding the agreement, that it was
badly negotiated and lacked adequate environmental guarantees.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920729

