FT921-11899

FT  29 JAN 92 / Stripped of the good banking badge: The impact on Credit
Suisse of its credit downgrading by Moody's


   By ROBERT PESTON


Swiss bankers' worst fears were realised yesterday when Moody's, the US
credit rating agency, downgraded Credit Suisse from its precious Aaa credit
rating and said the Aaa rating of Swiss Bank Corporation was also being
reviewed for a possible downgrade.
Their chagrin will appear petulant to bankers elsewhere, many of whom have
been battling to preserve their capital in the face of colossal losses. In
stark contrast, the three biggest Swiss banks, Union Bank of Switzerland,
Swiss Bank Corporation and Credit Suisse, a subsidiary of CS Holding, are
exceptionally strong and making record profits.
But Swiss bankers are trained to believe that there is a higher goal than
making profits. Their priority has been to retain 'triple A' credit ratings,
the badge of good banking. So it is difficult to exaggerate the shock caused
by Moody's announcement.
Mr Robert Jeker, Credit Suisse president, put on a brave face: 'We would
have preferred to keep the rating,' he said. But he took comfort from
Moody's reasons for the downgrade, which referred to the 'potential' for a
deterioration in the quality of its loans and other assets rather than an
actual deterioration.
Mr John Kriz, a Moody's vice-president who was involved in evaluating Credit
Suisse's rating, also cited 'the likelihood of a more adverse competitive
environment in Switzerland and abroad'.
Mr Jeker argued that the downgrade was because of factors beyond the control
of the bank's management. But in private interviews, senior executives do
not hide their annoyance: 'It is a question of prestige,' said one.
When an agency gives a triple A rating to a bank it is saying that funds
deposited with that bank carry almost no risk for the lenders. Until
yesterday, the trio of big Swiss banks were among only five private sector
banks which had been given the accolade of triple A for all forms of debt by
all three of the world's leading agencies, Moody's and Standard & Poor's,
based in the US, and IBCA in London. The other members of this bankers' club
are Rabobank of the Netherlands and Deutsche Bank of Germany. Morgan
Guaranty of the US also has this distinction, although it is denied to its
holding company, JP Morgan.
Over the past couple of months, Credit Suisse's chairman, Mr Rainer Gut, and
Mr Jeker have tried to reassure staff that a downgrading will make little
difference to the business. Mr Jeker insists that the downgrade
profitability. However, he is contradicting a statement made in last year's
annual report: 'Thanks to our Aaa credit rating we were able to benefit from
the shift in global business to European banks.'
Credit Suisse and its highly rated peers have been able to increase their
share of better quality banking business and widen the margin between
borrowing and lending rates because they are regarded as safe havens for
deposits, compared with Japanese and US banks which have had their capital
eroded.
In theory, a cut in Credit Suisse's rating will lead to a reduction in
profits from this traditional banking business but Mr Robin Munro-Davis,
managing director of IBCA, says: 'There are so few triple A banks in the
world that I don't think it will make much difference when raising funds.'
However, financial analysts are convinced that Credit Suisse made record
profits in 1991 in part because of this 'flight to quality'.
Mr Munro-Davis said a downgrade would have been more understandable a year
ago. The bank's profits after tax in 1990 were SFr549m (Pounds 215m), 30 per
cent lower than the previous year.
'There is no question that Credit Suisse today is stronger than 12 months
ago. That is blindingly obvious,' Mr Munro-Davis said. Both IBCA and S&P
stress that they have no plans to downgrade Credit Suisse.
Moody's, however, is concerned that the quality of Credit Suisse's assets
may deteriorate 'over the intermediate term', because of the 'soft economies
in Switzerland and elsewhere'. It also highlights the weakness of the Swiss
property market, which 'could weaken Credit Suisse's domestic property loan
portfolio'.
Mr Jeker said he did not expect the bank to suffer from significant property
losses. Indeed, analysts point out that Credit Suisse's residential and
commercial loans are backed by collateral worth much more than the loans.
There would have to be an astonishing crash in the property market for
Credit Suisse to be badly hurt, they say.
Its record of minimising losses on overseas lending is also impressive,
especially in the US, where it has made about 15 per cent of all its loans.
Its experience in the UK, where it has a similar exposure, is not so good:
it made big loans to Brent Walker, the troubled leisure group, and to Polly
Peck, the fruit and electronics company, which is in receivership.
Mr Jeker does not dispute Moody's contention that the Swiss banking market
is likely to become more open to competition from foreign banks. Nor does he
deny competition between Swiss banks is intensifying. But he is convinced
that the net effect of these trends will be to reinforce the position of the
big three Swiss banks at the expense of the many smaller banks.
However, Mr Munro-Davis said that it would be difficult to 'prove' that
Moody's had made a mistake, even though his firm takes a different view of
Credit Suisse: 'It is almost impossible to prove that someone in the rating
business is wrong.'
MOODY'S, the rating agency, downgraded to Aa1 from Aaa the long-term deposit
rating of Credit Suisse and said it was reviewing the Aaa long-term deposit
rating of Swiss Bank Corporation. Moody's cited the 'soft' Swiss economy and
a 'potential' deterioration in asset quality. Credit Suisse Financial
Products, the subsidiary specialising in derivatives or sophisticated
financial instruments, also lost its Aaa long-term deposit rating.

The Financial Times


London Page 21 Photograph (Omitted). Chart (Omitted). Illustration
(Omitted).

920129

