FT921-534

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Last chance - if it's Labour


   By JOHN AUTHERS


SOME cliches make sense: 'Invest in haste, repent at leisure' is a good
example. The Labour party, which has a good chance of forming the next
government, has pledged to abolish the Business Expansion Scheme for assured
tenancies if it becomes the government next month. But there is a chance to
invest in the BES between April 6, the beginning of the 1992-93 tax year,
and April 9, the election date, and most big BES sponsors have launched
schemes to allow you to do this.
There is a strong tax logic in favour of this, but it may become much weaker
in the context of your other financial plans. These are points you should
bear in mind:
Tax shelter investment usually happens at the end of a tax year when you
know quite clearly how much you have earned. How certain are you that you
can afford to shelter so much money for five years?
The increase in top tax rates if Labour wins has been well-publicised. This
would cut monthly disposable income. BES is a non-income producing
investment, so check that the opportunity cost of doing without the income
from Pounds 40,000 in a more liquid investment would not damage your
standard of living.
Many property analysts believe that a Labour government would be bad news
for the residential property market. Some would disagree, but this is
another point to bear in mind.
Although this is only a faint risk, Labour could abolish the BES
retrospectively. It is not at all likely, but it is possible.
If a BES investment next year still adds up for you, the following companies
are on offer; Election Hedge, sponsored by Capital Ventures, will aim to
arrange covenanted 'buy-back' schemes with universities or colleges, at a
price of Pounds 1.35 in five years for every Pounds 1, before tax relief,
paid now; IMPRESS II, sponsored by Hodgson Martin, will offer a similar deal
buying property for Imperial College, London; Artesian Performer II, open
until April 17, will buy properties for growth, with no attempt at setting a
guaranteed buy-back price; 6-10 April BESSA Cash Backed, sponsored by Close
Brothers, involves a buy-back deal, backed by a special cash deposit, with a
North Sea support ships company, at a price of Pounds 1.32 for every Pounds
1 spent now, and; Election Protection Cash Backed, sponsored by Johnson Fry,
which is structured to stay open until the day the BES is abolished. It aims
to fix up cash-backed deals offering Pounds 1.25 in five years for every
Pounds 1 spent now.
A different animal, the non-property trading company is making a comeback.
The adventurous might like to sample the following; Nevada Bob, sponsored by
Williams De Broe, is financing a new golf superstore for the City of London,
which will be part of a larger worldwide chain; Spittoon, sponsored by
Gouldens solicitors, is raising money to make Spitting Image-style
television programmes, First Standard Media will raise money for film
production - its founders include a former director with both BBC and ITV;
and HarleyScreen, sponsored by Matrix Securities, will fund a private
pathology laboratory working on screening for AIDS.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920328

