FT922-4422

FT  05 JUN 92 / Survey of South Africa (21): Something to cheer about -
Sports-mad South Africa has been welcomed back into the fold


   By PHILIP GAWITH


THE emergence of South African sport from years of isolation is replete with
irony, not least that the sport which led the way was cricket. After all, if
the start of South Africa's sporting isolation can be put down to a single
event, it was the announcement in 1969, by the then South African prime
minister, Mr B J Vorster, that the England cricket team was not welcome in
South Africa with the coloured cricketer Basil D'Oliviera (ironically, a
South African exile).
Cricket was also responsible for the nadir of the isolation era - the
infamous Gatting rebel tour in 1989 which caused widespread civil unrest.
Again, ironically, it was this tour which galvanised cricket administrators
into grappling with the impact of apartheid in sport, with such success that
few could begrudge them their right to be the first sport re-admitted to
international competition.
The past year has seen events move at a giddy pace. South Africa has been
re-admitted to the international Olympic movement, and will participate in
the Barcelona Olympics, and the national cricket team has been to India, the
West Indies and the World Cup in Australia. Later this year, Australia and
New Zealand will play rugby internationals in South Africa.
Last time South Africa played rugby against New Zealand was in 1981 at Eden
Park in Auckland, a completely surreal affair highlighted by an
anti-apartheid demonstrator repeatedly buzzing the ground in a light
aircraft while flour-bombing the players.
From Eden Park in 1981 to Bridgetown, Barbados, in 1992, where South Africa
played its first test against the West Indies, is a long way. In between was
the era characterised by South Africa's isolation and the slogan 'No normal
sport in an abnormal society'. As punitive measures go, sporting sanctions
were enormously effective. South African sportsmen and women were deprived
of the athlete's ultimate goal, the right to compete against the world's
best.
Whether the sanctions hastened the process of political reform must be
doubtful. However, they have undeniably been enormously important in
pressurising (white) establishment sports administrators into getting their
house in order. Men such as Mr Sam Ramsamy, now head of the National Olympic
Committee of South Africa (Nocsa), who led the drive for sporting isolation,
made the normalisation of sport contingent on a simple equation:
international competition depended, first, upon the achievement of unity
between different, normally racially-biased, administrative bodies in each
sporting code; and, second, the implementation of development programmes
within these codes for uplifting the disadvantaged sector.
Although some sports have done better than others, the overall advance
towards unity has been rapid. Mr Ramsamy comments: 'Progress has been
tremendous from the side of the establishment (white) bodies simply because
they realise they can't get international competition without it.'
After Barcelona, the accent will fall on development. A two-pronged strategy
will be pursued, with the development of an elite, who can provide role
models, being encouraged, as well as a 'sport-for-all' policy which will
eventually provide all children with access to sporting facilities.
Now, however, progress on the sporting front is being hampered by the slow
progress of political negotiations. Thus the thorny question of national
symbols, such as flags and anthems, remains unresolved. Commentators at the
cricket World Cup were encouraged not to refer to the cricketers as the
Springboks, and athletes at Barcelona will not perform under the national
flag. Should they win a medal they will have to listen to Beethoven's 'Ode
to Joy'.
A further irony of the sports unification process has been the dominance of
the ANC and its sporting allies. In spite of white South Africans being
completely sports mad, the government has almost entirely abdicated from the
sporting arena. The sport portfolio in cabinet is tagged on, almost as an
afterthought, to the porfolios of National Education and Environment.
Although there would have been no re-admittance to world sport without the
reform efforts of President F W de Klerk, all subsequent developments have
been the fruits of efforts by non-establishment individuals. On the Olympic
front, this was Mr Ramsamy. But the man who emerged as the absolutely
crucial figure, particularly as regards cricket and rugby, was Mr Steve
Tshwete of the ANC, previously a very senior figure in the armed wing of the
ANC, Umkhonto we Sizwe.
Nobody doubts that without Mr Tshwete's support, South Africa's cricketers
would not yet have left these shores. And the picture of a tearful Mr
Tshwete hugging the South African captain, Kepler Wessels, after the
historic World Cup victory over Australia did more for the ANC's support
among whites than any number of political speeches could achieve.
Moments such as that lend truth to the dewy cliche about sport building
bridges between people. The gap to be traversed, however, remains large.
When South Africa came so close to achieving a hugely improbable victory
over the West Indies, only to crumble on the last morning, white South
Africa went into mourning. The Sowetan, the largest black daily paper,
celebrated, however, the 'Magnificent West Indies victory'.
Still, the time is now much closer when South Africans can watch their sport
without worrying about politics. Already, patriotism has enjoyed an
unexpected comeback. For many South Africans patriotism has always been a
dirty word, full of unhealthy political resonances about being on the side
of the oppressor. The World Cup, for the first time, allowed people to feel
patriotic without being ashamed. It was a liberating and healthy experience,
and it was not only whites who enjoyed it.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920605

