FT922-4232

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: Options that can ease the burden


   By JOHN AUTHERS


THE OPTIONS for school fees planning grow narrower as your child grows
older. You also have less choice if you lack the luxury of capital and have
to pay out of income. Independent advice is essential, but the following
guidelines to possible products should help.
10 years before school starts
From income: Unit or investment trust savings schemes can be used,
preferably held in a Pep (personal equity plan). Prices can go down as well
as up, a disadvantage when aiming at a fixed sum, but over 10 years you
would be unlucky not to make significant real growth. No income or capital
gains tax is payable.
With-profits endowments have the advantage of a 'sum guaranteed,' which
allows you to aim at a fixed target for fees with some confidence. But they
are much less flexible - you must pay the premiums for at least 10 years to
get a full return - and lack the full tax efficiency of Peps. A mixture of
the two, slanted towards Peps, might be judicious.
From capital: 'Composition' schemes are a possibility, but only if you are
certain about your choice of school. Some bursars will accept a lump sum and
then invest it in an educational trust. In return, they guarantee you fixed
fees, and so compound interest over a long period and the tax-free
environment of the trust should save a lot of money. But many schemes cannot
be transferred to another school.
Educational trusts, offered by a few insurance companies, are more
attractive if you want to retain flexibility in choice of schools, but the
education of a specific child is not a charitable purpose. Hence, trusts
must be written for the benefit of many children, for education at any
school, and tax rebates from them must not be diverted to the investor. When
the child starts at school, the trust's proceeds buy an annuity to pay the
fees.
Boyton Financial Services suggests zero-dividend preference shares, as they
have a known redemption value at a pre-determined date. They allow more
flexibility than endowment products.
5-10 years before school
From income: Investment solely in equities begins to look ambitious, so
financial consultant Noble Lowndes suggests money should be put into
National Savings, banks or building societies as a supplement to a Pep or
endowment. The first such scheme to which you should go is a Tessa
(tax-exempt special saver account), which pays gross interest if you leave
the capital untouched for five years. Maximum investment in the first year
is Pounds 3,000, and over the five years Pounds 9,000, so you can make
regular savings for a while before hitting the limits.
From capital: Most of the options remain open but, again, as time is drawing
on, a share of cash-based investments might be sensible. Noble Lowndes
further suggests an insurance bond. These have the advantage that you can
withdraw up to 5 per cent of the original capital each year, free of tax,
and the capital build-up can be considerable. But beware of high charges and
commissions on what can be an unwieldy investment.
1-5 years before school
From income: Endowments are no longer a sensible option as they need to be
held for 10 years. Noble Lowndes suggests you might still try unit trusts
but, otherwise, restrict yourself to National Savings, banks and building
societies.
From capital: The balance tips further towards keeping some of the money in
cash-based savings.
Up to 1 year before school
From income: If the costs cannot be contained within your salary, then there
is no choice but to take out a loan. Needless to say, this is a big step. If
you use the Independent Schools Information Service scheme, then there is a
decent range of repayment vehicles. 'Draw-down' loans secured against your
house allow more flexibility than borrowing the full amount in one go, which
would amount to taking out a second mortgage.
From capital: Banks, building societies and National Savings (if the child
will be at school for five years or more) can all play a role. A temporary
annuity might also make sense. You give a lump sum to a life company, which
then pays a guaranteed income for a fixed period (which you should arrange
to be the years the child spends at the school). Educational trusts and
composition schemes can be used, but you have missed the chance to profit
from compound returns.

The Financial Times


London Page III

920606

