FT922-13397

FT  11 APR 92 / Arts: A Family Affair


   By B A YOUNG


THE PLOT of Ostrovsky's play, written in 1850 and censored on the Tsar's
orders, runs fundamentally like this: to hoodwink his creditors, the wealthy
merchant Bolshov makes over most of his assets to his clerk Lazar and goes
bankrupt. The scheme is that he can settle his debts at some trivial rate,
and Lazar with then return the property. To ensure Lazar's loyalty, Bolshov
marries him to his daughter Lipochka, although a matchmaker has already
found her a husband more to her taste.
Lazar has learnt much from his master, however. He is content see him
languish in a debtor's gaol, rather than return his property; and Lipochka
has used all the ill-gotten wealth to buy herself into a society as good as
whatever she may have missed.
Nick Dear's adaptation goes easy on Ostrovsky's financial complexities, but
emphasises the comedy and the sex, much of which is his own addition. The
result is a very funny play, but without such condemnation of the merchant
class as led to the original ban, and this is a pity. The dishonesty is
taken as a joke, and pages of the admirable programme are given over to the
comic affairs of the Guinness takeover, the Clowes swindle, and the Robert
Maxwell pensions affair.
Director Martin Houghton is clearly more on Dear's side that Ostrovsky's.
The self-conscious excess of dirty words may have come from the adapter, and
there is frequent public coupling, in more detail than one is used to in
this kind of theatre. (The only two out of a cast of eight that I never saw
at it were Bolshov and his wife.) Like the merchant's ill-dealing, this is
presented with no sign of disapproval.
Mark Chatterton's Lazar graduates from simple clerkdom to a sublime
self-satisfaction that he learned from Robin Polley's Bolshov without
incorporating the built-in bad temper. Sharon Muircroft's Lipochka is a
blonde career-girl, very much of our day rather than Ostrovsky's; and there
is delightful work from Tina Jones as the match-maker and John Fleming as a
drinking solicitor. The costumes and decor by Nettie Edwardsare as
effectively between periods as Dear's script.
Everyman Theatre, Regent Street, Cheltenham Ends April 25 Box Office
0242-572573.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920411

