FT921-12027

FT  29 JAN 92 / Volvo faces urgent talks as Sweden bars Procordia deal


   By ROBERT TAYLOR


   STOCKHOLM


THE SWEDISH government and Volvo are to hold urgent talks to try to resolve
the future of Procordia, the Swedish food and pharmaceuticals conglomerate
in which Volvo and the Swedish state are the main shareholders.
This follows the rejection last night by the Swedish cabinet of Volvo's
attempt to become Procordia's majority shareowner in a share swap deal worth
SKr38.7bn (Pounds 3.64bn).
Mr Carl Bildt, the prime minister, said at a press conference that the
proposed deal was 'unacceptable' as it would have meant a financial loss for
the state. The government owns 34.2 per cent of Procordia's equity and 42.7
per cent of the voting rights.
The mounting public controversy over Volvo's planned acquisition of
Procordia has cast serious doubt over whether Mr Pehr Gyllenhammar, Volvo's
executive chairman, can force the deal through in its present form.
On a business trip to the US, the Volvo chief said last night that it was
possible to discuss further the details of the proposed offer and reach a
solution through negotiations with the Swedish government.
Mr Gyllenhammar added that he was sorry the Procordia bid had caused so much
political turbulence in Sweden but he remained determined that the deal
should go through.
The Swedish cabinet's swift decision to oppose the proposed merger followed
the unanimous rejection of the deal yesterday afternoon by the government's
own recently appointed privatisation commission.
Mr Curt Nicolin, head of the commission, said that not only were there no
'convincing synergy effects' in the proposed merger, but the advantages for
Volvo had to be balanced by the clear disadvantages for Procordia.
The commission added that in all circumstances the interests of the state
and smaller shareholders in Procordia had to be safeguarded.
Volvo's unrestricted shares fell yesterday by SKr8 on the Stockholm bourse
to SKr390, their level before the proposed merger was announced on Saturday.
Mr Bildt denied publicly yesterday Mr Gyllenhammar's assertion that the
government was informed in detail about the merger intentions as long ago as
last October.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920129

