FT924-753

FT  22 DEC 92 / International Company News: BfG deal faces disruption threat
from Fondiaria


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES and HAIG SIMONIAN


   FRANKFURT, MILAN


THE DIFFERENCES over plans for Credit Lyonnais to take control of Germany's
BfG bank have been resolved, Aachener und Munchener Beteiligungs (AMB), the
German insurance group, claimed yesterday.
However, the deal seemed threatened with further disruption as Fondiaria,
the Italian insurer with a 20 per cent stake in AMB, was reported to have
called for a vote of no-confidence in Mr Helmut Gies, chairman of AMB's
supervisory board, at a weekend meeting.
AMB officials did not deny the report, which included claims that Fondiaria
had asked for an extraordinary shareholders' assembly on December 30 to be
postponed 'on material and legal grounds'. If shareholders approve the
resolutions at the meeting, AGF will gain a blocking stake in Germany's
second-biggest insurer, Credit Lyonnais will win a foothold in the top ranks
of German banking, and AMB will rid itself of its barely-profitable banking
subsidiary.
Meanwhile, the German insurer, with 51 per cent of BfG, insisted an
agreement on the deal would be signed before Christmas. The extraordinary
assembly to approve the transaction would be held as planned, despite
rumours of possible postponement, AMB added. The meeting would also be asked
to bless another, linked, agreement, reached earlier this year, under which
Assurances Generales de France (AGF) is to be granted full voting rights on
its 25 per cent stake in AMB.
AGF, the state-owned French insurance group, acted as broker in the deal
with Credit Lyonnais. It accepted the role as part of a peace settlement
with AMB, which had hitherto viewed AGF's holding as hostile and had
withheld full voting rights on its stake.
Fondiaria, which yesterday refused to comment on the weekend meeting,
originally entered enthusiastically into its relationship with AMB.
However, plans to form a three-way alliance of independent European
insurers, including Britain's Royal group, have been left increasingly to
one side as a result of AGF's growing involvement with the German concern.
Relations may also have been soured by developments within Fondiaria itself.
Ferruzzi, the industrial group which jointly controls the insurer, is
believed to be unhappy with Fondiaria's profitability. With AGF threatening
to dominate AMB, the value of the Italian group's 20 per cent holding seems
likely to be diminished both in strategic and financial terms. Unless
Fondiaria can be pacified, it could be tempted to use its votes at the
December 30 meeting in an attempt to block both resolutions.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921222

