FT921-4001

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): Businesses facing higher
bills set to gain - Uniform Business Rate


BUSINESS ratepayers who face higher rate bills as a result of the 1990
business rate reforms will be the main beneficiaries next year of important
changes to the rating system transitional arrangements announced by the
chancellor in the Budget.
Businesses whose bills fell but who are still in transition to their lower
rates bill will benefit from receiving their gains more quickly.
The Uniform Business Rate was introduced in 1990. This reform meant that the
rate poundage cannot rise by more than inflation, and local authorities
cannot determine rate bills.
The introduction of the UBR was accompanied by the first general revaluation
since 1973. This revaluation meant sizeable changes in the rates bills
attached to individual premises and the transitional arrangements were
designed to phase these changes in. They were self-financing, so that both
losses were postponed and gains delayed.
The measures announced in the Budget change these transitional arrangements
to cancel the real increases in rate bills in 1992-93 faced by those moving
towards higher bills and to accelerate the gains for those who are moving
towards lower bills.
Existing transitional arrangements
The existing transitional arrangements mean that businesses which face much
higher rate bills, as a result of the 1990 non-domestic revaluation and the
introduction of the uniform business rate, have their year-on-year increases
limited to 20 per cent in real terms for larger premises, 15 per cent for
other small premises and 10 per cent for small premises with living
accommodation attached. At present this transitional protection is lost if
the occupier of the property changes.
Under the existing arrangements the cost of this protection is met by
limiting the gains of those whose rate bills are lower under the new system.
For 1992-93, this would have meant that large premises in downward
transition would have seen reductions in their bills limited to 19 per cent
in real terms and small premises would have seen their reductions limited to
24 per cent. The transitional arrangements remain in force until the next
non-domestic revaluation which will take effect on April 1 1995.
The Budget changes
The effects of the changes to these transitional arrangements announced in
the chancellor's statement are:
businesses in transition towards higher bills will face no increase in real
terms in 1992-93. The existing limits on real annual increases will apply
again for 1993-94;
transitional protection will continue to apply to business premises even if
the occupier or owner subsequently changes;
the maximum reduction for businesses in transition towards lower bills will
be 3 percentage points higher than previously announced. These businesses
will receive all their remaining gains in 1993-94.
The government will bring forward legislation to make these changes as soon
as practicable. Non-domestic rate bills issued by local authorities will
stand until the legislation comes into force. The changes will, when they
take effect, be backdated to March 11 (in the case of the change of occupier
rule) or April 1 (in the case of the change in transitional limits).
The arrangements described above apply also to Wales, which has a similar
non-domestic rate system to England. In Scotland and in Northern Ireland,
which each have their different systems, rate bills in 1992-93 will be
reduced on average broadly in proportion to the reduction in England, ie by
3 1/4 per cent. The revenue cost on a UK basis of the business rate measures
announced in the Budget is Pounds 480m in 1992-93, Pounds 590m in 1993-94,
and Pounds 390m in 1994-95. About 900,000 premises will benefit.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

920311

