FT921-403

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (15): Board
room defences highlighted - Executive protection is on the rise


   By CHRIS CLARKE


THERE seems little doubt that a key growth market lies in various forms of
corporate and personal liability.
A recent survey of the UK market for directors' and officers' (D&O)
liability insurance, by the Wyatt Company, management consultants, estimated
that total premium income in the UK for D&O policies had risen from Pounds
20-25m in 1989 to Pounds 40-50m in 1991. Most insurers in the market seem to
think that this is about right.
Despite this rapid growth, UK and European take-up of D&O cover lags far
behind demand in the US. 'In the US, you won't get directors sitting on a
board if D&O insurance is not in place,' according to Philip Foley, managing
director of brokers Minet's professional services unit. Yet a series of
pressures in recent years has been driving Europe in the same direction.
In Britain, Minet identifies more than 200 offences in the Companies Acts,
where directors and officers can be held personally liable, with more under
the Health and Safety Act 1984, the Financial Services Act 1986, the Company
Directors Disqualification Act 1986, the Insolvency Act 1986 and other
legislation.
This piercing of the corporate veil has been highlighted by a series of
court cases, including not only Barlow Clowes, Blue Arrow and Guinness, but
also the less spectacular 1990 case involving Caparo Industries, in which
auditors were held not to be liable for misleading representation of an
acquisition target's financial position. Although many expect the Caparo
ruling ultimately to be overturned, it is still seen as a milestone,
signalling a shift in liability from professional auditors to company
management, after a long period when litigation seemed to be directed
towards accountants' professional indemnity (PI) insurance.
In a period of high mergers and acquisitions activity, such as the
mid-1980s, or of recession and company failures, such as today, the risk of
such litigation is high. Mr Foley detects a worrying tendency to assume that
if something goes wrong it is not a risk for investors but one for which
management or professional advisers must be held responsible. 'Auditors have
been punished in some situations,' he says, 'because either they were the
only party left on the scene or they were the only ones who had taken their
responsibilities seriously enough to have maintained adequate insurance.'
Apart from Caparo, a lot of attention has been attracted by a 1991 case
under the Insolvency Act, in which two directors of a small company were
found personally liable for Pounds 417,000 for breach of fiduciary duties
under the the Act's 'wrongful trading' provisions.
'Small companies are terrified of Insolvency Act exposure,' according to Reg
Brown, of Octavian Underwriting, who underwrites syndicate 702. He is aware
of several hundred cases pending under the Insolvency Act.
Beyond that, there is the European Community's proposed fifth Company Law
Directive, which would introduce joint and several liability and a reversed
burden of proof. This has been delayed for years, primarily because of the
UK's objections to quite separate provisions for inclusion of worker
representatives on company boards. Parts of this directive worry even the
Americans, according to Mr Brown.
Despite these risks, most companies in the UK do not yet purchase D&O cover.
Hayley Shaw, financial risks underwriting manager at Sun Alliance, estimates
that there are still probably less than 10,000 D&O policies in the UK. The
Wyatt survey found that the buying of such insurance was directly related to
company size. In its sample, 74 per cent of firms with turnover above Pounds
100m had D&O cover, compared with only 6 per cent of those with turnover
below Pounds 5m.
At present, the UK market is led, in terms of premium income, by two
American groups, AIU and Chubb, with Lloyd's third and Sun Alliance emerging
in fourth place. In terms of policy count, however, the survey found Sun
Alliance overtaking Lloyd's since 1989, to take second place behind AIU.
This reflects, Ms Shaw argues, the fact that her company has the widest
branch structure in the D&O market, allowing it to pick up a much wider
geographical spread of business, including many small companies.
Lloyd's, however, remains ahead by premium income; and Alec Sharp, of Castle
Underwriting Agents, who underwrites syndicate 839, can see real advantages
to the policyholder from insuring this kind of personal liability business
with Lloyd's - particularly PI cover, which protects lawyers, accountants,
architects and similar professionals.
'I firmly believe that PI is very much a Lloyd's market kind of business,'
he says. This, he argues, is primarily because of the professional and
in-depth claims-handling service at which Lloyd's often excels. Architects
especially require a sensitive approach to claims, because they frequently
want to retain a client, even where he makes a claim against them.
One trend that is emerging is a cross-over between PI and D&O cover, in the
form of management indemnity insurance. Minet are offering this, with Mr
Brown the lead underwriter. It is aimed at accountants employed within
companies, as opposed to independent professionals, giving them individual
liability cover, either in addition to, or in advance of, company D&O
insurance.
In the long run, Mr Sharp foresees an increasingly sophisticated approach to
this kind of insurance. 'Insurers are going to know much more about the
people they insure,' he says, with a more scientific approach to the risks.
Mr Brown warns that the D&O market could be heading for disaster if the
growth is seen as an easy way of making money. 'This is a long-tail class of
business, where the average claim stays outstanding for five to seven
years,' he argues. He sees evidence of the potential risks in Australia,
where the market has grown rapidly and there are reported to be in excess of
ADollars 1bn (Pounds 440m) of outstanding claims.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920330

