FT921-1434

FT  24 MAR 92 / World Trade News: US risking Round over services, says EC


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS and REUTER


   GENEVA, BRUSSELS


THE EC, on the defensive over farm subsidies in the stalled Uruguay Round
trade talks, has accused the US of imperilling the talks by refusing to
apply multilateral trade rules to services, Frances Williams reports from
Geneva. EC officials said yesterday the US was seeking wide exemptions for
its services sectors from the basic fair trade principle that liberalisation
measures should apply without discrimination to all trading partners.
The US proposes it be exempted from most-favoured-nation (MFN) treatment on
maritime transport, financial services, air transport and basic
telecommunications. Brussels says the four sectors make up perhaps
three-quarters of world services trade. The US stance may be seen as an
attempt to press the EC to compromise on deadlocked farm trade talks,
officials said.
US officials say that, excepting exemption for maritime transport, the
proposed derogations are negotiable and could be withdrawn if trading
partners make better offers to open their markets.
The US, EC and 40 other countries have indicated the sectors where they wish
to take MFN derogations. Exemption would allow nations to keep their markets
closed, or open only to partners with reciprocal arrangements. Main US
targets for market-opening are financial services of Japan and important
developing countries, basic telecoms markets in almost all trading partners,
and the EC audio-visual market. The services talks are due to finish this
month, ready for an Easter end to the Round - an increasingly unlikely
deadline.
The US could seek trade sanctions against the EC unless Brussels reforms the
way its subsidises oilseeds farmers or renegotiates trade concessions to the
US, Reuter reports from Brussels. A panel appointed by Gatt has criticised
the EC system of subsidising the producers. An extract from its report says
Gatt members should act against the EC if the US asks.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920324

