FT923-6495

FT  24 AUG 92 / The Lex Column: Sharing the deficit


One side-effect of the Maastricht treaty may be to drive Europe more quickly
towards privatisation. With governments under additional pressure to bring
public sector finances under control the equity market is being asked to
shoulder an increasing chunk of the burden. The Italian government has
pencilled in L42,000bn from sales of commercial assets by the end of 1994.
Last month Germany outlined a programme which will probably start with the
offering of a 25 per cent stake in Lufthansa. A giant flotation for Deutsche
Telekom - valuing the group at anything up to DM70bn - may not be far
behind. France is looking to raise FFr15bn next year, assuming the
Socialists retain power, while under a centre-right government privatisation
will have a far greater role. To this must be added rolling programmes in
Spain and Portugal, and the first hints at privatisation in cash-strapped
Belgium.
In contrast to early UK experience, the recent continental wave of
privatisation is driven by budgetary pressure rather than reforming zeal.
Equity investors will still be hoping for efficiencies as nationalised
industries are put to the test of the market. Partial privatisations which
leave the state in majority control, though, may be the worst of all
possible worlds: making additional demands on the equity market without the
promise of real efficiency gains.
Smaller European equity markets may benefit from greater liquidity and the
breadth of investors that a privatisation programme can attract. The
experience of the UK suggests supply can be perfectly benign in the upswing
of the economic cycle. On the downswing, however, the story is likely to be
different. Will governments relying on asset sales to meet strict
Maastricht-style criteria be prepared to pull back if the market turns
against them? After all, every lira not raised from the equity market will
have to come from either taxation or the bond market. In a recession the
economy can barely afford the former, while the latter hardly solves the
problem of public sector indebtedness.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920824

