FT923-9726

FT  04 AUG 92 / If it's in Spanish on the box, it must be Televisa: Damian
Fraser tracks the Hispanic media empire


   By DAMIAN FRASER


WATCH a soap opera in Lima, Caracas, Mexico or Miami, and the chances are it
will have been made by Televisa, the giant Mexican television company. Turn
on the international news, and it will probably have been produced by Echo,
Televisa's Spanish-language alternative to CNN. Buy a Spanish-language
glossy magazine, and it may well have been published by a Televisa
subsidiary.
Televisa is rapidly becoming the Hispanic world's dominant media group. It
has recently bought large stakes in television channels in Chile and Peru
and has joint ventures with others in Venezuela and Argentina.
In April, it bid, with partners, Dollars 550m for Univision, the largest
Spanish-language network in the US. Last week it paid Dollars 130m for the
American Publishing Group, distributor of some 80 Spanish-language titles,
turning Televisa into the world's largest Spanish-language publisher.
The company has a near total stranglehold on entertainment in Mexico,
controlling 90 per cent of the television market, 10 radio stations, the
largest cable station, record labels, two national football teams, the
national bull ring, popular magazines, and one of the best museums.
If Televisa succeeds in its ambition of dominating Latin America's airwaves,
Mr Emilio Azcarraga, the company's president, will become not just the
continent's most powerful media baron, but arguably as important in Latin
America as William Randolph Hearst was in the US in the 1920s. Mr Azcarraga
known as El Tigre, is already Mexico's richest man, worth Dollars 2.8bn,
according to Forbes magazine.
Televisa's purchases of Hispanic channels are intended to let it take a
bigger slice of profits generated from its hugely popular soap operas
(telenovelas). Televisa produces about 40 per cent of all Spanish-language
television shown in Latin America and the US. At present it earns just the
distribution fees - around 15-25 per cent of profits generated by their
programmes. It would like to increase this to at least 50 per cent, explains
Mr Fernando Diez Barroso, Televisa's vice-chairman.
But many Televisa watchers see a different plan. The larger and more
powerful Televisa becomes in the Hispanic world, the harder it can squeeze
its competition, its long-suffering advertisers, and its huge in-house
stable of Spanish-speaking performers.
The Mexican government is about to privatise two network channels, 7 and 13,
and Univision - until Mr Azcarraga acquired it - was a rumoured bidder.
'Televisa wants to have a quasi-monopoly in the Latin world,' explains
Hermann von Bertrab of the Bertrab Mexican Report, 'partly because of
excellent growth prospects in the Hispanic market, but also to protect its
home turf from entrants.' Televisa's near-monopoly in Mexico enables it to
charge advertisers in advance, and it has raised rates 180 per cent in two
years.
On the production side, Televisa's influence is so pervasive that many Latin
performers live in fear of it. Televisa makes most of its employees sign
exclusive contracts, forbidding them to work for other companies. The fewer
alternatives there are, the more leverage Televisa has. Multivision, the
cable network competition to Televisa, already has to pay its performers a
premium because they fear being blacklisted by Televisa.
Mr Diez Barroso, the nephew of Mr Azcarraga, denies such a black-list
exists, but says: 'If somebody under contract walks away, of course there is
a problem.'
He readily accepts that Televisa's vast presence gives it an advantage over
competitors. 'We can offer actors a soap opera for six months, then a movie.
After that they can work in a nightclub. And if the lady sings we can cut
her a record, and it is distributed throughout the world.' In return, 'we
are going to ask her to behave in a certain manner. Its like the star system
in old Hollywood.'
Hispanic groups in the US have objected to Televisa's intended minority
purchase of Univision - still subject to approval by the Federal
Communications Commission - in part because of the feared cultural effects
of having this monolith responsible for US Spanish-language television.
Several groups have formally filed complaints before the FCC against the
acquisition, claiming that Mr Azcarraga has used an American investor, Mr A.
Jarrold Perenchio, as a frontman to circumvent FCC rules that limit foreign
ownership of stations to 25 per cent. Mr Diez Barroso describes the charge
as ludicrous, given that Mr Perenchio is a respected producer in his own
right.
Ms Esther Renteria, head of the National Hispanic Media Coalition in Los
Angeles, is also fearful about biased news coverage. Televisa rarely
criticises the Mexican government, almost never covers demonstrations
alleging vote fraud, or embarrasses it in any way. 'The Mexican government
uses newspapers to form political opinion, and Televisa to shape public
opinion,' explains Raymundo Riva Palacio, a columnist for El Financiero
newspaper.
Televisa already has an option to increase its stake in Univision, if the
proposed North American Free Trade Agreement changes FCC rules with regard
to Mexican purchases. Mr Diez Barroso is clear about his company's ambitions
in North America: 'We see this as one market in years to come, speaking two
different languages. We will be number one in the Spanish-speaking part.'

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920804

