FT924-6236

FT  23 NOV 92 / The ERM Alignment: ERM move puts pressure on punt, and
Reynolds - Dublin pledges to defend the currency


   By TIM COONE


THE IRISH government, which faces a general election in two days, will
continue to defend the punt even if it means putting up interest rates
again, the government said yesterday.
Ireland stood by the punt's value in the central band of the ERM as the
Spanish and Portuguese currencies were devalued at the weekend.
The government would defend its currency within the central band of the ERM
at the cost of higher interest rates in the short term, the Finance Ministry
said, but 'sustained high interest rates would be unbearable' in the longer
term. This would 'undermine the good fundamentals of the economy which have
sustained the punt until now'.
The government denied coming under pressure from German and French officials
to allow the punt to join the realignment. The ministry described the
reports as 'speculative loose talk' but added: 'It is anybody's guess
whether the (currency market) raiders will return. The continuing
instability within the system is a cause for worry.'
The government faces a renewed run on Ireland's reserves if the punt comes
under further pressure today.
Since sterling abandoned the ERM last September, there has been a question
mark over the punt. Around 30 per cent of Ireland's exports go to the UK,
and 40 per cent of its imports are sourced there. The government increased
interest rates by 3 percentage points in September and it has created a
IPounds 50m (Pounds 55m) fund to assist Irish companies adversely affected
by sterling's devaluation.
A number of Irish economists predict that interest rates could rise by a
further two points this week, bringing the Central Bank's short-term
facility rate to a record 15.75 per cent. Inflation is expected to be only 2
per cent this year.
Maintenance of a strong currency, linked to the D-Mark, has been the central
plank of the government's economic policy, which has until now enjoyed
cross-party support, over the past five years. It is a policy which has also
received the backing of the Confederation of Irish Industry and the trade
unions, although individual industrialists who have suffered most from
sterling's fall and the high interest rates have begun to raise their voices
in favour of a devaluation.
Should interest rates now be forced higher still, those voices will become a
clamour, and could cost Prime Minister Albert Reynolds' Fianna Fail party
votes in the election, especially from mortgage holders.
Nonetheless, abandonment of that policy on the eve of a general election
would be seen as politically damaging, particularly as opinion polls already
indicate that Fianna Fail will suffer a setback and that the Labour party is
likely to emerge greatly strengthened and hold the balance of power in the
new parliament.
Mr Ruari Quinn, the Labour party's economy spokesman, said yesterday: 'The
problem is being created by the high German interest rates, but the
Bundesbank is clearly not going to change its policy and bring them down.'
He was in favour of 'an orderly realignment' of ERM currencies involving the
French franc as well as the punt.
'It is not that we want to devalue. The problem is that the punt is being
revalued upwards with the D-Mark, which is now functioning as a European
reserve currency,' he said.
Last September, the Irish central bank borrowed over IPounds 1bn from other
EC central banks to defend the punt after sterling left the ERM, and is
estimated to have spent an additional IPounds 700m in reserves. In September
overseas investors also sold an estimated IPounds 500m in Irish gilts of a
IPounds 4bn total held by them, forcing the government to reverse its policy
of capping the foreign debt at IPounds 8.9bn.
A key factor which saved the punt though, was Ireland's remaining exchange
controls, which are due to be dismantled by the end of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921123

