FT924-12130

FT  22 OCT 92 / Survey of Leman Region (3): Competition intensifies -
Banking and Finance


   By IAN RODGER


Geneva has long been a leading international financial centre, and still
ranks fourth after Tokyo, New York and London in terms of fund management
with Dollars 265.9bn under management at the end of last year, according to
a recent study by Technimetrics, the London investor relations research
group.
Competition is intensifying, however, and the city's financial leaders are
now enlisting help from all sides, including their neighbours, to maintain
the centre's dynamism.
The strongest pillar of Geneva's financial centre is international private
banking: managing the fortunes of rich individuals. By definition, a high
degree of discretion surrounds this business, but Geneva is generally
believed to be the world leader in it.
Chase Manhattan Private Bank, which is one of several non-Swiss banks to
have a significant presence in the city, estimates that wealthy individuals
have placed some Dollars 2,000bn in banks outside their home countries.
Banks in Switzerland hold more than a third of it, and Geneva banks more
than half of the Swiss total.
By contrast, commercial and investment banking activity has tended to
gravitate to Zurich although Geneva bankers suspect that they account for
rather more than 30 per cent of the value of the country's securities
transactions. That is the figure that has been used in assessing the Geneva
Stock Exchange's contribution to the costs of the national project to
develop an electronic securities trading system.
Signs of trouble with the competitiveness of the Swiss financial centre
emerged in the mid-1980s when liberalisation elsewhere suddenly made Swiss
practices look outdated and expensive.
The first steps towards liberalisation and rationalisation came in the late
1980s when a capital market syndication cartel was broken and in 1990 when a
consolidation of the country's seven stock exchanges into three was agreed.
Geneva benefited from both these changes. It was S. G. Warburg Soditic, a
Geneva house, that was the first and most aggressive bank to compete against
the old syndicate cartel. The closure of the Lausanne Stock Exchange made
Geneva's exchange effectively the national exchange for French-speaking
Switzerland.
Mr Jacques Treyvaud, chief executive of the Cantonal Bank of Vaud, was
immediately invited to join the board of the Geneva exchange and a new form
of collective membership was created so that all the former Lausanne Stock
Exchange members could have access to the Geneva ring.
'We very much want to put our structure and operations at the disposal of
other Romand cantons,' says Mr Thierry Lombard, vice-chairman of the
exchange.
The Geneva exchange itself is under threat of extinction as trading activity
concentrates in Zurich and London and the creation of a national electronic
exchange approaches. Bank Julius Baer, a leading Zurich private bank, has
withdrawn from the Geneva Exchange and Swiss Volksbank said it would give up
its membership this year.
In response, the exchange decided to open its membership to non-Swiss
bankers for the first time, inviting Mr Maurice Dwek, chairman of Warburg
Soditic, and Mr Pierre Dejardin-Verkinder, chief executive of Banque
Scandinave en Suisse, to join the board. Mr Claudio Generali, president of
the Lugano-based Banca del Gottardo, which is controlled by Sumitomo Bank of
Japan, also joined the board.
Its other initiative has been to create a foundation - Fondation Place
Financiere - to co-ordinate the efforts of all interested parties in the
promotion of Geneva as a financial centre.
Geneva's financial leaders say that even though there are more than 80 banks
in the city, there is very little sense of community such as one finds in
the City of London or on Wall Street. In large part, this is because each
bank tends to work on its own, managing its clients' funds and minding its
own business. As there is little capital market activity, there is little
occasion for banks to work together.
The foundation is an attempt to compensate for this atomisation, to bring
people from different types of banks together to work on improving the
city's financial centre.
Mr Lombard, who chairs the foundation, says promotion is the first function
of the foundation. 'We need to attract people who are willing to take risks;
who have a vision of the future,' he says. He wants to create an impression
that Geneva is an exciting financial centre where innovative bankers, such
as Mr Edmond Safra and Mr Edgar de Picciotto, come and build up successful
private banking businesses.
The foundation's other ambition is to make Geneva a recognised European
centre of financial education by creating an institute for studies in
financial analysis with pan-European recognition.
Although regional co-ordination in financial matters has intensified on the
Swiss side in recent years, there is still little cross-border financial
activity with the French departments of Haute Savoie and Ain.
The main element would probably be the accounts held by Swiss commercial
banks for many of the 30,000 French nationals who commute to work every day
in Geneva.
At the moment, the French national banks have very strong positions in these
markets and differences in legal systems have discouraged cross-border
activities. However, with the prospect of full recognition and mutual
acceptance of banking licenses coming into effect between Switzerland and
the European Community next year, there have been some recent moves.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921022

