FT924-11468

FT  26 OCT 92 / Arts: Eszterhazay influence - Sponsorship


   By RICHARD FAIRMAN


THE Palace of Eszterhaza in west Hungary was built on a foundation of music.
Its great period in the latter half of the 18th century, when Prince
Esterhazay brought Haydn there as composer in residence and enjoyed
unrivalled evenings of musical splendour, echoes on in its walls, its rooms,
its very fabric - even if the palace has sometimes found itself used since
the war for less gracious purposes, such as the billeting of Soviet troops.
Now there is an ambitious plan to put the building to use as an educational
centre for music. Since 1986, the Prague Mozart Foundation wants to turn
Eszterhaza into a college for advanced musicians and when a trial run for a
European equivalent of the American Marlboro festival was first tried out in
France, the scheme has followed a twisting path, which at times has seemed
to grasp at any opportunity as it presented itself.
The present set of plans, however, looks set to become reality. The
Foundation, which intends to adopt a new title with the word 'European'
prominently on its letter-head, wishes to turn the changed political scene
to its advantage and establish a major presence in central Europe. It will
embrace three countries - Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland - with public
performances or festivals in each, at Prague, Budapest and Krakow
respectively.
The idea seems to have captured the imagination of European leaders. Jacques
Delors had hoped to come to the launch weekend, but a certain other
gathering in Birmingham clashed on the same evening. President Goncz of
Hungary and Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia each attended one of the
concerts, which were held at Eszterhaza and the barely less elegant castle
of Dobris outside Prague.
Their influence is likely to prove critical if the money for the scheme is
to be found. The cost of renovating Eszterhaza, which will surely be very
considerable, was not included in the calculations. But even setting that
aside, the annual operating budget is calculated at some Dollars 4.2m each
year.
The Foundation foresees three likely sources of funding. A third of the
total is expected to come from individual support; a third should come from
scholarships for the students at Dollars 20,000 a time (the EC has said it
will fund those from eastern Europe, western European governments will fund
their students, while those from the rest of the world will need private
funding); the remaining third will have to be found from sponsor-ship.
In the present economic climate the total plan is ambitious indeed.
Undaunted, however, the Foundation is pressing ahead with the auditioning of
its first intake of students and preparations for its first operatic
production, which is to be Mozart's Idomeneo.
An immensely impressive list of musicians has agreed to participate in the
academy and its concerts. The first festival is already planned in Prague
for April next year. The momentum looks unstoppable.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

921026

