FT924-8267

FT  12 NOV 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: India worried about rise in
imports of cashew nuts


   By KUNAL BOSE


   CALCUTTA


INDIA IS becoming increasingly dependent on the import of raw cashew nuts to
sustain a high level of export of cashew nut kernels.
Strong growth in the domestic demand for cashew nuts, much to the surprise
of commodity experts, has eaten into India's exportable surplus. As a result
the country will have to import about 100,000 tonnes of raw nuts to maintain
its share of more than 50 per cent of the world trade in cashew nut kernels.
In 1987-88 imports amounted to 42,600 tonnes.
Traders say India cannot continue to depend on raw cashew imports
indefinitely as the East African countries that supply them are rapidly
developing mechanised cashew processing facilities of their own. India has
nearly 532,000 hectares (1.3m acres) of land devoted to cashew cultivation.
Besides Kerala, the other important growing states are Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa.
It is believed that better agricultural techniques could lead to a
substantial improvement in the average productivity from the present 635 kg
a hectare. Moreover, there is scope for bringing more land under the crop,
particularly in the north-eastern states.
Because of its value as a foreign exchange earner - export receipts are
about Rs5.5bn (Pounds 126m) at present - and the huge employment it offers
to the poorer sections of society, the federal and state authorities have
been wooing established business houses to take up cashew cultivation and
export.
The World Bank has also made available a line of credit to promote cashew
cultivation in a number of states.
India's capacity to process raw cashew is almost double the domestic
production of the crop. Without a high level of imports, much of this
capacity will lay idle, throwing hundreds of people out of employment. The
edge Indian cashew enjoys in the world market is largely because of the
quality of manual processing.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

921112

