FT923-15386

FT  02 JUL 92 / Bar may seek simpler fraud law


   By ROBERT RICE, Legal Correspondent


THE BAR is expected to call on the government to introduce a simple offence
of fraud based on the old English common-law offence of cheating among other
measures to simplify long and complex fraud trials.
A committee set up to look at long fraud hearings after the collapse of the
second Guinness trial in February is also expected to recommend improvements
in pre-trial procedures putting the onus on the prosecution to present the
defence with a list of facts that can be agreed before trial. It is also
expected to recommend a formal system of plea or sentence bargaining.
The committee, chaired by Mr Jeremy Roberts QC, remains split on whether to
recommend abolition of jury trial in serious fraud cases. If it recommended
change, its preferred solution would be for such cases to be tried by a
judge and two lay assessors, as recommended by the Roskill fraud trials
committee.
Mr Roberts said the bar was anxious for the government to address long fraud
trials before the next round of big cases arising from the Polly Peck, Bank
of Credit and Commerce International and Maxwell scandals.
The government promised an urgent review of serious fraud trials after the
collapse of the second Guinness trial, but now appears happy to leave any
changes until after the Law Commission and the Royal Commission on Criminal
Justice have reported next year.
The Law Commission has since 1987 been considering replacing the common-law
offence of conspiracy to defraud in England and Wales with a simple fraud
offence. Mr Roberts said the Bar believed it was absurd that two people
could be convicted of conspiracy to defraud for doing something for which
one of them could not be convicted for doing alone.
A simple common-law offence of fraud would give prosecuting authorities
greater flexibility in dealing with white-collar crime, he said.
With the present system of statutory offences, the prosecution is one step
behind offenders all the time, because a new statutory offence has to be
brought in to tackle each new issue as it arises.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920702

