FT923-6551

FT  24 AUG 92 / Bad weekend for South Africa's right-wingers


   By PATTI WALDMEIR


   JOHANNESBURG


RIGHT-WING whites in South Africa had a hard time over the weekend. Rugby,
the national sport of the right, dealt them a cruel blow when the South
African side lost to Australia 26-3 (though the relatively civilised
behaviour of the fans at least ensured that future rugby tours should not be
in jeopardy).
And right-wing politicians took a small step towards acknowledging the end
of white hegemony when they agreed to participate in 'talks about talks' on
a post-apartheid constitution which, even if they have their way, would
leave whites with a much smaller share of land and privilege in South
Africa.
The weekend ended what has been a rough month for the right: Mr Eugene
Terreblanche, leader of the paramilitary Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging
(Afrikaner Resistance Movement or AWB), has had his sexual relationship with
a South African journalist exposed in the British courts in sordid detail.
Mr Terreblanche had already become a figure of fun when he tumbled from his
horse last March at a right-wing rally in Pretoria. Now that the court has
bared Mr Terreblanche's green underwear to the world, it is difficult to see
him leading a ferocious Afrikaner nationalist resistance to reformist
President FW de Klerk.
Indeed, lack of leadership appears to be the right wing's main weakness at
the moment. Mr Andries Treurnicht, leader of the right-wing Conservative
party, the official parliamentary opposition, is an old man weakened by the
referendum result, and is scarcely likely to survive much longer at the CP
helm. And there is no heir apparent to Mr Terreblanche, a powerful orator
whose humiliation weakens the right-wing cause.
But if the right lacks leadership, it does not lack support.
Over 30 per cent of the white electorate voted for the right in the recent
referendum, and there are believed to be well over a hundred small
ultra-right groups (many of them paramilitary) operating throughout the
country. They could prove a powerful force if united.
For the moment, unity is proving illusory, even among the politicians. Ten
days ago, five Conservative party members of parliament resigned to form a
new right-wing party, the Afrikaner Volksunie. Led by Mr Andries Beyers,
whose victory in the Potchefstroom by-election earlier this year prompted Mr
de Klerk to call a referendum to prove his support among whites, the new
party advocates negotiation with blacks for a much smaller separate white
homeland in the northern Transvaal and parts of the Cape. (The Conservative
party says it wants a larger homeland covering the 41 constituencies won by
the CP in the 1989 elections and by-elections.)
Though it is too soon to gauge the new party's support, its formation has
provoked a number of resignations from grass-roots party organisations, and
its more moderate stance appears to have forced a measure of moderation on
the parent Conservative party as well. Last Saturday the party decided after
a special congress that it would participate in talks with the Zulu Inkatha
Freedom party, and possibly the National party, about the failed Codesa
constitutional talks, suspended since June.
Mr Treurnicht, who has raised evasion to an art form during his long
political career, refused to be drawn on whether the Conservatives would now
join negotiations with the African National Congress (ANC) on a
post-apartheid constitution. But it seems likely that the weekend decision
to attend 'talks about talks' could eventually lead to negotiations with the
ANC.
Both the ANC and the National party hope that the Conservatives can be drawn
into talks. They worry that white separatists could turn to violence if they
feel that they have been barred from all peaceful avenues to achieve their
aim of national self-determination for the Afrikaner.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920824

