FT921-15322

FT  10 JAN 92 / Letter: Removal of agriculture would open way to concluding
Uruguay Round


   From Lord TREFGARNE


Sir, Having served as minister for trade in the Department of Trade and
Industry until the middle of 1990, and thus responsible for leading the
British delegation to the various General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
meetings at that time, may I express a view upon progress since then.
It is, I believe, common ground that much has been achieved and a general
consensus reached in almost all of the negotiating groups, numbering 15 in
all, which go to make up the Uruguay Round.
The major problem remains the resolution of the agricultural question, with
current positions even more entrenched than they were a couple of years ago.
It seems that there is now near certainty that the round will founder on
this issue, thus setting at naught the whole range of good things which have
been achieved in the other groups. Nor is it possible to blame one side or
the other.
While I certainly think that the European Community ought to be willing to
go further to reform the Common Agricultural Policy, I equally think that
our American friends ought to be doing something about the 'beam in their
own eye' before rounding so forcefully on us and our partners. The truth of
the matter is that whether we like it or not the US government and the EC
authorities are obliged to accommodate major vested interests in this field
and a compromise position looks like being impossible to find.
So, what are we to do? I would like to suggest that we now seek to reach a
conclusion to the Uruguay Round by simply removing agricultural products
from its application. Overturning the preconception that the various
subjects are indissolubly interrelated, we could then begin to apply all the
remaining provisions which have been so painfully negotiated. These are now
becoming all the more urgent, given the need to lift so much of the world
economy out of recession. Thereafter, and in the fullness of time, the
agricultural issue can be again addressed in new circumstances and with new
faces at the table.
There is also a strong and growing feeling that the time is fast approaching
when some new insight and drive in the conduct, control and direction of
such negotiations from within the secretariat is necessary. Should the
Uruguay Round fail, a change at the helm will be essential if we are to
salvage anything from the breakdown of these discussions. Lord Trefgarne,
honorary president,
Metcom,
Carlyle House,
235/237 Vauxhall Bridge Road,
London SW1

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920110

