FT921-495

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: With the ladies at Annabel's - Playboy Taki
Theodoracopulos romps with the rich and famous


   By TAKI THEODORACOPULOS


IF CIVILISED society is measured by the quality of its parties, restaurants
and nightclubs, we can all rest easy in our beds. London is still the most
fun capital in Europe, the separation of Fergie and her prince
notwithstanding. Even the prospect of Neil Kinnock becoming Prime Minister
has not quite overwhelmed the high life. This past week Annabel's was
conducting business as usual, as were Tramp, Christopher's, Le Caprice,
Harry's Bar and so on . . .
After 29 years Mark Birley's creation is still the numero uno nightclub not
only of London, but of Europe. (American nightclubs are considered theme
parks.) Whether one is a gourmet, a gambler, or simply a drinker, and I'm
all three, the evening is not complete without a visit at 44 Berkley Square.
Upon arrival one is greeted by the smiling countenance of that walking death
machine, Nando now nearing 50 but still a very good man to have on one's
side during a brawl. After being admitted by Ted, the greatest Pole since
General Sikorski, one is immediately taken care of either by John, premier
barman and maker of drinks extraordinaire, or shown to a table by Louis, the
greatest Italian since . . . Mussolini.
Oh yes, I almost forgot. If one is a lady, one is taken care of by Mabel,
the grande dame of Annabel's, who even takes precedence over a duchess. (If
you see a man or two in the ladies, don't be alarmed. It is either an
Irishman by the name of Galagher, or your's truly. I believe we are the last
two men left who are members of the ladies, a club created by Mabel on a
whim which allows gents to enter the ladies.)
The membership of Annabel's is a mixed affair. I don't know many nobs who
don't belong, nor any Greek shipowners who Louis doesn't address by name.
There are also some of our rich Arab brethren, but - amazingly - they do try
and stay away during week nights, and only attend on weekends, when the rest
of us are away. I have never understood if this is part of the deal struck
between them and management when the camel drivers join, and whenever I have
attempted to find out I have been told in no uncertain terms to drop it.
One thing is for sure. Of all the great nights I have had in London these
past 25 years, most of them have finished up in Annabel's, standing in the
hallway next to the bar, hearing Harry Worcester ululating, and watching
John trying to control the more amorous members of the British upper crust
who want to make fools of themselves.
And speaking of amorous souls, if one likes girls - or pre-women, as the
politically correct Americans refer to them nowadays - Tramp is the place
for you. The owner and prime mover behind Tramp is, as every model, rock
star and groupie knows, Johny Gold, the hardest working owner, certainly the
friendliest, of any club in the capital. Johny knows everyone who has ever
been in the newspapers or on the telly, and going to Tramp is like a bit
like watching a Nigel Dempster column on video. Tramp attracts the most
beautiful girls in London, and even its competitors admit the fact that
Tramp has an exclusive on the fairer sex.
Now this is how one finishes the evening. Before going to Annabel's or
Tramp, one needs to eat. The hottest restaurant of London this year has been
Christopher's - of which I'm part owner - although I have as much to do with
the running of it as Gerald Kaufman has with the election campaign.
Christopher's caught on immediately because of timely publicity, and because
it does serve great food at very reasonable prices.
Both the Queen Mother and Princess Margaret attend regularly, as do most wet
Tory politicians. Christopher Gilmore, son of retiring Sir Ian is the Fuhrer
of the place. Needless to say, Tory MPs flock to the place, as do
journalists, mainly of the conservative complexion. I have managed to spot a
couple of Labour politicos, both of whom happened to be moving their lips
while reading the menu. There are also many artists coming in from across
the street, where the Royal Opera House is (on Wellington Street).
One of the funniest remarks I have heard in a long time came from a Japanese
gentleman last week in Christopher's. Looking at Amanda, the lovely girl who
seats people, he remarked in all seriousness that 'Ah, vely, vely difficult
eat salad with election . . .' I happened to agree.
By now of course, however backwards, one also needs to eat lunch. Until
Christopher's opened, Harry's Bar, was THE place to lunch. It probably still
is.
One day I spotted the ex-king of Greece and the present king of Spain
lunching, and behind them, hidden away by the posts, the diminutive king of
Jordan. Oh yes, and on the other side of the room, sitting tall above the
risotto, the Princess of Wales. Nobody except for a few Americans seemed to
be aware of their presence.
After a two-year pursuit of Kate Reardon, the prettiest girl of London, I
chose Harry's Bar as the venue of our first lunch. The trouble was I ran
into Nigel Dempster - which scared Kate - and my old friend Charles Benson,
England's greatest gambler, who scared me for a loan. In spite of these twin
catastrophes, I still love the place.
And do not ask me about breakfast. That's to be taken in bed, served more
often than not by lovelies.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920328

