FT922-4113

FT  06 JUN 92 / Kohl and Major urge faster EC enlargement


   By QUENTIN PEEL and ALISON SMITH


   BONN, LONDON


CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl of Germany and Mr John Major, the UK prime minister,
called yesterday for a speedier widening of European Community membership,
in spite of Denmark's vote to reject the Maastricht treaty on European
union.
The joint call, issued after informal talks in Bonn, gives German backing to
Mr Major's push for a rapid enlargement of the Community.
In particular, the two leaders called for negotiations with prospective
member states from the seven-nation European Free Trade Area (Efta) to begin
at the start of 1993.
The push for faster EC enlargement is seen in Bonn as a way of playing down
the significance of Denmark's referendum result, which threatens to sabotage
the Maastricht agreement on European economic, monetary and political union.
In the House of Commons, the UK government's balancing act over the EC was
highlighted by Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, who attacked the 'seemingly
endless and unquestioning pressure' from Brussels for an extension of the
Community's competence.
Mr Lamont said the Danish vote provided a timely reminder that there was
'nothing inevitable or predetermined about the future development of the
EC'.
His implicit criticism of Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission president, will
strike a chord with many Tory MPs.
Describing their talks in Bonn as 'very friendly', Mr Major and Mr Kohl
welcomed the outcome of the meeting on Thursday of EC foreign ministers. The
ministers had insisted that the other 11 member states press ahead with
ratification of an unchanged Maastricht treaty by the end of the year, but
leave the door open for Denmark to reconsider its position.
While emphasising the commitment to press ahead with ratification, the two
leaders believe that more work needs to be done on how the Community can
move forward before this can sensibly be discussed by European heads of
government, who will meet at the Lisbon summit in three weeks.
The UK legislation to ratify the treaty is almost certain not to come back
to the House of Commons before July. This leaves the UK parliament with
little prospect of completing its consideration in the time agreed by EC
foreign ministers.
Mr Major and Mr Kohl called for 'speedy initiation and conduct of
negotiations on accession with those Efta states which so desire', urging
the Commission to produce a negotiating mandate by the time of the EC summit
in Edinburgh in December.
The move is regarded with suspicion by some member states, including France,
which believe 'deepening' of the Community via the Maastricht treaty is an
essential precondition.
They fear new members will delay the integration process. So far, Austria,
Finland, Sweden and Switzerland have applied to join.
At the Anglo-German talks yesterday, Mr Major apparently failed to persuade
Mr Volker Ruhe, the German defence minister, to modify his objections to the
European Fighter Aircraft project.
Mr Ruhe did agree to further talks with Mr Malcolm Rifkind, his British
counterpart, before reaching a final decision. The parties in Germany's
ruling coalition are due to decide the fate of the aircraft on June 23.
Vote 'will jolt Irish', Page 2
Out of step, Page 9
Editorial comment, Page 8

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920606

