FT924-6082

FT  23 NOV 92 / Acas talks raise hopes of Tube strike being averted


   By CATHERINE MILTON, Labour Staff


HOPES ROSE last night that a planned Tube strike may be averted as the RMT
rail union considered calling off action in protest at London Underground's
shake-up of pay and conditions.
Both sides expressed cautious optimism that the all-out, indefinite strike
due to start at midnight tonight would not go ahead following 25 hours of
informal talks at Acas, the conciliation service, over the weekend.
If the left-leaning ruling executive committee of the RMT agrees to call off
strike action it is likely to be seen as an industrial relations coup for
the company. In the past, rail unions have forced London Underground to
abandon less ambitious plans to restructure pay and introduce flexible
working practices.
Mr Jimmy Knapp, RMT general secretary, said last night the talks had
provided 'clarification' on a number of 'important areas', including the
role of the unions in future negotiations.
'My hopes are higher tonight that we can avert a stoppage than they were
when I arrived on Friday night,' he said. A joint statement agreed during
the talks would be put to the union's executive committee this morning.
Mr Ian Arthurton, London Underground's director of passenger services, said
the company had not shifted its position during the talks. It could not
negotiate with just one of the three rail unions.
Aslef, the drivers' union, and the TSSA white-collar rail union are in the
process of balloting members on strike action.
Mr Arthurton said: 'We are hopeful that the RMT executive committee will
take a decision early on Monday to withdraw their strike threat.'
Under the plan all 21,000 employees would switch to salaried status with 30
per cent losing financially after three years and 70 per cent gaining
immediately. About 5,000 jobs would be shed in the next two to three years.
Controversy undermines privatisation plans for British Rail, Page 9

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921123

