FT922-452

FT  27 JUN 92 / Motoring: The perfectly formed joys of a microcar - Stuart
Marshall tests the latest fashion from Japan


   By STUART MARSHALL


THEY CALL them microcars. There are dozens of different models, all small
and beautifully formed, made by companies which produce cars that are
household names. For driving where road and parking space are at a premium,
the cars cannot be bettered.
Sadly, there are only two ways of getting one. Go and live in Japan or
arrange to bring one into Britain as a personal import, of which more in a
moment.
In Japan, these under-660cc-engined microcars form a sub-class - 'sub' only
in size, certainly not in sophistication. Just consider the diminutive
Daihatsus that the UK importer, Daihatsu UK, invited me to sample in Jersey
a few days ago.
The Mira Turbo TRXX Avanzato - a very big name for a very small car - the
Leeza Oxy-R and Spider have fuel-injected, turbocharged and intercooled
three-cylinder engines (naturally with catalytic converters) putting out 63
horsepower at 7,500 rpm.
Mira and Leeza were air-conditioned, which was bliss in temperatures more
like those of the Cote d'Azur than the Channel Islands in early summer. They
had central door locking, electric windows and power steering. Gadgetry on
the Mira included a CD player with remote control and screenwipers and
lights that switched themselves on automatically when it rained or got dark.
Jersey is a beautiful island. It has beaches the size of those in Brittany,
rocky summits and a rural interior laced with tiny, high-hedged lanes.
Nowhere can you drive legally at more than 40 mph (64 kph). There are plenty
of 30 mph (48 kph) and 20 mph (32 kph) limits, too.
They are strictly enforced - and why not? Who has any reason to go faster on
a patch of land measuring 10 miles (16 kms) by six miles (9.7 kms) on which
the only straight piece of road is barely two miles (3.2 kms) long?
So, all I can say about the performance of these muscular midgets is that,
given full use of the five-speed gearbox, they leapt up to 40 mph with an
Olympic sprinter's speed and cornered like go-karts. The open two-seat Leeza
Spider's 4-speed automatic transmission worked as well as they do in cars of
twice its size.
Without turbocharging and intercooling, the standard Opti was no
mini-fireball but was acceptably lively and just as squeezable into tiny
spaces. Nothing could be handier for nipping down to the shops or threading
through heavy traffic. One Opti even had part-time four wheel drive. Should
the front wheels lose traction - as they might on snowy hills or even in a
damp, grassy paddock - you thumb a button in the gear lever knob and some of
the power is put through to the rear wheels.
The tiny Daihatsus are not much longer than a Rover Mini but are tall for
their size, so headroom is generous. They ride well. Providing you overlook
some elbow touching with your front passenger, they do not feel ridiculously
small when you drive them.
Daihatsu UK has no plans to bring microcars into Britain, at least while the
number of units it can import is limited by quota. For the moment, it makes
more sense (and more profit) to sell Pounds 8,000 Charade family hatchbacks
and Pounds 10,000-plus Fourtrak and Sportrak recreational 4x4s than Optis
from around Pounds 5,000 upwards.
If the urge to own one is irresistible, call Clive de Carle of Rare Imports
on 0734-713244. He ships in all manner of officially unobtainable Japanese
cars, from the Honda Beat mid-engined microcar (this column, December 7
1991) to a super-luxury Lexus coupe with active suspension.
As a personal import, you would have to collect it from Jersey or pay for it
to be delivered to your home. It is a slightly grey area of the motor trade
but de Carle is reassuring on matters like routine maintenance and the
availability of spare parts.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920627

