FT923-15534

FT  01 JUL 92 / International Company News: Hughes Aircraft to cut workforce
by over 9,000


   By NIKKI TAIT, ALAN FRIEDMAN and BARBARA DURR


   NEW YORK, CHICAGO


HUGHES Aircraft, part of General Motors and the leading US defence
electronics group, is to axe over 9,000 jobs, or 15 per cent of its
workforce, during the next 18 months. The move accompanies a significant
overhaul of the company's production facilities and business lines.
The restructuring - blamed partly on cuts in defence programmes and partly
on the weak economy - will result in an after-tax charge of Dollars 749.4m,
to be taken in the second quarter of 1992. Hughes said yesterday that about
60 per cent of this figure related directly to the consolidation or
elimination of certain facilities.
Another 20 per cent - about Dollars 150m - is to cover redundancy payments
and other expenses. The rest relates to the costs of rationalising some
product lines, business and other assets.
Hughes did not disclose which specific businesses and plants would be closed
or merged. It merely stated in broad terms that 'a major facilities
consolidation' was being undertaken. But the company did make clear that it
was still planning to sell or close some businesses 'that are no longer
considered strategic to our growth'.
A year ago, Hughes announced organisational changes designed to put more
emphasis on commercial markets and lessen the company's dependance on
Pentagon contracts. US defence spending has been falling at around 5 per
cent a year, while Pentagon contracts still accounted for about 70 per cent
of Hughes sales. The company has said it would like to reduce this to around
50 per cent.
The bulk of the jobs lost will be in southern California, where two-thirds
of Hughes' 60,000-strong workforce is based.
Hughes added that there would be a further Dollars 40m charge on earnings,
because of a change in the way it recognises revenues from some of its
commercial businesses. This, it said, would be more consistent with the
practices in those industries.
Northwest Airlines, the heavily-indebted US carrier, said yesterday that it
was cutting 250 management jobs out of a total of 5,000, agencies report.
Boeing, the US aircraft maker, yesterday said it was in talks with China
about possible new aircraft orders this year, writes Alan Friedman in New
York.
The company also sought to play down the significance of a Dollars 1.2bn
deal announced on Monday by McDonnell Douglas to co-produce 40 commercial
aircraft in China. Boeing, a rival of McDonnell Douglas, termed the
McDonnell deal a mere 'follow on' to previous orders.
Boeing declined to elaborate what new orders it may receive from China's
airlines. But it said that by the end of the year more than 100 Boeing
aircraft would be operating in China.
THE Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa), the world's largest aluminium
producer, is cutting 2,100 jobs from its worldwide workforce, writes Barbara
Durr in Chicago.
It will take an after-tax charge of Dollars 40.6m, or 48 cents per share, on
its second-quarter results to cover severance costs.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920701

