FT924-12149

FT  22 OCT 92 / Technology (Software At Work): Getting closer to the
customer - Continuing a series on software, Claire Gooding explains how the
TSB Group is using multimedia to develop and test its managers' financial
skills


   By CLAIRE GOODING


An energetic, middle-aged man enters the office and takes a seat on the
other side of the desk. He is wearing a casual jacket and sweater - unusual
for an MD seeing the bank manager - and his manner is brisk. 'I haven't much
time, I've got to get back to the shop,' he says.
His name is Richard Evans, and students on the TSB Group's management
courses get to know all about him and his plans to expand his high-street
pharmacies by diversifying into menswear.
Using a real company, its accounts, its staff and its dilemmas, TSB staff
can hone their skills using interactive video. In the same way that a flight
simulator gives the illusion of real interaction, multimedia techniques
provide a real 'customer' on the screen.
Saying yes (or no) to a potential borrower demands a blend of analysis and
judgment not easy to teach. The TSB Group Management College is using
multimedia techniques to develop and test its managers' financial skills in
a situation as close to real life as possible.
Students converse with Evans through the keyboard. They pose questions by
typing in certain words - for example, capital, assets, turnover. The
computer composes questions derived from these words, so avoiding the need
for keyboard skills.
The questions are selected from a list of 800 options. The user can comply
with a suggested question, or search for another. For computer-shy branch
managers (97 per cent have never used a keyboard before), the Y and N keys
are labelled clearly. Back comes the appropriate pre-recorded response from
Evans, complete with mannerisms and body language.
'It brings a subjective element into the classroom that just can't be
reproduced on paper,' comments Theresa Barnett, head of business
development.
Learning is a holistic experience at the college. The students are typically
managers of all age groups, resident for up to a week at a time. They are
encouraged to test and assess themselves, not only in the classroom. A
swimming pool and a supervised gymnasium lie on one side of the 1990s-style
cloister.
Multimedia techniques have brought a breath of real life into what used to
be largely paper-based exercises. As with studying a foreign language, the
real learning starts only when the theory is put into practice.
Real people, according to Barnett, were co-operative when it came to being
'guinea pigs' for her training courses. But, as she points out, there was a
limit to the number of times they could be asked to participate.
'These are busy people with businesses to run, and that's what they should
be doing. You can't have 12 people interviewing the same person, posing the
same questions over and again.'
Her solution, using multimedia techniques, was ingenious and cost-effective.
It drew on previous experience with video and paper-based exercises. 'We
researched a real business and put it into an interactive video.'
Evans is a real person, with genuine plans to take his chain of shops up
market. The process of researching, devising and scripting the dialectic
took six weeks. Every possible question had to be researched and its reply
recorded. Taking no chances, Barnett pressed six experts into service to
provide a broad spectrum of techniques. The thorniest job was to pare down
the answers into tight, pithy scripts which became the 'sound bites'
prompted by students.
The scripts are interpreted by an actor, who met the real-life protagonist
so that he could reproduce his mannerisms, turn of phrase and personality
faithfully.
Barnett emphasises that multimedia should not be seen as something new and
frightening, merely an evolution and amalgamation of familiar teaching
tools, consolidated by the use of the computer.
'Multimedia is a lot of things we already know about - sound, picture,
video, computer graphics and printouts - just connected. It's easier to have
multimedia on your desk rather than lots of different machines. It can go
with you wherever you are working.'
The next step came in 1988 when Barnett and her colleagues recognised that
they could 're-purpose' the interactive video. 'It occurred to us that we
could create a different program from the same video,' she explains. 'We
wrote a different piece of software and used the video as a database of
background information.'
The new video was fleshed out with CVs of other staff members, balance
sheets and forecasts in Lotus 123 spreadsheet format, and market research on
pharmacies, regulation, local competition and other factors.
Students could then do an open-ended SWOT analysis (Strengths Weaknesses
Opportunities Threats). The tutor could focus on any aspect: recruitment,
human resources or capitalisation.
There were savings on time and and cost in using the same source material,
but also spin-off benefits outside TSB, in an RBI project to educate
head-teachers about business principles.
When the real-life Evans visited the college to watch his impersonator in
action, everyone was intrigued to hear how his business had fared
subsequently. A fraud perpetrated by a fellow director had leached thousands
from the balance sheet, threatening the cashflow and shrinking stocks. The
result was a sequel video in 1989.
The exercise takes several hours, and is an entertaining mix of soap opera,
documentary, detective thriller and interactive Cluedo.
The student picks a route through evidence, drawing on resources such as
personnel records, appraisals, company accounts and legal tomes, all
available through the computer.
Role-playing as an investigator, the student can call other characters into
the multimedia office, and practise such tricky human situations as accusing
an accomplice of theft, firing an old friend and threatening legal action.
The dialogue is recorded and can then be edited, with the user reviewing his
own reactions. Unlike real life, the interviewer who feels he has made a
mess of any part of the dialogue can re-record the skirmish until he is
satisfied. The whole interview can be kept on compact disk for replay,
review and discussion.
The technique has proved popular with users. 'It's a first-class method of
learning,' comments one. 'It really brings the case studies to life, and it
allows delegates to trace their steps and actions stage by stage,' says
Wally Valentine, financial services manager.
Paul Turner, director of the college, takes a broad view of the benefits of
multimedia training. 'The organisation needs managers who match the
opportunity to sustain competitive advantage. We're using proven technology
to train them, although the application itself is new. Multimedia is an
exponential leap for us.'
Barnett believes the multimedia manufacturers have not yet spotted the true
potential of multimedia software in a tutorial, rather than purely
one-to-one, instruction.
BUZZWORDS
MULTIMEDIA describes a mixture of resources controlled by computer.
Paper-based sources, computer graphics, video, sound and other choices are
controlled through screen-based options.
RE-PURPOSING means the source material, usually video (which is costly to
film and produce), is adapted for a different purpose by using it with a new
software harness.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921022

