FT922-13338

FT  11 APR 92 / From now on, he'll do it his way: The changes of emphasis to
be expected in the prime minister's 'classic conservatism' for the 1990s


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


Now it is Mr John Major's government. As he stood triumphant in Downing
Street yesterday, the youngest prime minister this century repeated the
pledge he gave in November 1990 to create a nation at ease with itself. He
is assured of five years in office to keep that promise.
This week's mandate from the voters gives Mr Major the authority to shape
the Conservative party in his image. His majority at Westminster may be only
a fifth of that achieved by Mrs Margaret Thatcher in 1987, but in an
election fought in the depths of a recession he secured a share of the
popular vote close to the level she won during an economic boom.
The outlook is not trouble-free. Even if, as Mr Major hopes, the election is
followed by the return of confidence needed to trigger economic recovery,
the legacy of the recession will not be easily brushed aside. Public
borrowing this year looks set to rise above the Pounds 28bn announced only a
month ago in Mr Norman Lamont's Budget. Unemployment could continue to climb
for much of this year. Over the medium-term, economic prospects will depend
on how well industry can adjust to the constraints of a fixed exchange rate.
Ministers were claiming publicly yesterday that the gains made by the
Conservatives in Scotland underlined the strength of the government's case
against devolution. In private they were acknowledging that the pressures
north of the border for more self-government can not simply be wished away.
During the campaign, the prime minister promised a 'great debate' on the
future of the Union. It may be harder to deliver it.
But Mr Major now has the authority to govern without worrying always about
divisions in his party. The team he announces this weekend will be the first
that is his own. He will never be in a stronger position to make his own
decisions about who should sit at the cabinet table. The signs last night
were that it would be a radical shake-up.
Many of the old guard, including Mr Kenneth Baker, the home secretary, and
Mr Tom King, the defence secretary, are expected to depart. Mr Michael
Heseltine, the author of Mrs Thatcher's downfall, can expect a more
prominent role in her successor's government.
Unless a clever device is found to keep him, Mr Chris Patten, defeated in
Bath, will not be in the cabinet, even though he did most to articulate Mr
Major's prospectus for the 1990s. But in any event the party chairman's
social market conservatism is likely to be at the heart of a programme for
the next five years designed to add substance to the change in style and
rhetoric seen over the past 16 months.
Mr Major's victory will herald the largest shake-up of Whitehall
responsibilities since the early 1970s. The Treasury and the department will
both be given greater responsibilities.
A new cabinet-level post will be created to oversee the Citizen's Charter,
to take responsibility for reforms of the civil service, and to monitor a
new drive to improve Whitehall efficiency and public purchasing. A second
new department will merge the responsibilities - currently split between
several ministries - for broadcasting, arts, sports, heritage, tourism and
the film industry.
Most of the duties of the department of energy will be transferred to trade
and industry. Employment will lose charge of tourism and small businesses
but gain women's issues.
It is not just the structure of Whitehall which will change.
Mr Major's succession to the leadership at the height of his party's civil
war over Europe and the poll tax left him with an awkward balancing act. As
Mrs Thatcher's chosen successor, he had to keep faith with her revolution.
Until the Maastricht summit in December, there was always a danger that his
party at Westminster might yet tear itself apart over Europe. But alongside
this defence of his inheritance, the new prime minister had to sketch out a
prospectus for a different future to win back an electorate disenchanted
with permanent revolution.
It did not always go smoothly. During the campaign, he sometimes looked
uncertain as to whether he was addressing audiences packed with his
predecessor's disciples or was seeking to reach out to the disenchanted with
his brand of more caring conservatism.
Now Mrs Thatcher has left the Commons, Mr Major's authority is unassailable.
Some on the right of his party will remain restless over Europe, concerned
that his instincts are to spend rather than cut taxes. If the economic
recovery is long delayed there may be voices questioning sterling's place in
the exchange rate mechanism. But such dissent will have little resonance.
The Conservatives are committed to Mr Major's prospectus.
Those looking for a decisive break with all that has gone before will be
disappointed. But so too will those who believe that Mr Major is a convinced
Thatcherite. The prime minister is a politician guided by his instincts
rather than by any ideological certainties. There is no grand design vision
for the 1990s. Instead, he believes that his personal grasp of the mood and
aspirations of the country can be fitted to the business of government.
People want the choice, opportunity and individual responsibility at the
heart of conservatism during the 1980s; but they also want the welfare state
to which Mrs Thatcher was never fully reconciled.
It was no accident that one of Mr Major's priorities in Downing Street was
to underline that he would remain a trustworthy guardian of a free National
Health Service.
The election manifesto with which Mr Major launched his campaign lays out in
characteristically painstaking detail the promised continuities with the
1980s and the shift in emphasis for the 1990s.
Mr Major called it 'classic conservatism'. A senior colleague described it
as a prospectus for the post-socialist era; a few seconds later he added
that it was one also for a post-Thatcherite world. It is a manifesto as
concerned with practicalities as with political philosophy.
The new government will remain faithful to the central economic 'truths' of
the 1980s. The prime minister believes that the benefits of market economics
 -of deregulation and liberalisation  - have been obscured rather than
discredited by the recession. Low taxes, low inflation, enterprise and curbs
on trades union power remain the precondition for prosperity.
He is convinced of the virtues of privatisation. The franchising of British
Rail passenger services is planned as the precursor to an eventual sale.
British Coal is to be sold and contracts with the private sector for local
authority and Whitehall services are to be accelerated. There are promises
too of further deregulation and plans to weaken public and private
monopolies.
Mr Major is equally serious about his goal of stable prices. His commitment
to the ERM has strengthened rather than weakened since Britain joined two
years ago. A move to the narrow bands is promised after the election.
Ownership, another favourite theme of the 1980s, will be just as central to
the Conservative agenda for the 1990s. The manifesto promises further tax
incentives to encourage savings and another drive to boost home ownership
through 'rents-into-mortgages' schemes. Inheritance tax will be diluted to
ensure that wealth 'cascades' down the generations.
Mr Major has made it clear that the new lower rate band of income tax will
be the route from a progressive, if gradual, move down to a 20p basic rate
of tax.
But there are also distinct changes of emphasis. As one senior colleague put
it yesterday, income tax cuts are 'an aspiration rather than a firm goal'.
Mr Major has little time for those on the right who would like to see the
top as well as the basic rate reduced.
The prime minister stressed repeatedly that the looming explosion in public
borrowing next year as a result of the recession will not produce
post-election cuts in spending on the welfare state. The next spending round
will be tough but Mr Major is a politician who believes that some problems
at least can be solved by spending money.
The election victory will be followed by an acceleration in the education
and health service reforms started by his predecessor. But the final
destination will be different. Mrs Thatcher saw privatisation as the
ultimate goal. For Mr Major, the disciplines of the market are designed to
strengthen state-run health and education services.
None of this adds up to an ideological 'ism'. It may be that in five years
time it will be possible to define something called Majorism. But for now,
the politician who has journeyed from Brixton's Coldharbour Lane to No 10
Downing Street is promising no more and no less than a government which is
responsive as well as radical.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920411

