FT921-1348

FT  25 MAR 92 / Bulgaria unveils austerity budget


   By REUTER


   SOFIA


BULGARIA unveiled a tough austerity budget yesterday, saying it was tailored
to please the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF), Reuter
reports from Sofia.
The draft budget, which provoked heated debates in parliament, proposes a
deficit of 9.2bn leva (Pounds 226.5m) or 4.3 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP).
Last year's budget deficit turned out to be 8.5bn leva, or about 3.9 per
cent of GDP. It was originally set at 7.5bn leva.
'The budget has been drawn up in line with the the IMF and World Bank and
fulfils their recommendations,' the finance minister, Mr Ivan Kostov told
parliament.
Bulgaria, whose economy contracted by around 20 to 25 per cent last year,
and which is saddled with an Dollars 11.5bn foreign debt, needs the approval
of the IMF to attract foreign investment and reach agreements with its bank
creditors.
The 1992 budget provides for 53.6bn leva of expenditure and 44.4bn leva of
revenue. Last year's budget originally set revenue of 63bn leva and
expenditure of 70.5bn.
The new budget, the first by a non - communist government for four decades,
slashes capital and social security spending.
'The budget is reasonable and consistent with the objectives of the
government, which set priority on privatisation and development of the
private sector,' said Mr Emmanuel Dzervoudakis, the IMF representative in
Bulgaria.
The former communist Bulgarian Socialist party protested at the austerity
measures.
The government faced its first crisis on yesterday when miners and oil
workers demanding better working conditions threatened to strike against new
economic policies.
The Podkrepa trade union warned of strike action after talks with the
government broke down over plans to close down or cut production at uranium,
zinc, lead and iron ore mines.
'We are protesting against the lack of a government concept for the
country's mining industries and failure to fulfil promises given to us last
year on better working and pay conditions,' a union official, Mr Dimitar
Dimov, said.
Coal miners and workers at Bulgaria's largest oil refinery in Burgas on the
Blask Sea also threatened to strike.
The industry minister, Mr Ivan Pushkarov, said metal production could
survive only with radical restructuring of the industry and drastic manpower
cuts. He said the state had spent more than 900m leva recently to cover
losses by the mining industry.
In recent years Bulgaria produced an average 105m tonnes of lead annually,
but output more than halved to 50m tonnes last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920325

