FT924-6107

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (13): An exhausting
programme of technology - A look ahead at the development of new products


   By ALAN BUNTING


ENVIRONMENTAL legislation has become the most powerful influence on truck
technology and will remain so, through to the year 2000 and beyond. The
challenge for manufacturers is one of complying with progressively-tougher
exhaust emission and noise limits, while remaining competitive on vehicle
cost, fuel consumption and performance.
Though environmentalists might argue otherwise, making trucks quieter and
cleaner does little or nothing to enhance their appeal in the eyes of
today's recession-battered transport operator, whose concerns are more than
ever centred on costs and vehicle productivity.
If truck operators lived in a world where fuel consumption, vehicle price
and payload (carrying capacity) were of no consequence, then cutting noxious
emissions to the levels being demanded under so-called Euro 2 and 3
legislation in 1996 and 1998/9 would be simple.
But new technology is needed to clean up the diesel engine without incurring
those penalties. Oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and particulates are the two most
critical noxious exhaust constituents subject to legal limits. At present,
moves to reduce NOx lead to heavier fuel consumption and/or reduced engine
power.
At the same time, formation of particulates (visible as black exhaust smoke)
is increased. They can be readily removed from the exhaust using a filter,
albeit a heavy, bulky and expensive unit, in which the deposits are
periodically burned off harmlessly at high temperature.
But diesel technology is moving ahead at such a pace that many manufacturers
expect by the end of the decade to be offering engines which need no
aftertreatment (exhaust filters or catalytic converters) to meet even Euro 3
emissions legislation.
And those turn-of-the-century engines will match the performance and fuel
efficiency of today's diesels.
In the forefront of such development are the American company Cummins, which
builds engines in the UK, and Scania of Sweden. They have joined forces to
develop an all-new diesel fuel system called HPI (standing for high pressure
injection). It will raise peak injection pressures, from today's typical
1300bar, to 1700 or even 2000bar (30,000psi). With HPI, injection will start
later in the cycle and finish earlier, enabling both NOx and particulates to
be reduced.
Using the established American principle of mechanically- actuated
injectors, HPI will feature a new method of electronic injection control,
designed to overcome the leakage and injector bursting problems which would
otherwise result from such ultra-high fuel pressures.
Meanwhile, Mercedes-Benz is involved in a parallel fuel system research
collaboration with another US engine maker, Detroit Diesel. Less radical
technology will be applied than in HPI; further refinement of Detroit's
present DDEC electronically-controlled injectors is the most likely path of
development.
In the wake of the agreement with Mercedes, Robert Bosch, Europe's near
monopolistic diesel fuel system supplier, has taken a 49 per cent stake in
Detroit Diesel's research company.
Nevertheless, Bosch's own German-based research and development programmes
continue, with emission law compliance central to them.
Meanwhile, traditional European diesel fuel-injection systems, in which the
injector is opened hydraulically, continue to be developed. For diesel
makers wanting to meet Euro 2 emission laws, without the virtually total
engine redesign needed to accommodate HPI or DDEC, Bosch will be supplying
its new RP 39/43 sleeved-element pumps which feature electronic control of
injection timing and fuel metering (quantity).
Constrained by an inherent injection pressure limit of about 1300bar, their
installation will mean, for the same low emission levels, say the proponents
of HPIx, a greater fuel thirst. On one trend all truck and bus builders
agree: more electronics are inevitable and not just on engines.
Interactive electronic connections between the engine, semi- or
fully-automated gear-change systems, and anti-skid and anti-wheelspin
systems are already the subject of extensive road trials. Safety as well as
vehicle operating efficiency are driving such developments, as commercial
vehicle manufacturers struggle to endow their products with a more positive
image in the eyes of a hostile public.
Electronic control of compressed air-powered truck brake systems has been
under active development for nearly a decade. It promises higher safety
standards, specifically on the longest trucks and buses, where the
compressibility of the air in pipes running from the driver's brake pedal to
actuators on the rearmost axle create a built-in delay. A 'brake by wire'
system can eliminate that piping, each brake actuator being fed via an
adjacent air reservoir and solenoid valve.
Unfortunately, progress is inhibited by the need for both halves of
articulated tractor-trailer combinations to be equipped for electronic
braking. In a big fleet that hampers interchangeability and hence
operational flexibility.
Given most truck operators' conservative, even sceptical, view of
electronics - especially the thought of them applied to often neglected and
abused trailers - it is hardly surprising that 'braking by wire' has been
greeted less than enthusiastically.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921123

