FT924-1079

FT  19 DEC 92 / Travel: In search of the shy tribe of Thailand - Justin
Wintle heads south from Bangkok into baking hot mountain country in pursuit
of a tiny timid people and is greeted with laughter


   By JUSTIN WINTLE


HAVING escaped the sticky velvet claws of Bangkok, I am in no hurry to
return. I decide, instead, to head south, all the way down the Kra isthmus
to the Malaysian border. My object is to visit a tribe called the Sakai.
My interest in the Sakai is twofold. In the first instance they are
Australasian-Negroids, sometimes called pygmy negritos. Having once
travelled around the Solomon Islands, I am curious to see for myself the
physical relationship between the Sakai and some of the black Melanesians
encountered in the South Pacific.
Secondly, more whimsically, I am chasing a different sort of memory. My
earliest forays into Thailand, in the mid-1970s, regularly took me to the
north of the country, beyond Chiang Mai. There, like other would-be
jungle-bashers of the period, I hunted out relatively unknown hill-tribes.
My happiest achievement was to have spent a week with the dog-eating,
opium-smoking Akhai, in a village to which even my hired guide refused to
accompany me. Since then, however, those remote mountain areas have been
opened up, and hill-tribe-visiting, among the Akhai, Meo and Karen, has
become a tourist routine.
The deep and mainly Moslem Thai south, on the other hand, has lagged behind
tourism's relentless exploitation of the country's human resources, and so
it is my hope to resavour some of the joy of original travel.
I take the early boat from Nathon to the mainland, weaving through smaller
islands of great beauty. Then it is a five-hour coach journey to Hat Yai,
about half-way to my intended destination.
Hat Yai, though, is more than a staging post. Rather, it is the south's
principal commercial city. Three long central streets provide a mart for
chattels of all sorts, including exotic birds and fish. What gives the place
its character is the identity of the shoppers: mainly Malaysians who have
streamed over the border at Sadao or Padang Besar in search of bargains or a
good time.
Like every other place in Thailand, Hat Yai has a smattering of tarts, only
more so. There are no go-go bars, though: for the Moslem customers a
non-alcoholic presentation is preferred.
Even so, in the wake of Aids, Hat Yai has been the cause of considerable
acrimony between the Thai and Malaysian governments. South of the border the
authorities have done what they can to discourage sex-trips; north of it,
officials have issued dubious disclaimers.
I check in at the Dusit J B, the hotel that seems most likely to offer me
comfort and least likely to give me a sexually transmitted disease.
Fortunately, my hunch is accurate on both counts. A new wing has rooms that
are probably superior to any others in a radius of several hundred
kilometres and no massage parlour-cocktail lounge-nightclub, although the
same cannot be said of the old wing.
Then I make my way to the regional tourist office. In no time at all, and
with the help of a local tour operator, a three-day programme is planned.
Mercifully, the only material about the Sakai available is half a typed page
that tells me they 'are content just living day to day eating this and
that,' and that 'their greatest fear is the fear of ghosts.'
The following day is spent loitering in the Hat Yai area, which mainly means
loitering around Songkhla, the adjacent port and resort city. I am taken to
a splendid seven-tiered waterfall at Ton Nga Chang which massages the eyes
and ears as no human agent could. Then it is eastwards and up another hill,
to the Institute for Southern Thai Studies' Folklore Museum, a scattering of
teak pavilions that contain, among many other traditional artefacts, an
unrivalled collection of personalised coconut graters.
A coconut grater in this part of the world is not a slim tin object you hang
on your kitchen wall. Rather, it is a low-lying stool, carved out of a
single block of wood, with a metallic blade inserted in the forward section.
In a country that offers more scope for individualism than anywhere else in
the Far East, these blocks have, over the centuries, taken on the forms of
various animals - tigers, rabbits, turtles, even small boys.
But perhaps the finest exhibits are the stunning views over nearby fishing
villages, with stilted prawneries stretching far into the sea, and across
Songkhla Lake. Thither I now descend. What is left of the afternoon and the
early evening is spent loitering on Samila Beach. Miss Ouyporn from the
tourist office gathers spiral shells from around the base of a deteriorating
and much-photographed golden mermaid and gives them to me: a simple
hospitality that puts even the offshore naval frigate in a kindly light.
But Miss Ouyporn, alas, has not been detailed to venture with me to Yala and
beyond, so my travels are now to be unleavened by the female presence.
Instead, they are increasingly hot. The temperature climbs steadily to 40`C
and higher. There is also a frisson of danger, as my (male) guide explains.
The southernmost provinces were once a communist stronghold, and although
there are no communists now, there are still a few 'outlaws' who have
somehow acquired 'war weapons.'
The road, running parallel but at a distance from the slanting Malaysian
border, is serviceable, the half-baked landscape thinly populated. A
disproportionate quantity of white Mercedes, not all of them bearing
Malaysian number-plates, kick up clouds of dust that pick out the road
ahead, as do a disproportionate quantity of small military convoys. In the
villages, where there should be gleaming temples, there are mosques instead.
We are now on the edge of a typhoon belt, though happily, in boiling April,
the belt is dormant. We pass through Chana, a nowhere village that boasts
one of the oddest festivals in Asia: a competition of singing doves. In a
small park a forest of tall bamboo poles stands ready and waiting for 1,000
cages to be hoisted aloft. The trills and cooing of the zebra doves, brought
by their owners from all over south-east Asia, are then keenly compared,
though with the poles only 1 metre or so apart and 3m-4m high it must be
hard to arrive at a clear winner.
After two hours the road forks: Pattani and Narathiwat to the left, Yala to
the right. We turn right. Hills and small mountains materialise. In one of
these there is a vast cave, as big as a provincial cathedral, and within is
a reclining Buddha, 25m long and 700 years old, a remnant of the Srijaya
civilisation of far-away Java.
At my insistence we spend too long at Wat Khuhaphimuk. The Buddha really is
impressive, the more so since I had no forewarning of it. But what makes the
place special, even unique, is the ragged gaping hole in the cave's roof.
Overgrown with twisted tropical flora on its circumference, it seems to
control the inflow of light so that the Buddha's vast closed-eyed face is
naturally illuminated without being woken. Spindly grey monkeys clamber up
the steep rockface to peer down through this vent. To see them from within
is a curious inversion of roles. One feels examined, as though a member of a
peculiar species that doesn't quite fit in with the rest of the natural
order.
And so to Yala, which again surprises me, for it is not, as I had expected,
a scrubby southern market town but something of a garden city, painstakingly
laid out in concentric circles with a long and more or less prosperous
boulevard to boot.
We put up for the night at the Yala Rama, which is clean and modern enough,
but clearly a prostitute hotel. Notices in the lift proclaim three distinct
retail outlets: a nightclub, a cocktail lounge and a barber-shop backing
onto a snooker room, both offering massage.
On the morning of the third day we at last set off for the Sakai village, in
Than To district, Yala province. The road, snaking toward the border town of
Betong between steep and jagged mountains sporting heavy green jungle
plumage, is nothing short of glorious. We have entered one of the better of
Thailand's 63 national parks.
We stop first at the park's headquarters, to collect a ranger and his
antique rifle. From there it is a mere 30 minutes in our Toyota Carry Boy to
the Sakhai settlement, called Village No 3 in the Ban Rae sub-district.
It is a small place, eight huts and an open hall strewn on the side of a hot
hill overlooking a hotter valley, total population 37, the only Sakhai
domiciled in Thailand. As luck would have it, 25 of them, representing
one-twelfth of all the Sakai on the planet, are absent, visiting relatives
in Malaysia. But as luck also has it, the headman, Mr Lud, has stayed behind
with two of the womenfolk and two of the childfolk.
When I arrive, all five are seated in the open hall watching TV. In spite of
their legendary shyness, none of them runs away. They remain glued to the
box. Yet I manage to detach old Lud, a cheerful, smiling man. His features,
weathered and compressed, with upwardly exposed nostrils and reds insteads
of whites around the small brown eyes, are instantly recognisable, or would
be were I on Guadalcanal. Although he is 50-plus, he has the unspoilt torso
of a 12-year-old.
What is even better is Lud's volubility. Nor is there a language problem: he
speaks the same Malay as my guide. He tells me as much as anyone could be
told about the Sakhai in an hour.
Originally his people were nomadic, wandering to and fro across the frontier
at will. But the communist insurgency put a stop to that. Both governments
decided it would enhance security if the Sakhai put down roots, so most were
settled in Malaysia while a few ended up in Thailand. The village children
attend Thai schools, where they are taught the Thai language. It is left to
Mr Lud to teach them the Sakai language. It would, he says, break his heart
if the day ever came when no-one knew the rudiments of Sakhainese.
But does he like his new home, his new environment? Lud giggles. Things are
very nice. The huts are well-made, the government provides electricity, and
he likes the TV. The village itself is 10 years old. But there again, it is
different to the way he grew up.
As well as housing, his people have been granted some land. But land
ownership brings responsibilities. In the old days one simply scavenged in
the forest for food. Now, to an extent, the Sakai must earn their keep. They
produce four or five sheets of rubber a day, as well as a little coffee and
some coconuts. 'So we can make some money for ourselves, which we never had
before, to spend on rice, which we never ate before.'
Lud takes me across to his hut, vanishes for a few moments, and reappears
with some scrawny roots. These, it transpires, are the traditional herbal
medicines of his people, culled from the forest. They work against most
jungle diseases - he has never had malaria - but in the big world of
antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals, he finds they have no value.
What, I ask, does Mr Lud think will happen to him when he dies?
'Oh, religion, you mean. We find that very confusing. Of course we want to
go to heaven, but the Buddhists tell us the path lies this way, while the
Moslems say no, the path lies that way. Should we burn our dead, or bury
them?'
'But what did the Sakai believe in the past?' Again he giggles.
'Not a lot, I think. We were too busy enjoying ourselves, moving through the
jungle all the time. Or, if we did believe in anything, I've forgotten it
now.'
'And visitors? Does it annoy you when people like me arrive in your village
with a lot of questions and cameras?'
Mr Lud explodes with laughter.
'No, no, no. I love visitors. I wish we had more. You see, even with the TV,
even when everyone is here, it gets so lonely.'
I stand to leave. My guide puts in a question of his own. Can Mr Lud show us
his deadly blowpipe? For the first time he looks sad. Sorry, no blowpipe. He
had one, but he sold it to the local police chief for a measly sum.
The word from Village No 3 is that the Thai Sakai are well on their way to
being assimilated . . . all 37 of them.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

921219

