FT922-566

FT  26 JUN 92 / Navy boards French boat after 'unprovoked attack'


   By RICHARD EVANS


ROYAL NAVY officers yesterday boarded a French fishing boat off the Isles of
Scilly following an 'unprovoked attack' by French trawlermen on Cornish
boats over disputed fishing rights.
Mr David Curry, fisheries minister, told the Commons there had been a
'violent and outrageous' incident, and the UK government intended to bring
sustained pressure on the French authorities 'to make sure their vessels are
brought to book'.
The incident, one of several in recent months as a new bilateral fishing
agreement is being drawn up, has created anger among the Cornish fishing
community and some MPs, but it might not develop into a full-scale
diplomatic row.
The UK government, while taking a tough line, clearly does not wish to see
unnecessary friction with France as it takes over the European Community
presidency, and the French authorities were conciliatory.
Mr Curry said Mr Charles Josselin, French secretary of state for the sea
with responsibility for the fishing industry, had 'vigorously condemned' the
behaviour of the French boats, and had pledged a full investigation followed
by firm action should the allegations be confirmed.
HMS Brecon, a minehunter and fisheries protection vessel, was sent to the
scene, 16 miles north of the Scilly Isles, following a dispute involving
three small boats from Newlyn in Cornwall and two larger French vessels from
Concarneau in Brittany.
The Cornish vessels alleged that the French deliberately ploughed through
their nets and when the St Uny, one of the Newlyn boats, approached one of
the French vessels, the Larche, to advise it on the position of its nets, it
was pelted with pieces of metal and chain.
A second incident was also reported to have taken place between the Larche
and the St Uny. No one was hurt in either incident, although several
thousand pounds of damage was said to have been done to the Cornish boats'
nets.
Officers from HMS Brecon later boarded the Larche, with the permission of
its skipper, to seek further information about the incidents. They also
planned to board the St Uny and to remain on patrol to prevent any further
confrontation.
The clashes are the culmination of incidents going back several years.
Fishermen's groups from Britain and France are on the point of agreeing
fishing rights beyond the six-mile territorial limit. The area where the
incidents took place is being divided into 'boxes' to prevent such clashes
happening, but details have yet to be finalised.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920626

