FT923-15520

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, state of the union: Majors ministers prepare wide
ranging agenda


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Correspondent, DAVID DODWELL, World Trade
Editor, DAVID LASCELLES, Resources Editor and DAVID GOODHART, Labour Editor


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
Britain's chancellor, Mr Norman Lamont, may be a Euro-sceptic at heart. But
his agenda during the UK presidency will be firmly based on two elements of
the Maastricht treaty, writes Peter Norman, Economics Correspondent.
While Maastricht's main purpose it to lay down the route to European Union,
the chancellor's EC policy will be based on those passages which specify
that the Community shoul have an 'open market economy with free competition'
and operate on the principle of 'sound public finances'.
The latter principle has been thrown into sharp relief by the failure of the
Lisbon summit to make progress on the future shape of the EC's finances.
This leaves the British presidency with the difficult task of beginning
negotiations again on trying to trim back the so-called Delors II package of
Commission proposals calling for a real increase of almost a third in EC
revenue between now and 1997.
Mr Lamont has vigorously opposed the Commission's plans in the past but will
be working to reach an agreement by December's EC summit in Edinburgh.
While the UK presidency may require the chancellor to be more even handed
than he might like in discussions on the future of the EC budget, Sir John
Cope, the paymaster general, will feel under no such constraint when batting
for Britain against Mr Delors' plans over the next six months.
UK ministers will be putting considerable stress on value for money when
negotiating to ensure that the future financial arrangements of the EC fit
in with Britain's idea of budgetary stringency.  In other respects, however,
the chancellor has already indicated some flexibility on EC affairs.
On Monday, he signalled a willingness to drop the UK's long standing
opposition to the EC setting a minimum value added tax rate as part of a
bargain that would include lower excise duties for whisky than those
proposed by the Commission in Brussels.
Although no final decision was taken, the move may take the contentious VAT
issue off the boil for the duration of the presidency, particularly as the
latest proposals would allow the UK to retain its zero-rated VAT for
products such as food and childrens' clothing.
Mr Lamont will also be pressing his EC colleagues to support the completion
of the single market and to lobby in their own cabinets for a liberal EC
trade policy.  The UK presidency will give him a high-profile opportunity to
press for more open EC markets for goods from the former communist countries
of eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
The chancellor believes that one of the important duties of a finance
minister is to promote supply side reforms that make economies more
efficient and sensitive to market signals.  If he has his way, such broader
issues and their long term impact on the EC will play a significant part in
the informal weekend talks among Community finance ministers scheduled for
early September in Bath.
If any British minister is poised for Britain's EC presidency, it should be
'the Prez', as staff at the Department of Trade and Industry irreverently
refer to Mr Michael Heseltine, their minister and president of the Board of
Trade, writes David Dodwell, World Trade Editor.
Mr Heseltine sees three priorities:  successful conclusion of the Uruguay
Round;
completion of the Cockfield agenda of 282 harmonisation measures in the
European single market by next January 1;
Progess on 'outstanding specific policy initiatives', including issues like
the extent of national powers inside the single market, enlargement, and
liberalisation.
'If we are going through something as ambitious as the Cockfield agenda,
there are inevitably going to be compromises and arrangements that are not
as good as you would like, so we are going to want to look carefully to see
where further progess can be made,' he says.  'We shall revisit many of
those compromises in the interests of even more competitive circumstances,
or in pursuit of our determination to flatten the bumps in an only partially
level playing field.'
He sees liberatlisation as a constant, evolving force essential to Europe's
future competitiveness:  'I do not mean a well-meaning, wishy-washy
liberalism, but a dynamic and radical programme to remove regulation, open
markets and give people freedom of action and choice.'
In specific terms, he is looking to liberalisation in the gas and
electricity sectors, in telecommunications and in air transport.
He talks of 'three great economic realities' that will guide 'our
presidency'.
The single market itself.
The overriding importance to UK exporters of markets in the developed world,
where 'trade does not need special support'. This hints that he intends to
give little ground to special pleading exporters to developing countries for
soft loans and favourable export insurance premiums.
Developing countries need access to industrial markets more than aid. This
suggests strong support for the market-opening aims of the Uruguay Round,
and new association agreements with eastern European countries.
The first test of his mettle will come sooner than he might like, Britain
and Germany have been busy over the past two weeks trying to broker and
EC-US compromise on liberalising farm trade that would break the deadlock on
the Uruguay Round before next week's Munich summit.  The past three EC
presidencies have been dedicated to a similar compromise - in vain.  It
would be a sterling start to the presidency if he could succeed.
Coming hard on the heels of the Earth Summit, the environment will loom
large in the UK presidency.  Mr John Major has already written to EC heads
of government proposing deadlines for implementing decisions taken at Rio,
including ratification of the treaties to curb greenhouse gases and protect
bio-diversity, writes David Lascelles, Resources Editor.
However, Mr Michael Howard, the UK environment minister, will be pursuing
some specific British aims.  One is to ensure that EC environmental measure
are more evenly implemented throughout the Community.  The UK has always
complained that while it adheres to EC rules, others quietly ignore them.
So it will press for an 'Inspectorate of Inspectorates', a Brussels watchdog
that will chase up national environmental agencies.
The UK also hopes to resolve the long-running wrangle over the siting of the
EC's own environment agency.  This has been held up by the horse-trading
over the location of other EC institutions.
Measures already on the agenda include the completion of the EC's fifth
action plan on the environment - a kind of check list which parallels Rio's
Agenda 21.  A directive on disposal of waste is in the works, and further
decisions will need to be taken on aiding the clean-up of east Europe.
One measure unlikely to make much head-way during the UK presidency is the
plan form an EC carbon tax.  With the departure of Mr Carlo Ripa di Meana,
the environment commissioner, it has lost its chief proponent, and the UK
was lukewarm at best.  On the other hand, the idea will not go away.  It
remains, an option for reducing carbon emissions and stimulating energy
efficiency, and several EC states are keen on it, if only to boost tax
revenues.
Employment secretary Gillian Shephard will use her six months in the chair
of the council of ministers to argue for 'minimalist' approach to EC
employment legislation rather than introduce a raft of new directives,
writes David Goodhart, Labour Editor.
She may also be in a position to further postpone the controversial working
time directive. laying down minimum holidays and maximum working hours.  An
understanding was reached last week on the main points but important
technical differences remain between Germany and France.
Mrs Shephard, helped by the Danish referendum, has been good at winning
sympathy from other countries for striking out what the UK dislikes in the
directive.  Her officials say she is closer to the European Christian
Democrat tradition than here predecessor, Mr Michael Howard.
But considering that Britain would still prefer to see the directive fall
Mrs Shephard may be in the odd position of steering this directive on to the
statute book; possibly then to launch a legal challenge to it at a later
date.
The UK government hopes and believes that the high-water mark of
interventionist employment legislation - epitomised by the working time
directive - is now past.
The themes to be highlighted by the UK at various events around Britain
include employment creation, health and safety, removing obstacles to labour
mobility, and training.
The UK's other passion is the implementation of social directives. It can
point the finger, having implemented 22 out of 22.  Just behind it comes
Germany with 21.  Ireland trails everybody, with 16, but four countries have
only implemented 17.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920701

