FT922-475

FT  27 JUN 92 / Markets: Two tales of high street banking - The Bottom Line


   By DAVID BARCHARD


TSB returned to the black this week with pre-tax profits of Pounds 92m in
the first half of its financial year to April 30.
It was not a particularly sparkling performance but it was a world away from
the misery of TSB's first half results in 1991, when heavy losses at Hill
Samuel, its merchant banking arm, plunged it into a Pounds 150m loss after
making bad debt provisions of Pounds 422m.
The market seems to have seen this improvement coming. After being out of
favour during the second half of last year, TSB has generally outperformed
the market in 1992.
TSB clearly feels that it has things back under control at Hill Samuel and
that its retail banking side is moving along fairly well in spite of the
recession. The worst bad debt problems on its retail operations come from
Mortgage Express, a now defunct subsidiary which lent to the wrong sort of
customer at the height of the housing boom.
Provisions on Mortgage Express were Pounds 37m - and it is by no means
certain that all the bad news is out of the way.
TSB's management is hoping that the years of hard slog are over. A few years
ago, it was a straggly federation of local savings banks with little focus
on its business and much higher operating costs than the rest of the
industry.
That picture has been transformed. TSB has its cost base under control and
has shed nearly 5,000 staff. It knows who its customers are and what it
wants to sell them. In some areas, notably the sale of insurance products
through branches, it is streets ahead of most of its UK competitors.
The trouble is that it is as much affected by the recession as any other
high street bank. The latest results showed that its lending business is
marking time, but that it is chasing high interest deposit customers with
considerable success.
This suggests that its interest income could come under pressure in the
months ahead as it pays out more to its savers without earning more income
from loans. It may be able to offset this by selling other financial
services to those well-to-do customers with their high interest savings
accounts.
Perhaps this is partly why stockbroker analysts still seem to have rather
muted expectations of TSB, even though there are good grounds for thinking
that its troubles are over. But it is also a stock with some bid potential.
TSB's five year period of protection from takeover ended last autumn and
unless it grows in size, it could well attract a predator.
TSB's chequered history contrasts starkly with Abbey National's seemingly
effortless succession of good performances since its stock market flotation
three years ago.
Abbey National is generally seen as a reliable cash generating machine with
a return on capital of more than 17 per cent, even though it is even more
dependent on the housing market than TSB.
Next month Abbey National turns in its half year figures, but there is a
general expectation on the market that they will show a steep rise in loan
loss provisions.
Last year these were Pounds 155m. This summer they could be 50 per cent up
and Abbey National signalled to shareholders in April that profits will be
down at the half year.
That does not necessarily mean that a poor set of results is on the way or
that the medium term outlook is bad. Abbey National has a dividend cover of
two, well ahead of what most other banks are capable of these days.
Abbey National has no merchant bank or corporate lending portfolio to hold
it back and its record on bad debts is likely to remain far better than
those of its competitors among banks and building societies.
Next year should set the seal on its run of successes when its assets
overtake those of its rival of many years, the Halifax Building Society,
making it the undisputed leader of the UK housing finance industry.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920627

