FT921-14042

FT  17 JAN 92 / A fragile exchange: The effect of tensions within the EMS


   By DAVID MARSH


Mr Jacques de la Rosiere, the governor of the Bank of France, emphasises his
country's new-found monetary rectitude by spelling out to visitors his
employees' latest pay increase: just 2.5 per cent.
He arches his Gallic eyebrows at events in Germany. As part of general high
wage demands in this year's German pay round, the civil servants'
association - which covers officials at the Bundesbank - has launched a
claim for an increase of 10.5 per cent. German steelworkers, meanwhile, this
week have threatened to strike in pursuit of a 10 per cent-plus pay claim -
even though yesterday there was growing confidence that a 5 to 6 per cent
pay deal might be negotiated without recourse to widespread work stoppages.
The uncharacteristic flagging of Germany's inflation performance - one of
the side-effects of German unification - - has a crucial influence on the
present strains within in the European Monetary System (EMS).
The nervousness surrounding sterling - which was yesterday still hovering
just above its effective floor in the system - reflects just part of the
tensions. The strongest currency in the EMS remains the Spanish peseta, but
the Italian lira, French franc and Danish crown have all been weak lately
against the D-Mark.
The EMS has functioned for five years without a significant exchange rate
realignment. But partly because Germany has fallen from financial virtue as
a result of post-unity economic turbulence, the system is starting to look
vulnerable, for three basic reasons:
High German interest rates: these have risen as a consequence of the
Bundesbank's worries that Germany's unity-induced boom in 1989-90 has left
the country with an inflationary hangover. The German public sector deficit
is running at about 4 per cent of gross domestic product, caused by
large-scale public sector transfers to east Germany, while German wage
inflation last year was an unusually high 7 per cent.
Worries about sterling: the British government has firmly ruled out
devaluation. But with the economy still in the doldrums, the UK has been the
only member of the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) not to have increased
interest rates in the wake of the Bundesbank's pre-Christmas boost in
discount and Lombard rates. Confidence has not been helped by the Bundesbank
view - shared by some at the Bank of England - that sterling joined the ERM
15 months ago at an uncompetitively high rate.
Longer-term concern about the position of the higher-inflation currencies
within the EMS, above all the lira and the peseta: both Italy and Spain are
running large current account deficits and will be prime candidates for
devaluation if a large realignment needs to take place during the next two
years as part of preparations for economic and monetary union (Emu).
In spite of this fragility, a realignment in the near future looks
improbable, especially after the D-Mark's fall against the dollar in the
last few days. Most EMS participants are considerably more wedded to
exchange rate stability than at the time of the last shake-up in parities
five years ago.
Most of these countries believe that the competitive advantage gained
through any devaluation against the D-Mark would be outweighed by the
negative effects on inflation. Rather than seeking a currency adjustment,
Germany's partners seem likely, therefore, reluctantly to tolerate high
interest rates in the next few months - part of the price of German unity.
One senior European central banker who has played a key role in running the
nearly 13-year-old EMS says: 'There was a good argument to revalue the
D-Mark 18 months ago to lower inflationary pressures (during the
reunification process). If that had happened, there would have been less of
a boom in Germany, inflation would still be only 2.5 per cent, and German
interest rates would not be so high.'
Now, however, with German growth slowing, he says: 'The situation is
different. The time for a revaluation has been missed.'
In his struggle to avoid a foreign exchange market showdown, Mr Norman
Lamont, the UK chancellor, has several cards up his sleeve.
Sterling's crucial EMS floor - at present, just below DM2.85 - is set by the
peseta, the only currency other than sterling to benefit from the wide 6 per
cent fluctuation margin. If the Spanish currency moves lower in coming
weeks, this automatically increases the pound's leeway to drop to its
ultimate floor of DM2.78, reducing pressure on the UK authorities to take
defensive action.
If the Bank of England does need to intervene to protect sterling, it can
draw on an increased stock of foreign exchange reserves - much of them now
held in D-Marks. The UK's currency reserves have risen since the end of 1986
from Dollars 13bn to Dollars 36bn. This is part of an unprecedented Dollars
125bn increase in the currency holdings of Germany's eight ERM partner
central banks during the past five years.
There is now less overall economic reason for a currency adjustment than in
the past. European inflation rates have converged noticeably during the past
five years - sharply narrowing interest rate differentials (see chart).
With French inflation down to 3.1 per cent last year, against 4.2 per cent
in Germany, the Bank of France believes that the franc could eventually take
over the 'anchor' role in the EMS enjoyed by the D-Mark, allowing the French
government to reduce its interest rates to less than Germany's. This
explains why Mr Pierre Beregovoy, the French finance minister, has become
the arch-defender of the franc's present D-Mark parity.
One senior French finance ministry official remarks with hauteur: 'We find
it unacceptable that a currency with a lower inflation rate should be
devalued.' If there should be a realignment in the future, he says, the
franc would move up in line with a revaluation of the D-Mark.
Mr Beregovoy's rebuttals of devaluation now have considerable credibility,
for he has found some powerful allies at home. In spite of slow growth and
increasing unemployment - projected to rise to more than 10 per cent in
early 1992 - there is near-consensus among French industrialists in favour
of keeping the franc stable.
The French Patronat employers' organisation, which called at the beginning
of the 1980s for a lower franc, now firmly rebuts the devaluation option.
'Exchange rate discipline has had very positive effects on the
competitiveness and efficiency of French enterprises,' says Mr
Ernest-Antoine Seilliere, Patronat vice-president in charge of economic
affairs. 'For decades, we experienced systematic devaluations, which became
a way of life. We do not want to start again.'
Similar firmness on the need to stick to current EMS levels is shown by
employers' organisations in the UK and Germany. Mr Douglas McWilliams,
economic adviser to the Confederation of British Industry, says he is
pleasantly surprised by the number of industrialists supporting the UK
government's anti-devaluation line. Of CBI members, he estimates that 'most
would go along with a small rise in interest rates rather than a
devaluation'. Sir Brian Corby, the CBI president, yesterday ruled out a
devaluation as 'unacceptable, unnecessary and counter-productive'.
Mr Ludolf von Wartenberg, general manager of the Federation of German
Industries, the BDI, urges EMS partners to stick to the 'stability course. A
realignment would not be helpful', he says. 'Other countries may try to
escape the influence of German interest rates. But it would not solve their
difficulties.'
As European governments ponder how long the German credit squeeze will last,
forecasts that the Bundesbank will reduce its key lending rates by April are
starting to look more credible after a sharp fall in German capital market
yields during the past few weeks - a signal that the German economic
slowdown is now starting to bite.
Much will depend on the outcome of the next few weeks of German wage
bargaining. If further evidence of sluggishness in the German economy
coincides with moderation in pay deals, there will be overwhelming pressure
on the Bundesbank to relax its stance. 'At these high levels of interest
rates,' says one key Bundesbank official, 'the air gets a little thin.'
In the meantime, Germany's EMS partners will have little choice but to take
the medicine from Frankfurt.

The Financial Times


London Page 16 Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted).

920117

