FT922-4055

FT  08 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Rugby pays Pounds 15.3m for Ward after
unusual administration


   By IAN HAMILTON FAZEY, Northern Correspondent


WARD GROUP, which makes technically advanced components for the building
industry but ran out of cash to survive the recession, has been bought by
Rugby Group for Pounds 15.3m. Nearly 1,000 jobs will be saved in Britain,
France and Germany.
Ward, based in Sherburn, North Yorkshire, went into administration last
month, but the sale to Rugby was only made possible because two Coopers &
Lybrand partners sent in to run it borrowed Pounds 2m to sell it as a going
concern. Accountants say such a move on the part of the receiver is unusual,
but not without precedent.
Rugby, also in the construction components business, has got Ward cheaply,
since the book value of net assets purchased is Pounds 27.1m. Ward has been
trading on a cash with order basis while a buyer was found.
The purchase will strengthen Rugby's position in the metal products market
and give it Ward's Atlas building system, which supplies complete metal
buildings packages through a network of approved contractors.
Ward also makes structural steel frames, pre-engineered components and steel
cladding systems, as well as owning Abbseal, a glass processor and insulated
glazing manufacturer with modern plant in Leeds and Peterborough.
Ward made Pounds 12.6m on sales of Pounds 175m in 1989, when interest
charges were Pounds 266,000. In 1990, turnover dropped to just under Pounds
173m but profits tumbled to Pounds 8.7m as interest charges rose nearly
eightfold to more than Pounds 2m. Last year's sales crashed to only Pounds
99m and Ward just managed to break even before interest.
However, the soundness of Ward's advanced products in construction markets
convinced Mr Michael Moore and Mr David Waterhouse of Coopers' Leeds office
that they should risk borrowing Pounds 2m to keep it going. The money will
be repaid by the deal and Coopers, which would have shared any losses, will
get a fee.
Ward's creditors agreed to freeze their positions. Mr Moore said all would
now be paid. 'Although it was risk, it was an innovative approach which
worked well,' Mr Moore added.
The sale includes marketing companies for Ward building systems in Germany
and France, as well as Multicom in Colmar, France, a steelwork manufacturer
employing 151 people.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920608

