FT924-6252

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (12): One-time jewel in
the crown shows up flaws - Profile of Navistar International


   By LAURIE MORSE


LEGENDARY financier JP Morgan would certainly blink if he saw the balance
sheet of Navistar International, a slimmed-down version of the former
International Harvester, once a jewel in Morgan's turn-of-the-century
corporate empire. The company, having eluded bankruptcy in the mid-1980s, is
once again on the financial brink.
Battling five-year cumulative losses, Navistar sold off the Harvester name
and its prestigious line of agricultural machinery in 1985. The ambitious
restructuring saved it from bankruptcy, and its surviving core businesses of
heavy- and medium-weight truck and engine manufacturing were projected to
carry it to solvency.
However, seven years after the overhaul, the company is still dogged by
losses and is locked in negotiations with the United Autoworkers' Union over
benefits for retired employees that it contends could push it into
bankruptcy. Chicago-based Navistar reported its eighth consecutive quarterly
loss last month, an outflow of Dollars 50m, or 13 cents per share, on sales
of Dollars 920m.
With a whopping 251m shares outstanding, those sales translate into little
more than Dollars 3 1/2 for each share. Navistar's stock has not traded over
Dollars 5 since 1989, and is now about Dollars 2 a share.
The core of Navistar's financial difficulties do not rest with its
day-to-day operations, which analysts agree are in fine shape. The class
eight heavy truck market, of which Navistar holds a 20 per pent market
share, is pulling out of recession with gusto, and is projected to grow by
about 20,000 units in 1993. Heavy truck assembly comprises about 40 per cent
of Navistar's business.
The medium-truck market is still flat, with 1993 industry sales projected at
about 95,000 units. Navistar commands about 30 per cent of that market,
which represents about 40 per cent of its business. Included in the medium
truck class is Navistar's school bus chassis business. Navistar produces two
thirds of all the school bus chassis manufactured in North America. However,
the sector has been dented by recalls and weakness in municipal budgets, and
is expected to recover more slowly from the recession than other truck
lines.
Sales of Navistar's truck engines have increased steadily, and have
benefited from a recent Mexican expansion, and a Dollars 100m a year
commitment to production research and development.
The development programme has kept Navistar's truck engines in the forefront
in terms of fuel consumption and emissions controls, as well as in
production efficiency. 'Navistar has good products, and their engine
technology is as good as anyone's,' says Robert McCarthy, a securities
analyst with Chicago-based Duff and Phelps. 'In terms of the products they
present to the marketplace, they are extremely competitive.'
However, decisions during the 1986 restructuring are bleeding red ink on to
Navistar's bottom line. To trade off its big International Harvester units,
executives agreed to have Navistar retain responsibility for all of
International's former workers' retirement and health benefits. As
health-care costs have escalated in the US, the company has been swamped
with pension bills and related costs. The pension burdens increase operating
costs by about Dollars 150m a year - costs not shared by its competitors.
Securities analysts say that sum, ploughed back into income, would equate to
50 cents a share each year.
In its pared-down condition, Navistar supports three retired workers for
each of its active workers. A decade of downscaling has reduced the
company's workforce to 13,000, from 100,000 in 1980.
The realities of that ratio have caused John Horne, Navistar's president,
and James Cotting, the firm's chief financial officer, to seek to reduce the
level of health care and other benefits it provides to former workers. By
asking employees and retired workers to contribute some of their healthcare
costs, they expect to achieve annual savings of about Dollars 90m.
The alternative, they have said in court filings, is bankruptcy, and the
loss of the company's remaining jobs as well as retired workers' pension
benefits.
While declining to comment directly on the case, Mr Cotting noted that to
remain competitive, a company must focus on productivity. 'If you're not
servicing your customers or supporting your people who do, you simply can't
afford to be in business any more,' he said.
When first proposed in July, the reduced benefits were strongly opposed by
unions representing Navistar's workforce. However, by October the powerful
United Auto Workers' Union had agreed to negotiate, with both sides aiming
for a resolution by early December. The union has also agreed to open the
terms of its master contract for existing employees.
Mr John McGinty, securities analyst for the investment firm First Boston,
sees the talks as a potential landmark. If Navistar is successful in
obtaining union concessions on healthcare and pension issues, the
repercussions would reach far beyond its own workforce, and deeply influence
contract negotiations for autoworkers in Detroit next year, he said.

The Financial Times


London Page V

921123

