FT922-7227

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (3): Monopoly likely
to end soon - EC post offices may soon be facing more competition


   By JANINA WALKER


MAIL services around the world, once the monopoly of national post offices,
are set to be opened to more competition.
The hugely profitable UK Post Office is awaiting increased deregulation of
the Royal Mail while abroad a group of state-controlled post offices have
joined forces with private Australian express operator TNT.
Meanwhile, a long-awaited EC Green Paper on the future of the community
postal services, which has taken almost two years to compile, has
recommended gradual liberalisation of cross-border and direct mail services.
This is a significant softening of tone compared with earlier drafts which
recommended the removal of mail services from post office monopolies.
However, five state-owned post offices - three of them from member states -
went ahead with liberalisation of some services before the Green Paper was
published.
The administrations of Germany, the Netherlands, France, Sweden and Canada
formed a new group, GD Net, and embarked on a joint venture with a
subsidiary of TNT - TNT Express Worldwide - to handle their international
express traffic.
GD Net has taken a 50 per cent stake in the venture with the other half
owned by TNT. The new company is autonomous and managed independently of
both shareholders. It is also structured to allow other postal
administrations to join.
It is a marriage of the utmost convenience which gives the post offices the
opportunity to compete equally in an international express market worth
about Dollars 2.5bn.
TNT, who had been suffering in Europe from excessive competition, now have
guaranteed volumes within a high-fixed cost infrastructure. In addition,
they have benefited from a substantial cash injection into the venture by
the post offices.
Mr John Mullen, chief executive of TNT Worldwide Express, said: 'The current
level of losses in the industry were unsustainable. It was a worldwide
issue; we needed volume for fixed-cost structure and we needed partners to
develop a strategy - it had to be someone who could bring something to the
table.
'The post offices felt they desperately needed an integrated worldwide
structure to give them what no post office could have - a full end-to-end
chain.
'Ninety per cent of our customer base is corporate while 80 per cent of the
post offices' business comes from over the counter - the small-users market.
If you put the two together there is a lot of potential.
'Some post offices have reserved their position while others said they don't
intend joining. At the moment we are involved in discussions with the UK
post office.'
Thousands of words have already been written on what the EC Green Paper
might contain and it had been the source of intense wrangling in Brussels
between Sir Leon Brittan's competition directorate and the post and
telecommunications directorate.
Sir Leon had spoken of his commitment to full liberalisation of the
international and express postal services while the telecommunications
directorate took an entirely different view - giving support to arguments by
post offices against wholesale liberalisation.
The post offices feared that the broad reform which stripped them of their
monopoly rights meant they could not afford to maintain universal services.
The Green Paper does reiterate the right of each member state to apply for
'a more restrictive solution' under the EC treaty in the interest of
preserving a universal mail service.
Sir Leon, launching the Green Paper last week, said he would not rule out
the use of special Commission powers to break open national monopolies
without approval of member states.
He stressed that the Commission would move quickly to turn its discussion
document into legislation.
Mr Colin Mitchell, chairman of the UK-based Mail Express Services Users'
Association, said private operators had looked to the Green Paper for a
level playing field between post offices and non-monopoly suppliers in
competitive areas.
While the rest of Europe digests the implications of the Green Paper the UK
Post Office, widely regarded as the most efficient and the best in Europe,
is flexing its muscles for increased deregulation within the Royal Mail
which will remove its monopoly for letters costing under Pounds 1.
Research suggests that opening the postal service to competition would
create a Pounds 500m market for letter services.
Post Office chairman Sir Bryan Nicholson said he would welcome what he
describes as sensible competition and de-regulation and believes the
corporation is in a strong position to compete successfully within the new
market place.
Certainly, the Post Office itself is in good shape. During the past 10 years
it has contributed more than Pounds 700m to central government financing.
It is also true that no private operator could hope to match the sheer scale
of an organisation which handles around 60m letters a day.
The Post Office is also no stranger to handling competition - Parcelforce
and Royal Mail International compete against private operators for business.
However, the situation may not be so cut and dried.
Mirroring some European fears about opening up monopolies to increased
competition Mr Alan Tuffin, chairman of the Union of Communications Workers,
has warned that deregulation could mean the end to the universal service
with private operators taking the most profitable parts of the letters
business.
Mr Tuffin said: 'When this happens we will steadily fall into loss-making
decline which I believe will lead to cuts in services.'
The government has always been adamant that the universal service would be
retained and Sir Bryan said the Royal Mail would continue to give what he
describes as a top-class universal service to customers.
He dismissed the ideal of a free-for-all which would disadvantage rural and
outer urban areas.
'We have a national mandate and it is clearly against the customers'
interest - competition mustn't undermine that.'
Looking to the future, Sir Bryan believes the industry will move towards
more partnerships. He is negotiating with GD Net and said he was 'looking at
what is best for us and keeping my options open'.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920520

