FT924-876

FT  22 DEC 92 / World trade talks in 'race against time'


   By DAVID DODWELL


   GENEVA


COMMITMENTS by the US and EC to conclude a Uruguay Round trade deal by
mid-January will require endorsement from US President-elect Bill Clinton,
trade negotiators said in Geneva yesterday.
They said President George Bush and British prime minister Mr John Major,
while making an honest attempt to achieve a conclusion, had failed to take
note of the time needed to win agreement from the other 106 countries
negotiating the round.
One senior US official insisted that while negotiators remained ready to
settle the Uruguay Round, which has made faltering progress for the past six
years, the obstacles remained at a political level back in national
capitals: 'I don't see any change in circumstances between last week and
Christmas that are likely to make a mid-January conclusion possible.'
Another official argued that Gatt negotiators 'could not see the outgoing
Bush administration being able to make the sort of concessions that would
make an agreement possible.'
Mr Clinton has still to name his senior trade negotiator, though it is
assumed he will this week.
A senior EC official, who argued that with the right political impetus from
Washington and Brussels the EC and the US could settle outstanding
differences, insisted that neither President Bush nor Mr Major had taken
proper account at the weekend of the views of other countries negotiating
the Uruguay Round: 'We are not living in a world where the US and the EC can
assume a deal can be rubber-stamped by others. At the very least, they will
have to do some work on the issues back in their own capitals.
'President Bush and Mr Major have made an honest attempt to achieve a
conclusion, but have underestimated the resistance of the multilateral
system.'
The comments follow a rather gloomy top-level stock-taking meeting at the
end of last week, at which Mr Arthur Dunkel, director general of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, brought talks to an inconclusive halt ahead
of Christmas, commenting that 'now, more than ever, we are engaged in a race
against time.' He called for a further 'stock-taking' meeting on January 15,
which would keep pressure on negotiators, and test the authority of this
weekend's commitments from Washington.
Many countries represented at the meeting voiced frustration at slow
progress in recent weeks. Others criticised the US for demanding that a
number of issues - including anti-dumping rules and proposals for protection
of intellectual property - be reopened.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

921222

