FT922-4125

FT  06 JUN 92 / Leading Article: EC suffers a Viking attack


IN THE ninth and 10th centuries, Vikings used from time to time to fall upon
the undefended coastlines of western Europe. Jacques Delors, Francois
Mitterrand, Helmut Kohl and John Major, not to mention the other headmen of
the European Community, now experience the shock and dismay of these earlier
Europeans. Like them, they are anxiously wondering whether they will be
allowed to rebuild their city in peace. Can Brussels be restored to its
former glories, let alone fulfil the dreams held for its future?
Not only the chieftains are in distress. Ordinary inhabitants are concerned
about the prospects for their bonds and their gilts, their sterling and
their pesetas. Not so long ago, after all, they may have believed that these
would be included with bunds and the D-Mark in the great palace of economic
and monetary union. Is that hope overturned?
Not necessarily. In the first place, the Maastricht plan for reconstructing
the European Community is not yet destroyed. The rest of the European
Community seems likely to ratify the Treaty in the course of this year. At
that stage, it might be possible to cajole Denmark either into economic and
monetary union or, if not, out of the EC altogether. Either way, the 11
could continue to live in the city that Jacques built.
Moreover, the palace of Emu had, in any case, not gone much further than the
foundations. It was already unclear whether it would be finished by 1997,
1999 or even at all. It was equally unclear who would be allowed to live in
it.
The questions now are, first, whether the palace is much less likely to be
completed than previously thought; and second, whether the present temporary
ERM accommodation might prove an adequate substitute.
Uncertain future
Even before the Viking raid, the uncertainties about the future had been
clearly shown in the market. Long-term interest differentials vis-a-vis
German bunds were larger than inflation differentials in the cases of
France, Italy, the UK and Spain, the four most important potential entrants
into Emu. This would suggest that, far from the markets being confident that
Emu would be built, they were even less confident than the continuation of
current inflation performance would imply.
Spanish long-term interest rates, for example, were some 3 1/2 percentage
points above the German in early 1992, even though consumer price inflation
was only about 2 percentage points higher. Startlingly, Italian long
interest rates were about 4 3/4 percentage points higher than the German
even though inflation was only 1 1/4 percentage points higher.
The bond markets were, therefore, already indicating substantial doubt about
the long-term chances of exchange rate stability. A 4 3/4 percentage point
interest differential would, for example, offset a devaluation of almost 40
per cent within a decade. Of these countries, only France had interest rates
compatible with the expectation of exchange rate stability, although the UK
had been getting close to that point.
How much more uncertain can something already so uncertain become? Remember
that in the cases of Italy and Spain the widening in differentials predated
agreement of the Maastricht Treaty. Those increased doubts reflected
awareness that there would not only be tough convergence criteria, but that
the date for Emu might be as late as 1999 or, judged by the sudden onset of
bitter internal German controversy over the fate of the D-Mark, later still.
Markets shaken
Inevitably, the result of the Danish referendum has shaken the markets
further. The yield on Danish bonds rose by some 25 basis points between
Tuesday and Friday. Those on Spanish bonds rose by almost 40 basis points,
while those on Italian bonds rose by some 35 points. But other yields were
somewhat less affected. British and French bond rates rose by less than 20
basis points, while Dutch and German bond rates were unaltered.
The question is whether this represents a once and for all shift or the
beginning of serious instability. There are good reasons for not panicking.
Exchange rate stability within the ERM, which has experienced no general
re-alignment since the beginning of 1987, reflects at least as much an
economic as a political commitment. Governments had become convinced that
inflation was a hindrance not a help.
Where governments can make that economic commitment credible and are also
not replaced as a result of the rigours thus imposed, the ERM can yet prove
a substitute for an always uncertain Emu. This has a good chance of being
true of the UK. Given Mr Pierre Beregovoy's popularity, the same should be
true of France. Felipe Gonzalez also seems to have a chance of establishing
his government's convergence policy before elections due in Spain next year.
Only in Italy, of the major countries, would the failure of Maastricht make
convergence hugely less likely than now.
The Danes have inflicted a noteworthy shock. But the city can be rebuilt
and, even if not, it might not mean the end of economic stability in Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920606

