FT923-11015

FT  27 JUL 92 / Deal signals moves to fly in formation: Implications for
Europe's regional aircraft business of the agreement to transfer Fokker into
German hands


   By DANIEL GREEN and RONALD VAN DE KROL


THE Freedom Snack bar, run by an ex-convict in The Hague, the Dutch capital,
had a busy night last Thursday. It fed the nocturnal appetites of three men
debating a Fl 1bn (Pounds 312m) deal in the foreign ministry next door.
Their eventual agreement, secured on Friday morning after 20 hours of talks,
opened the way for the transfer of one of the Netherlands' flagship
companies into German hands. It could also trigger a consolidation of the
regional aircraft industry, which makes short-range aircraft, most of them
for the domestic US market.
Officially, the talks were a three-way affair between Fokker, the Dutch
aircraft maker, Deutsche Aerospace (Dasa) of Germany, and the Dutch
government, whose 32 per cent stake in Fokker gave it a veto on any deal to
sell the company.
In reality, they pitted the Dutch government against Mr Jurgen Schrempp and
Mr Erik Jan Nederkoorn, the chairmen of Dasa and Fokker.
Across a table on the ninth floor of the foreign ministry building in The
Hague, the two men pressed Mr Koos Andriessen, the Dutch economic affairs
minister, to agree to Dasa taking a 51 per cent stake in Fokker. Mr
Andriessen wanted guarantees that Fokker would not become a screwdriver
plant run from Dasa's Munich headquarters.
Mr Andriessen eventually, and grudgingly, agreed on a timetable for the
Dutch government to surrender its influence on the new Dasa-Fokker holding
company. The industrialists were delighted. In the words of Mr Nederkoorn:
'Fokker will become the Airbus of the regional aircraft market in which
other companies will participate.'
Important details - even the price - have yet to be agreed. 'Price did not
play a role in the negotiations,' said Mr Andriessen. The talks were about
the structure of Europe's aerospace industry and the role to be played by
Fokker.
There are also regulatory obstacles still to overcome, and delays are still
possible from the Dutch parliament or European Commission competition
watchdogs. But there is little doubt that the regional aircraft market is
ripe for an Airbus-style grouping, in which many manufacturers contribute to
a single range of aircraft.
The industry is dogged by overcapacity, with nine different manufacturers
having sold more than 100 aircraft each into the huge US market. That
overcapacity has led many manufacturers into financial difficulties.
Companies such as British Aerospace, Aerospatiale of France and Sweden's
Saab have been forced to consider partnerships to survive.
Fokker had more to worry about than many. It has already been rescued by the
Dutch government, in 1987, and its successful Fokker 100 aircraft needs
heavy capital investment for 70-seater and 130-seater versions to be
developed.
In the forefront of partnership moves across the industry is Dasa, just
three years old and owned by Germany's biggest industrial group,
Daimler-Benz. It was established as an umbrella for the country's fragmented
aerospace industry and has since entered into a series of international
alliances for helicopters, satellites and aero-engines.
Last November, Dasa formed the Regioliner regional jet consortium with
Aerospatiale and Alenia of Italy. Fokker believes that the French and
Italians will take stakes in the new Dasa-Fokker company and that the Fokker
100 will form the core of the consortium's model range.
The arrival of Fokker in the Dasa camp brings one step closer the creation
of a genuine giant in regional aircraft.
Regioliner is dominated by Dasa and could provide the sought-for focus for
the German company's disparate activities. And, if successful, Regioliner
could face only dishevelled and dispirited rivals struggling to find
partners. BAe, which last month relaunched its loss-making regional
aircraft, said yesterday it was 'still pursuing talks leading to a joint
venture or a merger, not necessarily in Europe'.
BAe may be hoping that the Dasa-Fokker deal hits trouble. This happened in
1969 when Fokker merged with VFW, now part of Dasa. The partnership was
dissolved in 1978 amid recriminations over the flop of a new 44-seater
aeroplane, the VFW 614.
Nor is opposition dead within the Netherlands. Dutch politicians and trade
unions remain worried about 'carving up' Fokker among the Germans, French
and Italians.
This disquiet springs from many sources. Unlike the fruitfulness of
Anglo-Dutch partnerships, which have produced big groups such as Unilever
and Royal Dutch/Shell, there is no tradition of successful corporate
alliances between Dutch and German companies. At the same time, lingering
resentment resulting from the Second World War, combined with the natural
wariness of a small country for a powerful neighbour, charges the takeover
with emotion and politics.
But everyone in the regional aircraft industry is aware of what happened to
big aircraft makers. This once bustling business is now dominated by just
three companies: Boeing, Airbus and McDonnell-Douglas.
They know that the regional aircraft industry needs fewer competitors,
Fokker needs a big brother and Dasa wants to become a mature business. Some
in the Netherlands fear that the deal means the beginning for the end for
Fokker. Some in Germany hope it is the end of the beginning for Dasa.
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
DEUTSCHE AEROSPACE TAKES CONTROL OF FOKKER
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
Deutsche Aerospace
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
1991
Turnover:  DM12.4bn (Dollars 8.3bn)
Profits:   DM50m
Employees: 56,465
Subsidiary of Daimler-Benz.  Operations include Deutsche
Airbus which will assemble the A321 in Germany; makes
segments of other Airbus models.  MTU unit makes aero
engines in partnership with Pratt & Whitney.  MBB airframe
unit, acquired in 1989, is a partner in Eurocopter project
with Aerospatiale.  Domier unit builds small passenger aircraft
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
FOKKER
 -------------------------------------------------------------------
1991
Turnover:  Fl 13.8bn (Dollars 8.2bn)
Profits:   Fl 194m
Employees: 12,880
Bailed out by Dutch government after heavy losses in 1987.
Aircraft include Fokker 50 twin-turboprop and F100 twin-jet;
subcontract work includes Airbus 300 and 310 and F-16 military
jets and guided weapon systems such as Patriot and Stinger
missiles.  Needs partner to achieve ambition of building larger
regional jets
 -------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920727

