FT923-6439

FT  25 AUG 92 / Balkan sights set on Serbia's Kosovo province: It may be a
key to peace or a new focus of bloodshed


   By LAURA SILBER


AS United Nations and European Community diplomats try to work out a
long-term solution to the war in the former Yugoslavia, many diplomats fear
that in the short term Serbia's southern province of Kosovo could be the
next focus of bloodshed. But despite these fears, Kosovo could hold the key
to peace in the Balkans.
Any chance for peace rests on working out out a compromise between Kosovo's
2m Albanians, who demand independence from Serbia, and Serbs who insist on
retaining the present status of the province  - which has no autonomy, no
ethnic rights and no working parliamentary democracy.
Without such a compromise between Kosovo and Belgrade, the Serbian capital,
ethnic Albanians have few illusions about the region's fate. 'If Kosovo
erupts it could mean war throughout the region,' says Mr Veton Surroi, an
Albanian leader whose views are shared by Albanians and Serbs in the
province.
In an attempt to step up international pressure on Serbia to open the way
for dialogue with Kosovo, Lord Carrington, chairman of the European
Community-sponsored peace Conference on Yugoslavia, last month made a trip
to Belgrade to act as a mediator between Kosovo and Serbia, led by President
Slobodan Milosevic.
Mr Milosevic, intransigent as ever, dismissed Lord Carrington's mediating
attempts as 'interference in Serbia's internal affairs'.
However, Kosovo has managed to remain outside the war which engulfed Croatia
and Bosnia-Hercegovina. This week's London peace conference could determine
whether it continues to do so.
Mr Surroi believes the ethnic Albanians should be included in talks about
their future status, and not be confined to the sidelines of the conference
 - their current status. But Mr Vukasin Jovanovic, a Kosovo Serb politician
who is also deputy speaker of the Serbian parliament in Belgrade, says any
invitation to the ethnic Albanians to attend the talks amounts to
encouraging 'the hopes of Albanians to secede from Serbia'.
Essentially, the view among Serb leaders in Belgrade is that they will
continue to rule out any discussion on the status of Kosovo as long as
Albanians call for independence from Serbia.
Moreover, any signs of compromise on the part of Belgrade with Kosovo could
in fact undermine the policies of Mr Milosevic.
After all, it was Kosovo which Mr Milosevic exploited in his bid for power
in the late 1980s. Under the pretext of protecting the small ethnic Serb and
Montenegrin minorities in the province against alleged discrimination from
the ethnic Albanians, he vowed to bring Kosovo back to the Serbian fold.
The late President Josip Broz Tito had carved out of Serbia the southern
province of Kosovo and the northern province of Vojvodina, as a means of
containing the influence of Serbia throughout the Yugoslav federation. Both
provinces were granted a wide degree of autonomy from Belgrade. In
particular, Kosovo is viewed as the cradle of Serbian culture.
Mr Milosevic, who sought to redress this perceived historical grievance,
moved to curb the autonomy of Kosovo.
By 1989, Serbia crushed mass demonstrations in Kosovo, stripped Kosovo of
its autonomy, and imposed direct rule from Belgrade. Tens of thousands of
Albanian professionals were sacked and replaced by Serbs.
In response to the imposition of a virtual police state throughout this poor
province, the ethnic Albanians built their own 'shadow' state. Albanians now
have their own government, denounced as illegal by Belgrade, their own
schools, and their own hospitals.
The question facing their leaders is how long they can pursue the creation
of their own, unrecognised state before public opinion among the Albanians
becomes impatient with, or radicalised by, Serb rule and repression.
Certainly, the appalling destruction and bloodshed in Bosnia has helped
consolidate the policy of non-violence propounded by Mr Ibrahim Rugova, the
Kosovo president elected in last May's unofficial elections. Moreover,
Albanians say, in the event of a conflict with Serbia, there would be a
bloodbath in Kosovo.
'Albanians are not preparing for war. They have seen what happened in
Bosnia,' says a western diplomat.
Serb politicians claim Albanian households are concealing arms. But Mr
Jovanovic says: 'Albanians do not have arms for a serious war.'
Serbia is reported to have armed Kosovo's Serbs, who vow to keep control of
the province at all costs.
'Many Serbs want a 'final solution'. Serbs want a war to solve the problem
of not being able to live together (with the ethnic Albanians),' admits a
Serb official in the Kosovo capital of Pristina.
Yet despite the militancy of Kosovo's Serbs, any decision to change Kosovo's
status would be made not by them but by Belgrade.
Whether they would accept any compromise dictated from Belgrade is doubtful.
Mr Milan Panic, the prime minister of unrecognised Yugoslavia, has promised
to lift the 'special measures' which legalised Kosovo as a police state,
although Serb politicians deny such measures were ever applied. But
compromise appears incompatible with the climate of intense polarisation and
ethnic hatred between the two communities.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920825

