FT922-7297

FT  19 MAY 92 / Parliament and Politics: Left aims to make gains from low
base - The balance of political forces inside the union movement


   By DAVID GOODHART


BRITAIN'S biggest Civil Service union, the Civil and Public Services
Association (CPSA), may today elect as general secretary a leading member of
the far-left Militant group.
That should not be taken as a sign of a shift to the left in the unions,
with activists looking to militant syndicalism to defend them in the wake of
Labour's election defeat.
After Labour's 1979 defeat there was a leftwing backlash both in the party
and the unions. With increasing confusion about what is 'left' and 'right',
there is no evidence of the Labour party repeating that reaction now.
The picture may be more complex in the unions. With the unity of the
election campaign no longer required, and moderate, Kinnockite activists in
the unions even more depressed than leftwing activists, the left may
increase its representation on a few union executives.
But, in spite of some movement to the left in the past year, the left is
starting from a low base. Even in unions that are called 'left-led', such as
the TGWU general union, the left is often no more than an election machine
with little ideological coherence.
While the left may celebrate the odd victory, it is also losing leaders. Mr
Roger Lyons, a pragmatist, will take over the leadership of MSF, the general
technical union, from left-winger Mr Ken Gill in August.
Most important of all, the old backbone of the left in the unions, the
Communist party, has collapsed along with its traditional paymaster, the
Soviet Union. The collapse of communism and the smothering effect of
'Kinnockism' - beyond left and right - has reduced the left in the unions to
a rump.
In the early 1980s the Broad Left groupings in the unions were genuinely
broad - ranging from the left of the Labour party, through the Communist
party, to various Trotskyist splinter groups. Now most Broad Left groups are
synonymous with the Militant group, which appears to have shifted its
'entryism' efforts from the Labour party to unions such as the CPSA.
A revival of the left depends on having issues to regroup around. No obvious
issues are in sight. On bread-and-butter industrial issues, all unions, and
all factions within them, are on the defensive.
On political issues, the debate will be between the reformers who want to
revise, if not sever, union links with the Labour party, and the
conservatives who want to preserve as much of them as possible. The left is
in the conservative camp on that issue but is accompanied by a fair number
of moderates.
In the sectors that face big, politically inspired shake-ups, the picture
may be slightly different. The Civil Service is high on that list and if Mr
John Macreadie, the Militant-backed candidate for the CPSA's top job, wins
the election today it will be partly because many civil servants fear for
their jobs and believe that a radical would defend them better than a
moderate.
Mr Barry Reamsbottom, the moderate candidate, said it would be
'catastrophic' if the left won - either the top job or in the executive
elections which are taking place simultaneously - and would 'give the
government the excuse it needs to end collective bargaining entirely in the
Civil Service'.
The CPSA, 'a bed-sitter activist paradise' according to one Labour MP, has a
history of violent political swings and Mr Macreadie has a higher profile
than his opponent and a reputation for competence. He is offering to do the
job for no more than the average skilled wage - a good populist gesture in
any union election.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920519

