FT924-11926

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (13): Where to
shelter if inflation returns - Remaining outside the ERM would have
implications for UK portfolios


   By JOHN AUTHERS


STOCK MARKETS have faced more than their usual share of imponderables in the
past three months. But one question particularly exercising the minds of
many analysts is: 'What if the pound stays out of the exchange rate
mechanism and inflation returns?'
If inflation is coming back, then, for the private investor, the most
obvious move is into index-linked products. The simplest are index-linked
National Savings certificates, which guarantee to beat inflation by 4.5 per
cent if held for five years. If inflation should approach double figures
again, the returns on these certificates would dwarf the 6.75 per cent
available on the 39th issue fixed-rate certificates.
Index-linked gilts also have their attractions, although their yields
dropped sharply in the week following Black Wednesday, as bond-traders
decided to guard against inflation. Even large equity houses are now talking
about using index-linking for a substantial part of their funds, as a
bulwark against higher inflation.
International bond markets are also attracting attention from many advisers.
With German interest rates likely to come down next year, the argument is
that European bond prices will rise. Both the dollar and Yen also have
supporters.
This might explain why Richard Boyton, of the Boyton Group, would put
clients' money into offshore current funds, international bond funds, and
index-linked gilts. He comments: 'Interest rates worldwide will come down,
and I remain unconvinced that sterling will not sink lower against a basket
of currencies.'
The other traditional hedge against inflation lies in the equity markets.
The years of the squeeze on price rises have coincided with poor returns for
the markets. What factors would most help a company's shares?
Jonathan Powell, a director of Newton Investment Management, looks at the
implications of a permanent departure from the ERM. He said:
'We wouldn't be able to do what the Germans have done, so the other option
would be to do what the US is doing. That means lower interest rates, and
going for growth. If you do that, manufacturing is the winner. When you take
into account the currency factors, then that means, in particular,
manufacturing companies with overseas earnings, either exports or overseas
business.'
He points to Glaxo, BOC and Unilever as shares to watch in this scenario.
Other analysts agree that it is important to look for dollar-earners. Eric
Hathorn, director of research at Henderson Crosthwaite, also points to the
importance of 'defensive' qualities - companies with a relatively stable
core business, which will not be knocked too hard by renewed recession. That
leads to the large classic 'blue chip' international traders such as
Unilever, GEC and ICI.
So the prime sectors to look for are:
Pharmaceuticals
This sector includes several big 'international' stocks, such as Glaxo,
SmithKline Beecham and Wellcome. More important, it has recently been hit
hard by speculation in the US that Governor Bill Clinton will win the
presidential election, and then introduce strict price controls on drugs.
Several analysts believe that this speculation has been overdone, and that
there might now be a significant 'buying opportunity'. Mr Hathorn said: 'I
think it's unlikely Clinton would do that, and the prospects for that sector
remain brighter than most. Glaxo, in particular, has a strong range of new
development products.'
It is also, of course, the arch-defensive sector, because people continue to
fall ill and take medicine even in times of inflation.
Conglomerates
This is an untidy sector, which includes most of the companies that might be
expected to launch takeover bids, such as Hanson.
Mr Hathorn points out that the sector has been very quiet for a while, but
sentiment that the market is bouncing up, which would follow any return to
inflation, would make it much more likely for the conglomerates to start
making bids, before prices took off. Hanson's bid for Rank Hovis MacDougall,
at the beginning of this month, was cited as an example.
Other Industrial Materials
This awkwardly-named sector includes some companies which might normally be
thought of as conglomerates, such as BTR and Tomkins.
Oil & Gas
Most of the companies in this sector are international earners. They also
benefit from recoveries in manufacturing. Thus the prospects for such as
Shell Trading & Transport, or BP, should be healthy.
Are there any areas which should be specifically avoided? Unfortunately, the
names in this list include several sectors which have already endured
protracted underperformance:
Property, Building Materials and Contracting & Construction
The three sectors most closely tied to the property market face continued
difficulty. As Mr Hathorn puts it: 'I am concerned that they are not going
to get the over-capacity clearing in a hurry. From the property angle,
there's far too much development property remaining unoccupied.'
Kenneth Levy, head of fund management at Capel-Cure Myers, points out that
construction companies enjoyed something of a 'bounce' in their share prices
before Black Wednesday, but he thinks a return to inflation would, in the
short-term, be very bad news for them. His strategy would be to avoid them,
and hedge by buying overseas earners.
Smaller Companies
Mr Levy says: 'In the short-term, you would have to be careful about smaller
companies.'
His reasoning is that a return of inflation would dampen any hopes of
interest rate cuts, and with it the possibility that small companies could
borrow cheaply.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

921023

