FT923-6477

FT  24 AUG 92 / UK Company News: UBS hits back at 'ill-founded allegations'


   By ROLAND RUDD and ROBERT PESTON


UBS Phillips & Drew, the securities house, has written to leading fund
managers stressing that it is committed to the 'production of independent
research' on companies.
The letter is a response to what the firm calls 'allegations that Mr Smith
has been suspended due to pressure from major companies'.
It calls these allegations 'ill-founded and objectionable'.
Mr Terry Smith, head of the firm's UK research department, was recently
suspended for allegedly breaching internal procedures with regard to writing
the book, called Accounting for Growth.
It is an expanded version of research published by P&D in January 1991,
which highlighted a number of accounting techniques used by companies to
boost the level of profits they disclose or minimise the level of borrowings
shown on their balance sheets.
Several investment fund managers said they found the UBS letter unconvincing
and voiced concern that independent research was being 'stifled'.
One senior fund manager said: 'The fact is we have always suspected that
companies can put pressure on security houses. The Smith episode appears to
confirm this; nothing in UBS's letter makes us feel any happier about the
situation.'
The UBS letter, co-signed by Mr Rudi Mueller, chairman, and Mr Hector Sants,
vice-chairman head of equities, says analysts are required to show before
publication any 'significant piece of material' to the company or companies
covered by it before it is published.
'We do not, however, in any way guarantee to make changes to reflect
differences of tone or interpretation, although a company's views are always
considered carefully before our final decision is reached.'
The letter goes on to accuse Mr Smith of not going through the standard
procedures. It also alleges that a vast majority of the UBS research report
in 1991 - on which the book was based - 'was written and edited by our
senior analyst Richard Hannah'.
Mr Smith, who attended a UBS disciplinary hearing on Friday, said: 'I was
never aware of any standard procedure at UBS.
'As to the writing of the book, I have never taken away the fact that I
received help and contributions from my colleagues.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920824

