FT923-9611

FT  04 AUG 92 / BBA half-year results boosted by cost cutting


   By ROLAND RUDD


A COST-CUTTING exercise in all divisions at BBA, the component maker for the
automotive, aviation and industrial markets, helped it report a 26 per cent
increase in pre-tax profits for the half year.
For the six months to June 30, BBA's pre-tax profits increased from Pounds
26.1m to Pounds 33m, on sales of Pounds 649.1m, up from Pounds 620.2m a year
earlier.
Mr John White, managing director, said: 'By reading the recession early we
were able to tackle costs against the background of difficult economic
conditions.'
He warned that there was 'no firm evidence of any generalised recovery' and
called on the government to cut interest rates at the 'earliest
opportunity'.
An exceptional charge of Pounds 4.8m relates to redundancy costs covering
the loss of 600 jobs and the closure of loss-making plants.
Mr White said the company would concentrate its resources on its core
businesses which had rare technology and a high proportion of the market,
such as its friction materials operations.
He said there would be no 'firesale' of non-core businesses. 'If there are
constraints from resources we will address them as and when they arise.'
However, Mr White did not rule out disposals of some of the portfolio
businesses if the price was right.
The automotive division, which saw the most significant reductions in its
cost base, made the strongest recovery, reporting increased pre-tax profits
of Pounds 17.4m against Pounds 12.8m a year ago.
Pre-tax profits from aviation edged up to Pounds 5.6m (Pounds 5.5m). BBA
said its airline clients had reported 'diabolical market conditions' which
would lead them to extend the life of their fleets of aircraft.
Industrial activities, particularly in the US, went late into recession.
This helped explain the fall in the division's pre-tax profits from Pounds
20m to Pounds 18m. After a sharp fall in the second half of 1991, profits
have recovered to the level achieved in the first half of last year.
An extraordinary item of Pounds 4.4m relates to the settlement of a claim
over the value of the net assets of a disposal.
Gearing increased from around 40 per cent to about 50 per cent of
shareholders' funds. The interest charge, however, fell by Pounds 4.2m to
Pounds 8m because of money received from last year's Pounds 79m rights issue
and lower US interest rates.
The interim dividend is maintained at 2.25p. Earnings per share increased to
5p (4.4p).

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920804

