FT924-11435

FT  26 OCT 92 / International Company News: Finmeccanica set for stock
exchange debut


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


FINMECCANICA, the Italian state-owned aerospace and engineering holding
company which is part of the IRI group, will today make its stock exchange
debut following the reverse takeover of Sifa, a quoted financial holding
company already under its control.
The transaction by Finmeccanica, which also controls the quoted Alenia
aerospace and Ansaldo Trasporti engineering companies, was originally to
have been the prelude to a multi-stage capital increase of up to L1,700bn
(Dollars 785m).
However, the plans have been thrown into confusion by the financial problems
of IRI, struggling to reduce its heavy debt burden and probably reluctant to
put up the L493bn required.
Private investors would also have been offered a stake in Finmeccanica at a
later stage through a L999bn convertible bond with warrants to buy shares.
However, changes in tax law have made the bond issue less advantageous,
while investor interest in Italian equity issues has been tempered by the
poor performance of the bourse.
The incorporation of Sifa, which has interests in equity trading and
property, has sharply improved Finmeccanica's financial position. Sifa is
thought to have had about L350bn in liquidity, while subsequent property
sales have pushed the total to around L800bn, bankers say.
Last week, the Italian government announced the loss-making aerospace and
defence interests of Efim, the state holding company in liquidation, would
be transferred to IRI on a management basis, pending a sale.
Bankers expect the two main companies concerned, Agusta in helicopters and
Oto Melara in missiles, to be run by Finmeccanica, possibly as a prelude to
an outright takeover once they are restructured.
However, it is unclear whether the additional funds available through the
merger with Sifa will spur Finmeccanica, which has grown through
acquisitions.
Last year, it reported a L525bn loss after meeting a European Commision
requirement to repay IRI L615bn in respect of aid to the Alfa Romeo cars
group, which it used to own. Group sales amounted to L10,966bn.
Although the government has said it will take on Agusta's and Oto Melara's
debts, Finmeccanica is expected to seek tight guarantees on future order
levels and employment before agreeing to buy the two outright.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921026

