FT924-12215

FT  22 OCT 92 / Bonn faces new costs of supporting east


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


THE German government is facing a string of new demands on its central
budget to support the east German economy, including the cost of servicing a
DM50bn (Pounds 20bn) debt on public housing, subsidising house sales, and
promoting new investment.
Details were spelt out to the cabinet yesterday by a series of specialist
working groups, charged with proposing ways of speeding up recovery in the
former communist part of the country.
The government remains adamant, however, that there will be no tax
increases, and no compulsory investment loans, at least in 1993, in order to
finance the soaring unification costs.
What is no longer excluded within the ruling coalition is the possibility of
increased taxation, or some form of investment loan, in 1994 or 1995, when
the full burden of east German indebtedness will fall on the public
exchequer.
Immediate measures to bridge the gap must be found from cuts in other areas
of public spending, and in streamlining the bureaucracy relating to new
investment in the east, Mr Friedrich Bohl, minister of state in the
chancellor's office, said yesterday.
He said the cabinet had agreed in principle to an increase in the investment
subsidy for small and medium-sized enterprises in the east. The
recommendation is for an increase in the subsidy from eight to 25 per cent
for all enterprises employing fewer than 20 workers, at a cost to the
exchequer of DM30bn from 1993 to 1996. A final decision would come on
November 4.
The reports presented to the cabinet show that the central government is
prepared to take over responsibility for the east German housing debt, and
assume responsibility for the entire public housing stock, if it fails to
reach any agreement with the federal states on sharing the burden.
The housing working group has called for an extension of subsidies to help
sell housing, costing an extra DM200m in 1993 and 1994. A sum of DM20bn
which has been set aside for modernisation of public housing in 1993 has
already been exhausted, and requires a further DM5bn in subsidised credit
facilities, it says.
A further DM200m a year is called for to promote owner-occupation, and
special subsidies and depreciation allowances for new house-building should
be extended by two years.
The financial consequences of housing measures are estimated at between
DM2.7bn and DM5.2bn, for which, according to the working group, no
comparable savings measures can be found.
In addition, extra cash is urgently required for culture, sports, facilities
for young people, and for the care and repair of historical monuments,
according to a separate report.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921022

