FT922-3984

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (1): From cyber-brat to
superman - The extraordinary rise of Bill Gates, the founder of Microsoft


   By MAX WILKINSON


   HARD DRIVE


BILL GATES AND THE MAKING OF THE MICROSOFT EMPIRE by James Wallace and Jim
Erickson John Wiley, Dollars 22.95, 426 pages
WHEN THE screens and keyboards which clutter office desks are finally
replaced by proper visicom robots, men will marvel that such crude and
cumbersome machines could have ordered the business affairs of the late 20th
century.
Yet the revolution which produced today's personal computers was itself a
marvel of ingenuity and persistence. And among the heroes of that epic none
is odder, nor more spectacularly successful, than Bill Gates, the schoolboy
programmer, who became the billionaire chairman of Microsoft.
From his schooldays Gates was fascinated by the programming which makes
inanimate machines jump into life. In the early years this was a dreadfully
slow and painful task, both for the programmer and for the user: the machine
communicated in sullen and pedantic monosyllables.
Gates's and Microsoft's most recent success is founded on the vision that
personal computers should be bright, alive and responsive to the user,
should communicate in a simple standard way and should anticipate the user's
needs wherever possible. These ideas were first embodied in the operating
system of Apple computers, which present the user with a screen of small
drawings (or 'ikons') representing tasks he might want it to perform. By
using a remote controlled pointer, or 'mouse', the user can give
instructions without any need for typing.
Microsoft developed its rival Windows system for use on International
Business Machines personal computers and compatible makes. After a hesitant
start, Microsoft Windows is now sweeping the computing world, consolidating
Microsoft's dominance of the software industry and Gates's position as the
richest man in America, with a net worth of more than Dollars 8bn (Pounds
4.3bn).
Windows will no doubt come to be seen as an early form in the evolution of
intelligent desk-top machines to a point when they can understand the human
voice, can make suggestions and carry out many routine tasks unasked. Anyone
who thinks such ideas seem far fetched should read Wallace and Erickson's
account of the extraordinary progress made during the 36 years of Gates's
life and love for the soul of the machine.
It started when Gates was a bright, curious and highly competitive schoolboy
at Lakeside school, Seattle, playing games on a cumbersome terminal
connected to a computer owned by a local company called Computer Center
Corporation. Before long the 13-year-old Gates and his fellow pupils were
exploiting so many loopholes and faults in the machine that they were
invited by the company to go in after school to test the operating system to
destruction - while keeping a careful log. Gates then developed his lifelong
habit of working far into the night, but he did well in school also.
Gates even founded his first company, Traf-O-Data, at Lakeside, offering
analysis of urban traffic flows to local authorities. It might have
prospered, had not the Federal Government undercut him.
It was at Harvard, however, that Gates made his first serious business
venture with a fellow computer enthusiast, Paul Allen. They read that a
small company in New Mexico was to produce the first hobby computer in kit
form, the 'Altair', for the then amazingly low price of Dollars 397. No
matter that it lacked keyboard, screen, adequate memory, or programmes to
make it work, hobbyists were queueing to buy. Gates and Allen worked
feverishly at the Harvard computer to produce a version of the BASIC
programming language that would run on a machine of such meagre capacity. It
was a formidable task, since the computer understands only the simplest
instructions to open or shut switches. Gates and Allen completed the job,
formed a company called Microsoft and struck a deal with the maker of the
Altair.
In those early years, Gates displayed all the qualities of obsessive hard
work, vision, salesmanship, arrogance and temper tantrums which were so
important in 1980 when International Business Machines asked Microsoft to
develop a BASIC for the personal computer it was planning. Microsoft was
also to develop an operating system for the first IBM PC. This is the
central nervous system of a computer which silently organises the memory,
disk storage, and other 'bodily functions'. Devising an operating system is
a huge task which depends on excruciating detail, a combination suited to
Gates's genius. Even so, his new Disk Operating System was derivative, and
Gates struck a very tough bargain with Seattle Computer for the rights to
MS-DOS, the system which was eventually used on millions of machines
throughout the world.
This was an epic success, which broke some men and came close to destroying
the company, but it led to greater things, the development of Windows, and
Microsoft's leading wordprocessing and spreadsheet packages, Word and Excel.
Wallace and Erickson have made this into an exciting tale, told in the racy
style of American business journalism, with plenty of detail and well
researched quotations, all focused on the enigmatic personality of Bill
Gates. He emerges as a mildly unpleasant night owl with few interests
besides writing and selling computer algorithms. He relaxes by breaking the
speed limit, but cannot, it seems, fit women into his busy schedule nor find
time for many of the usual forms of relaxation. He screams abuse at his
employees and forces them to work inhuman hours. Yet work they do, at a
frenzied pace, and many are now millionaires through stock options.
By the end of the book one cannot help liking this appallingly ambitious and
lonesome brat. And if one should ask: 'What shall it profit a man that he
should gain the whole world . . . ?', the answer is that Gates's Dollars 8bn
represents, not just his winnings, but an important contribution to one of
the great revolutions in human history.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920609

