FT922-437

FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: A basic 'Beggar' - Records


   By MAX LOPPERT


Gay-Pepusch: The Beggar's Opera. The Broadside Band/Jeremy Barlow. Hyperion
CDA66591/2 (two CDs)
Handel: Agrippina. Capella Savaria/Nicholas McGegan. Harmonia Mundi France
HMU 907063.65 (three CDs)
Handel: Giulio Cesare. Concerto Koln/Rene Jacobs. Harmonia Mundi France HMC
901385.87 (three CDs)
Handel: Rodelinda. La Stagione/Michael Schneider. Deutsche Harmonia Mundi RD
77192 (three CDs)
WHAT TO do with The Beggar's Opera? It had a triumphant first performance in
1728, and a no less triumphant modern revival (the famous Hammersmith
performances) in 1920; at least since the latter date, it has seldom been
absent from the stages of the English-speaking world. This year in Britain
alone, there has been a new RSC production at Stratford, an Aldeburgh
Festival concert performance of Britten's radical re-working, and, alongside
those, a new Hyperion recording setting out to catch the 'ballad opera' as
nearly as possible in its original form.
The attractions of the work - an English opera-comique simultaneously
sending up the Italian opera seria then so popular in London and depicting
the morals and manners of the city's underworld at the time - seem undying.
The string of popular numbers (folk tunes and dances, airs by composers like
Purcell, Handel and Bononcini) that Pepusch set down in music and Gay
re-worded to fit the dramatic scheme maintain their appeal.
And yet the whole so rarely manifests the cutting edge one knows it to
possess. As I remarked the other day while reviewing the Opera North Orpheus
in the Underworld, a perennial problem crops up in the revival of popular
music-theatre works of genius whose satire is, paradoxically, universal and
tied to a specific place and time: that is, the problem of maintaining the
sting of the social criticism when the local-colour references of those
works - if not their targets - have lost their immediacy of recognition.
Since the time of the Hammersmith revival, the most favoured method of
treating The Beggar's Opera has been to practise various forms of musical
re-working upon it. Some attempts (Frederic Austin's in 1920, Britten's in
1948) have had at least the 'relevance' of particular performers and
performing circumstances to justify them; others (the sludgy Guy Woolfenden
edition for Scottish Opera and the gruesomely over-scored Bonynge recording
for Decca, with James Morris and the Dames Joan and Kiri, both 1981) have
been so overlaid with the rearranger's arts and artifices as to leave the
original unrecognisable.
The new recording proposes a period-conscious, 'back to Gay-Pepusch'
rationale: as its editor and musical director Jeremy Barlow notes in the
booklet, Pepusch's arrangements have been adhered to - in terms of key
signature, vocal range and likely instrumental support (strings, oboe,
bassoon harp) - as closely as possible. The dialogue is given in full; the
singers speak it. There are no bedizenings to the vocal lines apart from
touches of ornament. The style is intimate, unforced.
With Bob Hoskins declaiming the Beggar's introduction and envoy to the final
scene in his inimitable cockney tones, the performance starts off with high
promise. It is when the main cast take over - Adrian Thompson as Macheath,
Charles Daniels and Sarah Walker as the Peachums, Bronwen Mills as Polly,
Richard Jackson as Lockit, Anne Dawson as Lucy - that difficulties begin.
Almost all the low-life accents sound fearfully creaky and quaint; and
though the air-singing is neat and often attractive - Miss Mills, an
underrated and under-used soprano, is particularly welcome on records - the
smell and feel of theatre seem light years away. Gay planned the work for
actors who could sing; a reverse formula has been used by Mr Barlow, and its
bite is lost. This remains a recording of interest and value, worth
investigating; but it is not the Beggar's Opera revelation for which I've
been waiting.
Handel, whose London Italian operas Gay parodied, and whose hold on the
London public was directly affected by the success of The Beggar's Opera,
has a slew of new Italian-opera recordings, all in 'period' style, to
correct the historical balance. The best of the bunch is the early
Agrippina, a triumph of the composer's Venetian sojourn, whose mix of
historical characters and Cavalli-like comic intricacy comes up in McGegan's
performance with delicious freshness. He paces it expertly, and his cast -
led by Sally Bradshaw in the title role, the countertenor Drew Minter (Otho)
and the sopranos Lisa Saffer (Poppaea) and Wendy Hill (Nero) - catch its
light, sophisticated tone with captivating deftness. Only a single weakness,
the woofy low-bass Claudius, mars the impression.
The new Giulio Cesare - most popular and most recorded of all Handel operas
 -has already been widely acclaimed. I do not entirely subscribe to the
enthusiasm. The singing, particularly by the ravishing Jennifer Larmore
(title role) and sumptuous Bernarda Fink (Cornelia), is among the best
modern Handel performance has to offer; but Jacobs's sometimes leadenly slow
tempos (how very odd of a singer-conductor to adopt them]) try our patience
sorely. Rodelinda, one of the supreme London masterpieces, simply needs
better singing that it receives from the all-too-modest Frankfurt-based
recording. Only Barbara Schlick in the title role - she is also Jacobs's
Cleopatra - emerges with any credit.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920627

