FT921-3779

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: Mellor attacks Smith over policy on tax


   By IVOR OWEN and ALISON SMITH


THE prime minister launched the Tories' election campaign yesterday with a
confident prediction of winning a 'clear and working' majority.
Mr John Major's long-awaited announcement in Downing Street came as party
managers made final adjustments to the manifesto for approval at today's
cabinet - the last before the election.
He said voters had a clear choice between Tory policies of low taxation and
greater independence and the Labour approach of a return to the 'disastrous'
policies of the past.
The prime minister suggested that he had waited to announce the election
until after the Budget statement, as well as December's EC negotiations at
Maastricht and the completion of the bill to replace the poll tax with the
council tax.
He will use a speech to a party rally in Torquay at the weekend as the
springboard for the campaign, before the manifesto is published next week.
'We have a clear idea of the sort of Britain we want to see,' he said. 'We
are going to set it out, we are going to move towards it and after the
general election we are going to implement it.'
The Tories' determination to focus on Labour tax plans, in particular the
Opposition's decision to vote against the introduction of a 20p lower-rate
income tax band, was underlined by Mr David Mellor, the chief secretary to
the treasury.
To cheers from Tory MPs, he used the second day of the Budget debate to
highlight Labour's initial disarray over the inclusion of one of its own
favoured tax reforms in the Budget.
Mr Mellor argued that by finally deciding to vote against the 20p tax band
Mr Neil Kinnock, Labour leader, and his colleagues had made clear their
intention to 'soak' the poor as well as the rich.
The minister ridiculed Mr Kinnock's failure to clarify Labour's attitude
when challenged to do so on Tuesday, and claimed that some Labour
backbenchers, including Mr Austin Mitchell, MP for Great Grimsby, and Mr
John Garrett, MP for Norwich South, had publicly supported the 20p
lower-rate band.
To further cheers, Mr Mellor condemned the 'absurd spectacle' of Labour MPs
insisting that it was imperative to help low earners through a statutory
minimum wage while proposing to meet the cost of its introduction by
increasing the marginal rate of tax on the same low earners by 25 per cent -
from 20 pence to 25 pence.
Defending Labour's decision to vote against the lower band, Mr John Smith,
the shadow chancellor, insisted: 'I think it is wrong in our economic
circumstances to borrow for tax cuts for anyone.'
Mr Mellor emphasised that only Pounds 1.8bn of the Pounds 28bn public sector
borrowing requirement planned for the coming financial year would be used
for tax cuts.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920312

