FT923-15743

FT  01 JUL 92 / Japan's labour market slackens


   By STEVEN BUTLER


   TOKYO


JAPAN'S labour market showed clear signs of slackening in May in response to
the steep slowdown of the Japanese economy, although employment remained at
high levels, according to government statistics released yesterday.
The Management and Co-ordination Agency said unemployment in Japan inched up
by 0.1 per cent to a seasonally adjusted 2.1 per cent in May. The ratio of
job offers to applicants, however, declined from 1.17 to 1.14, according to
the Labour Ministry, indicating a considerable loosening of the labour
market compared to March last year, when the ratio stood at 1.47.
However, some economists believe that the labour market will have to show
even stronger signs of softening before a recovery of the economy can get
under way.
In the manufacturing sector, which has been hit hardest by the slowdown in
Japan's economy, employment fell by 100,000 compared to April, when 20,000
jobs were lost.
Although not reported in the survey, overtime and part-time work in
manufacturing industries is known to have been cut back sharply as well.
Job losses in manufacturing were more than offset by an increase of 580,000
jobs in the service sector.
Also yesterday, the Economic Planning Agency said its index of leading
indicators in April fell from 40.9 per cent to 18.2 per cent, pointing to
weak economic activity in the months ahead. The EPA report showed
across-the-board weakness of the economy, with the exception of the housing
sector.
An expected recovery of the housing sector, however, was yesterday brought
into question by the Construction Ministry, which reported a 0.1 per cent
year-on-year decline in housing starts in May, following a small increase in
April. Starts of private-owned houses increased by 9.1 per cent, while
construction of houses for sales fell by 33.4 per cent. Condominium starts
were down by 45 per cent.
The Japan Machinery Federation said that planned spending on plant and
equipment by the country's largest machinery makers is down 13.2 per cent
this fiscal year, compared to actual spending last year.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920701

