FT924-6534

FT  20 NOV 92 / Arts: Classic drama in Germany gets a revolutionary look -
Jackie Wullschlager finds that the boldest, most inspiring shows come out of
east Berlin


   By JACKIE WULLSCHLAGER


It is exactly three years since the Berlin Wall fell, and in the theatre the
offstage drama is revolutionary. This month, a newly privatised Berliner
Ensemble, once Brecht's Marxist bastion, is launched. The Rosa Luxembourg
Volksbuhne (People's Stage) reopens with a savage satire against the
Bolsheviks. And the jewel in east Berlin's dramatic crown, Max Reinhardt's
Deutsches Theater, is finding 80 per cent of its audience from the west.
What is left of the theatrical traditions of East Germany's proudest
cultural achievement? Theatres in the DDR used to be cheap, full, and
politically alert. The structure and the audiences may have changed, but the
surprise is that the style survives. Drive blindfold in and out of the
Brandenburg Gate, pick any Berlin stage, and from gesture, accent, overall
mix of dramatic ingredients, you will still tell an east German production
at once. Some of the boldest, most inspiring shows across the country now
come out of east Berlin.
At the Deutsches Theater, Thomas Langhoff's version of Hofmannsthal's The
Tower is a model of a classic given a new lease of life. The Tower, written
by an ageing author lamenting the collapse of Vienna, has an unhappy stage
history - it opened in 1928, simultaneously in Munich and Hamburg but with
opposite endings, because Hofmannsthal could not make up his mind - and on
the page it seems incredible that this lumbering relic of palmy Habsburg
days was a contemporary of Brecht's Threepenny Opera, which opened in Berlin
the same year.
Yet Langhoff, via a dash of Brecht, has turned the play into a comic
commentary on our times. The story, adapted from Calderon, is a parable of
changing regimes. It tells of Prince Sigismund, who is imprisoned in a tower
because an oracle foresaw he would cause his father's downfall and, taken to
court for a day, turns out as murderous as predicted. But he is in fact
anti-Machiavellian, a spiritual leader used by plotters, then sacrificed for
a people's king, Corporal Oliver.
Langhoff works it as cartoon strip of coup and counter-coup where palace
putsch, revolt against the ancien regime, new totalitarian ruler all strike
chords with Germany's current upheavals. Jorg Gudzuhn plays the King as
Clown, a fusspot in furs and feathers who rolls his 'r's like Chaplain doing
Hitler, haggles over his pension, throws tantrums. Gudzuhn, with his elastic
face, shaking limbs and forlornly grand gestures, streaks slapstick with
tragedy: from mad Habsburg to Honecker, he is every ruler on the way out. In
a climactic fight with his son, he gets a bloody red nose - a literal clown
who has lost power and love.
Langhoff underlines Oedipal battles with a comic vision of the Doctor
(Reimar Baur) as an identikit Freud, bearded, spectacled and anxious, sent
to analyse the wild beast that the caged Prince has become. For his visit,
the huge black tower-prison commanding the stage reverses into a tall white
lab with fluorescent lights and doors and furniture distorted into high,
long, unnerving shapes.
It is one of many brilliant clashes of mood with which Langhoff paints
conflict. Another has grey advisors giggling against the chime of church
bells as the king goes mad in a monastic rose garden: spiritual ecstasy
versus worldly disaster. Sigismund, metamorphosed from wild child to
courtier to martyr in breathless, blood-and-sweat star turns from Daniel
Morgenroth, is sacrificed like the tower in a chess game. In a last metaphor
of changing values and the downfall of ideologies, Oliver (Frank Leinert),
the commissar in boots and steel-rimmed glasses, pushes his double forward
onto a balcony and the power puppet is acclaimed by the masses.
Langhoff uses Brechtian devices - kinghood must be ridiculous, for example -
but each character is so finely delineated that individual emotions are
rarely subsumed in big ideas.
But at the Rosa Luxembourg Volksbuhne Frank Castorf directs a King Lear
which is just the reverse. At first its craziness compels. Castorf has the
obligatory absurd king (Wilfried Ortmann), a bumbling pensioner so
down-and-out that even his shoelaces are rotten. His three daughters are
charladies, cleaning the stage with silver buckets. The abandoned Cordelia
(Annett Kruschke) does not cry but pisses into hers; her husband marries her
with her trousers still down and drinks the contents of the bucket.
This proletarian Lear turns the disintegrating state into an everyday farce:
its reality, perhaps, for the man in the street who finds the shops empty
and the tram too expensive. It is set on shifting planks of wood whence
courtiers fall off the edge into ditches of water. No one knows where he is
going: a country adrift without policy. Lear is not even sure which tragedy
he is in; once he calls Cordelia 'Ophelia'. A fat cabbage, hacked up with a
hammer, points the blame: the German for cabbage is 'Kohl'.
If you enjoy political satire, this is a show to catch. But it is not
Shakespeare, it is absolutely lacking in emotion, in the sense of characters
as individuals, and in the subtlety and generosity of spirit which makes
contemporary reworkings of Shakespeare truly come alive.
The Tower and Lear are both about individuals caught up in revolutionary
times, and this is the dominant theme across east Berlin stages. The
Berliner Ensemble continues to show vintage Brecht productions on the
subject, Galileo and The Good Woman of Setzuan, until the premieres of its
new directors in January. The highlight of the recent Brandenburg Theatre
Festival in Berlin was a Potsdam production, The Small Pogram at the Station
Buffet, about uprisings against a small town Jewish couple. It was sparked
by Jewish mourners in Brandenburg overhearing the disapproving mutter 'It
wouldn't have happened under Honecker'.
Another Volksbuhne premiere, City of Justice, is a first-ever production of
a Russian satire on the revolution by Lew Lunz written in 1923. Director
Andreas Kriegenburg catches some of the mood of its propaganda opposite,
Eisenstein's Battleship Potemkin, with a mass of desperate Soviet soldiers
hanging on to a ramp which goes straight through the auditorium and a cast
of citizens who find themselves in a city not of justice but of nightmarish
machinery ordering every aspect of their lives.
This is a loud, dark, violent show, the jokes about soldiers wanting to 'get
to Russia' - a cause of special mirth here - as insistent as the drumbeat
from the foyer which carries even to the nearest U-bahn station. It is a
claustrophobic, heady experience, but like the other shows here, unlike
drama anywhere else in Germany.
The Tower is in repertory at the Deutsches Theater; King Lear and City of
Justice in repertory at the Volksbuhne am Rosa Luxembourg Platz.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921120

