FT921-372

FT  30 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Tories on Idiot Curve


   By JOE ROGALY


THE impossible is now a distinct possibility. Mr Neil Kinnock could march
into No 10 Downing Street on Friday week the undisputed champion of the
election, a temporary uncrowned king needing no support from the Liberal
Democrats, the unchallenged holder of one of the most powerful offices in
the democratic world, Britain's elected dictator for the duration.
Hold hard. I know it could go the other way. The Conservatives could learn
how to do politics. The thought of Mr Kinnock might frighten floating voters
into a last-minute stampede towards the Tories. It is also true that the
polls point unwaveringly towards a hung parliament. That would favour Labour
but might constrain it in office. It is still the most likely result.
Yet it would be unwise to rule out the most stupendous outcome of them all -
a simple majority for Labour. In 1987 and 1988 the thought of such an
upheaval was properly dismissed as fantasy. Labour was hopelessly
discredited. The Conservatives were riding high. When the election came,
Labour would have to capture about 100 seats to win outright. Many of its
target constituencies are in the south-east, the most difficult territory
for Mr Kinnock's party. An unprecedented proportion of the Conservative
electorate would have to be persuaded to change their allegiance.
This ancient conventional wisdom, which I shared at the time, has since been
replaced by a less mechanical theory. What nearly everyone now says is that
there will be no winner, and that in consequence there will have to be a
coalition. Failing that, a second election will follow hard on the heels of
the first. The new supposition has gained credence since 1989. The basis for
this is shown in a special graph, designed by a bank of computers in the
Financial Times laboratory of political science. It is the Idiot Curve. The
x-axis represents rising Tory ineptitude. The y-axis shows an increasing
Labour advantage. The line is currently pointing upwards at a steep angle.
It charts the realisation that even if the psephological arithmetic seems to
make a Labour triumph highly unlikely, the probability of the Conservatives
throwing the entire game away grows every day.
This is why a Conservative overall majority would now be the surprise
outcome. A mere 50 seats down, and they lose their supreme command of the
commons. They have worked hard to lose those 50 seats. It has required a
long and laborious climb up the Idiot Curve. They invented the poll tax,
then messily discarded it at the cost of 2 1/2 p more VAT. They encouraged
the aspiring classes - their own voters - to mortgage themselves beyond
their reasonable means. They lowered taxes and deregulated, stoking a boom,
and were in consequence obliged to raise interest rates, busting it. This
destroyed the housing market and faced their loyal supporters with the
threat of eviction. They kept Mrs Margaret Thatcher on as prime minister for
at least a year longer than was wise, as I suspect her old adviser, Lord
Whitelaw, would agree.
All of this landed Mr John Major with the task of preventing Labour from
winning and a maximum of 18 months in which to do it. He was an interesting
choice as antidote to Mrs Thatcher. I thought he might do the trick. Yet his
many attractive qualities have obscured the central fact about his political
abilities: that he is deficient in both experience and sheer horsepower.
That explains why he mistimed the election, persevered with the politically
deadly (although otherwise sound) reforms of the National Health Service,
chose as party chairman a man with a marginal seat to defend, and appointed
Mr Norman Lamont as chancellor. He climbed that Idiot Curve like a squirrel
after nuts. All the Conservatives need to do is keep climbing for 10 more
days and General Kinnock will enjoy a walkover.
It need not be that way. There is no national desire to see the Labour
leader become prime minister. But if the Conservatives are to pull back
Labour's lead in the short time available they should learn campaigning from
the experts - the Labour party. One small example: the Kinnock platform
always flaunts the slogan 'it's time for change; it's time for Labour', or a
part of it. The leader's speeches almost invariably end with the same
assertions. The ordinary rules of advertising prevail. As to the Tory slogan
 -do you know what it is?
Mr Major, or his party chairman Mr Chris Patten, should select one and stick
to it. If desperate, they could settle on 'you can't trust Labour'. It could
shift the focus to Mr Kinnock this week. He acknowledged in his TV interview
with Mr Walden yesterday that under his governance public-sector pay would
be indexed to private earnings. Labour is already committed to indexing
social payments to earnings or prices, whichever rises faster. These are
immense commitments but the Conservatives' attack on Labour economics is not
focused. It strays from hyperbole to absurdity. The Tories' tacticians will
have to do much better than that if Labour is to be turned back. Failing
such an improvement, Mr Kinnock's dream will come true.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920330

