FT921-14121

FT  17 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Vietnam set to license
foreign bank branches


   By ALEXANDER NICOLL, Asia Editor


VIETNAM looks set to begin licensing foreign bank branches in a move keenly
awaited by banks seeking to take advantage of the country's market-oriented
economic reforms.
The State Bank of Vietnam, the communist country's central bank, has told
seven banks they have approval in principle to open branches, according to
foreign business sources quoted by Reuter from Hanoi yesterday.
However, it was not clear whether other banks would also be given approval
at this stage. At present, foreign banks may only have representative
offices, and there is one joint venture with an Indonesian bank.
The seven did not include Standard Chartered, which has developed a strong
profile in Vietnam through an active representative office. Standard
Chartered said in London its office in Ho Chi Minh City was being upgraded
towards branch status. However, it could not speculate on the precise timing
of the award of a licence.
Four French banks with representative offices in Vietnam were reported to be
among those given the green light for a branch. They are: Banque Nationale
de Paris, Banque Francaise du Commerce Exterieur, Credit Lyonnais and
Indosuez.
The other three - Bangkok Bank, ANZ, and a Taiwanese bank - do not have
representative offices. Mr Vo Van Kiet, Vietnam's prime minister, confirmed
during a visit by Mr Anand Panyarachun, the Thai prime minister, that
Bangkok Bank would be granted a licence.
The permitted scope of branch activities has yet to be made clear, though
foreign banks are keen to expand their trade financing operations. Vietnam's
banking system is under-developed, and banks including Standard Chartered
have been training local banks in skills such as foreign exchange trading.
In the longer term, Vietnam offers large potential for retail banking as the
government seeks to develop the infrastructure of a market economy. Several
foreign banks, including some from the US, are believed to be anxious to
begin retail business, though US banks are currently prevented from doing
business with Vietnam by a US embargo.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920117

