FT924-6140

FT  23 NOV 92 / International Company News: Western & Pacific delisting -
Vancouver quotation ended after inquiries into UK share pledge


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


A COMPANY closely associated with natural resources entrepreneur Mr Clive
Smith has left the Vancouver Stock Exchange following inquiries from
officials over transactions involving its shares in the UK.
Authorities in Vancouver suspended trading in the company, Western &
Pacific, in October, pending clarification of the pledge of Western shares
as security to a UK company.
They were concerned following articles in the British media stating that a
substantial shareholder in Western had pledged the shares following a loan
transaction involving cooking manufacturer, Belling, which went into
receivership in May.
The stock was security for a Dollars 2m advance fee payment made by Belling
last year, in return for a promised loan of Dollars 50m from a third party,
Global Prospect Funding, a Newcastle-under-Lyme company. Belling borrowed
the Dollars 2m from its own pension fund.
The Dollars 50m loan was never made, and the Western shares were eventually
given as collateral for the Dollars 2m in April. Soon after they were
pledged, the value of the shares fell from an estimated CDollars 1.75m to
about Pounds 200,000.
The shareholder which pledged the stock was Finchley Investments, an Isle of
Man company administered from Jersey, which Mr Smith has often used to
handle some of his investments. Western & Pacific is also 18.6 per cent
owned by Newsham Investment, another vehicle for the Smith family interests.
The Vancouver authorities also questioned the company as to the extent of Mr
Smith's involvement with Western & Pacific.
After several meetings towards the end of October, Western & Pacific
eventually decided to delist from the VSE. It retains its listing on NASDAQ
in the US, where most of its shares are traded.
Western & Pacific came to the VSE in 1991 through the reverse takeover of a
shell company Nor-Quest. Some months later Western purchased Montana Mining
Properties, one of the founders of Butte Mining. Cash-strapped Butte has
launched litigation alleging fraud and misrepresentation by more than 70
defendants, including Mr Smith, who is contesting the action.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921123

