FT923-9746

FT  04 AUG 92 / Break-up of Black Sea fleet delayed


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   YALTA


UKRAINE and Russia yesterday decided to postpone a carve-up of the Black Sea
fleet until 1995, ending at least temporarily a dispute which had threatened
the peace between the republics.
The decision by President Boris Yeltsin of Russia and President Leonid
Kravchuk to share the fleet and its land facilities under a united command
answerable to both leaders follows negotiators' failure to make headway
implementing a two-month-old presidential agreement to divide it up.
The move may be interpreted as a climbdown by Ukraine, which has been keen
to create its own navy as fast as possible. But the decision provides a
breathing space for both men whose people, already worn down by economic
hardship, are tired of bickering between the republics.
The irony is that the fleet itself, although the size of the British navy,
has no real strategic significance and costs more money to maintain than
either Russia or Ukraine can afford.
The two leaders, who said they had set up a telephone hotline to deal with
future flashpoints, also agreed to allow visa-free travel between their
republics and to share out former Soviet embassies and other property
abroad.
They plan soon to sign a friendship treaty which will be accompanied by
agreements on oil, sugar and grain.
The deal was struck at an exclusive dacha half way between Yalta, where the
fate of post-war Europe was decided, and Sebastopol, home to the disputed
fleet. It was also near the house where former Soviet President Mikhail
Gorbachev was holed up during an abortive coup last year.
A row has broken out inside the Russian government, and between the
administration and central bank, over the issuing of a further Rbs1,000bn of
credit by the central bank to prop up large state companies struggling under
vast loads of debt, John LLoyd adds from Moscow.
Mr Pyotr Fillipov, chairman of the parliamentary sub-committee for
privatisation, said the move would 'push the country to the edge of an
horrendous economic crisis' and raise inflation to between 70-80 per cent a
month from the present 15 per cent.
Mr Victor Gerashchenko, the new acting chairman of the central bank,
promised to issue the credit at the end of last week - although the majority
of government ministers appear to be strongly opposed. However at least two
 -Mr Georgy Khizha, deputy prime minister, and Mr Victor Chernomyrdin,
minister for fuel and energy - were reported yesterday to support the move.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920804

