FT924-6117

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of World Commercial Vehicles (3): In search of an
alliance - Profile of DAF


   By KEVIN DONE


IN THE endless war of attrition in the European truck industry Daf, the
Dutch commercial vehicle maker, appears set to be the latest victim of the
wave of restructuring that has swept through the sector.
Three months ago it admitted that it had been forced to enter discussions on
'a strategic alliance'. While still refusing publicly to identify the
hoped-for saviour, it appears that Daf is seeking shelter under the giant
shadow of Mercedes-Benz, the world's leading truck maker and the automotive
subsidiary of Daimler-Benz, Germany's biggest industrial corporation.
Daf, which is now in its third year of heavy losses, says that it is seeking
an alliance, where the new partner would provide fresh equity to bolster its
battered balance sheet, as well as collaboration to allow it to share
products, new product development costs and plant capacities.
Its need for an alliance is becoming increasingly urgent as truck markets
weaken across Europe, and as recovery from prolonged recession in the UK,
still Daf's biggest market, remains elusive.
In its latest setback Daf announced last month that it would have to defer
payment of a dividend in 1992 on an issue of preference shares made only a
year ago to raise Fl 250m to strengthen its creaking finances.
The dividend postponement - along with the announcement of more production
cutbacks caused the Daf ordinary share price to plunge to an all-time low of
Fl 8.80 in trading in the last month from a high for the year of Fl 26.90.
Daf was floated on the Amsterdam and London stock exchanges in 1989 at a
price of Fl 47.00 a share and peaked at Fl 58.30 shortly afterwards.
The reluctance of some Daf shareholders to subscribe to last year's share
issue has radically changed its shareholder structure.
The British Aerospace stake (a product of Daf's takeover in 1987 of the
Leyland truck operations and BAe's subsequent takeover of Rover, formerly
British Leyland) has fallen from 16 per cent to only 10.9 per cent.
At the same time three leading Dutch financial institutions have emerged as
big shareholders, ABN-AMRO Bank with 8.2 per cent, and the Dutch insurance
groups ING and Aegon with 10.6 and 6.4 per cent respectively.
While Daf seeks the support of Mercedes-Benz, it is also in advanced talks
for additional funding of Fl 210m in credits backed by the Dutch and Belgian
states. Separately it has explored potential collaborative ventures in
components with Hino, the Japanese truck maker.
Daf's fortunes have changed with alarming speed reflecting the dramatic
volatility of the European truck market. It fell into net losses of Fl 228m
in 1990 and Fl 394m in 1991 - and failed to pay dividends - after achieving
a record net profit of Fl 172m in 1989.
Daf has turned from hunter to prey in the European truck industry.
In the late 1980s it moved into high gear in a drive to acquire, itself, the
critical size that might have promoted it into the top league of European
truck makers.
In 1987 it took over the then British Leyland truck and van operations in a
move that transformed it from being essentially a heavy truck and bus maker,
into a commercial vehicle producer with a full product range from vans to
light, medium and heavy trucks and buses.
Buoyed by the record sales and profits of 1989 it then tried successively to
take over Enasa in Spain and Steyr in Austria, but each time it was
thwarted, as bigger rivals stepped in.
Among today's surviving European truck makers, DAF is exposed by having the
breadth of product range of the biggest players without their production and
sales volumes. It has entered a collaboration with Renault to develop a new
van range for the mid-1990s, but until it started its present negotiations
with Mercedes-Benz, it had failed to find a partner to share the much more
onerous product development burden on the truck side of its business.
At the same time it has lacked the depth of financial resources to allow it
to emerge unscathed from the horrors that have beset its sales in the UK,
which became its single biggest market after the merger with Leyland.
Daf has tried hard to reduce its dependence on the UK by building its dealer
network and sales in particular in Germany and in France. Its endeavours are
beginning to bear fruit in those markets, but in 1991 the UK still accounted
for 29.4 per cent of group turnover.
It was little consolation that Daf became the truck market leader in the UK
last year, narrowly overhauling its bitter local rival Iveco Ford, when at
the same time overall UK truck sales were suffering their steepest slide
into recession since the Second World War with demand at its lowest level
since the early 1950s. UK truck sales have fallen by 60 per cent in the past
three years.
According to figures from DRI, the London-based automotive analysts, Daf's
share of the western European heavy truck market (above 15 tonnes) fell to
only 7.9 per cent last year from 10 per cent in 1990 leaving it last among
the seven leading European truck makers.
It has managed, however, to cut its net loss in the first half of 1992 to Fl
97.4m from Fl 179.1m a year ago, with its operating loss reduced to Fl 27.4m
from Fl 116.5m a year earlier. It has launched this year a new heavy truck
range, the Daf 75/85, developed at a cost of Fl 550m.
Between the end of 1991 and the end of 1993 restructuring measures will take
costs of Fl 500m a year out of the business. With manufacturing operations
in the Netherlands, Belgium and the UK, the company will have cut its
workforce to fewer than 12,000 by the end of 1993 from 16,782 in 1989.
Daf's earlier forecast - conditional on various favourable developments - of
a break-even for 1992 after a loss in the first half, had to be changed, in
late August to a break-even only in the second half of 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921123

