FT921-3742

FT  12 MAR 92 / International Company News: A very good place to own a bank
 -The numbers behind the 83% rise at HSBC


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


What's good for Hong Kong is clearly good for the Hongkong Bank . . . and
vice versa. So said Mr William Purves, chairman of HSBC Holdings on Tuesday
night after announcing an 83 per cent rise in 1991 profits to HKDollars
5.66bn (USDollars 730m).
Some in the colony may take issue with Mr Purves's afterthought but none
would question the validity of his first observation.
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank had a year to turn many a British or US banker
green with envy. But the results continued to underline the importance of
Hong Kong to its profitability and future; it remains the bank's treasure
trove.
The bank does not make it easy to divine the source of its profits.
Regulators in the US and Australia make it come clean about its profits and,
more to the point, losses in their jurisdiction, but not in Hong Kong where
banks are allowed to salt away earnings in hidden reserves.
The best way to get an inkling of the bank's domestic Hong Kong business is
to restate its declared profit on a 'before losses' basis.
As all its loss-making operations are in the US, Australia and, until
recently, the UK, then its profit centre must be the Asia Pacific region, of
which Hong Kong is known to represent the bulk.
By adding back the losses it appears that the board of the bank decided on a
profit before losses of HKDollars 7.4bn, a virtually identical figure to the
before losses profit in 1990. By keeping that figure virtually constant the
rebound in last year's profits is explained by the turnround in the bank's
operations in the developed world.
However, Mr Purves gave a hint as to what the bank transferred this year to
hidden reserves. He said the transfer to inner reserves was greater than the
profit the bank made on the sale of part of its stake in Cathay Pacific, the
Hong Kong airline. That sale produced an exceptional profit of HKDollars
1.6bn.
That takes 1991 net profit, before transfers to inner reserves, to more than
HKDollars 7.3bn.
While this figure accounts for a lot of the bank's profit last year it does
not appear to account for much profit growth in the Hong Kong part of the
business.
So what happened in Hong Kong? Mr Purves said that the local bank did well
last year. He added that its growth in profits was of a similar order to
other local banks.
Hang Seng, the nearest in size to the bank - excluding the 13 member banks
of the Bank of China group, which do not report - reported a near 30 per
cent growth in net earnings last year.
The Bank of East Asia - a distant third in the rankings - reported a 30 per
cent rise in its net profits.
Hong Kong was one of the best places in the world to own a bank last year.
Last June the government, in an attempt to dampen a feverish housing market,
engineered a rise in bank lending rates but did not allow an increase in
deposit interest rates. It wanted to preserve the colony's fixed link with
the US dollar and a rise in local deposit rate could have fuelled demand for
the Hong Kong dollar.
Bank analysts at Salomon Brothers, the US securities house, estimate that
the average lending spread for all banks in the colony rose from about 3 per
cent mid-year to more than 5 per cent by the end of 1991.
This is a large change in margins, and one which seems likely to prevail at
least until the middle of this year, but possibly longer - underwriting bank
profitability for much of the year.
Mr John Gray, the bank's executive deputy chairman, said yesterday that a
close eye was kept on costs and further gains in productivity sought in the
Hong Kong operations as well as in overseas subsidiaries.
There is more. Mr Gray said the board had taken a decision this time to put
a lot more into the bank's general reserve. This was prudent because of the
uncertainty surrounding the economic situation in North America, Europe and
Australia, Mr Gray said.
At Tuesday night's press conference Mr Purves killed two hares, until then
scampering through financial markets, stone dead. The bank would not be
having a rights issue this year and it would not be making a European
acquisition either. Its preference remained for an 'alliance' along with the
one it enjoys with Wells Fargo in the US.
However, he did set another hare running. Last April's changes to the bank's
structure - the bank's assets were rearranged and ownership vested in the UK
incorporated HSBC Holdings - prompts the thought in some analysts' minds,
notably Mr John Mulcahy of Peregrine, the local broker, that it could float
equity in Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp, the subsidiary which manages
the Asia Pacific assets.
Mr Purves said he would not preclude it, but added that it was not on the
agenda and not before the board.
He did say that the holding company would begin to take on responsibilities
best handled at a global level, and that the board of the bank in Hong Kong
would become more localised, while the board of the holding company would
become more international in its representation.
Changes are happening at a senior management level. Mr Gray said that within
18 months a general restructuring of the bank should be complete, involving
the transfer of treasury risk and policy analysis, legal and management
information systems, and human resources, among others.
'This process will evolve,' Mr Gray said. 'We want to avoid creating more
management layers and additional costs.'
However, as 1997 appr-oaches, it is not impossible to conceive of a
situation where a large minority interest in the main subsidiary were
floated - or placed.
This would satisfy the appetite for international investors to own a slice
of one of the best regional banks in Asia; if a part were sold to a mainland
Chinese company it may be a way for the bank to secure its relations with
Beijing.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920312

