FT921-1494

FT  24 MAR 92 / International Company News: Shareholder ends board bid at
Sears, Roebuck


   By NIKKI TAIT and BARBARA DURR


   NEW YORK, CHICAGO


MR ROBERT MONKS, the shareholder rights activist who has been campaigning
vigorously for changes at Sears, Roebuck, yesterday withdrew his candidacy
for a seat on the struggling retail and financial services group's board.
But Mr Monks made clear he was withdrawing only because he believed success
in the vote at the Sears annual meeting in May was 'mathematically
inachievable'.
He stressed he would support other dissident shareholder resolutions - 'both
vocally and financially' - including one which demands a study of the
demerger possibilities at the group.
Mr Monks's Washington office also said it was 'very likely' the activist
would run for a board seat in 1993, if the company takes no action in the
interim.
Sears confirmed it had been informed about the withdrawal of Mr Robert Monks
as a candidate for its board, but refused to comment further.
Mr Monks lost a bid to join the Sears board last year, receiving 12 per cent
of the vote. Before the election took place, Sears decided to shrink the
size of its board from 15 members to 10, meaning that only three seats were
up for election, instead of five. Under the cumulative voting system, that
meant Mr Monks needed 25 per cent of votes cast at the meeting.
Sears has pledged to add new outside directors, but yesterday Mr Monks noted
that 'by not proposing any new candidate for a vacated seat', the company
had effectively shrunk the board again.
'This leaves only three directors to be elected in 1992,' he said, 'making
my candidacy mathematically inachievable.'
Mr Monks, who owns 100 Sears shares and has no intention of buying more,
highlighted a proposal which would require Sears management to hire
independent investment bankers to evaluate the spin-off of the non-retail
assets, as one that he was particularly keen to support. The proposal was
made by Mr Hazard Bentley, agent of Allstate, the property-casualty insurer
owned by Sears.
Concern over Sears has centred on its retailing business, which has a high
cost base compared with many rivals. Critics say that retail operation has
been slow to respond to trends in the industry.
Sears claims to be addressing the problems, but dissident shareholders argue
that worries about the retail side depress the share price and the value of
the financial services interests are overlooked.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920324

