FT922-470

FT  27 JUN 92 / Finance & the Family: Ombudsmen's workload doubles -
Scheherazade Daneshkhu studies the increasing number of complaints
concerning building societies


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


COMPLAINTS to building society ombudsmen have more than doubled over the
past year. There were 9,525 complaints and inquiries in the year to March
31, according to the scheme's annual report, compared to 4,451 in the
previous year. This is six times the figure for 1987-88, the scheme's first
year.
Stephen Edell, the first ombudsman, said he could not account for the 'flood
of complaints' and said the rise was even more remarkable since Abbey
National had become a bank in 1989 and therefore fell outside the
jurisdiction of the scheme.
A third ombudsman, Brian Murphy, was appointed last month to join Edell and
Jane Woodhead in coping with the workload.
There was also an increase in the number of cases taken up by the ombudsmen
from 642 to 1,070 over the same period. Formal decisions were made in 392
cases, of which 19 were resolved wholly in favour of the customer and 45
were 'partially' resolved in the complainant's favour.
The ombudsmen can make awards up to Pounds 100,000 though the largest
compensation that has so far been made is Pounds 25,000. Edell said most
awards made last year were in 'hundreds of pounds or the low thousands.'
Investment interest rates: The sharpest rise in complaints was about
interest rates on savings accounts, with over six times more complaints than
in 1990-91. Typically, a building society will launch a new account with
much publicity while closing an existing account to new investors. The new
account will usually pay higher rates of interest but those in the old
account are often unaware that there is a better replacement available.
Most of these complaints arose as a result of the launch by Nationwide
Anglia of its Bright Horizons investment range in late 1990 but Edell said
many other building societies operate in the same way.
He said that the onus was on investors to be 'vigilant' about their savings
but that building societies should make information about new accounts
'reasonably accessible'.
Repossessions: Complaints about mortgage repossessions increased by 171 per
cent over the year. Edell said there were few cases in which action could be
taken because the ombudsmen cannot stop repossessions nor can they deal with
cases handled by the courts.
The most common complaint was that properties had been sold too cheaply by
building societies, leaving the former home owner in debt to the building
society. The ombudsmen said that even if he were to award compensation in
some cases, he would not be able to stop this being set off by the society
against the amount owed by the borrower. Instant access accounts: If a
society advertises an account as instant access, the ombudsmen concluded
that the customer must have instant access to the cleared funds. In one
case, a family was short of money because the father was out of work. His
first pay cheque was wrongly coded by the paying bank and it was put into a
suspense account. The society said it could not make a withdrawal against
the cheque for a further three days. The ombudsman found in the
complainant's favour and his claim of Pounds 100 was reimbursed.
Errors in investment accounts: Societies sometimes credit or debit an
account by mistake, usually without informing the customer. In one case,
Pounds 1,000 was credited to a young man who thought the money had been sent
by his parents and proceeded to spend it. The society realised it had made a
mistake, debited Pounds 1,000 and charged the man for the overdraft. He paid
Pounds 260 before complaining to the ombudsmen who ordered the society to
recredit him with Pounds 740 (the part of the original Pounds 1,000 that he
had not repaid) backdated to the time of the original debit.
Insurance: Complaints about insurance more than doubled, mainly as a result
of the fees customers are charged to take out insurance other than a package
offered by a building society. Few cases were taken up because the ombudsmen
had already said it was reasonable for societies to charge a small fee in
return for consenting to particular arrangements.
Home income plans: Edell said there were under 50 complaints in this area
but wanted to highlight the distress of elderly people lured into unsuitable
schemes.
Edell said that home income plans which involved paying off a fixed rate
mortgage with a fixed rate annuity were excellent and virtually risk-free.
However, the danger with schemes with a variable mortgage and unit-linked
bond investing in equities, is that the value of bonds can fall while
interest rates rise leaving people saddled with a mortgage they cannot
afford.
Since these schemes involve equity based investments, they do not fall
completely within the jurisdiction of the building society ombudsmen.
However, Cheltenham & Gloucester, Bradford & Bingley, and Britannia have
agreed to co-operate with the ombudsmen, while Bristol & West and National
Counties have refused. West Bromwich is undecided.
Building Societies Ombudsmen, Grosvenor Gardens House, 35-37 Grosvenor
Gardens, London SW1X 7AW. 071-931-0044.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920627

