FT924-11310

FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (15): Long tradition of democracy -
Politics


   By MERVYN DE SILVA


YEARS of civil conflict have put Sri Lanka's democratic system under severe
strain, but the country has somehow managed to maintain the integrity of
civilian rule.
Sri Lanka has a long democratic tradition, with the introduction of
universal suffrage in 1931 when the country was still a British colony.
Under the 1978 constitution, the president carries considerable authority
within government and over the 225-seat parliament. He can hold any cabinet
portfolio and has the power to dismiss ministers or parliament at will.
In spite of such far-reaching powers, President Ranasinghe Premadasa has had
to fight off two assaults on his authority since being elected in December
1988.
Last year, the main opposition Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP) and a faction
within the ruling United National Party combined in an attempt to impeach Mr
Premadasa on 24 accounts of alleged abuse of power. The impeachment failed,
as did a move by the SLFP to annul the results of the 1988 national
elections.
The moves underlined Mr Premadasa's status as an 'outsider' in modern Sri
Lankan politics. All elected presidents and prime ministers since
independence have been products of elite Colombo schools except for Mr
Premadasa.
The president, a deeply religious, orthodox Buddhist, reacts to the jibes of
Sri Lanka's elite with a self-assured disdain.
He was born from the same underprivileged section of society from which the
People's Liberation Front (JVP) insurgents garnered their support.
Perhaps for this reason, there is a belief that Mr Premadasa, who played a
key role in crushing the 1986-89 JVP insurgency, was chosen to lead the UNP
merely to meet the needs of the hour.
The president has said as much. Of the attempt to impeach him, Mr Premadasa
told a visiting European human rights team that his predicament was best
understood in terms of Sinhalese cooking. To flavour rice, cooks place a
leaf called rumpay in the rice; once it is ready, the rumpay is thrown away.
Mr Premadasa is not likely to be so easily discarded.
The failure of the impeachment has strengthened the president's political
position. The SLFP, the main Sinhalese opposition, has meanwhile turned
increasingly to internecine fighting.
Mrs Sirima Bandaranaike, former prime minister and SLFP leader, has suffered
a recent illness and is a ghost of her former self. Two of her children are
now fighting for political control of the party.
Ms Chandrika Kumaranatunge, Mrs Bandaranaike's daughter, is the widow of
movie-star politician, Mr Vijay Kumaranatunge, the assassinated leader of
the Sri Lanka People's Party.
Her younger brother is Mr Anura Bandaranaike, London-educated, moderate and
a parliamentarian through and through. He made an able opposition leader in
the years when his mother was out of politics, stripped of her civic rights
by former President Jayawardene after the UNP 1977 election victory.
'The people. . . seem to trust and respect certain families that have served
them well in the past,' says Mr Bandaranaike, but he admits to a running
dispute with his mother.
'My complaint is that she hasn't held an election in the party for well over
a decade. How can we demand the full restoration of democracy from the
Premadasa regime when we do not practise democracy in our own party?' he
asks.
His mother disagrees: 'Anura is in too much of a hurry. He is being used by
a dangerous element that has infiltrated the party.'
This is a reference to the 'Hela Uramaya', a caucus of about 25 MPs in the
SLFP's 67-strong parliamentary group. The group resists any serious offer of
devolution to the Tamils in the north and east, the only possible basis for
an end to the war.
There are also a number of minor opposition parties, both Sinhalese, Tamil
and religious.
The island's newest party, the Democratic United National Front (DUNF), is a
breakaway faction of the ruling UNP formed from 13 MPs, including three
former ministers expelled for alleged involvement in the attempted
impeachment.
The DUNF is still not clear on tactical choices. If it fields its own
candidate at the 1994 presidential polls, it could help the SLFP to offer a
serious challenge to Mr Premadasa.
The Supreme Court order rejecting Mrs Bandaranaike's petition to annul the
1988 polls wrecked the calculations of both the SLFP and the DUNF, which
were hoping for presidential and parliamentary elections by next January.
There are also four small Sinhalese parties, with a history of Marxist
affiliation, grouped under the United Socialist Alliance banner. On a good
day the socialists can round up 13 MPs.
Although the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam are barred from official
politics, there are several influential Tamil parties in parliament.
Distinct from the Tamil communities in the north and east provinces are
those Tamils concentrated in the plantations of the central highlands. They
are identified as 'Indian' Tamils, descendants of the labour brought from
south India by British tea companies last century.
Their trade union, the Ceylon Workers Congress, is the island's largest
union, founded and still led by Mr S. Thondaman, minister of tourism. The
CWC has three seats in parliament, but can deliver 300,000-400,000 votes in
a presidential contest. It thus remains a decisive voting block.
There is also the Eelam Revolutionary Organisation of Students which has 13
seats. Its MPs are hardly seen in parliament, largely because the party has
close ties with the Tigers.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

921027

