FT924-11440

FT  26 OCT 92 / Economics Notebook: Japan learns lessons from a burst bubble


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


   TOKYO


MR Noboru Hatakeyama, the vice-minister at Japan's Ministry for
International Trade and Industry, summed up the lessons Tokyo's economic
mandarins needed to draw from the rise and fall of the bubble economy -
discipline.
He said: 'We became over-confident, too bullish. We should learn not to
become too pleased with ourselves. The Japanese are a very disciplined
people, but they became intoxicated by the bubble and they somehow forgot
their discipline.'
The bubble is still deflating more than two years after it was punctured.
The authorities are still learning as they take in the scale of the mess.
This week Bank of Japan managers from branches around the country will
discuss the economy. Many analysts believe this could be a precursor to a
further cut in interest rates.
On Tuesday, the Ministry of Finance will disclose its estimate of the bank's
non-performing loans, expected to have risen from about Y8,000bn in March to
about Y12,000bn (Dollars 98.8bn) at the end of September.
In the past six months Japan's economic policy consensus has moved from
complacency to concern. However, few would share the prognosis offered in
Tokyo 10 days ago by Mr Alan Greenspan, chairman of the US Federal Reserve
Board. He said the US and Japan were facing a kind of downturn unknown since
1945.
Mr Greenspan calls it 'the balance sheet problem' as companies and consumers
divert spending away from goods and services to reduce debts and rebuild
assets. But the Japanese economy's balance sheet suggests Tokyo policy
makers have reason to be optimistic.
Japanese banks are still uncovering financial black holes created through
excessive property lending in the late 1980s. Filling in the holes will take
years. There will be more bank mergers, rescues and even failures among
smaller institutions.
But it seems unlikely there will be any crisis to compare with the Savings
and Loans fiasco in the US.
Japanese manufacturers are in better shape than their dismal profits over
the past three years suggest. They are not overburdened by debt and most
have deep cash reserves.
During the bubble they invested in plant and equipment, whereas in the US
more of the boom went into consumption.
Small and medium-sized enterprises, the bedrock of employment in Japan, are
hurting. They have lower cash reserves than large companies and are more
dependent on the banks which are squeezing credit at a local level.
But Japan is better placed to avoid a bank squeeze on small companies than
the US was. The vast, semi-public sector, postal savings system - the Fiscal
Investment and Loan Programme - should provide small business funding when
banks withdraw credit.
The Japanese public and personal sectors are in better shape than their US
counterparts. In the US, the private sector financial profligacy of the late
1980s followed public sector fiscal profligacy. The US is so burdened by its
federal deficit that monetary policy is the only lever of economic policy.
Japanese public finances were strictly controlled in the 1980s, allowing the
government to use fiscal and monetary policy to revive the economy. Japanese
households similarly are less indebted than their US equivalents.
However, confidence that Japan can avoid the US's struggle to resuscitate
the economy does not rule out important changes in policy. The bubble's
burst has already prompted reassessment of economic policy on four counts:
The movement of asset prices will loom larger. Economic bureaucrats are
determined the asset boom should not be repeated, which could have
consequences for investment in land and stocks. For 30 years, Japanese
corporations have invested spare cash in land on the assumption it would
rise in value. Land prices in the 1990s may rise more slowly than the rate
of growth of the economy, forcing widespread reassessment of investment
practices;
Domestic considerations will become more important than international
concerns. The Japanese boom was partly created to satisfy US demands for
faster growth to reduce the Japanese trade surplus. In the wake of the 1987
stock market crash, the Japanese were also concerned that tighter monetary
policy might risk a widespread financial crisis.
Tokyo policymakers in part blame the bubble on bending over too far to
satisfy foreign demands. As a result there is no appetite in Tokyo for
international moves to manage the dollar or promote growth. It will be more
difficult to persuade Japan to enter the kinds of economic agreements such
as the Plaza and Louvre Accords of the mid-1980s;
Policy will increasingly focus on creating medium-term stability. As Dr
Yoshio Susuki, chief counsellor at the Nomura Research Institute put it: 'We
were involved too much in short-term co-ordination rather than medium-term
management. The most important contribution we can make to the international
economy is to run an autonomous policy, but one dedicated to stable growth;'
Japanese policymakers, traditionally focused on manufacturing and
investment, will now have to be concerned with the financial system as well.
Mr Shijuro Ogata, senior adviser to Yamaichi Securities, said: 'Policy was
too slow to tighten in the late-1980s and too slow to ease in the past year
because policymakers were used to just looking at the real economy rather
than the financial system.'
Ministry of Finance officials remain committed to liberalisation of the
finance sector. But over the next few years the state will be so involved in
helping the banks sort out their difficulties that re-regulation through the
backdoor cannot be ruled out.
Turning the economy around will be more complex than in previous recessions.
Discipline will play its part but more than that will be required to pull
the economy off the bottom.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921026

