FT922-13415

FT  11 APR 92 / Motoring: Conservative victory brings some relief to motor
industry - The implications of the election result


   By STUART MARSHALL


FOR THE motor industry and trade, a convincing Labour victory in the general
election had been rated worrying but not the ultimate disaster.
The industry believed a hung parliament would have been worse because it
would have prolonged the uncertainty from which it had suffered for so long.
A return of the Conservatives with a sound working majority was earnestly
hoped for. But few believed it was more than a remote possibility.
Ford's pre-polling day view was typical. It considered Labour's plans to hit
the new car buying classes with higher personal taxation could only make the
market shrink further. A drop in the total market this year from 1.7m to
1.5m if Kinnock replaced Major at number 10, had been pencilled into Ford's
forecasts. Bad though this was, the uncertainty caused by a hung parliament
with the Liberal Democrats holding the balance of power would have been
worse.
'For weeks, everyone held off buying until they knew what was going to be in
the Budget in March,' said Ford. 'The chancellor cut the 10 per cent Special
Car Tax by half. That was good; it reduced the price of an average family
car by around Pounds 400. We made some price cuts of our own and for a few
days, sales went up.
'Then the general election was called. Instantly, everything went dead as
buyers waited to see what was going to happen. Would the Tories get back?
Would Labour take over? Or would the Liberal Democrats have control over a
hung parliament which could easily lead to another general election within a
year? One result of the indecision was that British new car registrations
tumbled 15 per cent last month compared with March a year ago - and they
were far lower then than they had been a year earlier,' said Ford.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, representing both sides of
the motor business, has been unwilling to commit itself publicly. 'We are,
and must be seen to be, non-political,' a spokesman said.
Labour's claim that its tax proposals would leave most wage earners better
off cut little ice with the motor business. 'Even if what they said was
true, giving under-Pounds 22,000-a-year families with two kids and a
mortgage another couple of pounds a week to spend is hardly going to make
them rush out and buy new cars,' one large dealer said before polling day.
But increasing the marginal tax rate for the better off from 40 per cent to
59 per cent could only have a serious effect on their car buying habits.
'In many cases the husband will still have his company car. But is he going
to buy his wife the new estate car or hatchback she has had her eye on? More
likely he will be worrying about finding next year's school fees,' the
dealer said.
The chancellor of the exchequer's budget last month held out hopes of
changes in company car taxation. In future, the tax band a company car came
into would depended only on price. Engine cylinder capacity would not count
any more. All the details were to have been sorted out by summer. Now they
will. This measure will remove one of the handicaps from which fuel saving
and environmentally friendly diesel cars have suffered.
They use up to 30 per cent less fuel than comparable petrol cars but often
have slightly larger engines. That puts them into the next tax band and can
more than double the user's personal income tax liability.
During the run-up to the election neither Labour nor Liberal Democrats had
much to say about diesel cars; it was as though they were barely aware of
their existence.
After three years of Tory tightening of the screw on the 'perk' element of
company-car use, the last budget slightly eased the pressure.
Company cars are of critical importance to the motor industry. They account
for an estimated 52 per cent of all new registrations. The industry had
feared that with a change of government, the situation for company car
buyers and users could only have got worse.
The industry had detected an anti-motoring attitude, presented as a concern
for the environment, among both Labour and Liberal Democrats. Reducing the
number of cars (particularly company cars) driven into cities, and
persuading drivers to use improved public transport systems, is dear to both
parties.
How would this have been achieved in the lifetime of a parliament? One
option was road pricing. It would have had the dual purpose of penalising
car use in city centres and funding improved bus and train services.
Or there could have been a sharp rise in the excise duty on petrol. The
greener elements of Labour and Liberal Democrats think this a good thing.
Above all, what the motor industry and trade needs is a period of stability
in which it can lick its wounds and plan for the future. It now hopes that
it will get it.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920411

