FT922-13360

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Voters follow same pattern across country


   By DAVID OWEN and IAN HAMILTON FAZEY


THE PATTERN was the same virtually throughout the country. Labour made some
progress, mainly at the expense of the Liberal Democrats. But with the
Conservative vote holding up unexpectedly well, it was not nearly enough.
In spite of a professional and imaginative campaign, Mr Neil Kinnock's party
fell short of its targets in all three of the main marginal-rich regions.
The party fared best in the Midlands, capturing all but one of its target
seats in Birmingham, although the move in the west Midlands was less
conclusive at around 3 per cent.
It did less well in the north-west of England and Greater London, capturing
only about half the critical seats as it fell short of the 7 per cent to 8
per cent swing it required.
In Scotland, the Conservatives confounded pundits by increasing their share
of the vote and picking up two seats, and ministers Mr Ian Lang and Mr
Michael Forsyth survived against the odds. The Scottish National party lost
one of its four MPs with the defeat of Mr Jim Sillars.
Another blip in the overall pattern was in the south-east, where Essex man
spectacularly declined to turn against his 1980s benefactor, notwithstanding
the severity of the regional recession.
In London, Labour's decision to concentrate on 24 marginals in the second
half of the campaign was vindicated as the party secured a greater swing in
these seats than across the whole capital.
But the dozen seats it won was not nearly enough. A swathe of marginals
manifested a substantial but inadequate move to Labour of between 5 per cent
and 6 per cent. Mitcham and Morden provided an early warning sign for the
party, as Ms Angela Rumbold, home office minister, held on in defiance of a
5 per cent swing. It also fell just short in Edmonton, where Dr Ian Twinn
held on for the Tories by some 600 votes.
In the east Midlands, Labour achieved its biggest regional swing from the
Tories at nearly 5 per cent, winning in fine style in Nottingham East and
Nottingham South.
In the north-west, the remarkable firmness of the Conservative vote meant
Labour was even more dependent than elsewhere on squeezing Liberal Democrat
support to make headway.
It did this to a significant degree, with a 4.2 per cent swing away from Mr
Paddy Ashdown's party. But with turnout exceptionally high, it pulled up
short in too many constituencies. Bury South, where Tory Mr David Sumberg
polled just 5 fewer votes than in 1987 but had his majority trimmed to 800,
was typical.
In the region, the Conservatives suffered little or no swing against them in
15 of the 20 marginal seats at stake. Labour won none, the Tories held 10.
Against all expectations, there was a swing to the Conservatives in five of
the marginals and no swing in another three seats. In another eight, the
swing against them was less than 1 per cent.
Only Barrow and Furness showed the sort of swing from Conservative that
Labour was hoping to see repeated across the regions - 2.6 per cent against
the Conservatives and 1.7 per cent against the Liberal Democrats to give
Labour a 4.2 per cent swing and a winning margin of 6.4 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920411

