FT922-474

FT  27 JUN 92 / Markets: Bush campaign turns heat on Greenspan - Wall Street


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


WITH THE economic recovery showing signs of cooling off, the heat was turned
up on Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan this week.
President Bush took time off on Wednesday from trading brickbats with Ross
Perot via television and radio talk shows, to launch his clearest call yet
for lower interest rates. In an interview with The New York Times, Bush said
he believed the outlook for inflation was sufficiently unthreatening to
allow room for another cut in interest rates. The implication of his remarks
was clear: Greenspan should worry less about inflation and the bond markets,
and more about the desperately weak nature of the economic recovery.
The President's plea for a policy ease, echoed a day later by Michael
Boskin, his chief economic adviser, was carefully timed. The Fed's key
policy-making Open Market Committee (FOMC) meets next week for its monthly
review of the economy and monetary policy.
The day after the meeting, the June employment report, traditionally the
most closely-watched indicator of economic health, is published. Bush knows
that if anything is going to trigger another rate cut, it is the employment
data. Another rise in the national unemployment rate like the one seen in
May (it jumped from 7.2 per cent to 7.5 per cent), and the pressure for a
policy change may be too intense to ignore.
The President also knows that later in the month the Fed chairman has to
give his bi-annual Humphrey-Hawkins testimony to Congress, where he is bound
to be given a rough ride over his handling of the economy if he has done
nothing by then to stimulate business activity.
Politicians on both sides of the fence in Washington have been united in
their belief recently that the Fed is being too cautious with monetary
policy, and that Greenspan's refusal to cut interest rates one more time (he
last lowered rates in December) could scupper the economy's chances of
making a sustainable, and substantial, recovery from the recession of
1990-1991.
At its last meeting on May 19, the FOMC voted to adopt a neutral stance on
policy. There has been no indication from within the Fed since then to
suggest that view has changed. If anything, recent pronouncements from Fed
governors have confirmed that the policy makers are content with the
economy's progress.
Yet since that May meeting the economic indicators have looked especially
discomforting. This week alone saw bad news on durable goods orders (down
2.4 per cent in May), jobless claims (up 16,000 in the second week of June)
and money supply (all measures down for the middle of the month).
Although the bulk of the decline in durable goods orders was due to a plunge
in defence orders, the most worrying aspect of the data was that factories'
backlog of orders fell for the ninth month in a row, an indication that
consumer demand is not keeping pace with production. If the trend is
maintained, it could have serious implications for output in the second half
of the year.
So what does all this mean for the stock market? One thing is sure: without
an interest rate cut, share prices will not be scaling any new summits in a
hurry.
The 70-point drop in the Dow of a week ago may have cleared the air, and
lured a few buyers back into the market. But if this week's feeble
performance (the Dow moved up and down in the tightest of ranges on light
trading volume) is anything to go by, no one is going to buy this market
until the discount rate, currently at 3.5 per cent, has been cut, preferably
to 3 per cent.
If the feeble state of the economy were not enough to worry about, equity
investors this week had to contend with a possible national rail strike,
which some analysts warned could put the skids under the recovery, and a
Supreme Court ruling that may have opened the door to potentially costly
litigation against the big tobacco companies. That the market took both in
its stride suggests no one is panicking, at least not just yet.
For the moment, the only thing Wall Street can look forward to is perhaps
some quarterly 'window dressing'. Watch out next week for money managers
buying stocks in the hope of making their portfolios, and with it their
performance, look a little bit better for the end of what has been a
difficult second quarter.
 ------------------------------------------
Monday        3280.80    -    4.55
Tuesday       3285.62    +    4.82
Wednesday     3290.70    +    5.08
Thursday      3284.01    -    6.69
Friday        3282.41    -    1.60
 ------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page II

920627

