FT922-4517

FT  05 JUN 92 / Bets are off in a three-horse race: Ross Perot's rise in the
US presidential contest marks a breakdown in traditional party politics


   By JUREK MARTIN


The United States is now sailing in waters politically uncharted in 80
years. Three candidates, not the usual two plus or minus a distant third,
want to be president and any one of them could make it. All the standard
electoral calculations are rendered for the moment suspect. Proving the
point, California, the biggest state and supposedly its trendsetter, held a
primary on Tuesday - and hardly anyone noticed or cared.
Serious three-horse races in the US are rare, as in Britain. The last
approximation to what could happen here was in 1912 when former president
Teddy Roosevelt, running on the ticket of the independent Bull Moose party,
won nearly 30 per cent of the vote. No other independent has since hit
double digits except George Wallace from Alabama in 1968, and he was, in the
end, strictly a regional candidate, albeit one who helped put Richard Nixon
in the White House.
But Ross Perot is a completely different sort of independent candidate. All
the others of note this century had party roots - Teddy Roosevelt, Robert
LaFollette, Henry Wallace, Strom Thurmond, George Wallace, John Anderson. Mr
Perot not only springs from no party, he is above, beyond and without party.
He conforms to tradition only in that he is a populist, a long line, to be
sure, but one normally confined to state boundaries, like the Kingfish, Huey
Long of Louisiana.
Mr Perot, it must be said from the outset, could also prove to be one of the
greatest ephemeral and illusory candidates of all time. His current popular
standing, at least level with President Bush and usually ahead of Governor
Bill Clinton, is attested to only by exit and public opinion polls of
smallish samples and, more persuasively, by the insistent buzz on the
talkshow airwaves and the mini-rush to his cause by some political veterans,
like Ed Rollins and Hamilton Jordan. To know Ross Perot, as the country
still does not, may not be to love him.
Six short weeks ago, the most that sobersided political observers would
concede was that he might be a factor in some states, like California,
always freaky, and Texas, his home. The basic question then was whether he
would hurt Mr Bush or Mr Clinton more, on which opinions were divided.
That is no longer the case; the same sobersides may still not believe in
their experienced minds that he will win, but their noses and their ears are
picking up smells and sounds that he might. He may lack all the conventional
attributes of a successful campaign - organisation, policies, advice, core
constituencies, everything with the exception of money - but if the country
is as angry as it seems then conventional wisdom matters less.
Why is this so? It does stretch credulity that a funny looking tycoon with a
Texas twang, known to be intolerant of disagreement, inclined to cut corners
in the pursuit of his goals, notorious for a folksy wisdom stuffed with
inconsistencies, and almost wilfully ignorant of some of the great issues of
our time, should be even considered as the popular choice to run the most
pluralistic, complex and constitutionally enshrined democracy the modern
world has produced.
The answer lies in part in the previous sentence. Americans want solutions,
not explanations, and he promises action. They are desperately disappointed
with the two party system, which has been in decline for a generation. Mr
Perot has found a new way to manipulate the establishment media, principally
by ignoring it. He has money, his own, to burn, which means that at least
his own campaign is not being financed out of taxpayer pockets. He is not
now, nor has he ever been, a regular or intimate member of the
establishment, though he has supped with it.
But mostly his improbable rise is a reflection of the alternatives, George
Bush and Bill Clinton. For Mr Clinton, in particular, this must seem
profoundly unfair. Having proclaimed himself the candidate of 'change,' and
made a detailed case for what should be done, he finds Mr Perot stealing his
clothes without ever saying specifically what he would do instead. Having
tried to pull the Democratic Party towards the sort of centre considered
necessary to win elections, he is now possibly more dependent on the liberal
special interests which still constitute its core.
Admittedly Mr Clinton was never his party's first choice, only emerging
after the Democrat heavyweights last year declined to take on an
overwhelmingly popular president. But his sense of Mr Bush's vulnerability
was right. More than that, he had to fight through scurrilous coverage of
his private life - wounds still not healed in the public perception - and
yet managed to beat back Democratic challengers of left and right. But the
emergence of Perotism, plus the distraction of the Los Angeles riots, has
meant that the better he has done in the primaries the more he has been
ignored.
Mr Clinton is tough and smart and in this for the duration. What nobody can
figure out any longer is what President Bush is in it for, or indeed even
whether his heart is in it. This does not mean he is going to lose, but his
reelection, apparently so certain six short months ago, is no longer
assured.
It is hard to convey the magnitude of the indifference with which the
president is now regarded at home. In the end Richard Nixon was loathed
because he had deceived and Jimmy Carter was dismissed because he had
disappointed. It is much harder to point a specific finger against Mr Bush
simply because the target seems so insubstantial. But it is a fact that on
any given evening it is easy to hear a constant private litany of complaint
from staunch Republicans - not the far right now led by Pat Buchanan - that
there is a void in the White House.
This sounds extreme of a president who led his country and the world so well
through the Gulf War. But the growing impression is that the resolution
demonstrated in the Gulf was in fact an aberration; the norm is only one of
reaction and expediency, and the charge sheet covers the full gamut of
taxation, the budget deficit, the inner cities, civil rights, abortion, the
environment, Yugoslavia, and now even poor Haiti.
Not even a recovering economy is yet working to his advantage, in spite of
all the statistics that say it always does. This is partly because of the
discrepancy between improving national figures and substantial local lags,
especially in the west. It is partly a testament to the fact that this
recession really did hurt and that recovery is still weak. Also, a three way
race makes it harder for Mr Bush to pin all the blame on 'tax and spend'
Democrats, when he has Mr Perot as well as Mr Clinton round his neck
pointing out that the budget deficit under the Reagan and Bush
administrations increased eightfold.
The overall picture is of an unwillingness at present to give President Bush
credit for anything, beyond the Gulf war. Even the nation's chief
executives, three quarters of whom will vote for him, according to a Fortune
magazine survey this week, profess little enthusiasm, but more a fear of the
alternatives.
There has been a tendency of late to say that it is not the president's
fault and that he is getting bad political advice. This explains the
non-stop flurry of rumours - that James Baker will be brought back from the
State Department to run the White House or the campaign, that vice president
Dan Quayle will be dumped from the ticket in favour of General Colin Powell,
that Mr Quayle might swap jobs either with Mr Baker or with Dick Cheney at
the Pentagon. All are denied and none will probably happen, but their very
currency bespeaks the perception of an incumbent president in trouble.
Of the campaign itself, the standard criticism is that too much time was
devoted to squashing the gnat that was the Buchanan campaign and not enough
to anticipating the threat of Mr Perot or the staying power of Mr Clinton or
to divining the nation's mood of discontent.
Above all, the president himself seems unable these days to articulate
either vision or policy with any consistency. Releasing Mr Quayle to lay
into the 'liberal' values of the media makes perfect political sense - but
it requires the president to play a part too, preferably above the fray.
This Mr Bush has failed to do, and has appeared confused and unpresidential
in consequence. Where he does speak, 'Bushisms,' his now notorious mangling
of the language, simply do not reduce to soundbites, and they are often even
more incomprehensible in print.
So what happens next? Normally there is a lull between the end of the
primaries and the party conventions, the Democrats' in New York in mid-July,
the Republicans' in Houston a month later. This month will be consumed by
speculation about when Mr Perot formally declares, who he runs with, and
what is the meaning of whatever he says. There will be much delving into his
history and his ideas, which may or may not hurt him.
There remains the possibility, very slight, of a movement to stop Mr Clinton
getting the nomination. It might gain pace if he is seen to be slipping in
the polls into a poor third place. It is mathematically possible for the 722
superdelegates to the convention, party bosses mostly, to get together and
deny him a first ballot victory. But the stop Clinton forces have no leader
and no apparent cause and he could stop both in their tracks by a shrewd
choice of running mate (for which the popular choice remains Senator Bill
Bradley of New Jersey).
What Mr Bush does, frankly, is anybody's guess. The best recourse for an
incumbent is always to be seen to be presidential, but neither the Earth
Summit in Rio, which he is attending reluctantly, nor the economic summit in
Munich next month promise initiatives that will grab the public imagination.
There is little on the Congressional agenda for him to make a distinctive
mark beyond exercise of the veto and if the Supreme Court upholds
Pennsylvania's restrictive abortion laws then his own pro-life stance will
land him slap in the middle of a divisive debate with clear political risk
attached.
It is, therefore, perhaps appropriate that exactly 500 years ago Columbus
sailed into uncharted waters and discovered America. If he returned, he
might think not much has changed since - no Republicans, no Democrats and a
lot of restless natives.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920605

