FT922-4214

FT  06 JUN 92 / Sport: Streetwise key to numbers game - Soccer analyst Neil
Lanham looks at what it takes to win the European title


   By NEIL LANHAM


JUST before the 1988 European soccer championship finals, the Netherlands
drew 2-2 in a match against England at Wembley in which they scored a goal
which followed 23 passes. Commentators waxed lyrical and said this was what
we would see in the finals.
The truth was very different. The Dutch won the championship because they
played the most 'streetwise' football. The winners in Sweden will do the
same. In five games in 1988, I recorded the following statistics:
Seven of the eight Dutch goals came from moves of three passes or less. The
40 per cent of the Dutch possessions that exceeded three passes brought one
goal.
Two-thirds of goals scored in the Dutch matches came from possessions
starting in the attacking third of the field and were far more likely to
produce goals than possessions that started deeper.
One-third of Dutch goals came without a prior pass - ie, directly off the
opposition (as were both goals in last month's England-Brazil match at
Wembley).
Two-thirds of the goals scored by the Netherlands' opponents were given away
by losing the ball in their own half.
We knew these things would happen before a ball was kicked because the same
ratios occur for every team everywhere and at every level of the game.
The Dutch simply played the ball more often in the way that brought the best
chance of scoring, and least often in a way likely to give goals away. They
averaged 36 long passes in midfield, which resulted in over half of their
goals, and 35 crosses a game, and these brought two-thirds of their goals.
Over the short five-game period, the Dutch deserved to win because:
More of their possessions reached the attacking third, or shooting area,
than any of the other semi-finalists; they averaged more shots per match and
more goals; and only the West Germans gave away fewer possessions in their
own half.
These statistics were repeated exactly in the average of the 52 games of the
last World Cup.
The merit of a performance and the result do not always go hand in hand, and
the team with the best performance over just four or five games might not
get the goals necessary to win a championship.
Psychologists tell us that 'man basks in the reflected glories in his fellow
man,' and delights in aesthetically beautiful but difficult moves. However,
the easy moves are more successful. Only one in 4,000 goals comes from moves
of 20 passes or more.
England under Graham Taylor have done well, but analysis shows they have
ridden their luck in not conceding more goals and have been fortunate to
score so many - and at the right times. Good and bad runs of chance can come
at any time but chance evens out eventually. England's recent good fortune
may well not continue in Sweden.

The Financial Times


London Page X

920606

