FT922-627

FT  26 JUN 92 / Survey of Norway (12): Where to spend the winter - A look at
the 1994 Olympics in Lillehammer


   By KAREN FOSSLI


LAST February, at the conclusion of the 16th Winter Olympics, the French
city of Albertville passed the flag of the five rings on to Lillehammer, a
sleepy Norwegian town two hours' drive north of Oslo, which will host the
next winter games in 1994.
In the best possible marketing scheme for Lillehammer that could have been
devised, the Norwegians took Albertville by storm, winning nine Olympic
golds, six silvers and five bronze medals.
Their success is expected to attract tens of thousands of tourists to Oslo
and Lillehammer in February 1994 and, it is hoped, thereafter. Up to 100,000
people will attend the 1994 games, it is estimated.
However, controversy over the NKr13bn investment for the Lillehammer games
has dominated domestic headlines alongside more important concerns such as
Norway's record high post-war unemployment and health care queues. The
prospects for 1994 have lifted the spirits of many Norwegians. But it will
take time for morale to recover from the deep economic recession of the past
few years.
Take Asborg, for example - a single, unemployed mother of three - for whom
the Lillehammer Olympics evokes only mixed feelings: 'My children are very
proud that Norway will host the games but with the economy the way it is I
can't help but feel that the money could be better spent.
'And there are all those stories about the organisers . . . the elitists who
are living the high life at the expense of the taxpayers. But I truly hope
the Olympics will be good public relations for Norway. I have German and
American friends already looking forward to Lillehammer who otherwise would
never have visited Norway,' Asborg says.
That is precisely what the organisers are counting on: first-time visitors
will return to Norway after the games, while millions of television viewers
all over the world will be inspired to visit after being won over by
Norway's wholesomeness and charm in a relentless PR saturation exercise,
lasting several hours every day for more than two weeks.
'The success of the Olympics hinges to a great extent on our success with
the media side of things,' one of the organisers said recently. But some
Norwegians can't help but feel that the timing for Norway's hosting of the
games is just slightly awkward.
Lord of the Rings, a book by Vyv Simson and Andrew Jennings of Granada TV's
World in Action team, does little to stem the embarrassment of those who,
like Asborg, are more concerned about such social problems as health care
and unemployment then they are about the number of cars which roll into
Lillehammer on any given day.
It criticises the elitist aspect of the Olympic organisation, with
particular emphasis on Mr Juan Antonio Samaranch, the International Olympic
Committee's president, and his inner circle. But LOOC's organisers, facing a
daunting task ahead of 1994, tend not to get bogged down in criticism and
controversy which they say comes with the job. 'The discussion over
investment and snobbery is something many of us simply have to live with. I
think this is a healthy and good project which puts Norway in a totally new
international position,' says Mr Aage Enghaug, LOOC's senior vice-president
of information.
The Norwegians, admittedly, have ulterior motives in staging the games
rather than just for the sake of sport. And who can blame them? The games
provide a unique opportunity to promote Norway and stimulate tourism,
particularly in Hedmark and Opland, the country's two counties which do not
have access to the sea.
'The continental regions in the eastern part of the country have hardly
profited from the growth experienced by coastal regions over the last
decades,' says the Olympic Triangle, a collaboration between the county
boroughs and municipalities in the Lillehammer region. It believes that
investment in the Olympics will not only help to develop their region as a
popular tourist attraction and educational centre but will also contribute
towards improving infrastructure and expanding jobs.
LOOC is going to great lengths to present Norway as a country founded on
strong, simple traditions which allow a high standard of living without the
excesses of materialism.
Central to this image is the fact that winter sports are part of the
country's national identity. Ancient petroglyphs depicting 4,000-year-old
skiers from the Stone Age have been discovered and LOOC is exploiting them
to the full.
Skiing is deeply embedded in Norwegian tradition; a 12th century skier is
featured on the city of Lillehammer's coat of arms. Among other cultural
events, the opening and closing ceremonies of the Olympics will highlight
Viking folklore and old Norse mythology.
As Thor Heyerdahl, the anthropologist, put it: 'Norway, the land of the
Vikings in the far north, the country that has held her doors open to
distant expeditions for more than 1,000 years, is now inviting all the
people of the world to cross her boundaries in friendly rivalry' in what
LOOC is calling the country's greatest-ever festival.
The Olympic facilities are already about 60 per cent completed. They will be
finished for the 1993 winter season when a number of winter sports
competitions will be staged to test Lillehammer's preparedness.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920626

