FT922-13359

FT  11 APR 92 / Election 1992: Clinging to the memory of loadsamoney -
Richard Gourlay visits Basildon to find out why Essex man spurned the Labour
party


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


   BASILDON


DAVID AMESS appears to be the only person in Basildon not surprised that
Essex man, as predicted by Margaret Thatcher, had returned him as
Conservative MP.
Like the pundits, residents of this new town were astonished that Labour
could not muster the 2.7 per cent swing needed to capture it. Unemployment
that has doubled, a poll tax among the highest in the country, repossessions
of council houses bought enthusiastically in the boom-boom 1980s - all
should have played into Labour's hands.
But come the crunch, the migrants from the east end of London and their
much-mocked offspring commuting to smart office jobs in the City clung to
the dimming memory of loadsamoney
In particular they judged that Labour would probably increase the costs of
mortgages which a generation ago many would not have dreamed they would ever
have.
'It all boils down to money,' said Phil Hayllar, a mechanic at Churchs
Motorcycles, who has seen sales of the large super bikes collapse. 'People
voted with their pockets.'
'A lot of people have bought their council houses and are right on the
edge,' said Roy Payne, a mini-cab driver who sold his ex-council house at a
profit, bought a bungalow with the proceeds and is now at full stretch. 'We
are very disillusioned by the Conservative party but you can't blame them
for worldwide recession, it's technology that has done that.'
Gary Francis, who works in administration in the City, was caught by higher
mortgage rates. 'I always voted Labour but I wavered thinking about my
mortgage on the house I bought three years ago, a bad time to buy,' he said.
'I couldn't stand Thatcher but John Major is not too bad.'
As damaging as fears of higher interest rates was Mr John Smith's pledge of
tax increases for anyone earning more than Pounds 21,000.
Roy Wood, a security guard, earns over that amount and believes higher taxes
would have hit too many modest earners. 'Most of the people round here are
high earners above that level,' he said. He was thrilled at the savings the
Tory victory will bestow on his son, whose move from Basildon to a career as
an insurance underwriter is what many Essex parents would aspire to for
their offspring.
Poll tax was a factor in Basildon, but not against the Tories, although they
had introduced it. Labour's candidate, John Potter, served on the Labour
council which had such large debts it had to set such a high poll tax.
Yesterday, voters dissecting their preferences in the Jolly Friers pub, had
conjured up clearer images of Labour's 1970s strike record than of the
Tory-induced hardships of poll tax 18 months ago.
'I was surprised Labour weren't given a chance,' said Paul Corey, who runs a
one-man window and carpet-cleaning business, the second part of which has
run into the wall this year because of the recession.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920411

