FT921-14129

FT  17 JAN 92 / International Company News: Perrier pressure on Agnellis


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


   PARIS


ITALY'S Agnelli family yesterday came under pressure to launch a direct bid
for Perrier, the French mineral water group, when the stock exchange
authorities refused exemption from the obligation to launch an offer.
Ifint, an Agnelli holding company, last month launched a FFr5.6bn (Dollars
1.03bn) offer for Exor, the holding company which controls Perrier. The Exor
offer has been cleared by the stock exchange and expires on January 24.
Having to bid for Perrier as well would be a costly setback, though
officials pointed out yesterday that the various stock exchange authorities
involved have not come to a final decision.
Exor and its allies, Societe Generale, the privatised bank and Saint-Louis,
a paper and packaging company, have together held 49.32 per cent of
Perrier's voting shares since Saint Louis earlier this month bought a 13.8
per centstake in the mineral water group.
They asked the Conseil des Bourses de Valeurs (CBV), the regulatory
authority, to release them from the obligation to bid for Perrier on the
grounds that it had already been controlled by Exor for several years.
However, the CBV refused their request on the grounds that it did not have
enough information on the conditions under which Saint Louis bought a stake
in Perrier, a transaction which is now being examined by the Commission des
Operations de Bourse (COB), the stock market watchdog.
The Agnellis' advisers are understood to believe it is unlikely that Exor
will in the end be forced to make a full bid for Perrier.
The Saint Louis deal tightened the Agnellis' control over the mineral water
group, incidentally staving off a planned counter-bid from Nestle, the Swiss
food multinational. The CBV said it could not could not give exemption
'without knowing whether the normal market rules were allowed to come into
play,' during the Saint Louis purchase of Perrier shares.
A COB spokeswoman could not comment on the precise subject of the inquiry,
which she said would be completed as soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920117

