FT923-6608

FT  22 AUG 92 / Arts: Hills alive with the strains of music - Salzburg
Festival


   By DAVID MURRAY


EVEN at 30` celsius, Salzburg remains a delightful place to be. The 'Sound
of Music' bus tours still run (they take you to see where Julie Andrews
stood when she sang this, and where the nuns did that) - though for such
senior citizens now, that they must be the last generation of clientele.
Temperatures and tempers have been rising still higher among the Festival
artists, as you may have read. There have been disputes, but no mass
defections; in fact the Festival proceeds with its usual air of comfortable
success.
Over what might have been the largest bone of contention, the new director
Gerard Mortier's aim of pulling the Festival further into the 20th century,
one hears no audible growls. After all, there is still plenty of Mozart,
including three of his operas - and two by Strauss, one by Janacek and one
by Rossini (with strong international casts, if not exactly the ones
originally announced).
The late Olivier Messiaen's Saint Francois d'Assise was sure of a safe
passage in a devout Catholic land; and the seven concerts allotted to Pierre
Boulez are going splendidly.
Of the four given by the Ensemble InterContemporain, two offered the
composer's Repons of 1981, so far his most brilliant marshalling of
instruments-plus-electronics, aptly prefaced by the Dialogue de l'ombre
double: 'strophes' for solo clarinet (Alain Damiens, dazzling) against his
own pre-recorded 'accompaniment'.
Each strophe exploits a particular diction - one studded with little
grace-note whoops, another gurgling with trills, and so on - while the
softer accompaniment whirls around the ring of speakers high on all four
walls. Patterns emerge and expand. The effect is not studied or arcane, but
marvellously fluent.
A large auditorium in the Lehrbauhof, some way out of town, had been adapted
for the purpose, and for the more elaborate demands of the 'concerto grosso'
Repons. There, the 24-strong ensemble sat at the centre, surrounded by the
audience, while the six soloists - pianos, harp, cimbalom, vibes - were
stationed at the perimeter below the speakers. (Boulez was not above leaving
them in darkness until their first collective entry, whereupon they were
dramatically spotlit.) Thus the soloists' 'responses' to one another
criss-crossed the hall, while the central ensemble seethed and the speakers
occasionally erupted.
Much like the Dialogue strophes, the sections of Repons are sharply
characterised by diction and colour - often dense, always clear, sometimes
disarmingly mock-simple.
For long stretches there is a perceptible harmonic base that helps the ear
to keep the incessant flow in order. The work teems with original ideas;
indeed, Boulez has been inclined to regard it as 'unfinished' (like several
other pieces). It made a thrilling, slightly exhausting three-quarters of an
hour.
From late Boulez to the 19-year-old Mozart's La finta giardiniera: would
that the composer's shade could have descended vengefully upon the
production] An excellent, hard-working cast, the fine Mozarteum Orchestra
(wonderful bassoons) with a committed conductor in Sylvain Cambreling, a
charming set - a whole wood of tall, slender trees, apparently real - by
Karl-Ernst Herrmann; and a staging by himself and his partner Ursel of the
utmost silliness.
Whether it was a good idea to incarnate the presiding spirit of Love as a
preening wood-sprite (a female midget in feathers) is perhaps a matter of
taste; but taste had nothing to do with the slapstick antics enjoined upon
all the players. Most of them had at some point to deliver an aria against
maximum comic distraction elsewhere on the stage.
Laurence Dale's romantic hero Belfiore, valiantly sung, was turned into a
ridiculous ass, starting by tripping headlong over a root at his first aria
 -with endless jolly japes to follow.
La finta giardiniera is not a farce, but a 'dramma giocosa' (a label that
would fit Repons too, in fact), in this case an uneasy but fascinating
compound of opera buffa and opera seria.
To wreck its serious side is inevitably to diminish its most forward-looking
dramatic music: real distress and rapture become jokey charades. By sheer
force of conviction Anne Sofie von Otter made a great impression in the
breeches-role of Ramiro, and when given a chance Joanna Kozlowska and
Elzbieta Szmytka sang stylishly as 'Sandrina', the pretend-gardneress, and
Serpetta.
Malvina Major's grande dame Arminda, Ugo Benelli's avuncular Podesta and
Dale Duesing's lusty Nardo completed the team with distinction - though the
it was a disservice to the latter to transfer his main, character-fixing
aria to the last act.
In the dubious circumstances, the score gleamed far better than might have
been expected. All the same, Salzburg has no business producing Mozart as if
for people who know that opera is foolish stuff, and want only to be kept
awake to laugh.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920822

