FT921-3653

FT  13 MAR 92 / Siemens chief sees no end to downturn


   By ANDREW FISHER


   FRANKFURT


MR KARLHEINZ KASKE, chief executive of Siemens, yesterday warned that a
speedy end to the worldwide economic slowdown was not in sight.
Turnover of the German electrical and electronics group rose 9 per cent to
DM23bn (Dollars 14bn) in the first four months. However, he told the annual
meeting: 'We should not pitch our expectations too high. The economic
climate has become much rougher in the last few weeks and months.'
Mr Kaske said new order inflow dropped 1 per cent to DM28bn in the first
four months ended January. Foreign orders were 3 per cent lower than the
previous year, with a 6 per cent decline in export contracts from Germany.
Domestic orders, however, rose 2 per cent. For the full year, he expected
total orders to be at least DM85bn, only around 4 per cent higher against
last year's 21 per cent.
He said hopes had not been fulfilled that the recession-hit economies of
North America and western Europe would recover before those of Japan and
Germany started slipping. There were also doubts over political development
in eastern Europe. 'This must have a particular impact on Germany,' he said.
Siemens had already noticed a slowdown in demand in Germany, he said. This
was evident in heavy plant business now that the order thrust from east
Germany appeared past its peak.
Mr Kaske, who will be succeeded in October by Mr Heinrich von Pierer, said
net profits - up 7 per cent last year to DM1.8bn - had risen this year at
the same pace as turnover.
One burden on group profits is Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme, formed
by merging lossmaking Nixdorf with its own computer operation. Mr Kaske said
SNI hoped to save DM600m a year by shedding staff and cutting production
costs.
At the Cebit electronics fair, Mr Hans-Dieter Wiedig, SNI chief executive,
said the company hoped to halve its losses this year but this would depend
on turnover.
SNI lost DM781m in the year to September 30, 1991, with turnover down 2 per
cent to DM12.1bn. In the first five months of 1991-92, turnover was up 23
per cent to DM4.8bn and the order inflow by 13 per cent to DM4.7bn.
Mr Wiedig said domestic business was as expected, but orders from abroad had
been lower. Restructuring costs would be less than the last year's DM470m.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920313

