FT924-6129

FT  23 NOV 92 / Risk and Reward: Borrowers take a chance on 'diffs' as
swaps' allure dims


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


TOUGH conditions in the swaps market have made it harder than ever for
companies to borrow cheaply, encouraging some to opt for more radical
solutions. In the process, some companies - and their financial
intermediaries - are taking on substantially bigger risks.
During the 1980s, companies were able to borrow at levels well below the
London interbank offered rate (Libor) by swapping the fixed-rate money they
raised through bond offerings into floating-rate financing. Now, only the
best-rated borrowers can hope to do this.
Falling US interest rates have squeezed the availability of swaps in the
dollar market. Borrowers have been unwilling to lock themselves into
fixed-rate interest costs, while rates are expected to ease further. The
result: fewer people willing to pay the fixed-rate leg of a swap agreement.
Other factors have also contributed to the decline in the swap market's
attractions. The growing sophistication of investors and intermediaries and
a breakdown of the barriers between domestic markets have eroded the
opportunities for arbitrage between markets. At the same time, bond and swap
markets have become tightly linked, so that price movements in one are
quickly transmitted into the other.
'Swaps and bonds have become much more closely correlated. Those who want
cheap funding are now having to take risks to get it,' said Mr Nick Burge,
executive director at Nomura International.
The most successful product this year has been the differential or 'diff'
swap, also known as the 'quanto' swap, which allows a borrower to separate
currency and interest rate exposure, by paying interest rates based on one
currency while taking the currency risk of another.
For example, a company with D-Mark liabilities, paying say 8 per cent
interest, may look enviously at dollar rates of 3 1/2 per cent. Under a
differential swap agreement, the company agrees to receive D-Mark Libor in
D-Marks, and to pay a margin over dollar Libor in D-Marks.
The structure takes advantage of different-shaped yield curves to create
immediate cost savings for the borrower. Such an agreement typically runs
from three to five years, so the borrower is essentially betting that the
shift in interest rates will be slower than the yield curve suggests.
'There are monetary policy pressures to keep short-term interest rates low,
and supply fears to keep rates high at the long end (of the dollar market),'
says Mr Ron Tanemura, head of fixed-income derivatives products at Salomon
Brothers.
The risk for the company is that if US interest rates rise or D-Mark
interest rates fall more quickly than expected, planned cost savings could
soon be replaced by losses. Because it is more complicated than a
conventional swap, a diff swap is also more difficult to unwind.
The financial intermediary assumes substantially greater risk than in a
normal swap. Currency risk, artificially separated from interest rate risk
in this way, is very difficult to hedge, since there is no direct
correlation between currency and interest rate movements.
'Diff swaps are more difficult to manage than a straightforward swap,' says
Mr Malcolm Basing, who heads the International Swaps Dealers Association.
'It's not something you can put into the top drawer and forget about.'
Diff swaps require what is known as dynamic hedging, which means that hedges
must be constantly adjusted in line with the latest market moves.
Even then, there is the risk that assumed correlation between interest rates
and currencies will suddenly disappear.
According to swap specialists, the structure of differential swaps is now
widely understood, but the methods of hedging residual exposure remain
proprietary.
Diff swap technology has also been applied to suit investors' requirements.
Credit for the concept is claimed by Credit Suisse Financial Products, which
began marketing diff swaps to Japanese investors in early 1991.
There could be room for further product expansion. According to Mr Chris
Goekjian, head of risk management at CSFP, it may be that 'not all the
applications (of diff swap technology) have been developed yet.'

The Financial Times


London Page 20

921123

