FT921-401

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (17): Ready
for takeoff as 'cheap' cover ends - Aviation Premiums


   By RICHARD LAPPER


TALK to anyone at the aviation insurance market at Lloyd's of London and
they will tell you their favourite story about how cheap airline insurance
has been in the past few years.
'It would cost less to insure a jet aircraft for a transatlantic flight than
the cost of fuel needed to circle once around Heathrow', jokes Mr Alan
Colls, aviation specialist with brokers Nicholson Chamberlain & Colls in
London and chairman of the Lloyd's Insurance Brokers Committee.
A Rolls Royce owner paying the same premium rate as the owner of a jet
airliner rate could insure his car for little as Pounds 8 a year, quips Mr
Ted Jemphry, managing director of Willis Corroon Aerospace, the world's
leading aviation broker and another active player in the Lloyd's market.
But everyone in the market - brokers who contract insurance on behalf of
airline operators, and underwriters who work for insurers who collect the
premiums and pay out when there are claims - agrees that the days of cheap
insurance are ending.
Nearly three quarters of airlines renew their annual hull and liability
policies on October 1. Most paid increases of between 200 and 300 per cent
for their hull cover and up to 100 per cent for liability policies during
the last renewal season.
Subsequently a spurt of large accident claims - including the loss of an SAS
MD-80 and a China airlines Boeing 747 - in the week after Christmas - has
reinforced the determination of underwriters to obtain further increases
this year. Claims from both losses amounted to nearly Dollars 100m and
served to expose the inadequacy of the industry's rating base. Total
premiums collected by airline insurers in 1991 amounted to barely Dollars
500m compared with claims of over Dollars 800m.
The rate rises have signalled a hardening in the market after five years of
fierce rate competition at Lloyd's, which has gradually undermined the
profitability of the aviation market. Mr John Wescott, the chairman of the
Lloyd's Aviation Underwriters' Association, acknowledges that the market has
traded at a deficit for at least four years.
Syndicates were attracted to the aviation market by the record profits of
Pounds 266.3m achieved in 1986. Many of the newcomers had little experience
of aviation insurance and simply formed a 'supporting market', co-insuring
risks which were in practice underwritten by the traditional market leaders.
Competition depressed premiums and increasing claims put pressure on a
number of syndicates. Although the aviation market returned profits of
Pounds 246.2m in 1987 and Pounds 154.2m in 1987 and 1988 this was only
possible because underwriters had bought reinsurance protection from other
Lloyd's syndicates, often at rates that were highly attractive for the
insurers buying the cover.
Short of traditional shipping business as a result of the downturn of the
shipping industry, a number of marine syndicates were particularly active in
this field.
However, over the past two years heavy losses have led many of these
reinsurers to back away from the market leaving aviation underwriters to
carry greater amounts of risk on their account. Aviation syndicates will be
only just in profit in 1989 and the market could even record a small overall
loss when it reports its 1990 results next June.
Many bigger syndicates are increasing their 'net lines', the amount of a
risk they are prepared to assume on their own account. Tougher operating
conditions have exposed the relatively high expenses of smaller syndicates
and prompted rationalisation.
The average size of aviation syndicates has grown a number of smaller
syndicates who had previously constituted a supporting market to the main
players have backed away. Sturge Holdings (which manages five aviation
syndicates, including the biggest, syndicate 960 underwritten by Brian
Beasley) now controls more than Pounds 250m in stamp capacity (effectively
capital backing underwriting). This is about a quarter of the whole Lloyd's
aviation market.
Five other agents - Methuen (whose Ariel syndicate is one of Lloyd's best
known), Wellington, Murray Lawrence, Wren and Archer - control a further
Pounds 350m in stamp capacity.
Wellington and Murray Lawrence, together with a smaller agency, Barder &
Marsh, have pooled the capacity offered by three of their syndicates to
support underwriter, Mr Barry Coleman. Talks are afoot to bring a fourth
syndicate, managed by Stewart & Hughman, into this arrangement. Other
syndicates which are all under pressure to reduce costs and rationalise
their operations may follow suit. These trends parallel developments on the
London company market.
In November, 1990, the separate aviation subsidiaries of the UK composite
companies - Commercial Union, Eagle Star, Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance,
Pearl, Prudential, Royal Insurance, Sun Alliance, and General Accident -
merged to form the British Aviation Group in order to improve efficiency.
BAG has the capacity to underwrite 25 per cent of airline fleets on its own
account, making it less reliant on other underwriters with whom it coinsures
most risks.
Indeed, Mr Wescott believes that eventually there may be only four large
syndicates and companies underwriting in the London aviation market as a
whole. That would lead the way to a more ordered and less volatile market.
It might mean the end of anecdotes about Rolls Royces and cheap insurance
but it would leave underwriters freer to compete on service rather than
price and that might be a better thing for the airlines.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920330

