FT923-6301

FT  25 AUG 92 / International Company News: Costly flying lesson for the
Argentines - John Barham and Peter Bruce examines the part renationalisation
of Aerolneas


   By JOHN BARHAM and PETER BRUCE


THE COLLAPSE of Argentina's first privatisation could hardly have come at a
worse moment.
Last month, Mr Domingo Cavallo, Argentina's economy minister, announced the
state was taking back 28 per cent of Aerolneas Argentinas, raising its stake
in the national airline to 33 per cent.
Less than two years ago it sold 85 per cent of the company to a consortium
led by Spain's Iberia for Dollars 810m.
The Aerolneas flop casts a long shadow over the government's privatisation
policies as it gears up to sell nearly all its state companies before the
end of the year.
The affair also raises questions about Iberia's expansion strategy of
acquiring privatised Latin American airlines. As well as 30 per cent of
Aerolneas, Iberia owns stakes in airlines in Chile, the Dominican Republic
and Venezuela.
A day after the partial renationalisation of Aerolneas came the European
Community's approval for a Spanish government injection of Dollars 1.26bn
into Iberia, which has accumulated pre-tax losses of Dollars 1.07bn since
1990.
The losses were mainly caused by fleet expansion and a downturn in tourist
flights to Spain, but empire-building in South America hardly helped the
bottom line. Nonetheless, Iberia may still bid for more Latin airlines.
The Aerolneas privatisation was flawed from the start. Iberia was the only
bidder for the company. Its local allies were a group of businessmen which
included a funfair proprietor and the owner of Austral, Argentina's only
other main airline.
The sale contract was signed in the dead of night after being repeatedly
renegotiated and amended, leading to confusion over the text's meaning.
Although the government won a high price for the airline, it placed a heavy
financial strain on the buyers, especially the under-capitalised local
investors. Initially it did not allow them to sell, lease or even use
Aerolneas aircraft as collateral for bank loans.
Still, the buyers managed to finance the acquisition with debt, rather than
through a debt-equity swap with foreign creditor banks. Soon, all but two
Argentine investors abandoned the consortium, leaving 21 per cent of
Aerolneas in the hands of three Spanish banks and an anonymous Argentine
living in Spain.
Among those forced out was Mr Enrique Pescarmona, formerly a majority
shareholder of Austral. He had used his Austral shares  - itself privatised
a few years earlier  - to pay for his Aerolneas shares. The result is that
Aerolneas now fully owns Austral, giving it a virtual monopoly over domestic
air transport.
Then the consortium began arguing with the government over the sale price
and payment terms as its debt load overstretched its finances.
At almost every turn, the government made concessions. But in the end it
still had to take back the shares of the insolvent Argentine buyers. Mr
Horacio Liendo, chief government negotiator, says that when the government
took back their shares, the consortium still owed it Dollars 90m.
The government took up new equity issued by Aerolneas but left unsubscribed
by the Argentine investors, by cancelling Dollars 21.7m of that debt.
Aerolneas will issue more shares worth more than Dollars 145m this year.
Instead of paying cash, the government will maintain its 33 per cent stake
by cancelling the remaining Dollars 61.8m in debt. The deal will preserve
the value of the government's original 5 per cent holding in the company,
whose net worth has shrunk to Dollars 380m from Dollars 623m.
Mr Amadeo Riva, the company's Argentine president, says the endless
arguments prevented him from concentrating on running the airline.
He says that persistently rising costs and overstaffing are the main
problems at Aerolneas.
Mr Liendo says rescuing Aerolneas  - rather than allowing it to crash, or
scrapping the privatisation and starting from scratch  - protected the value
of the government's shareholding. However, the Aerolneas precedent could
make it harder to resist rescuing privatised companies that run into trouble
in the future.
Once again, the government is the main shareholder in Aerolneas. The
government does not plan to manage Aerolneas, but wants to recruit
professional managers to take its five seats on the 12-member board.
As well as its 33 per cent share, the government also represents the
employees who hold 10 per cent of the company. Mr Liendo says 'the board
will be selected with the same rigour as American Airlines or British
Airways. We will look for the best people in the business'.
The hope is that Aerolneas will become profitable, making it easier to
attract buyers for the unwanted 52 per cent of the company held by the
government and the banks.
That will not be easy: not only is the industry in trouble internationally,
but Aerolneas has not made a profit in its recent history.
The Aerolneas affair risks bringing privatisation into disrepute in
Argentina, and just almost the entire public sector is being privatised.
Mr Cavallo was not responsible for privatising Aerolneas and has taken a
more studied approach to future sales. He says 'we have learned from the
case of Aerolneas companies to continue improving the privatisation process
and avoid repeating mistakes'.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920825

