FT922-725

FT  26 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Maastricht bill set for rough ride


   By ALISON SMITH


SENIOR Labour frontbenchers are preparing to add to the government's
difficulties when the Maastricht bill returns to the Commons in the autumn,
by voting against any attempt to curtail debate.
Tory Euro-sceptics are promising to put down at least as many amendments
when the bill returns as were tabled when the bill was last due to be
debated. 'The scope is limitless,' one leading Euro-sceptic said yesterday.
A decision by Labour to oppose any move by the government to timetable
debate on the whole bill or to limit discussion on any individual group of
amendments, may jeopardise the prospect of completing the legislation at
all.
At worst, the choice for the government might be between losing the bill
simply because of the time taken for debate, and losing it after trying and
failing to guillotine it.
Some opposition spokesmen are conscious that any move to stymie the bill
would have widespread and negative repercussions on the party's position
with its European counterparts - particularly if the move proved effective.
The balance of opinion, however, is that securing the bill is a problem for
the government and Labour should not allow them an easy time.
Basing the most determined opposition on the handling of the bill rather
than on its substance also offers Labour the best way of causing
difficulties without compromising its broadly pro-European stance.
Already more than 120 amendments have been put down, together with more than
30 new clauses. It will be for Miss Betty Boothroyd, the Speaker, to choose
which should be debated when the bill comes back.
The amendment most likely to see common interest between Tory rebels and
Labour MPs is one proposing a referendum on Maastricht.
Mr John Smith, the clear favourite to be Labour leader, has publicly said he
opposes the idea, but some elements in the party believe that support for
such a move offers the best chance of keeping Labour united over the bill.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920626

