FT921-4006

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): New tax-paid bond
proposed - Savings


THE Budget refers to the increased contribution that National Savings are
expected to make towards meeting the government's funding requirement in
1992-93. Among the measures to achieve this will be a new tax-paid savings
bond offering guaranteed growth and an increase in the holding limit for
Income Bonds. Other developments in the existing product range, including
issues of National Savings Certificates, will also play an important part.
Guaranteed growth bond. National Savings will introduce its new guaranteed
growth bond in the summer. Designed to appeal particularly to the basic-rate
taxpayer, the bond will offer fixed rates of interest guaranteed for a year
at a time.
Interest will be added to the bond annually after tax has been deducted at
the basic rate. The minimum purchase will be Pounds 1,000 and the maximum
holding Pounds 250,000. There will be no set limit for the life of a bond
and customers will be able to cash them in at any anniversary date without
penalty.
Income Bonds. The present maximum holding limit of Pounds 25,000 will be
increased to Pounds 50,000 next month.
Capital Gains. The chancellor proposes to increase the annual exemption to
Pounds 5,800 in line with statutory indexation. For 1992/93 each individual
will be exempt from capital gains tax on the first Pounds 5,800 of gains.
Most trusts will be exempt on the first Pounds 2,900 of gains.
Gains above the annual exemption are charged at income tax rates. So the new
20 per cent income tax rate will also apply to those who have capital gains
but have not made full use of the lower-rate band.
Pension scheme earnings cap. Treasury regulations increase from Pounds
71,400 to Pounds 75,000 the maximum level of earnings for which pension
provision may be made with tax relief.
Dividends. The Chancellor proposes to allow companies to send dividend
vouchers direct to shareholders whose dividends are paid separately into a
bank or building society account; require companies to provide vouchers for
electronic payments; and require nominee shareholders to provide vouchers
for payments to underlying shareholders.
Certificates of deposit. The chancellor proposes to change the tax treatment
of certificates of deposit, so that people who want to issue and hold them
in paperless form are not discouraged from doing so.
Bank and building society interest. The Chancellor proposes to remove the
need for a person who is not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom to
make two separate declarations in order for banks and building societies
both to pay interest without deduction of tax and to exclude the interest
from returns made to the Inland Revenue. In future only one declaration will
be needed.

The Financial Times


London Page 38

920311

