FT921-464

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Major builds momentum on hostile ground


   By ALISON SMITH


MR JOHN MAJOR took his campaign into the Labour heartland of south Wales
yesterday with jokes about Mr Gerald Kaufman, the shadow foreign secretary,
whose very name provokes a laugh in Tory audiences.
In a confident performance before 200-300 Tories, Mr Major mocked Mr
Kaufman's low profile. 'Where's he been? Where's he gone? Will he ever come
back? Do we care?'
Since the soft sell of a visit to a primary school in Grantham that opened
his travels, the prime minister's campaign has moved some way down the road
of political relevance, but still has a lot further to go.
Yesterday's visit to inaugurate a new engine maintenance centre in Nantgarw
at least had a clear reason, in the 400 new jobs announced for the occasion.
Elsewhere, from a road-rail freight yard in Melton Mowbray, in one of the
country's safest Tory seats, to a garden centre in Poppleton, North
Yorkshire, the purpose of parts of the Major roadshow in this second week of
campaigning has been more obscure than the origins of the phrase 'double
whammy'.
The schedule seems based on Keynesian politics. Every time there is momentum
after a rousing speech or a good reception on a walkabout, the brake is
applied with a pause or an un-newsworthy visit.
Travelling in the hermetically sealed capsule of the Major-mobile produces a
sense of dislocation. Even with the portable computers, fax machines and
mobile telephones, the team is distanced from the rest of the Tory campaign.
That may be an advantage. Mr Major's performance in set-piece rallies and
question-and-answer sessions has become sharper.
The attacks on Labour are gaining in virulence: apocalyptic language of
destruc-tion, calamity and disaster has become commonplace.
Alongside the onslaught on Labour's tax plans, the assault on its 'strikers'
charter' has escalated. The suggestion that Labour is 'soft' on crime is
also rising up the agenda.
It is perhaps a more positive trait that wherever the prime minister speaks
he continues to sound passionate about the impact on all of the UK of
separation for Scotland (and Wales), even though it scarcely registers as an
issue in England.
Mr Major seems to enjoy getting out of London and finds campaigning fun.
He appears pleased by the genuinely warm and largely enthusiastic welcome he
receives on tour, both in party rallies and meetings and on walkabout.
But it would be a politically naive assessment, uncharacteristic of Mr
Major, to translate a friendly reaction to a famous figure surrounded by
television cameras into a clear majority for the Tory party.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920328

