FT922-7343

FT  19 MAY 92 / Government rules out Jubilee extension without O&Y cash


   By DAVID OWEN and ROBERT PESTON


THE GOVERNMENT yesterday toughened its stance over the Jubilee Line
extension to the Canary Wharf office development in east London, saying that
construction would not begin until the Pounds 400m cash contribution pledged
by Olympia & York had been secured.
There could be no connection with a possible deal to move civil servants to
the development, the government added.
However, bankers to O&Y, the property company which last week filed for
protection from its creditors in the US and Canada, said they could not make
a decision on whether to provide the money until they had assessed Canary
Wharf's long-term prospects, which will take another few days.
Mr John MacGregor, transport secretary, told MPs in parliament that he saw
'no prospect' of his authorising construction 'until and unless' the O&Y
contribution was assured. 'We are . . . looking to Olympia & York to honour
that understanding before I can give London Underground approval to start
construction,' he added. The government had given Pounds 1.5bn towards the
10-mile extension, which was to have been finished by 1996.
Last night, Mr Steven Norris, junior transport minister, emphasised to MPs
that the funding of the Jubilee line was 'entirely separate' from any
decision about moving civil servants to Canary Wharf offices.
Mr David Blunkett, shadow local government minister, plans tomorrow to call
for two separate parliamentary inquiries into issues arising from the
affair.
He will call for the all-party public accounts committee to examine the
government's financial management in London Docklands, focusing on how much
public money has been spent there and on what it was spent. He will also
demand an independent parliamentary inquiry into more general aspects of the
government's urban regeneration policy.
Mr MacGregor's comments followed indications from the government that it
wanted an answer soon from creditor banks of Canary Wharf on whether they
would provide the Pounds 400m.
Bankers say they would be happy to discuss the issue with Mr MacGregor. But
they cannot tell him whether they will provide the funds until they have
received a detailed assessment of Canary Wharf's long-term commercial
prospects.
If the bankers then put Canary Wharf into receivership or liquidation, they
would not provide the Jubilee funds. If the project is kept as a going
concern - or even possibly if it is put into administration under UK
insolvency legislation - bankers might still provide the Pounds 400m.
According to ministers, London Regional Transport would be unable to
maintain beyond July the Pounds 1.5m a month project team now working on the
extension, without a definite go-ahead.
Meanwhile holders of Dollars 548m (Pounds 310m) in Eurobonds, whose security
is O&Y's New York office building at 55 Water Street, are meeting O&Y today
to discuss whether it has sufficient funds to refurbish the property. The
bondholders are concerned that without refurbishment their future interest
payments would be in doubt, as the building would be difficult to let.
Parliament, Page 10
Observer, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920519

