FT922-705

FT  26 JUN 92 / Leading Article: Calm nerves in Lisbon


IT WOULD not be surprising if several of the EC leaders assembled in Lisbon
today caught themselves wishing they were somewhere else. At their last
meeting, in Maastricht, they produced the Treaty on European Union. That
left two big issues to be discussed in Lisbon: the budget for the next five
years, and the enlargement of the Community. But the Danish people's
rejection of their earlier handiwork has confused the debate on both issues,
and has helped to thrust another - subsidiarity  - on to the table. In
addition, they must be well aware that this is their last chance to come up
with an agreed position on agricultural subsidies which could form the basis
of a needed breakthrough in the Uruguay Round at or before the G7 summit in
Munich the week after next.
All four issues are important and difficult. The budget is so divisive that
the Portuguese presidency has decided to seek agreement at this meeting only
on general guidelines rather than specific figures. But Spain threatens to
veto the opening of enlargement negotiations unless it gets the full 'Delors
Two' package, designed to double the receipts of the poorer members by 1997.
In support of their position the Spaniards cite the agreement reached at
Maastricht, that the budget must be agreed before enlargement negotiations
can start. That is correct, but does not mean it is necessarily in Spain's
interest to block agreement by insisting on a figure its partners are
unwilling to accept. Nor, however, is the British and Dutch opposition to
any raising of the ceiling before 1997 likely to prove tenable.
Should enlargement talks wait also upon ratification of the Maastricht
Treaty? No, say the British, Germans and Portuguese, arguing that Danish
fears of European Union can be allayed by the spectacle of fellow
Scandinavians negotiating to join that same Union. Yes, say most other
member states and the Commission, arguing that it must be clear to the
applicants what Union it is they are trying to join.
Meanwhile the Commission is scrambling to make Maastricht more acceptable by
offering powers back to the member states. This newfound zeal responds to a
widespread feeling, by no means confined to Denmark, that the EC is getting
too centralised and interventionist. But, as Mr Jacques Delors and others
point out, much of its interventionism has arisen from the anxiety of some
member states to make sure that others abide by the rules. Subsidiarity and
the single market - both concepts dear to the British heart - are to some
extent in contradiction with each other. Too much subsidiarity will make it
easier for Germany to ban imports of British lawn-mowers, or for France to
subsidise the research costs of its favourite national industries.
The issue is a complex one, and cannot be solved by an impulsive bonfire of
EC competences. Nor should the Commission be seen as the only sinner. It is
the Council (of Ministers) that makes EC law, and sometimes it is less the
powers themselves that are objectionable than the way they are exercised.
The least one could ask is that legislation be debated and enacted in
public, rather than behind closed doors.
In fact all three issues - the budget, enlargement, subsidiarity - are ones
over which the EC can afford to take some time, considering them in
conjunction with the Danish problem to which they are all connected. The
Uruguay Round is the only really urgent issue.
Put at its starkest, the EC faces a choice between risking the defeat of
Maastricht in the French referendum, and risking the collapse of the world
trading system through the failure of the Uruguay Round. Of the two, the
latter disaster would be the graver.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920626

