FT921-1403

FT  24 MAR 92 / Arms groups 'may fare better under Labour'


   By DAVID WHITE, Defence Correspondent


BRITISH defence manufac-turers could face heavier cuts in government
spending under the Conservatives than under Labour, according to a report
published today.
The report by the Oxford Research Group, an independent organisation dealing
with defence issues, says a Conservative government committed to curbing
public spending would probably be forced to make big cuts beyond those
already announced.
A Labour government, on the other hand, would be likely to maintain defence
spending, or at least delay cuts rather than face widespread redundancies
and closures.
The report says: 'There thus arises the curious situation whereby, although
the Conservatives are accusing Labour of planning large cuts in defence,
there is a distinct possibility that future cuts could actually be greater
under a Conservative government than a Labour one.'
The report says Labour's commitment to preserving employment would 'severely
limit' scope for reducing military spending.
It says, however, that the role of the Defence Diversification Agency
proposed by Labour is not yet well defined.
The report argues that, because of the size of its defence sector, the UK
faces a greater adjustment problem than any other European country, but that
the government has so far been reluctant to become involved.
'UK industry is not adapting as rapidly as other countries, or as quickly as
it could, because there is not a clear enough signal from government on the
shape of the future,' it says. Job losses in defence, it argues, are not
solely the result of the end of the Cold War. They also reflect changing
equipment requirements and efficiency improvements made necessary by
competition.
A report published last week by the University of Bradford's Department of
Peace Studies put the number of direct or indirect defence industry jobs
lost or scheduled to go since 1990 at 61,000.
The IPMS Civil Service union, the MSF technical union and the TGWU general
workers' union yesterday indicated how they believed a defence
diversification agency should work.
Their joint report foresees defence budget savings of Pounds 30.5bn by the
end of the century and calls for a commitment to 'frontload' the proposed
agency's expenditure.
Converting the Defence Industry: Have we the Political Will?, Oxford
Research Group, 32 Warnborough Road, Oxford OX2 6JA, Pounds 10.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920324

