FT924-6429

FT  21 NOV 92 / French government faces fury at home


   By DAVID BUCHAN


   PARIS


FRANCE'S political predicament over the farm deal has been sharpened by
last-minute US concessions, which look likely to isolate Paris within the
EC.
The French agricultural lobby has geared itself, and most of the country, to
believe that almost anything the US can agree to must be bad for France's 1m
farmers. Correspondingly, therefore, the government feels it has to show the
strongest suspicion - if not opposition - towards the Washington deal.
'For, if we don't take a firm attitude on the Gatt, this government could
well fall,' Mr Jean-Pierre Soisson, France's agriculture minister, predicted
in an interview with the Financial Times yesterday.
Mr Soisson was last night adopting 'a firm line' to assuage the passions of
furious French farmers, who were burning the US flag in Paris and storming
McDonald's on the Champs Elysees, and who have even threatened to attack Mr
Soisson's own house in Auxerre. The mood in France is hardly conducive to
the calm study which Mr Soisson has called for to examine the
'compatibility' of the Gatt accord with the EC's recent reform of its common
agricultural policy (CAP).
He claimed that the 21 per cent cut in subsidised exports for each and every
farm product would be opposed by countries such as Denmark and the
Netherlands which would not want to see their cheese and milk product
exports so drastically curtailed. But the agreement on oilseeds is unlikely
to attract objections from Germany, France's crucial ally.
The narrower the gap between the Gatt deal and the CAP reform, the harder it
is for France to paint the former as black and the latter as at least
off-white. But it is certainly in these stark terms that Mr Soisson sees the
political consequences for his government, if it cannot plausibly represent
the Gatt deal as acceptable to the French public, and if it is not seen to
mobilise all possible opposition against the accord.
The first condition may now be impossible to fulfil, because it may be too
late to shift public opinion in favour of a Gatt deal. And, the French
government may now be prisoner of its own anti-Gatt mobilisation plans.
The starting gun for mobilisation is due to go off next Wednesday. With a
Commission report before it from Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture
commissioner, on the compatibility of the Gatt deal with the CAP, the French
cabinet will produce a draft resolution to be debated by parliament that
afternoon. It will commit itself to abiding by whatever parliament decides.
'In EC negotiations, John Major tells us incessantly that he cannot move
because of the House of Commons, Helmut Kohl says he has to be careful of
his fragile coalition and of the Bundestag, the Danes are always saying they
must heed their Folketing,' Mr Soisson said. 'Well, we are not so free with
regard to our parliament as many of you (outsiders) think.' A French
president may be above parliament, but his government is not.
'If we do not take a tough stand on Gatt, the Communists will vote against
us,' predicted Mr Soisson. This happened last June. The Socialist government
was saved only when Mr Raymond Barre, the centrist leader, and one or two
others decided not to support a censure motion that failed by just three
votes.
Looming, too, are next March's parliamentary elections. According to Mr
Soisson, 'the outcome in some 150 seats will be determined by the
government's attitude to the Gatt.' That would make the difference between
the Socialists succumbing to likely defeat, or being swamped in a certain
landslide. 'Agriculture still determines parliamentary majorities in
France,' the minister said. An unreformed electoral system, which gives the
countryside more deputies per voter than the cities, 'gives agriculture a
political weight that is out of proportion to the number of farmers'.
Mr Soisson criticised - in more measured tones than some of his government
colleagues - the UK presidency for trying to rush through a Gatt accord in
order to 'have something for their Edinburgh summit, because they haven't
got much else to show'.
If a Gatt deal proves incompatible with the new-style CAP, Mr Soisson said
there might have to be 'a reform of the reform'. But he concedes this could
be disastrous. 'Everyone will have their own strong demands, and we will
never agree.' This, he suggests, must have entered into Washington's
calculations. Reforming the reform could produce no CAP at all, and European
farming would henceforth go into decline.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921121

