FT924-6482

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (11): How the government edits the news -
The press


   By DAMIAN FRASER


MEXICO'S government keeps a tight grip on the media.
A few months ago La Jornada newspaper, one of Mexico's more independent
dailies, published two photographs on its front page, under the heading,
'Two political rallies in the same town'. One showed the Official government
candidate in front of a huge crowd; the other showed the candidate for the
opposition Party of Democratic Revolution addressing an empty street.
La Jornada was paid Dollars 10,000 to publish the latter photograph (for
which it later apologised) which was taken several hours before the
opposition candidate's rally began.
The only unusual thing about the affair was that it came out in the open.
Every day, Mexican newspapers print news stories or photographs for which
the government pays. They can receive up to Dollars 30,000 for a front page
item.
In the same way, journalists typically receive monthly payments from the
government departments they cover, of as much as Dollars 3,000 a month or
about three times their salaries. They also receive a rake-off from
advertisements placed by their government department of about 10-15 per
cent.
However, such practices are not universal. A growing number of Mexican
newspapers - El Financiero, a financial city daily, El Norte of Monterey, El
Diario de Yucatan, Zeta in Tijuana, the weekly Processo and Mira, generally
do not take government money, and they criticise with abandon. And as the
government retires from large parts of the economy, its ability to control
the independent press with the threat to pull advertisements is declining.
But for the vast majority, the practice of receiving government money and
self-censorship is common. Naturally, it undermines the objectivity of
journalists - if they upset their department, the cash flow drops off. Few
daily reporters in Mexico cover government corruption, or criticise the
officials with whom they are in close contact. Such work, if it is done, is
assigned to political columnists, who are often following the orders of a
political rival when they make such attacks.
President Salinas and his government have done little to change such
practices, realising how useful they are in maintaining power. Government
money continues to subsidise journalists and newspapers, and newspapers that
criticise the administration are given the cold shoulder.
The ministry of finance refuses to advertise in Mexico's main financial
newspaper, El Financiero, because it does not like its editorial line. It
does not even include it in its daily synthesis of newspaper articles. Until
September, the president would not let an El Financiero journalist on his
press aeroplane.
Televisa, Mexico's near-monopoly television company, 'is like part of the
ministry of information,' says Mr Raymundo Riva Palacio, an editor of El
Financiero, and frequent critic of the government. Televisa almost never
reports post-electoral demonstrations, rarely interviews leaders of the
opposition, or runs anything embarrassing to the government.
What changes there have been have yet to have much of an effect. The
government has ended the monopoly of the state-owned paper company, giving
newspapers the right to import their paper. But this in practice has been of
limited importance, since cutting off a newspaper's paper supply was much
too much a Draconian and public measure of censorship. And most newspapers
still buy their paper from the state-run company, one of the few to have
escaped privatisation under President Salinas.
In September the government announced that newspapers would have to pay the
expenses of covering the president's international trips - up to then all
expenses, including entertainment, were paid by the government. A
presidential spokesman said 'that in a nation of symbols this is important.'
On television, the government reckons the imminent privatisation of two
state-owned channels will put increasing pressure on Televisa to be more
independent in its coverage.

The Financial Times


London Page V

921120

