FT921-1433

FT  24 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Secret Nafta draft shows big obstacles
remain


   By DAMIAN FRASER and NANCY DUNNE


   MEXICO CITY, WASHINGTON


A SECRET composite draft of the proposed North American Free Trade
Agreement, leaked over the weekend in Washington and Mexico, suggests that
while some progress was made by the time of a high-level February 21 meeting
in Dallas, huge obstacles remain.
A spokesman for the US trade representative said the negotiators had made
more progress since the text was completed. Differences are expected to
narrow further in talks between top negotiators from the US, Canada and
Mexico and their technical advisers, meeting in Washington yesterday.
Release of the draft could undermine the stance of the negotiators, who have
conducted the talks in secrecy to avoid political controversy as long as
possible. Mexico has refused to reveal how well the treaty is going, where
agreement has been reached, and where differences lie. In Washington, Mrs
Carla Hills, US trade representative, has offered little detail, but last
week insisted the talks were moving faster than any multinational
negotiation she had ever seen.
The environmental groups, which released the text and who will have some
influence on whether or not it gets congressional approval, complained that
food safety, health and environment standards were similar to those
contained in the Uruguay Round draft, which they oppose. But as a concession
to them, the section on investment leaves open the possibility that
'language on the environment may be provided for this chapter.'
The draft showed no final agreement on areas such as agriculture, financial
services, treatment of foreign investment or rules of origin. Two sectors,
cars and energy, are omitted from the leaked documents. The US is pushing to
open petrol stations in Mexico to sell American petrol. Some 80 per cent of
the text contained brackets, but this is common until the end of most trade
negotiations.
The US and Mexico seemed near accord on textiles. Dates of quota expirations
are left blank, but the two agree to phase out customs duties and refrain
from new curbs. US officials have said a gap still exists between Canada and
the joint US-Mexican proposal. In other areas, the text revealed:
Mexico insists on full market access for its banks in Canada and the US,
while US and Canadian banks would have to have a commercial presence in
Mexico through licensed Mexican subsidiaries. In the past month, Mexico has
agreed to open its financial sector in 1995, slowly increasing foreign
market share to a maximum 15 per cent in 2002.
Mexico asks the right to adjustment programmes for its farmers without being
subject to countervailing duties. It says farm supports should be 'at most
minimally' trade distorting, and requests exemption from US sugar quotas.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920324

