FT924-8198

FT  12 NOV 92 / Kohl and Major united over EC integration


   By DAVID MARSH and IVO DAWNAY


GERMANY and Britain closed ranks on EC integration yesterday after a summit
meeting that patched up recent quarrels between London and Bonn.
Mr Helmut Kohl, the German chancellor, declared his confidence that Britain
would ratify the Maastricht treaty in the first half of 1993.
In contrast to President Francois Mitterrand of France, who on Monday
criticised the British delay, Mr Kohl said he understood the UK's reasons
for postponing Maastricht's passage through parliament.
During a press conference with Mr John Major, the prime minister, at
Ditchley Park, Oxfordshire, Mr Kohl repeatedly referred to 'my friend John'.
Underlining that he 'respected' the British view on Maastricht, he said: 'If
they need a bit more time, it's no reason to get excited.'
Mr Kohl said he hoped that negotiations on EC enlargement to include members
of the European Free Trade Association could start, on schedule, at the
beginning of next year.
On the four-nation European fighter aircraft, which has been dogged by
rising costs and German opposition, Mr Kohl said he wanted 'a common
European solution' for the project's future. British officials interpreted
this as a sign that Germany would, after all, go ahead with EFA, but with a
lighter, cheaper model.
Mr Major said he believed an agreement was possible on the basis of a recent
report from the aerospace industry in the four countries showing that costs
could be cut 'very substantially'.
Mr Kohl added that a compromise on EFA was 'a precondition for an efficient
European aerospace industry'.
Mr Major appeared particularly pleased at Mr Kohl's understanding for his
domestic political difficulties over Maastricht.
However, the prime minister remained ambiguous about the exact timing of
ratification.
Mr Major hinted that the committee stage for the Maastricht bill could
continue beyond May next year. But he did not rule out British ratification
before a second Danish referendum on the treaty later next year.
German officials said Mr Kohl was unusually relaxed yesterday. 'He likes
Major', one noted.
However, Mr Kohl refused to answer a question over whether Germany had
offered Britain the chance of a formal sterling devaluation within the
European Monetary System in September.
German officials have suggested that this would have prevented the
speculative EMS flare-up and Britain's dramatic exit from the exchange rate
mechanism.
'You and I can write about this when we are in retirement,' the chancellor
quipped.
UK-German initiative on Bosnians, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921112

