FT921-14307

FT  16 JAN 92 / Regulator takes up the baton: The OFT's new boss


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER and HUGO DIXON


Sir Bryan Carsberg was yesterday sporting an unseasonal tan, courtesy of a
holiday in the Maldives. The idea that Sir Bryan takes holidays, especially
winter breaks on luxurious islands in the Indian Ocean, will probably come
as a surprise to the companies that have been the objects of his unrelenting
scrutiny during his seven years as director general of Oftel, the
telecommunications industry watchdog.
Sir Bryan has been the British pioneer of utility regulation. He helped to
privatise BT and then exposed it to tighter regulation and greater
competition. He has had more influence than any other individual on
regulation in electricity, gas and water, as well as telecommunications.
His influence will expand significantly in June when he takes over from Sir
Gordon Borrie as director general of the Office of Fair Trading (OFT), the
most powerful post within the British system of competition policymaking and
enforcement.
Sir Bryan will be an active and inquisitive competition chief. 'My approach
will not be to assume that everything is all right,' he says. 'My attitude
will be that there is probably quite a lot to be done.'
Certainly he comes to the post with a formidable record. At Oftel he was a
proactive regulator, seeking out opportunities to promote competition rather
than merely reacting to complaints about restriction.
One of his strengths is his ability to combine a general understanding of
the economics of competition, which comes from his academic background, with
an intensely practical interest in how markets and companies function, a
product of his long experience as an accountant. BT has learned to its cost
that Sir Bryan is a formidable opponent in arcane arguments over how much
deposit a customer should be charged for a telephone, as well as the grander
arguments about how much competition is good for an industry.
Like Sir Gordon, he seems able to work effectively with Labour and
Conservative politicians. He said there would be no problems if Labour was
the next government, as there was 'quite a large measure of agreement'
between the parties on the sort of work the OFT does.
Sir Bryan, 53, a trim former marathon runner, still has healthy reserves of
the stamina and tenacity that have kept him going in his continual battles
with BT. However, the personal character of his struggle with BT is also a
clue to Sir Bryan's shortcomings.
Critics accuse him of intellectual arrogance. He is a technocrat who
believes in taking decisions behind closed doors, without much public
consultation. He has been better at making policy than ensuring tively
pursues customer complaints against BT. Most of the OFT's work is similarly
humble stuff. It spends only 8 per cent of resources considering mergers,
compared with 37.6 per cent on regulation of consumer credit agreements and
estate and 15 per cent on other humdrum consumer protection work.
Former colleagues also say that he is not a good delegator. Dealing with a
single industry, it may have been possible for Sir Bryan to keep a tight
grip on all the reins. To deal effectively with the wide range of industries
covered by the OFT - from soft drinks to financial services, gas to car
retailing - Sir Bryan will have to draw upon the expertise of others.
Sir Bryan has no firm views on whether the OFT's investigative powers or its
structure need changing. However, he will certainly have to think about a
number of issues that go to the heart of the OFT's role.
He sees no reason why specialised utility regulators should be incorporated
within the OFT at this stage, although it is possible that he may want to
bring the Monopolies and Mergers Commission within its ambit to create a
single competition authority responsible for policy, investigation and
enforcement.
One of the most controversial issues may be whether competition should
remain the guiding light of merger and regulatory policy. In the energy and
water industries, environmental considerations are becoming influential. The
government has recommended that the OFT should consider state ownership,
foreign ownership and financial gearing in considering bids. A Labour
government would seek a new balance between competition, the environment,
job protection and other factors. There is also the question of the
relationship between British policy and EC policy, which is increasingly
impinging upon national markets.
BT may be giving out a sigh of relief at Sir Bryan's departure from Oftel;
but the rest of British business had better be on its toes. He is unlikely
to be taking a long summer break.

The Financial Times


London Page 20 Photograph Sir Bryan, active chief (Omitted).

920116

