FT922-7328

FT  19 MAY 92 / Ecuador elects to follow path of market reform: The
consequences of the left's declining popularity


   By STEPHEN FIDLER


ECUADOR appears set after elections on Sunday to follow the rest of Latin
America towards a more open market-oriented economy.
The new president will be either Mr Sixto Duran, 72, or Mr Jaime Nebot, 45,
who will face off in a second round on July 5. Mr Duran won 33.2 per cent of
the valid votes cast and Mr Nebot 25.4 per cent. Both favour privatisation
and moves to open the economy and make it more responsive to market forces.
This is in contrast to the administration of President Rodrigo Borja
Cevallos which, although lowering some tariff barriers, has resisted the
shift towards more liberal economic policies sweeping the continent. Mr
Borja's Democratic Left party, along with other socialist parties, suffered
a sharp setback in Sunday's local, congressional and presidential elections.
In theory, this suggests a new administration should have the support of a
sympathetic right-of-centre legislature. In practice, dealing with a
Congress fragmented among a dozen parties will be difficult and a common
economic cause will not necessarily overcome party rivalries.
Mr Jaime Duran, director of Informe Especial, a political survey group, said
a combination of local and international events contributed to the left's
decline.
The collapse of communism in east Europe and the success of market-oriented
economic policies elsewhere in Latin America were significant. On top of
this, many voters considered the Borja administration as mediocre and worn
out.
It has presided for four years over growth of 2-3 per cent, which translates
in per capita terms to economic stagnation. Inflation is down from its
highs, but still running at an annual 50 per cent. Ideology counts for
little among most voters.
Furthermore, the right-of-centre candidates satisfied traditional regional
divisions in Ecuadorean politics. Mr Duran, mayor of Quito for eight years
and twice unsuccessful as presidential contender, is viewed as the highland
candidate; Mr Nebot as the candidate of the hot coastal regions around
Guayaquil.
Mr Duran, an architect born in Boston, Massachusetts, who studied at Durham
University in England, claims blood ties with the coast and may have the
better claim to represent the whole of the country. He took more than a
fifth of the coastal vote, while in the highlands Mr Nebot took only 12 per
cent.
However, Mr Duran, while viewed as honest and unlikely to fall prey to
cronyism, is a less dynamic campaigner than the more charismatic Mr Nebot.
The latter is also likely to benefit more from the 21.2 per cent of votes
cast for Mr Abdala Bucaram, a populist of Lebanese extraction who is also
from the coast.
On the other hand, Mr Nebot is viewed with suspicion by the left, which has
no candidate in the second round.
Mr Nebot's Social Christian party secured at least 19 seats in the 77-seat
Congress. Mr Duran's Republican Unity won 13 but the Conservative party,
with which it is in alliance, enjoyed a resurgence and took seven seats.
If Mr Nebot loses he may prevent his party co-operating with the
administration, thus improving his chances of election in 1996. A year ago
Mr Duran pulled out of the Social Christian party, of which he was a
founder, to form his new movement.
Whoever wins, the new administration should be able to count on more support
from international financial institutions and western governments,
particularly the US. But the task ahead will not be easy. By some estimates,
Ecuador is 10-20 years behind neighbouring Colombia in its economic
development.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920519

