FT924-6480

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (13): 'Greenest treaty ever'


   By DAMIAN FRASER


WILL Mexico's environment improve with Nafta?
Nafta is nominally about trade, but the debate over the effect it will have
on Mexico's environment may help determine whether it is passed by the US
Congress, writes Damian Fraser.
The three governments like to argue that Nafta will make Mexico richer and
thus more able to afford the kind of environmental protection already in
place in the US and Canada. Faster economic growth will enable Mexico to
dedicate more resources to improving air quality in Mexico City, cleaning up
the US-Mexican border, and setting aside more land for ecological reserves.
Further, the treaty itself incorporates a number of environmental
safeguards, making it, according to Mr Bill Reilly, head of the US
Environmental Protection Agency under President Bush, the greenest free
trade agreement ever negotiated.
The green language of the treaty would give precedence to international
environmental treaties, such as the Montreal accords, over Nafta; let each
country choose the level of protection of the environment that it deems
appropriate; provides that no Nafta country should lower its health, safety
or environmental standards to attract investment; and allows disputes over
factual questions on the environment to be resolved by the Nafta trade
panels.
Mr Sergio Reyes Lujan, the president of Mexico's official Ecology Institute,
says such measures 'establish formulas to ensure that free trade is
equitable' while respecting national sovereignty. For many Americans, the
measures do not go far enough. For example, President-elect Clinton has
called for additional parallel environmental accords.
First, environmentalists worry that US firms would cross the border in
search of laxer environmental regulations. Although Nafta explicitly forbids
lowering standards to attract investment, it is not clear whether lax
enforcement that attracts investment is punishable. A number of US furniture
makers have thus moved to Mexico to escape tougher Californian state
environmental laws.
A recent report by the US General Accounting Office concluded that none of
six maquiladoras (foreign-owned plants) that they audited complied with
Mexico's required environmental impact assessment before going ahead with
operations.
Second, critics complain that the dispute resolution panels comprise trade
rather than environment specialists, and have insufficient authority to
settle many environmental complaints. As it stands, the panels can only
offer judgments on factual questions arising out of environmental disputes
that affect trade. Environmentalists want their own commission to monitor
each country's compliance with environmental laws, and would like to impose
'green taxes' on trade to finance a clean-up of the border.
Such measures would be seen by many in Mexico as intervention in its
sovereign affairs, and economically costly. But as the price of legislative
passage of the Nafta, Mexico may have no option but to accept them.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

921120

