FT924-6432

FT  21 NOV 92 / Plenty more tough bargaining in store


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


AFTER nearly a year of sitting impotently on the sidelines while the US and
European Community scrapped over farm trade, Gatt negotiators are impatient
to get the six-year-old Uruguay Round of world trade talks moving once
again.
But trade officials, while delighted that the key to unlock the round is now
to hand, warn that much hard bargaining is still needed to secure a
successful conclusion.
The terms of the US-EC deal on agriculture will first have to be agreed by
all 108 countries taking part in the negotiations. While it would be highly
improbable for trading partners to throw out the long-awaited accord between
the world's biggest economies, there could still be lively discussion over
details.
That hurdle over, other difficult issues will come to the fore, especially
in the areas of services and improved market access for foreign goods.
As soon as the protagonists signal that they are ready to present their farm
trade deal, Mr Arthur Dunkel, director-general of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (Gatt), will call a meeting of the round's top-level trade
negotiations committee.
Negotiators will be asked to agree a work programme designed to wrap up
agreements on all 28 subject areas within three months. This is to meet the
March 1 1993 deadline for submission of a trade liberalisation package under
the US administration's 'fast-track' negotiating authority, which requires
Congress to approve or reject the package without amendment.
Changes in the dramatis personae also pose some tricky timing problems. Mr
Dunkel will want to get all the policy issues contained in the draft 'Final
Act' he presented to negotiators last December sewn up by the end of this
year, when Mr Ray MacSharry, the EC's agriculture commissioner, leaves his
post.
Officials acknowledge that detailed country-by-country negotiations on
tariffs and access to services markets, which form an integral part of the
Uruguay Round package, will probably run into February. But the bulk of the
work must be completed by January 20 when Mrs Carla Hills, US trade
representative, leaves office along with the rest of the Bush
administration.
Mr Dunkel will be concerned to minimise the changes to the draft 'Final Act'
so as to prevent a general unravelling of hard-fought and carefully balanced
agreements already negotiated. He has already said changes can be made only
by consensus.
Thus Japan and South Korea are unlikely to succeed in keeping their bans on
imported rice. The US will be told not to re-open talks on intellectual
property protection to gain a better deal for the US pharmaceutical and
entertainment industries.
More problematic will be services, where the US is refusing to liberalise
shipping, and the complex bilateral negotiations on opening services markets
to foreign suppliers are a long way from completion. Negotiations on tariff
cuts averaging a third on farm and industrial goods have also been
difficult, though officials say resolution of the US/EC dispute on farm
subsidies and tariffs should now give the talks momentum.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921121

