FT921-1491

FT  24 MAR 92 / International Company News: TNT confident on European unit


   By KEVIN BROWN


   SYDNEY


TNT, the Australian transport group, expects its European distribution
network to move into profit in 1992-93, Sir Peter Abeles, chief executive,
said yesterday.
Sir Peter said increased revenues from deals with Federal Express, the US
express mail group, and five European and North American post offices, would
transform the loss-making European network.
The European network, which Sir Peter described as 'the single biggest drag'
on group profits, has never made a profit in spite of significant investment
in trucks, aircraft and handling facilities.
Sir Peter said its prospects had been transformed by the post office deal,
which sets up a joint venture company, called GD Net, to merge the express
mail businesses of TNT and the Canadian, Swedish, French, German and Dutch
postal authorities.
GD Net is also negotiating commercial agreements with a number of other post
offices, including several in Scandinavia, Sir Peter said.
TNT announced last week that it had agreed to act as a sub-contractor for
Federal Express in the delivery of inbound packages from the US to 10
European countries.
Sir Peter said the GD Net joint venture was expected to add about USDollars
120m to European revenues next year. However, he said TNT did not expect to
retain all the USDollars 100m revenue of Federal Express' European
operations.
Sir Peter said the GD Net deal had been delayed for more than six months by
adverse comment last year on the group's profitability and ability to pay
its debts.
He said TNT had always maintained sufficient liquidity to meet its debts as
they fell due for payment, and claimed media and market analysts had
misunderstood the group because of its complex spread of businesses.
Sir Peter said TNT was 'well on the way' to achieving a debt to equity ratio
of 1:1, as forecast in last year's annual report. The current ratio was 'in
the region' of 1.3:1 or 1.4:1, he said.
Sir Peter, who founded TNT in the 1950s, also said he had no plans to
retire, in spite of speculation that he would hand over to younger
management once the group's balance sheet had strengthened.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920324

