FT923-15749

FT  01 JUL 92 / World Trade News: Mercosur in push to meet timetable


   By JOHN BARHAM


   LAS LENAS


THE presidents of the four member states of Mercosur, South America's
nascent common market, have sent a signal they will press on with regional
integration, despite increasing doubts about the market's viability by the
end of 1994.
At their second presidential summit, the presidents of Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay have agreed a timetable for discussing issues ranging
up to harmonising macroeconomic policies.
The presidents of Bolivia and Chile also attended, ostensibly to sign
bilateral accords with Argentina. Chile, seeking a free trade pact with the
US, is understood to be sounding out Mercosur on possible association.
Bolivia's President Jaime Paz Zamora wants full membership, meaning his
country would have to withdraw from the Andean pact, of which it is now a
member.
Bolivia is being drawn into the Mercosur orbit through its increasing trade
links with Brazil. It plans to build a gas pipeline to southern Brazil, and
has signed an agreement to develop, with Mercosur, the Paraguay and Parana
rivers into a navigable waterway.
Officials said it was vital for companies and nations to believe in the
Four's determination to meet their deadlines, now that issues such as
harmonisation of industrial standards, customs procedures and taxation are
being analysed in detail. The timetable requires work to start on removing
barriers to capital movements in March 1993, with a proposal ready for
approval by governments nine months later.
Some Argentine companies resent Brazilian 'assymetries', a codeword for
subsidies, export incentives and an undervalued exchange rate, that have led
to a flood of Brazilian imports. Brazil says no subsidies exist. But
regional trade is increasing rapidly. Trade between the Four rose from
Dollars 1.37bn (Pounds 740m) in 1985 to Dollars 3.94bn last year. It is
expected to reach Dollars 6bn in 1992.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920701

