FT924-6289

FT  21 NOV 92 / Property: Try Cyprus for the good life - But don't pass dud
cheques


   By GERALD CADOGAN


APHRODITE'S island, where the goddess of love rose from the waves, is an
easy, welcoming place to live. Everybody in Cyprus knows some English - and
has relatives in north London.
Food is good and cheap. The grazer's delight is the multi-course meze. This
friendly affair for two or more people starts with pickled caper plants,
wild greens and other tidbits and continues through fish and stews to a
large grill.
Cypriot vegetables and fruit are heavenly. As they grow so fast, they are
both big and tender. (In Paphos, do not miss the market).
The World Service's signature tune of Lullibolero floats around Cyprus.
Reception is excellent, as the transmitter for the Middle East is between
Larnaca and Limassol. And there is the forces' BFBS station.
The Cyprus Weekly, a lively Daily Mail-style newspaper, complements the
country's news with full accounts of expatriate events. The daily paper is
the Cyprus Mail, and TV has English and Turkish bulletins as well as Greek.
Barclays bank has branches in Cyprus and the Cypriot banks have branches in
England, so it is easy to send in money. Cheques are accepted with an ease
long disappeared in Britain. (But if you pass a dud, the police will find
you quickly).
Driving has much the same rules as in Britain, including a breath test. The
new toll-free motorways make it easy to get around, and there is an
excellent system of inter-city communal taxis. The taxi, a large Mercedes,
goes round the town to collect passengers and drives them at breathless
speed down the motorway, dropping them off at the other end.
Much business is done in English and much of daily life is familiar.
Electricity works with square-ended three-point plugs on the same voltage as
the UK.
The water is safe - and this year has been plentiful - and there is good
bottled water. Usually, you cook using bottled gas. The village shops get
daily deliveries of bread and milk.
Cyprus brews two beers, Carlsberg lager and Keo, which tastes like English
beer. There are good wines and plenty of brandy. Mix it with lemon squash or
fresh lemon juice (better) and soda water and a dash of bitters to make a
brandy sour. Filfar is an orange liqueur similar to Curacao. All liquor is
very cheap.
Flights to and from Cyprus usually are packed. Make sure to reconfirm and
turn up early. Charter flights have more restrictions than in Greece or
Spain, with the result that Cyprus welcomes a more solid type of British
tourist than those delivered with their flying beer cans to other countries.
The young may be questioned hard at immigration if they look as if they do
not have enough money.
If you have difficulty getting seats, go to a Cypriot travel agent. He knows
the ropes, as most of his clients will be Cypriot-Britons returning for
holidays to their former home.
If you fly on Cyprus Airways, you will know you are on the right aircraft
when you hear the stewardesses speaking Greek with a north London accent.

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

921121

