FT924-6475

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment (5): Explosion of activity -
Virtual Reality


   By PAUL TAYLOR


In Japan and on both sides of the Atlantic the 'hot' new subject for
high-tech computer whizz-kids is Virtual Reality - or VR to those in the
know.
The past 18 months has witnessed an explosion of activity surrounding VR,
including heavyweight books on the subject, conferences, seminars and
exhibitions and an unexpected cinema box office hit - The Lawnmower Man.
Meanwhile, among all the hyperbole, the first practical applications of VR -
in the entertainment sector and in other fields - have begun to appear. At
the same time VR, and the mostly small start-up companies which have
pioneered the technology, are beginning to be taken seriously by big
multinational companies, academic institutions and government agencies.
Exactly what constitutes VR is still a matter of fierce debate. VR's roots
are in aeronautics and space research and it is a descendant of flight
simulators.
Today, VR is generally taken to mean a mixture of computer hardware and
software built around complex databases which enable the user to interact
with objects in an imaginary 3-D 'cyberspace' world.
This can either be achieved using using a 'dataglove' fitted with sensors
that pick up the real hand's movements and a helmet containing small LCD
screens in front of each eye - so-called 'immersion VR' - or using an
ordinary personal computer, a high resolution screen and a device, sometimes
called a 'spaceball,' to control movement - 'desktop VR.'
Some VR purists insist that 'immersion' VR is the only real VR, particularly
for entertainment applications.
However it has some serious drawbacks because using the equipment for more
than half an hour can result in a form of nausea called 'simulator
sickness', and the tiny screens inside VR helmets cannot provide the
high-quality images needed for virtual worlds to be convincing.
For 'serious' applications, such as architectural or engineering modelling,
design testing or process simulation, desktop VR is becoming increasingly
popular - helped on its way by tumbling hardware costs and increasingly
powerful microprocessors.
Nevertheless, some of the most immediate applications are likely to be in
the entertainment sector.
Virtual reality arcade games have begun to arrive and toy industry analysts
expect virtual reality versions of home video games to appear in the near
future.
Nintendo has already produced a Dollars 99 Powerglove, a simple version of a
dataglove, which lets video-game addicts play with hand gestures.
Outside the home in the US and elsewhere, leisure groups have plans for VR
entertainment centres and theme parks and Japanese electronics groups such
as Sony and Matsushita, which also own film studios and theatres, are said
to be watching developments closely.
For the moment, VR systems are a lot less sophisticated that most science
fiction writers would have the reader believe.
But this, too, will change.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921120

