FT924-8326

FT  11 NOV 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar dealers wait for news


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR yesterday regained some of the ground lost against the D-Mark at
the start of the week, but failed to break through the level of DM1.60,
writes James Blitz.
There is an air of 'wait and see' in dollar/D-Mark trading at the moment.
The US currency rose more than 5 pfennigs last week in the wake of the
Presidential election, but some dealers wonder whether the rise was
overdone. Yesterday the currency ranged between DM1.5907 and DM1.5991 before
closing  3/4 pfennig up on the day at DM1.5960. The dollar finished New York
trading easier at DM1.5913.
Last week's advance for the dollar reflected expectations that Germany will
ease monetary policy as it slides into recession, and that President-elect
Bill Clinton will fiscally boost the economy.
Those expectations must be fulfilled if the dollar is to appreciate from
here. Mr Avinash Persaud, a currency economist at UBS Phillips & Drew in
London, said: 'The dollar is like a dragon with an insatiable appetite at
the moment. It needs news to drive it further.'
News on the German front is not likely to be dollar-positive this week.
Nobody expects an easing in official rates at the Bundesbank council meeting
tomorrow, and some even expect a net drain of funds in today's German money
market operations, pushing cash rates higher.
Attention is increasingly focusing on possible candidates for the economic
posts in Mr Clinton's administration.
It is generally thought that the dollar will see a strong break through
DM1.60 if Mr Paul Volcker, former chairman of the US Federal Reserve, is
nominated as Treasury Secretary. His reputation for raising interest rates
to counter-balance the US deficits in the 1980s would help the dollar
upwards.
However, Mr Persaud believes that the other named candidates, including Mr
Roger Altman and Mr Robert Rubin, would also be positive for the US
currency.
Inside the European exchange rate mechanism, the French franc continued to
gain ground. Yesterday it appreciated  1/2 franc against the D-Mark to
finish at FFr3.3760. Some dealers believe it is slowly moving towards its
central ERM parity against the D-Mark of FFr3.3539.
Analysts of the ERM are considering how quickly the core currencies of the
system could move towards forming a unified currency in Europe.
For the first time since the autumn currency crisis, all the potential
hard-core currencies in the ERM - the D-Mark, French franc, Belgian franc,
Dutch guilder and Danish krone - were yesterday above their central Ecu
rates.
These currencies could continue to move in a uniform pattern next year.
Attention may focus on whether the hard core can move from the permitted
fluctuation bands of 2.25 per cent to narrower bands of 1 per cent or even
0.2 per cent.

The Financial Times


London Page 33

921111

