FT922-451

FT  27 JUN 92 / Summer Drink: Drinking in the sunshine - Giles MacDonogh
pours himself a Pimms and plans a summer party


   By GILES MACDONOGH


I SPENT a terrible two days last weekend, tying myself in knots costing a
summer drinks party. With a pocket-calculator in one hand and a bottle of
Pimms in the other, I endeavoured to come up with the precise figure I
needed to spend in order to entertain:
1 50 sober, responsible people;
2 50 not so sober, responsible people;
3 50 drunken, irresponsible people.
I was working on the basis of a double measure of Pimms (16 to the bottle)
to about a quarter litre of lemonade plus the usual fruit and ice; enough to
fill a half pint pot. In my mind's eye the first group would drink about a
litre and that (with a few edibles thrown in) would set me back roughly
Pounds 200. Having arrived at this figure I decided that the next two could
be arrived at arithmetically: Pounds 250 and Pounds 300 respectively. In the
last instance the guests would receive two litres each. Given the presence
of a few sober people and drivers this would mean that some people would get
royally drunk.
Then I spoke to Valli Watson at Party Professionals, and she told me I was
mad. The party, she said, would cost about Pounds 130: 'Nobody could drink
more than three-quarters of a litre of Pimms.' I put down my pocket
calculator in despair.
That left me with a glass of Pimms and some reflections on the Englishman's
summer drink. Pimms has changed rather a lot recently. For a start it has
moved to Scotland, and the gin base for the more popular No 1 Cup is also
Scottish distilled.
The alcohol content appears to have been lowered from 30 per cent to 25 per
cent, meaning that the old trick of adding a slug has become a practical
necessity (Valli tells me to add spirit to the first round and produce
weaker drinks as the party goes on).
There used to be six cups; latterly there were three; now there are two, and
the vodka-based No 6 is increasingly difficult to find. I only tracked it
down to Gerry's at 74 Old Compton Street, London W1 (071-734-2053).
I marginally prefer the Vodka Cup (as it is now called) to the gin-based No
1. The No 1 is darker, and tastes of oranges and caramel. The No 6 is
lighter and more lemony. It does not taste quite so sweet.
As students we used to drink a lot of Pimms and were always on the look-out
for ways of gingering it up. One method was to add more gin and cider. I
have seen people put champagne into Pimms but I think this is rather a waste
of champagne; especially now that prices have gone through the roof.
One alternative which appeals to me is a Maibowle: a traditional German
summer punch. In Theodor Fontane's Schach von Wuthenow of 1882 the publisher
Sandars gives the recipe specifying the use of May herbs woodruff and
celandine: 'Don't let them infuse for too long. Woodruff is not camomile
tea. Mosel wine, let's say a Zeltinger or a Brauneberger, pour that slowly
over the herbs; that is enough. Oranges are there simply for ornament's sake
. . . and don't make it too sweet . . '
Some readers might object that woodruff is hard to come by but it cannot be
any more difficult than the obligatory sprig of borage which floats in the
Pimms.
A suggestion from Austria is a mixture of vodka, elderberry cordial and
mint. A little elderflower cordial goes a long way, diluted to one 16th
strength. In Oporto the standard summer drink is slightly chilled tawny
port; although this might seem a rather serious (and expensive) solution to
the summer drinks party.
White port, however, can be turned into a long drink by using tonic water
with a sprig of mint. A more English solution is a cider cup. Andre Simon's
Dictionary of Wines and Spirits of 1958 suggests a litre of sweet cider to
75 cls of soda water, a glass of sherry, half a glass of brandy, lemon juice
and peel, nutmeg, pineapple and borage. A bone dry cider such as Merrydown
vintage might be more suitable for modern tastes. Cider cup has the virtue
of being cheap.
Now comes the problem of what, if anything, to give your guests to eat.
Valli Watson was all for Kettle crisps from America; pouring scorn on my
suggestion of black olives and salted nuts, which I imagined would provoke
the necessary thirst required for people to want to consume large quantities
of Pimms.
Another of her suggestions was ciabata bread with aubergine dip; or rubbed
with garlic and tomato and moistened with olive oil. Then she began giving
me recipes for dips and my head started to swim. I think I shall simply drop
in on Marks & Spencer, which does a very decent range of ready mades for
parties: good taramasalata, houmus, aubergine dip and a Greek dip selection.
The American-style dip tray is also good. Of course at either side of Pounds
1 apiece, these things will work out dear for 50 people. It might be better
to stick to crisps.
Information: Party Professionals, 33 Kensington Park Road, London W11. (071-
221-3438).
Elderberry cordial is available from Thorncroft Vineyard, Highland Farm,
Leatherhead, Surrey. (0372-372558).
Top quality white ports such as Fonseca's Siroco or Taylor's Chip Dry sell
for around Pounds 9.50. The recommended retail price for Pimms No 1 or Vodka
Cup is Pounds 10.19.

The Financial Times


London Page XIII

920627

