FT924-6402

FT  21 NOV 92 / Major rejects Matrix claims


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR indicated yesterday that he was unaware of attempts by the
Department of Trade and Industry in June 1990 to circumscribe the Customs
and Excise investigation into Matrix Churchill.
His move to underline that he had no direct involvement in the oversight of
exports of defence-related equipment to Iraq came as the government tabled
its amendment to a Labour motion condemning it for breaching its own
guidelines on the sales.
The amendment for Monday's full-scale Commons debate on the affair says it
will be for the inquiry under Lord Justice Scott to determine whether the
guidelines were breached. It underlines the wide-ranging nature of the
inquiry and 'deplores the sensationalised attempts of Her Majesty's
Opposition to anticipate the inquiry's findings'.
Mr Major, then chancellor, said yesterday that a letter to Customs from the
office of Mr Nicholas Ridley, then trade secretary, had been copied to
Treasury officials.
The letter gave conditional DTI approval to an investigation into the sale
to Iraq of Matrix Churchill machine tools. It emphasised that Mr Ridley was
happy for investigators to visit the company on the assumption that 'no
action would be taken as a result without consulting ministers'.
In a written parliamentary reply to Mr Tam Dalyell, Mr Major said the
document was copied to his private secretary. 'Treasury records do not
reveal whether I saw this correspondence, but I have no recollection of
doing so.'
The prime minister said that in 1990 the then paymaster general was
responsible 'in the first instance' for matters involving Customs and
Excise. Mr Richard Ryder, at present chief whip, became paymaster general in
1990. It was unclear last night whether he handled the correspondence.
Mr Major's reply added that Customs had made clear at the time to the DTI
that 'decisions about follow-up' action in the Matrix Churchill affair
'would rest with the Commissioners of HM Customs and Excise in accordance
with their statutory responsibilities'.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921121

