FT923-6570

FT  24 AUG 92 / Canada reaches reform accord


   By ROBERT GIBBENS


   MONTREAL


CANADA has reached broad agreement on constitutional reform, with the
likelihood of acceptance by all 10 provinces.
Mr Robert Bourassa, Quebec's premier, who has traded a reformed Senate for a
permanent guarantee of 25 per cent of the House of Commons and greater
autonomy, has endorsed the deal. The two provincial premiers who failed to
accept the Meech Lake accord in June 1990, Mr Clyde Wells of Newfoundland
and Mr Garry Filmon of Manitoba, are ready to fall in line.
But Mr Bourassa may well face opposition in his own Quebec Liberal party.
Quebec voters generally opposed Senate reform and nationalists say Mr
Bourassa has obtained less than Quebec was promised in the Meech Lake talks.
The preliminary text now goes for legal drafting and review by the first
ministers later this week. The federal parliament and all provincial
legislatures must ratify the final version. A national referendum is
possible.
The main points are:
The Senate will become an elected body with a fixed number of senators from
each province and one each from the Yukon and the northwest territories. It
will have little legislative power.
The Commons would be expanded from 295 to 337 members, with Quebec and
Ontario each getting 18 more seats, British Columbia four more and Alberta
two more.
Quebec gets 25 per cent of the seats, providing a guarantee of its input at
the federal level, and is recognised as a distinct, primarily francophone,
society. Protection for English minorities in Quebec and French minorities
in other provinces is provided. Quebec and all other provinces can veto
changes to the Senate and other federal institutions.
Aboriginal people get an 'inherent right to self-government', but no new
land rights.
More powers are transferred to provinces that want them, mainly Quebec, but
the problem of inter-provincial trade barriers has yet to be resolved.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920824

