FT923-6646

FT  22 AUG 92 / The Long View: Cold comfort at below zero


   By BARRY RILEY


IF PRICES can go down there is hope for the present economic strategy. If
not, the only solution is inflation.
Flexibility downwards is the crucial key to making participation in the
exchange rate mechanism work. Already, in the 22 months since the government
hitched sterling to a central rate of DM2.95 (although it has rarely
attained that level in practice), there have been some unheard-of
adjustments. London house prices, for instance, have dropped by around 13
per cent, according to the Halifax Building Society: the conventional wisdom
was that house prices could never fall. As for commercial property, central
London office values have crashed by some 38 per cent.
The big problem, however, was always going to be the labour market, and that
remains stubbornly resistant. Since ERM entry, average earnings have risen
by 15 per cent while the British economy has shrunk by some 3 per cent in
real terms. That 18-point gap is vastly in excess of any productivity gains
and is one measure of the inflationary strains still tearing the economy
apart (involving, for instance, a profits squeeze and an excess of domestic
demand over supply).
Unemployment has risen from 1.7m to 2.7m since October 1990. That is bad
enough, but large numbers of people apparently have left the workforce and
do not appear in the numbers.
In other respects, the impact on the economy of entering a fixed exchange
rate regime has, broadly, been predictable. Money market interest rates have
come down from 15 to 10 per cent. Bonds have outperformed equities
substantially even though shares were particularly low at the time because
of the Gulf crisis: the FT-SE 100 index has shown a capital gain of about 15
per cent while long gilts are up about 25 per cent; on a rate of return
basis (including gross income), the outperformance by gilts has averaged
nearly a point a month. Most of the benefit of this appears, however, to
have gone to foreigners, because British investors have remained devoted to
equities, which served them so well in the past.
Inflation, too, has slowed rapidly. During the 12 months leading up to ERM
entry it was more than 10 per cent. In the subsequent 22 months, prices have
risen by only another 7.5 per cent. By the beginning of 1993, if we stay on
course, it looks as though the annual inflation rate will fall below 3 per
cent.
Monetary growth has also collapsed. Over the past 12 months it has run - on
the M4 measure - at a mere 5 per cent, compared with something like 15 per
cent a year during the 1980s. In fact, the money supply has not been growing
as slowly as it is now since the beginning of the 1970s, which is why the
behaviour of financial markets is surprising so many people (I am thinking,
for instance, of analysts who are trying to value the equity market on the
basis of average bond-equity yield ratios during the past 20 years).
During the 1980s, the financial system became accustomed to double-digit
growth rates of balance sheet assets and liabilities, underpinned by
ever-rising asset values. Only when the government realised that asset price
inflation would feed through to retail prices did it spoil the party.
Indeed, property values have proved adjustable downwards in nominal terms, a
unique departure from British post-war experience. But this does not mean
that the financial system can accommodate a price meltdown safely.
In times of growth, property-based lending tends to improve its own
security. The greater the volume of lending, the higher property prices
rise. But, in reverse, the system turns into a vicious circle. When lenders
seize their security and sell it, prices are driven down further. This
undermines the security of other loans. Meanwhile, potential buyers hold off
because they are afraid of suffering capital losses.
If high percentages of the value of property have, conventionally, been lent
by financial institutions, a financial system must be vulnerable to falling
asset prices. This is true in the UK, although the worst of the losses on
residential property have been borne by the insurance companies which sold
mortgage indemnity policies. If there were another downleg to the bear
market in house prices, the building societies and banks would be much more
exposed - which could be why they have become so much more nervous in recent
weeks.
In commercial property, there is another valuable protection for property
owners and their lenders: the upwards-only lease. This does not help
developers or other owners of untenanted property. Nor does it protect the
landlord if the tenant goes bust. But if your tenant is, say, a public
sector body, the lease is as good as a gilt-edged security even if open
market commercial rents should go spiralling down and down in the future.
This arrangement protects institutional owners and, to some extent, the
banks (although most of their lending was probably on developments). But it
also means that most commercial rents cannot fall in the foreseeable future.
This could put established businesses at risk: for them, the vast amount of
cheap modern space is out of reach.
Similarly, in the labour market, pay is in practice decided on an
upwards-only basis. Employers making losses tend to lay off staff or even
shut up shop rather than attempt to recruit at below the going rate. There
are exceptions, in areas of relatively casual employment such as
construction or catering. But, in more rigid sectors, inflation is no longer
fast enough to cover up the brutal need to cut pay in real terms. The
result, again, is a growing waste of resources as supply and demand cannot
be brought together.
There can be no net zero inflation unless prices are free to move down as
well as up. John Major should have thought about this 22 months ago when he
put the UK into the ERM - and he should be thinking even harder now.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920822

