FT923-9570

FT  04 AUG 92 / World Trade News: Japanese claim US bill on mini-van tariffs
is unfair


   By REUTER


   TOKYO, DETROIT


A BILL approved by the US House of Representatives which raises the tariff
on imported mini-vans discriminates against Japan by excluding European
vehicles, a Japanese trade ministry official said yesterday, Reuter reports
from Tokyo and Detroit.
'It is regrettable the US House passed the bill which is apparently in
violation of Gatt,' Mr Yuji Tanahashi, vice-minister at the international
trade and industry ministry (Miti) stated. The bill, passed on Friday, would
reclassify some mini-vans and sports utility vehicles as trucks, making them
subject to a tenfold increase in import duties. It now goes to the Senate.
The bill, backed by the US car industry and unions, would transfer passenger
vans, multi-purpose vans, four-door sports utility vehicles and other
jeep-type vehicles to a category carrying 25 per cent duty. It makes two
exemptions. Critics say these were designed to exclude European mini-vans
such as Volkswagen, imported since 1963, and vehicles with sales in the US
of less than 10,000 a year, such as Britain's Range Rover.
The Bush administration opposes the mini-van reclassification on the grounds
it would increase consumer costs, could be seen as a violation of Gatt, and
could result in retaliation against US exports. Mr Bush is expected to veto
the bill.
Tokyo will seek to present its case to Gatt if the bill becomes law,
Japanese newspapers reported. It 'is clearly in violation of Gatt,' the
Asahi Shimbun quoted Miti as saying. The vote was protectionism in its most
blatant form,' Toyota Motor said. 'The bill ought to be named the Big Three
windfall profits Act of 1992. The real losers from this kind of
protectionism will be once again the American consumer.'
But General Motors said the reclassification was justified. 'When a vehicle
is designed as a truck, built like a truck, performs like a truck, it ought
to be called a truck for tariff purposes.' Chrysler, controlling over half
the mini-van market, said the House action showed 'determination to come to
grips with our trade problems'. The Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association,
a US industry group supporting Detroit's vehicle-makers, said the bill would
close a loophole giving unfair advantage to importers.

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920804

