FT921-11704

FT  30 JAN 92 / World Trade News: Fears over 'Gattzilla the trade monster' -
US greens lead a growing lobby worried about loss of sovereignty


   By NANCY DUNNE


TO THE list of US opponents to the proposed reforms for the Uruguay Round -
the textile, clothes and film industries, organised labour and family
farmers - add the environmentalists.
The Green view of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) is
succinctly expressed on thousands of anonymously produced posters littering
the streets of Paris, Tokyo and Washington, featuring a monstrous Gattzilla
devouring the globe, smashing the Capitol building, spilling DDT with one
hand and squeezing a dolphin to death with the other.
The environmental lobby was split over the North American Free Trade
Agreement, but on the Gatt it is presenting a near-solid front. Twenty-eight
environmental and consumer groups have sent letters to every member of the
US Congress opposing the proposed sanitary and phytosanitary standards in
the draft agreement produced by Gatt director-general, Mr Arthur Dunkel.
The US lobby's lawyers warn that the language in the draft threatens federal
and state environmental regulations if they are more stringent than the
international standards set out in the Rome-based UN commission Codex
Alimentarius. The opposition - in an election year when every politician
from George Bush on down tries to campaign as an environmentalist - could do
great damage to the support for any agreed Gatt package. Fears concerning
loss of sovereignty over the environment in addition to those on national
dumping laws might, at the very least, doom the Multilateral Trading
Organisation (MTO), which has been designed to strengthen Gatt enforcement
of trade rules.
Almost 50 congressman have signed or plan to sign a resolution sponsored by
Mr Richard Gephardt, the majority leader in the US House of Representatives,
which says that under the Dunkel plan 'national sovereignty to set domestic
environmental, health, safety and labour standards will be given away to
foreign countries'.
US environmentalists are still steaming over a Gatt panel's rejection of the
US ban on Mexican tuna, designed to protect dolphins. While trade purists in
Geneva may have welcomed the ruling for its assertion that the US has no
right to exert extra-territorial authority, Washington viewed it with alarm.
What may seem crusading and sanctimonious to some is regarded by
environmental activists as a US duty to exercise leadership and to use its
large market to protect the environment. Just as it would prohibit the
import of cars which pollute or clothes made by slave labour, Ms Lori
Wallach, a lawyer form Ralph Nader's Public Citizen organisation, says the
US should be able to dictate the process by which fish are caught. No
effective environmental or social regime can be established through the use
of moral persuasion alone, she contends.
Ms Wallach and other environmentalists were alarmed by Mr Dunkel's speech
last week in Bangkok, which suggested that rules initiated by countries
under international environmental agreements could be subject to Gatt
challenge. There was little reassurance in his contention that a country
'may' be permitted to place public health or safety or conservation goals
ahead of trade restrictions or that the environment could be recognised only
as 'possible' justification' for regulatory standards.
Environmental lawyers have held countless meetings with US officials to
explain their concerns, only to have every objection ignored.
They have found themselves closer to European Community positions than to
their own government's, supporting the EC effort to win approval for health
and safety measures designed for social objectives like animal welfare.
While the Washington-based Worldwide Fund for Nature has yet to express
itself against the Dunkel draft, when its staff met to discuss its
implications, members were in agreement on one point: ceding US sovereignty
to an MTO was too important a move to be attached to the fast-track
mechanism, which provides for limited debate. Mr Stewart Hudson, a spokesman
for the National Wildlife Federation, said his organisation has also been
dubious about the MTO, but opposition in Congress is already so strong that
the question of getting an MTO approved is now 'almost moot'.
The National Resources Defence Council supported the US administration on
the North American Free Trade Agreement and it worked hard to try to get a
Gatt pact. However, it said it cannot accept, among other things, a
requirement that technical regulations should 'not be more trade-restrictive
than necessary'. The Gatt was not to be left 'to determine whether
particular conservation or public health measures are the preferred or the
only means of achieving protection'.
Along with these concerns, environmentalists have a distaste for what seems
to them the undemocratic Gatt practice of behind-doors negotiation. Ms
Wallach says these talks shut environmentalists out of the decision-making
process, while their business opponents are heavily represented on advisory
groups.
'We see the Gatt as fundamentally flawed,' she said. 'It looks only at the
side of business interests who think only of trade liberalisation. We
represent other values, but we don't even get to see what the US is doing.'
Tuna dispute, page 28

The Financial Times


London Page 3 Illustration Green view, Posters seen in Washington, Paris and
Tokyo (Omitted).

920130

