FT921-14405

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Company News: Gengold profits decline sharply


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   JOHANNESBURG


GENGOLD, the gold arm of the Gencor group, saw attributable profits drop
sharply in the December quarter as a result of a weaker gold price and
higher capital expenditure.
Profits after tax and capital expenditure dropped by 56 per cent to R22.4m
(USDollars 8m) from R51m in the September quarter. The December figure is,
however, in line with profits earned in the March and June quarters.
Mr Gary Maude, managing director, said the figures disguised positive trends
which augured well for the rest of the year.
The main cause of the lower profits was an R18m increase in capital
expenditure to R52.3m compared to the previous quarter. Future capital
expenditure will be lower.
Profits were also hit by the lower average gold price received by the 11
mines in the group. At R32,578 per kg, it was 2.4 per cent lower than the
R33,385 price of the previous quarter. Total gold produced during the
quarter rose by 1.6 per cent to 18,114kg, at an average grade of 5.1
grams/tonne.
Total working costs rose by 3 per cent to R499.5m, but Mr Maude said this
reflected the build up for increased production, particularly at Winkelhaak
and Unisel.
Both mines have started increasing production and will continue to do so
throughout the year. They have recruited extra labour, following a long
period of retrenchments.
Of the five large mines in the group, St Helena and Buffelsfontein did well
to produce more gold and decrease unit costs; Kinross and Beatrix had steady
quarters while gold output increased at Winkelhaak.
Of the marginal mines, Grootvlei, a mine threatened with closure a year ago,
continues to improve its performance, while Mr Maude said West Rand Cons was
battling to stay alive.
Commenting on Gengold's recently introduced hedging operations, Mr Maude
said they were increasingly using the options rather than the futures
market.
He said they felt this was a much more responsible method of hedging because
it did not involve putting more physical product on to the market and hence
reduced the prospect of depressing the bullion spot price.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920116

