FT924-8070

FT  13 NOV 92 / Germany will help Croatia house refugees


   By JUDY DEMPSEY


   BONN


GERMANY is to help build houses for some of the half a million Yugoslav
refugees waiting in Croatia, foreign ministry officials said yesterday.
Bonn's action has been prompted by its increasing frustration at the
unwillingness of its European Community partners to take more refugees from
Bosnia-Hercegovina.
At the same time, Germany will ask EC countries to take part of another
group, some 7,500 Bosnian refugees who are either being held in detention
camps in Bosnia-Hercegovina, or who have been given temporary, but poor,
shelter in Croatia.
In what appears to be a dual strategy aimed at relieving the burden on
Croatia, which is refusing to accept any more refugees from Bosnia, and at
slowing the influx into Germany, Bonn will spend DM70m (Pounds 29m) on
building homes in Croatia. It will also send 300 train wagons to Croatia, to
act as temporary shelter for the refugees. 'We will provide the heating and
all the running costs,' an official said.
Germany has been at the forefront of EC countries in accepting refugees
fleeing the war in the former Yugoslavia. Since last January, nearly 100,000
people from the region have settled in Germany, bringing the total to
200,000 since the war started in June 1991.
But the additional influx of would-be asylum seekers from Romania, Bulgaria,
and from some of the republics of the former Soviet Union means that Germany
will be hard-pressed to take any greater numbers from Bosnia.
Mr Klaus Kinkel, foreign minister, earlier this week asked the British
government to take Bosnian refugees, but officials said the response from EC
states had been very slow.
'We have to step up the process in allowing the refugees fleeing the war in
Bosnia-Hercegovina to settle in other countries,' one official said.
'We have held talks with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and we know that the situation is becoming really desperate, especially now
that the winter is coming,' he added.
Of the group of 7,500 Bosnian refugees, about 6,000 are still detained in
Serb-controlled camps in Bosnia.
Although they are free to move out, they cannot return to Bosnia because
their homes have been destroyed, and they cannot travel abroad because
Croatia is no longer taking refugees, and EC countries have been unwilling
to open their doors to them.
A further 1,500 are living in poor conditions in Croatia.
German officials yesterday said these people would die of cold and
starvation, pointing out that Bonn had agreed to take at least 1,000 of
them. This may swell to 3,000 when families are taken into account.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921113

