FT924-11399

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (14): A late 20th century bonanza - For
the construction industry, the task of rebuilding east Germany is immense


   By ANDREW FISHER


LIKE a scene from a Grimms' fairy tale, a quaint little grey house with a
first floor bay window stands near the centre of Zwickau in east Germany. It
could do with some renovation, but is serviceable enough to house a dentist,
a cosmetics store, and the local tenants' association.
There is no building next door, only the ghost of the house that used to be
there. Its outline, including the steeply sloped roof, is clearly visible on
the wall that once separated the two houses. Opposite are ugly blocks of
flats. Nearby, stands what was once an elegant pre-war office building, its
rusting window frames empty of glass and its plaster peeling.
Zwickau itself, in the state of Saxony, is a handsome town, now being
spruced up as the prosperity - emanating from the new Volkswagen plant
nearby - begins to have an effect. But the mixture of the charmingly
historic, the irredeemably ugly, and the totally rundown is common in east
Germany. Some old buildings survived, many as virtual ruins, through sheer
neglect and lack of resources, while others were torn down to make way for
utilitarian housing, roads, or public buildings.
For the construction industry, the task of rebuilding east Germany amounts
to a late 20th century bonanza. According to a recent study by Ifo, the
respected Munich-based economic research institute, it will cost some
DM2,400bn (Dollars 1,600bn) by the year 2005 to bring living conditions in
east Germany up to west German standards.
All this amounts to DM158bn a year, starting from 1991, and represents
DM9,800 per east German inhabitant per year.
By far the biggest slice of the total sum will be required for housing, both
to improve existing homes and build new ones. Ifo reckons this will account
for DM975bn (the figures are all based on 1990 prices); every year, around
390,000 homes will have to be modernised and more than 140,000 new ones
built.
Making up most of the remaining construction needs in the east will be
industry (DM528bn, including energy), transport (DM403bn), and environmental
protection (DM174bn). The sums are enormous, and the work is already in full
swing. In the pretty town of Schneeberg, a short drive from Zwickau along
the old silver route in the Erzgebirge (ore mountains), restoration work has
been completed on the attractive white and beige town hall with its
crenellated tower. But a whole street near the main square has been ripped
open for new pipes to be installed and the massive church which dominates
the town is filled with scaffolding inside and has long cracks in its
outside tower walls.
The rash of building sites in towns, along roads, and in industrial areas -
many old factories are being torn down to be replaced by new commercial or
production sites - holds out hope for the future on one hand and leads to
chaos on the other. They are the visible aspect of the immense economic
overhaul which east Germany is now undergoing.
Last year, new building investment there totalled DM36.4bn, equivalent to 12
per cent of the investment in western Germany.
The public sector is leading the way, followed by industry. In the housing
sector, progress is much more restrained. As Commerzbank notes in a study of
the sector, repair and modernisation work is moving ahead with the help of
state financial support, while little new housing is being built. This
reflects low incomes in the east and fear of unemployment, as well as high
interest rates and building price rises.
Investment in new apartment blocks is also unattractive since rents, now
rising from the old heavily subsidised levels, are still too low to cover
costs. Uncertainties over ownership and the debts of east German housing
concerns are further dampeners.
Commerzbank expects housing investment to become more lively next year. But
far more dynamic will be the industrial sector, supported by state financial
help for new investment in east Germany. Much of the growth will continue to
be in the retail and service sectors - the big Quelle mail order concern,
for instance, is building a DM1bn distribution centre near Leipzig - with
the new owners of companies privatised by the Treuhand also investing.
Altogether, Commerzbank expects building investment in east Germany to grow
by up to 20 per cent in real terms this year, with the sector having taken
on the role of an economic locomotive. Private sector building investment
will continue to be buoyant in 1993, but the public sector will continue to
set the pace under pressure from the huge modernisation demands in
transport, communications, energy, and the environment.
In west Germany, too, the building industry is an important prop for the
economy, though the heady expansion rate is slackening. Because of the still
unfulfilled demand for new housing and business construction, the bank
estimates real growth of 4 per cent in west German building investment in
1992, followed by a marked easing to 1.5 per cent in 1993. With the
tremendous inflow of people since 1987, mainly from east Germany and eastern
Europe, about 1.8m new homes are needed. People want bigger and better homes
as their incomes rise.
With the west German economy now slowing down, it is clear that the
construction industry will be unable to keep on grabbing new business as
merrily as before. But there is still enough economic strength to keep
builders happy for some time yet. As for east Germany, the order surge is
only just beginning there.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

921026

