FT922-671

FT  26 JUN 92 / International Company News: Champion surfaces for Eurotunnel
investors - A look at the campaign to protect the interests of small
shareholders


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


EUROTUNNEL'S small shareholders are starting to get restive for the first
time since the Channel tunnel builder and operator was floated on the stock
market nearly five years ago.
A shareholders' action group made its debut yesterday at Eurotunnel's annual
meeting in Paris, the first stage in a campaign to ensure they do not get
sidelined in any compromise deal with the constructors on cost over-runs.
The action group is headed by Mr Christian Cambier, a voluble former banker
who is founder and president of Prigest, a small Parisian fund management
group. He claims to have gathered support, over the two weeks since he
founded the action group, from about 1,000 out of Eurotunnel's 600,000
mainly small shareholders. They represent about 1 per cent of the equity
capital, he believes.
Mr Cambier was not out to make waves yesterday, simply to draw attention to
small shareholders' interests. 'We are preparing our defences because we
fear that the small shareholders could one day become the hostages in the
battle against Eurotunnel and the contractors,' he explained in an
interview.
Transmanche Link (TML), the Franco-British consortium of construction
companies, has said it is prepared to accept Eurotunnel shares or other
kinds of paper in part settlement of the more than Pounds 1bn of extra
payments it is seeking. What worries Mr Cambier is that small shareholders
might get no rights or reduced rights to subscribe to new shares issued in a
Eurotunnel capital increase to pay off the contractors. Small investors
could see their holdings seriously diluted as a result, he fears.
'We have been in the project all the way and we know it will be profitable.
We don't want the contractors to run off with everything at the last
minute,' he said.
He suspects that it might be in TML's interests to drive down the Eurotunnel
share price before such an offer, to help the contractors get the largest
possible percentage stake in Eurotunnel for their money.
This, at least, is how Mr Cambier interprets last month's controversial
remarks by Mr Martin Bouygues, chairman of the Bouygues construction group,
that he could not exclude Eurotunnel going bankrupt.
A sharp fall in Eurotunnel's share price followed, triggering an inquiry by
the Commission des Operations de Bourse, the market watchdog. Bouygues had
no comment yesterday.
Eurotunnel says it will agree to no rights issue or paper settlement with
TML without consulting an extraordinary general meeting first. Mr Andre
Benard, its French co-chairman assured shareholders yesterday that their
interests would be protected.
Nevertheless, said Mr Cambier: 'I want to collect maximum proxy powers for a
possible fight at the extraordinary general meeting, which I expect either
in the autumn or next spring . . . Eurotunnel is under enormous pressure,
from its 223 banks and the 10 contractors. I just want to make sure that we
get the opportunity to buy the new shares on the same day and at the same
price as everyone else.'
He has approached big French institutional investors, like the insurance
groups UAP, AGF and AXA to join the group. They have been sympathetic, but
have not yet joined - impeded, believes Mr Cambier, by the fact that they
already have large investments in the French construction companies.
Mr Cambier has taken up the flag partly on behalf of the clients - whose
Pounds 100m he has under management - who are Eurotunnel investors. He also
has a healthy sense of wariness over the problems small shareholders have
faced in Paris in recent years.
Before setting up Prigest 10 years ago, he was a fund manager with Compagnie
Financiere Edmond de Rothschild, so Mr Cambier has been in the Paris market
for long enough to see several examples of small shareholders being given
raw deals.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920626

