FT921-510

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Still feeling the after-shock of a boom -
The question is not 'when?' the London property market will pick up but
'where?'


   By MIRA BAR HILLEL


ONE of the first things which will strike a visitor to London is the huge
number of For Sale boards festooning its finest streets. Indeed, in
Westminster the local council has taken stern measures to limit the number
and sizes of the boards as vendors' desperation had begun to hide the very
properties they were trying to shift.
After three years of stagnant or falling prices, London's houses are
becoming much more reasonably priced in comparison with several other
capital cities.
In spite of the uncertainties of the market, there has not been, in recent
memory, a better time to buy or rent in London. But some courage may be
needed, because few agents are predicting an immediate revival in prices,
and they may yet have some way to fall, depending partly on the result of
the General Election on April 9.
John Thorogood, a Wandsworth agent, says there is 'quite a lot of viewing
but no sales' because bargain hunters are making offers 'well below
acceptance levels.' But others are finding vendors prepared to accept very
low offers 'on the understanding that they can get a similar reduction on
the property they are buying'.
This suggests that buyers and vendors are adjusting to new conditions,
although the process could depress prices further.
The prospects, however, are markedly different in the many 'villages' of
London. A favourite guessing game is to predict not so much when the
recovery will begin - but where. The smart money is on Battersea, Chiswick,
Barnes, Putney and West Kensington. These are areas which are either
well-established or soundly up-and-coming - but which did not go over the
top during the last property boom as Clapham, Ealing and Fulham did.
In Chiswick, values have fallen relatively little, specially for fine
traditional family houses, down about 4 per cent from last year (to an
average Pounds 250,000) while small flats lost 6 per cent (to about Pounds
68,000). In Putney family houses lost about 3 per cent (to Pounds 188,000)
while small flats stayed steady at about Pounds 67,000. Similar prices and
movements apply to Battersea, while in Barnes both houses and small flats
dropped about 4.5 per cent (to Pounds 187,000 and Pounds 74,000).
In Clapham, which was almost level pegging with Battersea two years ago, all
but the family houses lining the common have dropped. Gentrification, which
pushed up prices in Ealing and Fulham as well, has virtually stopped as home
owners realise that pumping money into property is no longer a guarantee of
profits.
Some of the cheapest flats in London, in the Pounds 40,000-Pounds 45,000
range, are in Croydon, Mitcham and Morden. This end of the market is being
kept low by the the tidal wave of re-possessions coming up for sale.
Whatever they may claim, measures taken by the Government and the mortgage
lenders have done little to stem this tide. The number of lenders' actions
for repossession coming to London's County Courts is, if anything, up on
last year. Relatively prosperous areas are suffering, such as Barnet (129
actions for repossession in February 1992 compared to 73 in February 1991);
Wandsworth (199 up from 133) and Kingston-on-Thames (108 up from only 22).
Some first-time buyers are still waiting for further price falls or
repossession bargains, but those looking for a place to live rather than a
short-term investment should not wait much longer, especially if they are
paying rent.
Unusually, it is London's best-known areas which seem likely to stagnate as
the rest of the property world settles down round them. Properties in
Chelsea, Dulwich, Hampstead, Highgate, Kensington, Knightsbridge, St John's
Wood, Richmond and, of course, Mayfair and Belgravia have held their values,
mainly thanks to overseas investment. But in the absence of a lively market
at home, they are unlikely to rise in the near future.
At the top of the market you need to be very rich to make the big notional
'savings'. It is open to question, for example, whether 19 Upper Phillimore
Gardens, now on the market for 'only' Pounds 9.75m (about Pounds 1m per
bedroom) was ever worth its previous asking price of Pounds 12.5m.
On the other hand, Janet Holmes a Court has not reduced her asking price of
Pounds 17.5m for Grove House in Regents Park.
Also in Regents Park the Crown Estate have chosen to delay the marketing of
the completed Gothick (sic) Villa, the third in their Nash-style classics,
rather then reduce the price of the Pounds 9m Villa Veneto for the sake of a
quick sale.
The Government has proposed to allow leaseholders of high-value houses to
buy their freeholds, a right denied them under existing leasehold law. Flat
leaseholders excluded from the new right to buy would be entitled to have
their leases extended.
These proposals would affect hundreds of thousands of properties in London's
prime areas: Mayfair, Belgravia and Kensington. The leaseholders'
association is delighted. But the Grosvenor Estate, owned by Britain's
second richest man, the Duke of Westminster, warns that if it ceases to be
the landlord, properties would soon deteriorate. 'This could be a very sad
day for historic London,' the Estate said.
Grosvenor property certainly has a special cachet. Margaret Thatcher
recently paid Pounds 700,000 for a 10-year lease on a flat in Chester
Square.
The former residence of Lord Aberconway, 38 South Street in Mayfair, is
another Grosvenor leasehold. The asking price for the remaining 75 years has
recently been reduced from Pounds 12m to Pounds 8.45m. The selling agent,
Paul Taylor of Savills, admits that it would cost a further Pounds 3m to
Pounds 4m to renovate it in the style to which prospective occupiers would
be accustomed. In addition, the rent for the first 20 years alone - Pounds
200,000 - would nowadays buy a pleasant family house almost anywhere else in
London. Will the new owners have enough left over to buy the freehold?
The Grosvenor has also warned that the proposed leasehold reforms in central
London will have 'dramatic consequences on the housing market'. But so
inscrutable is the current market that even experts such as the Grosvenor
are not sure whether the result will be a collapse in values, or the
opposite.
The latter could only result from an onslaught on the market by foreign
buyers and investors.
'London residential property is excellent value compared with places such as
Vancouver and Sydney,' says Robin Paterson, managing director of Banard
Marcus. 'It is attracting inquiries from Hong Kong and Europe'.
Trends aside, historic one-offs can still cause a flutter in the current
doldrums. A City financier has just decided to spend Pounds 25m to convert
Crosby Hall in Cheyne Walk, which contains a medieval banqueting hall dating
to 1475 and associated with names such as Sir Thomas More, Richard III and
Sir Walter Raleigh, into a family home.
At the other end of the scale, an old listed cottage 'in awful condition' in
one third of an acre of wilderness was on offer in Newbury. 'In just three
weeks we had 57 viewings and 11 offers' said the astonished agents, Dreweatt
Neate. 'There's no accounting for taste'.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920328

