FT921-12039

FT  29 JAN 92 / Letter: Fiscal policy, better on auto pilot or using a
steering wheel?


   From Mr J C R DOW


Sir, Mr Samuel Brittan remarks (Economic Viewpoint, January 23) that fiscal
policy is in fashion again. He goes on to hope that we will not go back,
also, to the (as he sees it) benighted practice of varying fiscal policy
according to the needs of the situation (providing stimulus in a slump, and
restraint in a boom). As a survivor from an age when that was normal, may I
comment on each of these points?
First, I am not sure that - even when presented as such - fiscal policy was
dedicated to long-term aims. Whatever the theory, an evaluation of fiscal
intervention suggests that the impact of policy varied a lot year to year. I
doubt whether - in Samuel Brittan's phrase - the economy was, in fact, then
flying on fiscal auto-pilot. Perhaps it would be more true to say that the
authorities did not think that the short-term impact of fiscal policy was
important and did not pay attention to it, and made economic decisions on
this basis without being aware they were doing so.
The experience of these years was not a complete success. In the three years
before 1988, a powerful boom built up. Output grew too fast (3.5 per cent,
then 4 per cent, then in 1987 nearly 5 per cent); stock exchange prices rose
70 per cent and the current balance slid into worsening deficit. Fiscal
policy only became contractionary in 1988, but that was late in the day and
late clues can be painful as the depth of this recession shows.
One reason why 'fine tuning' went out of fashion was the view that it could
make fluctuations worse, because action was taken too late. That view was
probably correct. (A book I wrote in 1964 came to that conclusion - a
conclusion which has been generally accepted.) But in the last decade when,
to use Samuel Brittan's phrase, we were in theory on 'auto-pilot', we did
not seem to do much better. The lesson perhaps is not that we should lash
the steering wheel in one position and not use it, but that we should learn
to drive properly.
Applying that lesson to the present position would mean that the provisions
of the coming budget should depend on how bad the prospects are. If the
government continues to expect that the economy will quickly recover on its
own, it can surely make no case for a soft budget. Only if no strong
recovery is expected in 1993 - as, I am afraid, seems possible - could a
good case be made.
What seems to me highly desirable in any case is that the government should
not ignore the short-term impact of what it does, but should rather describe
and defend it (the Treasury's forecasting machine could easily produce
estimates). Abandonment of this discipline during the last decade has surely
been retrograde. In fiscal policy, governments have in their hands a
somewhat powerful weapon, and it is right that they should say each year
what they are going to do with it. Mistaken forecasts and mistaken judgments
would still be made; but openness is some protection.
J C R Dow,
Reform Club, London SW1

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920129

