FT924-6051

FT  24 NOV 92 / Call for auditors to give wider information


   By ANDREW JACK


AUDITORS should be made more accountable to shareholders and report on a far
wider range of activities in their scrutiny of listed companies, the
Auditing Practices Board said yesterday.
The recommendations follow strong public criticism of the role of auditors
after recent high-profile corporate collapses such as the Maxwell business
empire, BCCI and Polly Peck.
Auditors should provide more detailed information on a company's
performance, management and future viability, said the APB, the body funded
by the accounting profession which was created last year to draw up auditing
standards and guidelines.
In a radical, wide-ranging discussion document on the future development of
auditing, it said there was a need for auditors to report to a wider
audience of 'stakeholders' which might include both existing and potential
debtholders, customers, suppliers, employees and regulators.
In exchange, it says the law must be changed to reduce the exposure of
accountants to litigation and to share the risks of legal action with
directors of companies.
The APB stressed that auditors' are responsible to a company's shareholders
in law and condemns the colloquial use of the word 'client' by accountancy
firms to refer to a company and its directors.
It says that shareholders should be more directly involved in the
appointment, remuneration, scope of work conducted by audit firms, and in
discussion of the auditor's findings.
It welcomes recent calls from other bodies for the appointment of audit
committees in companies, for periodic rotation of auditors and for limits on
the dependency of an audit firm on a single company for fees.
But it rejects suggestions that auditors should not be allowed to conduct
other services such as consulting for audit clients.
It says independence is principally an attitude of mind which must be
controlled within the accountancy firms with strong controls and tight
procedures.
It has asked for comments on its proposals by March 31 next year.
Auditing Practices Board. The future development of auditing. Accountancy
Books, PO Box 620, Central Milton Keynes MK9 2JX. Price Pounds 7
Bottom line, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921124

