FT922-7168

FT  20 MAY 92 / UK Company News: Dowty estimates Pounds 29m in defence


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


DOWTY GROUP, the aerospace and specialist engineering company, yesterday
produced a robust response to the hostile Pounds 497m bid from TI,
estimating pre-tax profits for the year to the end of March 1992 of Pounds
29m.
The unaudited figure was Pounds 8.5m higher than the assumption TI made of
Dowty's profits in its offer document and also Pounds 4m higher than the
figure Cazenove, Dowty's brokers, had expected before the bid.
Mr Bruce Ralph, Dowty chief executive, said the 1992 profits on their own
showed the 183p bid and TI's cash alternative of 175p were too low. Accusing
TI of being obsessed with the past, Mr Ralph said the offer also grossly
undervalued Dowty's prospects. Dowty closed 2p lower at 179p.
Dowty also drew on forecasts from the world's airframe builders to highlight
an estimated Pounds 9.8bn of future sales it would make on current aircraft
programmes in the next 10 to 15 years.
The higher-than-expected profits estimate arose from a restructuring that
included the cutting of a fifth of the Dowty workforce - or 3,000 people -
in the first nine months of the financial year. The benefits had begun to
work through in the last quarter.
Initial reactions from institutional shareholders was that Dowty had at
least dealt itself back into the game after letting TI make all the moves
since it launched the bid almost a month ago.
However Dowty would need to convince the City and shareholders that
aerospace profits had bottomed out. It would also have to produce a vision
for the aerospace division that went beyond simply enjoying the benefits of
recovery in the industry in the next two years and the cost-cutting
programme.
Dowty has wanted to turn its shareholders' attention away from the dire
performance of last year to the more promising future. But it is unlikely to
be able to produce a forecast for the year to March 1993.
Mr Christopher Lewinton, TI's chairman and chief executive, said there was
nothing in the document to alter his view that TI's final offer fully valued
Dowty and its prospects.
Dowty derived its Pounds 29m pre-tax profits from operating profits of
Pounds 28m in aerospace, Pounds 9.5m from polymer engineering, Pounds 11m
from electronic systems - which analysts said suggested a very strong
recovery in second half - and losses of Pounds 4m in information technology.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920520

