FT922-13444

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Making waivers - Improving a company's
position


   By DAVID HARRIS


IMAGINE that you are a director of a small company which has been refused
further financial assistance by its bank. You are not in a position to issue
(or to purchase) loan stock or further shares, and you do not wish to damage
the share price by refusing to declare a dividend. What can you do to
improve the company's financial position over the short term?
If you have sufficient personal funds to meet your day-to-day living
requirements, you can take less out of the company (thereby leaving more
within it) by waiving dividends or remuneration, or loans outstanding to you
from it. However, some attention must be given to formality and timing in
order to avoid undesirable tax consequences.
A waiver is, effectively, a refusal to accept payment; it cannot redirect
the dividend to other parties. Funds which would otherwise be paid over are
then made available to the company for other purposes. Dividends. A dividend
can be waived validly only before the right to it has arisen. In general,
this happens on the date of declaration (or on the date it is to be paid, if
that is later). So, any waiver must certainly be made before the date of
payment and, preferably, before the date of declaration.
There are tax implications. You do not pay income tax on a dividend once
waived, unless the effect of the waiver is to increase payments by the
company to family members.
A dividend which is waived within 12 months before the right to it accrues
is not treated as a gift for inheritance tax purposes. A 'standing' waiver
should, therefore, be renewed regularly in order to take full advantage of
this exemption.
No advance corporation tax (ACT) is payable by the company on a dividend
which has been waived. This will increase the amount of cash available to
the company - particularly if it is unable to set off the ACT against
mainstream corporation tax on profits, for example, because it is making a
loss or has insufficient UK profits.
There is no effect on the VAT position of either the company or the
shareholder because both payment and waiver of a dividend are outside the
scope of VAT unless payment in some form or other is received in return.
To waive a dividend, you must sign and date a written document specifying
the dividend payment(s), and the shares to which it relates.
Remuneration. Any waiver of wages, fees or salary must also be made before
the right to them has accrued. You do not pay income tax on waived income
and it is not deductible by the company when computing its profits.
Provided no deduction is made by the company, the amount waived is not
treated as a gift for IHT purposes.
Loans. Other income to which you may be entitled from the company could
include a loan which you have made to it. Since a loan is a debt due to you
as the creditor, it forms part of your assets for inheritance tax purposes
unless repayment is validly waived.
The Capital Taxes Office of the Inland Revenue will accept a waiver only by
document under seal. Strictly speaking, this involves fixing an adhesive
wafer to the document.
In practice, though, if the document bears the printed words 'signed, sealed
and delivered,' and contains your signature plus an indication of where to
place the seal, it will be acceptable.
There will be no liability to capital gains tax on the waiver of the loan if
you are the person who lent the money to the company originally.
Waiving your entitlements from the company may be a highly tax-effective
method of short-term finance. It may also enable the company to make future
payments of dividends and remuneration which are sufficient to compensate
you for the amount you have had to forego.
David Harris is managing director of chartered accountant Chantrey
Vellacott.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

920411

