FT922-4401

FT  05 JUN 92 / Major seeks to defuse revolt by MPs


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR yesterday sought to defuse a threatened revolt by Conservative
MPs over the Maastricht accord by signalling that he was ready to postpone
for several weeks the legislation to implement the threatened treaty.
His cautious approach came after some of his cabinet colleagues echoed
backbench warnings that an attempt to push through the legislation before
the future of the accord had been clarified might split the government's
support.
Tory opponents of closer European integration claimed that the Danish
voters' decision this week to reject the Maastricht treaty on economic and
monetary union had wrecked UK chances of ratifying the deal.
A parliamentary motion calling for a 'fresh start' in shaping the future of
the European Community along non-federalist lines attracted the immediate
support of 70 Conservative MPs. Its sponsors said the figure would reach 100
by today. Leading Euro-sceptics claimed also that up to a dozen junior
members of the government had signalled their opposition to any move to
resurrect the agreement.
Speaking in the House of Commons, Mr Major said he was convinced that the
best outcome for the EC would be an arrangement to press ahead with the deal
on economic and monetary union. He warned that an attempt to unravel it
could threaten the concessions the UK had won from its European partners.
Earlier, the prime minister had told the cabinet that any suggestion that
Britain was about to renege on the agreement would undermine seriously its
authority when it takes over the EC presidency at the beginning of next
month.
But during a 30-minute discussion at the weekly meeting, some of Mr Major's
senior colleagues were said to have cautioned the prime minister against
pressing ahead too quickly with legislation to ratify the agreement.
Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, was said by colleagues to be among those
viewing the Danish rejection of the treaty and the doubts surfacing
elsewhere in Europe as a vindication of Britain's opt-out clause from
economic and monetary union. Others were said to be relaxed about the
possibility that it might prove impossible for the EC to salvage anything
from the wreckage of the Danish referendum.
Conservative party managers at Westminster insisted that they remained
relaxed about any potential revolt, pointing to a statement last night from
Sir Marcus Fox, the chairman of the 1922 backbench committee of Conservative
MPs, expressing full confidence in Mr Major's stance. They also took comfort
from the continuing disarray within the Labour party over the stance it
should adopt.
But the prime minister is understood to have agreed that it would be unwise
to bring back the Maastricht legislation while the outlook remained so
uncertain. That meant the detailed line-by-line examination of the bill was
unlikely to begin until after the Lisbon summit at the end of this month.
Tory rebels celebrate turn of tide, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920605

