FT921-15402

FT  10 JAN 92 / World Stock Markets: Seoul finally lets the foreigners in -
But tight liquidity has caused some frustration


   By JOHN RIDDING


Since the start of this year, and after a prolonged wait, foreigners have
been allowed to invest directly in the Korean stock market.
But for many, the liberalisation of Asia's fourth-largest stock market has
been frustrating so far.
'Foreigners have been faced with very tight liquidity and great difficulty
in executing orders,' says Mr Philip Smiley of Jardine Fleming, one of two
foreign companies which have been approved to trade Korean shares. Mr Duncan
Ross, manager of Baring Securities' Seoul branch, says that on most days
less than 10 per cent of orders have been executed.
Liberalisation has, however, added some vigour to one of Asia's worst
performers. Yesterday the index stood at 637.1, up 4.5 per cent so far this
year. But the market still languishes more than 35 per cent below its 1989
peak of 1,008.
There are two reasons for the tight liquidity. On the one hand, the strength
of foreign demand has caused many shares to rise by the maximum daily amount
 -generally about a 5 per cent increase in the share price. Faced with such
strong demand, and in the expectation of further price rises, the number of
sellers has been limited.
At the same time, the limited nature of the market's opening has also caused
bottlenecks. Almost 50 of the shares on the market have reached the limits
allowed for foreign ownership - about 10 per cent of a company's outstanding
shares.
There has been some improvement. The fall in the market after the first few
days of trading has eased the pressure and the volume of orders executed has
correspondingly risen.
Whereas just Won6.87bn of foreign orders were concluded successfully on the
first day of trading, daily executions are now in excess of Won20bn,
according to the Securities Supervisory Board, a government agency. The
total value of foreign investment this year is now more than Won50bn.
Brokers and foreign investors complain that the procedure for investment is
still far from smooth. 'The technical side of things is proving complex and
frustrating,' says Jardine's Mr Smiley. He cites frequent failures of the
computer system, which co-ordinates orders and executions, and complex tax
requirements as some of the bigger problems.
Most of the foreign investors who are enduring the teething trouble of
liberalisation are long-standing players in Korean Euromarket instruments
and have a commitment to the Korean market. 'What we have seen so far is a
lot of buying pressure from Korea enthusiasts,' says one broker in Seoul.
As this initial demand is satisfied, the pressure of foreign buying is
likely to recede. 'I do not think we will see really substantial foreign
investment until the economic fundamentals improve,' says one analyst. With
domestic interest rates continuing to be very high, and with Korean
exporters still having difficulties in overseas markets, this may take a
while.

The Financial Times


London Page 27

920110

