FT922-4017

FT  08 JUN 92 / Showpiece declaration pleases nobody much


   By DAVID LASCELLES


   RIO DE JANEIRO


THE Rio Declaration, which world leaders will sign at the end of the summit,
is supposed to be the showpiece of the event. Unfortunately, virtually
everybody thinks it is a flabby document, but no one wants to be the first
to pull it apart.
It consists of 27 principles enshrining what participants believe are the
tenets of sound planetary management. Some are obvious: the first says human
beings 'are entitled to a healthy and productive life in harmony with
nature'. Others lay down key objectives, like sustainable development.
Principle 3 reads: 'The right to development must be fulfilled so as to
equitably meet developmental and environmental needs of present and future
generations.'
A third set reflects the tough negotiations that went into it. For example,
Principle 2 recognises countries' rights to exploit their own natural
resources, a point which Third World states, particularly the tropical
hardwood growers, wanted in. But this right is balanced by an equal
obligation to ensure that 'activities within their jurisdiction or control
do not cause damage to the environment of other states'.
Others stress the need to eradicate poverty and aid developing countries. In
Principle 7, the industrial countries acknowledge a special responsibility
'in view of the pressures their societies place on the global environment'.
Free trade, more information, better environmental legislation, women's
rights, proper compensation for pollution victims - these are some of the
themes.
The main reason why the declaration is so flawed is that it was a compromise
from the start. Originally, there was to be an 'Earth Charter', 10 or so
commandments in simple language. That was thrown out because every country
wanted to alter the commandments to protect its own interests. The
declaration prepared instead is a highly political document in UN
bureaucratese, so finely balanced that to alter even one comma might upset
it.
'We're not enthusiastic about it. We'd like to see an Earth Charter which
would be sharper, more focused and more accessible,' says Mr Jean Charest,
the Canadian environment minister.
Other participants have more specific criticisms. The Israelis are cross
about Principle 23, which refers to 'people under occupation', and the
Vatican is opposed to Principle 8, which talks about 'demographic policies'.
The question, though, is whether anyone will demand that the agreed text be
re-opened. The fine balance means changes to one part would require changes
to others, setting off a chain reaction which could destroy the whole
document. 'It would be a mistake to re-open the Rio declaration,' says Mr
Klaus Topfer, German environment minister.
Much could however hinge on the US position. Mr William Reilly, the
administrator of the Environment Protection Agency, says: 'No country is
fully satisfied with it. We would have liked a different thing. We have not
decided yet whether to seek a reopening.'
The US does not like the parts which lay blame for environmental damage. It
also objects to a section which refers to the 'right to development'. This
could put economic rights above human rights, it fears, leading in extreme
cases to child labour.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920608

