FT921-462

FT  28 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Polls show leads for Labour in regions


   By GARETH SMYTH


LABOUR has taken a two-point lead in the battle for London, according to a
Harris poll for London Weekend Television published last night.
The poll puts Labour on 42 per cent and the Conservatives on 40 per cent.
This represents a remarkable turnaround since the 1987 general election,
when the Conservatives led by 15 per cent, and indicates a swing of 8.5 per
cent, which would give Labour 21 Conservative-held seats in the capital.
Repeated nationally, that would put Mr Neil Kinnock on the edge of a
parliamentary majority. The poll sample was 846, and was conducted between
Monday and Wednesday.
Neither of the Conservatives' trump cards seems to have impressed Londoners.
Although Mr John Major has a 14-point lead over Mr Kinnock as 'best prime
minister', only 4 per cent cited party leaders as one of the 'most important
issues'. Just 11 per cent of the poll sample mentioned taxation as 'the most
important issue regarding the national economy', with 37 per cent of the
sample naming unemployment as the most important.
This latest regional poll shakes a traditional Conservative assumption that
their strength in crucial parts of the country might prevent Labour from
translating a national poll lead into parliamentary seats.
National polls are snapshots of voting intention, accurate to within 3 per
cent. They are, however, inadequate as a guide to the likely outcome of the
general election, because the key marginal seats are unevenly distributed
across the country.
A total of 65 of the 94 Tory-held seats which Labour probably needs to win
to gain a parliamentary majority are in London, north-west England and the
Midlands. It is in these three regions that the outcome of the election will
be decided.
Any translation of national polls into terms of prospective regional voting
trends come with psephologists' health warnings. Sample sizes are not
designed to be representative of the particular region. However, from three
of the most substantial breakdowns, a hazy regional pattern emerges.
A 'Gallup 9,000' poll interviewed nearly 12,000 people between February 19
and March 17. The BBC political unit has twice compiled regional patterns
from its 'poll of polls', using figures only when 1,000 people were
questioned in each region. The first covered polls from March 11-18, the
more recent March 19-25.
All three analyses indicate a national Labour lead of about 1-2 per cent.
The 'Gallup 9,000' and the earlier BBC breakdown offered some comfort for
the Conservatives in London and the north-west.
The BBC found an 8.5 per cent swing to Labour in the Midlands, netting Mr
Kinnock 24 Conservative-held marginals, but its suggested London swing of 6
per cent would have seen only 12 of Labour's 21 desired seats in the capital
change hands. That tallied with Gallup's findings.
The most recent BBC regional breakdown, broadcast last night, supports the
Harris poll finding that London is now moving more substantially to Labour.
It puts the swing to Labour in the capital at 8 per cent.
The BBC political unit now projects that Labour will win at least 83
Conservative-held seats, leaving Mr Kinnock as leader of the largest party
but about 14 seats short of an overall majority. With 12 days left to
polling, Any small shift in the regional pattern may still be crucial in
deciding who occupies Downing Street.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920328

