FT921-3837

FT  12 MAR 92 / Business Law: Risk for professional advisers in US


   By LEO HERZEL


The US Supreme Court has just agreed to decide an important case involving
the egregious Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act (RICO)*.
In 1984 the Farmers' Co-operative of Arkansas and Oklahoma Inc filed for
bankruptcy. As a result, the holders of certain unpaid demand notes issued
by the co-operative instituted a class action under rule 10b-5 of the
federal securities laws, RICO and state law against several defendants
including the independent auditor for the co-operative, Ernst & Young.
The main allegation against Ernst & Young was that it had intentionally
departed from generally accepted accounting principles in an effort to
overstate the co-operative's worth.
The same case had been decided once before by the US Supreme Court but on a
different legal issue. In its first decision the Court had decided that the
notes were securities under the federal securities law. As a consequence,
the plaintiffs became entitled to a judgment of Dollars 6.1m.
This time around the legal issue is whether Ernst & Young violated RICO. If
so, the plaintiffs would have a right to treble damages. In its past
encounters with RICO, the US Supreme Court has not provided much help in
placing reasonable limits on the statute. Essentially, the Court's attitude
has been, Congress did it to us and it is Congress's responsibility to
extricate us.
The relevant section of RICO, section 1962(c), provides: 'It shall be
unlawful for any person employed by or associated with any enterprise
engaged in, or the activities of which affect, interstate or foreign
commerce, to conduct or participate, directly or indirectly, in the conduct
of such enterprise's affairs through a pattern of racketeering activity . .
.'
The precise issue the US Supreme Court is being asked to decide is whether
section 1962(c) requires proof that Ernst & Young participated in the
management or operation of the alleged racketeering enterprise.
The lower court had concluded that Ernst & Young's involvement with the
co-operative (which had been limited to audits, meetings with the board of
directors and presentations at annual meetings of the co-operative's
members) did not rise to the level of participation in the management or
operation of the enterprise required by section 1962(c).
Except for the warning against violating federal securities laws in the US,
a foreign reader reasonably might ask why he or she should be especially
interested in this peculiar US legal misadventure. But there are several
important, general lessons for non-American readers in RICO. In particular,
those readers who are in European Community countries should be interested,
since the EC is now embarked on the creation of a vast new system of
statutes and regulations:
Lesson 1: it is very difficult to predict how a new statute will be
interpreted in litigation under circumstances that are still unknown. RICO
had its origins in a congressional investigation of the activities in
business of ordinary hoodlums.
Lesson 2: bad statutes are difficult to change. No matter how bad, or even
absurd, a statute is, it quickly develops an avid constituency who resists
change. RICO, for example, has become an industry for plaintiff's lawyers in
civil cases and aggressive prosecutors in criminal cases. The RICO lobby in
the US remains adamant that the statute is essential to protect us from
white-collar crooks. Unfortunately, the US, Japan and Europe provide a
continuous stream of financial scandals which can be used by the RICO lobby
to support this argument.
There is another, even more remarkable, recent example of the high risks
involved in giving professional advice on financial, corporate and
securities matters in the US. This one was an administrative proceeding,
dated March 2 1992, brought by the Office of Thrift Supervision against a
large, ordinary, respectable New York law firm, Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays
& Handler and three of its partners.
The legal basis for the proceeding was not RICO but several new federal laws
passed in the wake of the savings and loan scandals in the 1980s. However,
these new laws adopt one of RICO's most remarkable innovations in aid of
intimidation by US government agencies: judgment and punishment first, trial
later.
As is now usual in US government blockbuster cases that allege white-collar
wrongdoing, the administrative notice of charges in this proceeding was
complicated, contained many allegations and was very long (83 pages).
The main charges were that the law firm, and the only three partners
specifically named as defendants, co-operated with Charles H Keating Jr in
violating banking and securities laws and in deceiving regulators in
connection with their investigations of the firm's client, Lincoln Savings
and Loan Association.
There were also charges that the law firm participated in breaches of
fiduciary duty with Mr Keating against Lincoln Savings and Loan Association
which Mr Keating controlled. The damages claimed were 'at least Dollars
275m'.
The most extraordinary feature of the proceeding was the temporary order to
cease and desist issued simultaneously with the notice of charges by the
Office of Thrift Supervision.
The order effectively placed Kaye, Scholer and its partners in a kind of
receivership with the Office of Thrift Supervision as receiver. The firm was
required to create an escrow account for its partners' earnings. Depending
on the identity of the partner, the firm had to contribute between 50 per
cent and 25 per cent of the earnings of each partner into the escrow
account. The firm was not permitted to enter into unusual transactions or to
dissolve or modify the partnership.
Even more startling, a partner was not allowed to leave the partnership
unless a large amount of security was provided by the firm or the partner.
In addition, the use by partners of their individual assets and earnings for
living expenses was restricted and subject to close surveillance by the
Office of Thrift Supervision. The only partners exempted from the order were
those who became partners on or after December 1 1987.
As a practical matter, it was difficult to see how the firm could continue
to operate successfully while the case was being adjudicated by the Office
of Thrift Supervision unless a court modified or set aside the order.
Not surprisingly, Kaye, Scholer reached the same conclusion. Over the
weekend it entered into a hurried settlement with the Office of Thrift
Supervision. It agreed to pay the government Dollars 41m. Two of the
partners named in the proceeding agreed to be barred from representing any
savings association or bank whose deposits were insured by the Federal
government. The third partner only had to agree not to commit in the future
the kind of violations alleged in the proceeding.
Several years ago, faced with the prospect of similar pre-trial restrictions
in a RICO case brought by the US government, Drexel Burnham capitulated,
paid a huge fine and went into bankruptcy.
In addition, the Resolution Trust Corporation, the federal agency charged
with bailing out the savings and loan industry has just filed a Dollars 150m
suit against Deloitte and Touche and a Dollars 100m suit against KPMG Peat
Marwick in connection with two different failed savings and loan
associations.
A flood of such suits against accountants, lawyers and other professional
firms who advised failed savings and loans is expected in the near future.
These cases are part of a disappointing regulatory pattern: too late and
heedlessly tough when something is finally done. The problem is not unique
to the US. One can see something similar in the UK, for example, in the
treatment of BCCI and in the Guinness and Blue Arrow prosecutions.
On the other hand, although Japanese financial regulation does not appear to
be much more efficient than anyone else's in terms of avoiding financial
scandals, the Japanese do seem to be much more cautious about limiting the
wreckage after the event.
* Reves v Ernst & Young, No. 91-886.
The author is a partner in the Chicago office of the US law firm, Mayer,
Brown & Platt.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920312

