FT922-4536

FT  05 JUN 92 / Management: Counsel of reason - Margaret Hodge used to be
pilloried as a member of the loony left. But Lucy Kellaway found Islington's
civic leader now cast in a very different mould / My Office


   By LUCY KELLAWAY


The paint is old, the heating antediluvian, the fitted carpet too big. The
furniture is plain, shabbier than that for sale in the neighbourhood's
second-hand furniture shops. The view is of dustcarts, a school playground
and a council estate.
In the middle of this large institutional room is Margaret Hodge,
incongruously smart in a crimson suit and matching lipstick.
The leader of Islington Council, once a symbol of London's loony left, is
happy in these unpretentious surroundings. Hodge is now Ms Reasonable, a
self-acclaimed pioneer in public sector management. She runs a budget of
Pounds 300m a year and evidently does not think tarting up her office would
be a good use of the funds. 'I've never felt obsessive about my place of
work, so long as it runs efficiently,' she says.
The great turnabout at the council is apparent from the outside. The red
flag that used to fly from the roof has gone. So too has the bust of Lenin.
The banner that once screamed out the ever-mounting total of Islington's
unemployed has been replaced by a more modest, modern digital display.
Inside the grand old town hall are signs of Islington's equal opportunity
employment policies which used to be the subject of ridicule but are now
held up as a shining example.
The man at the reception desk is slightly handicapped; his black female
colleague says that someone from 'the Leaders'' office will be down
presently.
Hodge's own administrative staff consists of three women, working in a
cheerful, low-tech chaos of piles of paper and peeling posters. Their task
is to organise the Leader and to make sure she sticks to her over-filled
schedule.
Hodge gets to work at 8.30 on mornings that it is not her turn to do the
'school run'. Her day is an obstacle course of work and family
responsibilities: she has six to eight meetings stacked up between 8.30 and
3 - 'I never have lunch' - and then dashes home to welcome the children back
from school, only to return to the town hall for more meetings in the
evening. She is proud that these never start before 7.30pm, to make them
more convenient for Islington Council's growing numbers of working mothers.
'Mad, isn't it?,' she says of her timetable, while seeming to relish the
amount she gets done. 'If I have an evening at home, I sit down at 10pm and
write until after 1am. But we do have a social life. That is very important.
I also garden and play with the kids.'
How does she manage it? 'Women are much more effective at managing their
time than men,' is her answer. Her PA's explanation is slightly different:
'She's alway's wired, she drinks strong black coffee all day'.
In the office there are no signs of her four children: indeed there are no
clues as to the sex, class or position of the person who occupies the room.
She says she has deliberately confined her personal clutter to her bedroom,
rather than to her office. 'The way you survive as a woman with kids is to
compartmentalise your life. There is nothing of me here. I used to have a
rubber model of Margaret Thatcher that we punched occasionally, but that's
gone now.'
Her desk is small and shabby and replaces the big one that occupied the
Leaders's office when she took over 10 years ago. On it are piles of papers
and there are usually plenty more in the Sainsbury's plastic bags she
carries about with her. 'I'm not into status,' she keeps saying.
She has, however, insisted on a few plants, a sad collection in a white
plastic tub. Some of the pictures say something about her radical
principles: two African pictures that were gifts from 'my black groups' and
a series of posters deploring the plight of the homeless and advertising an
exhibition of 'A history of Black Pressure in London'.
However, Hodge is careful not to be seen as being over the top. In the days
when the tabloid press ran apocryphal stories about Islington banning black
rubbish bin liners, Hodge was frequently being taken apart. 'I have to make
sure I seem reasonable,' she says. 'What I look like is important,' - she
points at her PA in jeans and T-shirt - 'I would never come to work dressed
like that'.
Despite the old fashioned look of her surroundings - the only recent
innovation is the crate of Perrier - Hodge speaks like the most up-to-date
management consultant. She talks of flat structures, culture change, of
quality, of participative structures, empowerment, and of passing
accountability down the organisation. To prove it, she does not stand on
personal ceremony.
She lets herself be interrupted by her PA and doesn't bat an eyelid as
numerous colleagues burst into her office without knocking. However, this
clearly does not mean a free-for-all. At the constant round of informal
meetings held around the low Formica table - which could be with anyone from
local tenants to ministers - Hodge makes sure she is in full control. 'We
decide who should come and what the agenda should be.'
Where is it all leading? Doesn't she want to go into politics proper? 'I run
a budget of Pounds 300m - if that isn't real politics, I don't know what
is.'

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920605

