FT921-693

FT  27 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Lib Dems aim to fend off the squeeze factor


   By RALPH ATKINS


THE WORST fear of Mr Paddy Ashdown, the Liberal Democrat leader, has so far
failed to materialise - the fierce battle between two far larger parties has
not squeezed him into the margins. Since the start of the campaign, Liberal
Democrat support has held at about 16 per cent, according to the FT's poll
of polls.
Resources and tactics are better focused than in the 1987 Alliance parties'
campaign. Mr Ashdown's election itinerary consists almost exclusively of
winnable seats. A campaign to counter charges that a Liberal Democrat vote
is 'wasted' will begin next week.
Party strategists said yesterday that the swing against the Tories would see
Liberal Democrat win seats such as Bath and Cheltenham, which in 1983 and
1987 were tantalisingly close.
In 1987, Alliance candidates came second in 259 seats - mostly to the
Tories. 'You only need a slight slip from last time for them (the
Conservatives) to lose quite a number of seats, many of which are vulnerable
to us,' said Mr Alec McGivan, deputy campaign director.
He added: '16 per cent in national polls is not actually that relevant to
our chances.'
It is too early, however, to rule out a crumbling in the traditionally soft
Liberal Democrat vote, with the knock-on effects in target constituencies.
Realistically, the party knows only a handful of seats are more than
'possible wins'. Seats the party holds, such as Rochdale and Southwark and
Bermondsey may be lost to Labour.
At the same time Mr Ashdown is, by conventional analysis, trying to defy
political gravity with his radical campaigning themes.
A penny on income tax, higher petrol tax and the phasing-out of mortgage
interest tax relief is not an obvious recipe for wooing disgruntled Tories.
Mr Ashdown is trying to convey the impression that Liberal Democrats are
distinct from Labour - not a modest alternative, but a different species. He
has stuck doggedly to his agenda at the cost of lost publicity. Yesterday he
tried to talk about the environment when the headlines were dominated by
health.
If Labour extends its poll lead, wavering Tories may be frightened back to
the fold by the threat of a Labour government or the implications of a
Liberal Democrat influence in a hung parliament.
Such arguments are not current at the party's Cowley Street headquarters. Mr
Des Wilson, campaign director, believes the lesson of 1987 is that national
and local campaigns must gel. Local activists were angered then by a
disorganised national campaign which portrayed the Alliance as the middle
ground between Labour and the Tories. Ironically, the only constituency in
England that the party won was Southport, which was almost ignored at
national level.
This time the party's manifesto, with its jumble of ideas, allows Mr Ashdown
to alter emphasis by region - tougher environmental protection in some,
improvements in the health service or job creation in others. He sees his
measures as populist - particularly the penny on income tax for education.
The radical mix also goes down well in many of the seats the party is
defending.
In spite of the scepticism of opponents, it is a strategy that has so far
stopped past Liberal Democrat supporters from drifting away. The party still
hopes it will do rather more.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920327

