FT924-12205

FT  22 OCT 92 / World Trade News: Community urged to pool its aviation
weight


   By DAVID GARDNER


   BRUSSELS


THE European Community should negotiate as a bloc the civil aviation accords
each member state now agrees bilaterally with non-EC countries, the European
Commission urged yesterday. In this way it could achieve the widest access
for its own airlines.
The recommendation is made in Brussels' long-mooted plan for a common
aviation policy. It argues that the 600 existing bilateral agreements would
stand, but that the EC's strength as a unit should be used to redress
lopsided arrangements between Europe and other countries, in particular, the
US.
The current free-for-all risks 'pitting one member state against another,'
said Mr Karel Van Miert, EC transport commissioner, putting at risk the
Community's own air transport liberalisation programme and restructuring of
the depressed airline industry.
In September, the Netherlands concluded an 'open skies' agreement wih the
US, giving KLM, the Dutch carrier, virtually unrestricted access. France,
Germany, Britain and Belgium are now attempting to reach similar
arrangements, in what Brussels sees as an American 'divide and rule'
strategy.
Mr Van Miert said US airlines already had 19 'fifth freedom' rights inside
the Community - allowing them to carry passengers from, for example, Munich
to Brussels - whereas no EC carrier could pick up and deliver passengers
inside the US. Similarly, American carriers operated 139 routes between the
US and the EC; Community airlines only 97.
'We are not the protectionists,' Mr Van Miert said, 'there is a clear
imbalance there.' If Delta airlines could use Frankfurt as a European hub,
EC airlines should be able to do the same inside the US from, say, Dallas or
New York.
In the scramble for market access, said Mr Van Miert, big airlines like
Lufthansa, which previously had felt able to look after themselves, were
coming round to the idea of negotiating from a position of greater strength
through the Community. The EC council of ministers has resisted ceding any
competence to Brussels in external aviation negotiations. But officials here
now believe it may reconsider.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

921022

