FT923-10814

FT  28 JUL 92 / International Bonds: Resumption of market-making in Ecu
sector


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


MARKET-making in Ecu bonds resumed yesterday, after a temporary suspension
on Friday, but confidence in the market's liquidity remained at a low ebb,
according to some traders and fund managers.
Although the suspension, forced by a further wave of selling last week,
helped calm the market, the fundamental imbalance of buyers and sellers is
expected to persist at least until the French referendum on the Maastricht
Treaty on September 20.
Market-makers are still holding long positions which they have been unable
to offload, and many have been accumulating further paper.
Dealers said that in the wake of the suspension, and the widening of
bid/offer spreads quoted by market-makers, the Ecu bond market has ceased to
be viewed as a government or semi-government bond market, and has taken a
step back towards the Eurobond market.
Friday's close was 'very damaging to the market', according to one fixed
income fund manager, who declined to be named. But he said that he would
continue to steer clear of the Ecu bond market 'because it is unattractive
for investment reasons', rather than for liquidity concerns.
Another fund manager said it was 'worrying that the liquidity of the Ecu
bond market was worsening'.
Like many fund managers - following Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht
Treaty on June 2 which sent Ecu bond prices tumbling - he is now focusing on
Europe's 'hard-core' markets including The Netherlands, France and the UK,
as well as Germany.
Even though Ecu bonds are now offering a yield pick-up of 30 basis points
above their theoretical value, few buyers have materialised.
The French government's Ecu OATs have generally outperformed other issues,
partly due to a statement by the Specialistes en Valeurs du Tresor, the OAT
assigned market-makers, that they will continue to make markets under the
same terms as before.
Eurobond market makers widened the bid/offer spread to 20 basis points in a
minimum size of Ecu5m for the most liquid deals, when they resumed market
making yesterday.
While the International Securities Market Association (ISMA), the market's
regulatory body, currently recognises 44 market makers, it is widely agreed
only a portion of market makers deserve the name.
Some of the market's problem's have stemmed from the burden on leading
market makers, some of which have taken on a huge volume of paper which they
are now unable to sell, even at lower prices. 'The core of the market
consists of 12-15 houses, which do 95 per cent of the business,' observed Mr
David Ovenden, who chairs ISMA's Ecu committee.
Although the need to cut the number of designated market-makers is widely
recognised, a firm's commitment to market-making may be hard to verify, as
some traders can obey the letter of the rules but not the spirit of the
obligation.
Elsewhere, only a handful of new Eurobond issues emerged.
In the German market, Deutsche Finance launched a DM500m five-year deal via
Deutsche Bank, while another German bank, DSL Bank, launched a Pounds 100m
issue of 10-year subordinated bonds, via S. G Warburg. Interest was fuelled
by the lack of high quality debt trading at around par. The subordination of
the debt is not a deterrent for investors, since the legal support of the
German government is insensitive to the subordination.
The European Investment Bank launched a further ADollars 350m issue of bonds
under its increased ADollars 1.5bn global bond programme, arranged by
Hambros Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920728

