FT924-6485

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Mexico (9): Quiet end to year - Equity and bond
financings


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE STEADY flow of both equity and bond financings by Mexican companies this
year was interrupted by the collapse of the Mexican stock market in June.
Weak stock market conditions put the brakes on several planned equity
offerings for companies such as Banamex, the Mexican bank. Several companies
then switched planned equity offerings into the bond market, which soon
succumbed to a severe bout of indigestion.
Consequently, after a surge of activity in the first half of the year, the
market for Mexican debt and equity is ending the year on a quieter note.
According to bankers, it is likely to remain on hold until the new year.
After a two-year rally, the Mexican stock market fell 15.5 per cent in June,
the sharpest drop since October 1987, but has since recovered some ground.
The market rallied strongly on growing confidence that the election of Mr
Clinton in the US would not jeopardise the Nafta free trade agreement.
Meanwhile, the shift of funding to the bond market has overstretched demand,
amid rumours of Dollars 3bn equivalent of funding in the third quarter,
according to bankers.
Grupo Dina's recent Dollars 150m five-year deal and Cemex's Dollars 280m
seven-year deal are among the offerings which were shifted to the bond
market after equity market conditions proved unfavourable. Some companies
felt that stock market prices were at an unattractive level for issuance,
while other companies, whose stock prices have been performing particularly
poorly, found the market closed to them.
The effect of the surge of supply in the bond market has inevitably been a
widening in yield spreads relative to the US treasury market. Yields for
state-owned Mexican companies, such as Pemex, the oil company, and Nafinsa,
have widened substantially, and increased funding costs are expected to keep
these borrowers out of the market for the time being.
Five-year Pemex paper now trades at around 300 basis points over the
comparable US treasury yield, compared with a historically tight level of
195 basis points early this year, according to Mr Miles Protter, a director
of Swiss Bank Corporation.
The impact on yields in the corporate sector has been even greater. For
example, a deal launched last year for Apasco at a yield spread of 357 basis
points tightened to 260 basis points before widening to a current level of
380 basis points.
Weak corporate credits are now forced to pay as much as 450 basis points
over the US treasury yield curve to tap the market. 'Small companies are
paying 12 per cent for one-year or two-year money (in the Eurodollar bond
market). But they would have to pay 25 per cent in the domestic market,' one
banker explains. Consequently, smaller companies have continued to raise
funds, at relatively expensive rates, in the private placement market, often
on a one-off basis.
Bankers are expecting activity to pick up again in the new year, but in the
meantime it is likely to be concentrated in the commercial paper market. A
handful of borrowers, such as Ica, the construction company, may try to tap
the bond market before the end of the year.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921120

