FT924-12188

FT  22 OCT 92 / Easing Mexicans away from inflationary inertia: Damian
Fraser analyses a fine-tuning of the peso


   By DAMIAN FRASER


THE cornerstone of Mexico's economic and political policy over the past five
years has been a stable exchange rate: a strong peso has kept the
dollar-conscious middle classes happy, put downward pressure on inflation,
and persuaded otherwise nervous foreign investors to finance the burgeoning
current account deficit.
Thus the government is extremely wary at portraying the decision on Tuesday
to raise the maximum rate at which the peso can slide against the dollar
from 20 to 40 centavos a day (2.3 per cent to 4.6 per cent a year) as a
devaluation. It is merely, goes the official government document, 'an
amplification of the band' in which the peso can fluctuate, and gives the
government more flexibility in managing the currency.
In one way the government is right. While the current exchange rate ceiling
(the maximum rate at which investors sell pesos for dollars) of 3,155 pesos
to the dollar will now rise by 40 centavos a day, the floor (the minimum
rate at which investors buy pesos) will stay fixed at 3.056.
Since the free rate is set by the market and varies between these
parameters, it is possible - although now less likely - that the free
exchange rate will be as strong or stronger next year than it is now.
However, the new flexibility given to the government in currency matters
suggests a subtle change of emphasis away from the exchange rate in Mexico's
economic policy.
'We think that international markets are demanding more flexibility in
exchange rates,' a government minister told reporters after the
announcement. 'International markets have been more volatile and the
rigidities of the old band could have provoked dangers.'
The minister hinted at a softening of the commitment to a fixed dollar. 'The
exchange rate has been used to fix inflationary expectations,' he said. 'We
are now in a different stage since the inflationary inertia has been broken;
the exchange rate is not as valuable as it once was.'
Such comments may reflect the buffeting the peso has suffered in recent
weeks, and even concerns that interest rates are too high. The free peso
last week came close to its ceiling.
Investors, influenced by events in Europe, and by Mexico's troubling high
current-account deficit and inflation rate, appeared worried about the
possibility of a devaluation and a subsequent collapse of the government's
economic policy. Interest rates on 28-day Treasury bills reached a year-high
19.7 per cent last week, partly reflecting such concerns.
The government seems instead to be hoping fiscal policy and wage moderation
will bring inflation down. Under the annual wage and price accord negotiated
between the business and labour sector, the government announced the minimum
wage would rise by just 7 per cent next year, and that contractual wage
rises, much more important in the economy, would be kept to single digits.
This was the first time the accord had restricted non-minimum wage
increases.
Also, the government announced petrol prices would increase by 0.79 per cent
a month (or 9.9 per cent a year), and electricity bills by 0.57 to 0.79 per
cent a month.
This is intended to have two effects: first, by phasing in increases over
months, the government hopes to avoid the traditional year-end bubble of
government-controlled price rises that has done much to keep Mexico's
inflation in double digits; second, to raise government revenues in real
terms, and tighten fiscal policy.
The government is expected to announce in November plans for a budget
surplus in 1993 similar to the 0.7 per cent of GDP aimed for this year.
'If you put all these measures together, we hope to reach an inflation
target of 7 per cent,' says another government official. 'The measures are
sufficiently strong to allow us a little breathing space on the exchange
rate.'
The financial markets have reacted favourably on the view that a credible
exchange rate policy has been laid out for the next 12 months, which should
avert the danger of a large one-step devaluation. The peso was strengthened
after the announcement, and the stock market rose 2 per cent yesterday
morning after rallying 3 per cent on Tuesday.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921022

