FT922-3971

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (18): Power plays for little
devils - Management


   By MARK ARCHER


POWER: CREATING IT, USING IT by Helga Drummond Kogan Page Pounds 10.95, 228
pages
HOW TO BE HEADHUNTED by Yvonne Sarch Century Business Pounds 7.99, 210 pages
HELGA DRUMMOND'S latest manual cleverly appeals to the devil and the angel
in all of us. A no-holds-barred 'guerrilla handbook' for anyone wanting to
get to the top in the corporate jungle? Or a common-sense plea for the
constructive benefits of using power wisely, on the view that 'power is not
about empire-building and personal aggrandisement. It is about enabling
managers to do their jobs instead of 'draining vital productive energy into
going around in circles'?
The problem with power is that it is both these things. Dr Drummond wisely
leaves the choice up to the reader. If you have been unable to read a report
for a meeting and consequently worry about being unable to answer questions,
her tip is to grab a highlighter pen, randomly isolate a few paragraphs and
scribble a few irritable looking notes in the margin. If you do this, and
then open the document on the table, no one will dare ask you anything for
fear of incurring a blistering response.
'The fact that you may have highlighted insignificant parts of the report or
written 'Rubbish]' against perfectly sensible passages adds to strength
because it makes others believe that your analysis is more penetrating than
theirs]'
Is this meant for the unscrupulous board-room bounder or the hard-pressed
corporate worthy? Although Drummond tries hard to distinguish between the
wise and the vicious uses of power, her illustrations nicely point up its
paradox by blurring the distinction.
Drummond's path to power is lined with good advice: aim to be mysterious,
restrict socialisation, cultivate unpredictability; divide and rule, keep
your options open, practise eternal vigilance and watch for clues in those
around you ('someone who regularly has bags under his eyes, or whose hands
shake, for example, is under strain, whatever he might say.').
Create a reputation for decisiveness, even by over-acting on small issues;
learn to be decisive and obstructive ('I only wish I could'); delegate the
difficult jobs to rivals; be diplomatic, compensate for other's
deficiencies; and never retract - 'if you put your foot in it, leave it
there.'
Never reveal yourself in an unguarded moment: Princess Margaret's scandalous
involvement with Peter Townsend was deduced by onlookers when she brushed
dandruff from his shoulders during the coronation.
Drummond is not afraid of the gruesome comparison: 'The Romans used to say,
to assassinate someone, first get close to them.'
Always offer the other party a way out: 'The torturers of the Spanish
Inquisition, for example, always kept a confession ready by the rack for
signature.'
If you have read Drummond's book and still not reached the top, then it can
only be because you have been murdered by a colleague whose deficiencies you
forgot to allow for.
However, you can exit in another way: by being headhunted. How to be
Headhunted, written by a top executive search consultant, covers much the
same ground, though in a less lively way.
The secrets are to build your profile, 'network' by developing contacts who
can assist your career progression, develop the stamina to succeed, broaden
your experience, and manage change.
It also helps to be seen to contribute to the bottom line. You will not be
headhunted until you have developed a clear strategy for your career success
and consolidated a reputation for achievement, inside and outside the
office.
Both books contain checklists and summaries to help prospective
power-seekers chronicle their progress. The lesson is plain. As one artistic
drop-out put it: 'There is a tide in the affairs of men, Which, taken at the
flood, leads on to fortune.'

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920609

