FT924-6079

FT  24 NOV 92 / Gas power plans scaled back


   By MICHAEL SMITH


PLANS FOR the construction of eight gas-fired power stations in England and
Wales have been abandoned or delayed in moves that will ease fears that the
electricity market will be heavily oversupplied in the mid 1990s.
The National Grid, which manages the electricity system, said yesterday that
of 28 stations for which it had agreed connection plans earlier in the year,
four had been cancelled and another four deferred.
Disclosures of the delays and cancellations come amid the government's
review of energy policy, prompted by British Coal's pit closure plan.
Displacement of coal-fired power stations by gas-fired facilities has been
one of the main factors in the decline of British Coal's market.
But capacity figures from National Grid do not hold much comfort for British
Coal. They still suggest an oversupplied market which, with present energy
policy trends, will not need large amounts more coal than British Coal
already expects to sell.
National Grid's figures, published with its interim results, confirm an
increase in the share of the electricity market held by the nuclear
industry. Nuclear Electric's share in the first half of this year was 21.4
per cent, compared with 18.5 per cent in 1991-92.
Separately, the environmental group Greenpeace urged the government to close
Magnox nuclear power stations after publishing an analysis which, it said,
showed that a levy on electricity consumers was being used to support the
facilities' losses.
Nuclear Electric, due to give evidence in the House of Commons on the issue
today, responded that electricity generated by the Magnoxes was the cheapest
in the system in 'avoidable' terms. Their early closure would not save any
of the inescapable liabilities.
The cancellation and delay of the eight Combined-Cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT)
power stations, with a capacity of 6,000MW, will have been influenced by the
possibility that permission for gas-fired projects will become less likely
after the energy review.
National Grid said that the new gas-fired projects already completed or
under construction suggested that plant margin - that is, the surplus of
capacity over peak demand - would be 32 per cent by 1996-97.
That compares with 22 per cent that could be expected in a typical system.
It is, however, far below the 60 per cent figure suggested earlier this
year, when National Grid included all stations of which it had been notified
but which do not necessarily have planning consent or contracts for gas
supplies.
In all, National Grid knows of 22,876MW of capacity that could be produced
by CCGT projects, but only 10,000 MW of that is totally committed.
The Greenpeace report, based on its interpretation of Nuclear Electric's
accounts, says that only 14 per cent of the Pounds 1.2bn levy notionally
funds the cost of future decommissioning. Even then, it says, there is no
decommissioning fund, so no money has been set aside to deal with
liabilities.
Monktonhall colliery, near Edinburgh, is to supply 3,000 tonnes of coal a
month to ScottishPower for four months for the nearby Cockenzie power
station. The pit is leased by more than 120 former British Coal miners.
National Grid results, Page 24

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921124

