FT922-4233

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: Hard arithmetic of school fees - As
the cost of a private education keeps rising, it pays parents to plan ahead


   By JOHN AUTHERS


WHEN big public schools call in debt collectors, you know that fees have
become a problem.
Malvern College's decision to employ a collection agency to approach parents
who had fallen badly behind on their Pounds 9,470 annual fees, said as much
about the problems parents are facing as it did about the school's problems.
Britain's independent education sector faces costs which inflate quicker
than the standard Retail Prices Index. In the process, independent education
will be removed from the reach of even more people - unless they plan their
finances very carefully.
Last year fees rose by an average of 12 per cent, according to ISIS, the
Independent Schools Information Service, following an increase of 12.6 per
cent the previous year. A term at a boys' senior boarding school can cost up
to Pounds 3,600, while an equivalent girls' school can cost Pounds 3,400.
Senior day schools do not come cheaper than Pounds 900 per term.
Meanwhile, the income of many parents fell.
School fees are usually one of the last expenditures a family will give up
in recession, but the figures for attendance at boarding schools, which in
many cases now offer particularly poor value, suggest that some parents are
being forced to make that choice. Numbers of full boarding boys dropped 4.7
per cent last year.
So, if you are convinced that your child needs private education, you will
need to do some clear-eyed financial planning. You do not want to find a
debt collector on your door.
Fortunately this is a last resort for the schools as well. Over the last
year, both the schools, through ISIS, and the government, through new tax
incentives for children's saving, have gone some way to addressing the
problem.
Meanwhile, as fees have grown ahead of the rate of inflation, so the
fee-planning industry has expanded and become more sophisticated.
Accountants offer full school fees plans backed up by powerful computer
software. Last year's budget introduced opportunities for tax-free saving
for children via friendly societies - the maximum is Pounds 18 per month and
investments must be continued for ten years - and National Savings Bonus
Bonds - up to a maximum of Pounds 2,000.
These and other tax-efficient savings products introduced in recent budgets,
underpin the plans, along with tried and tested life assurance products such
as endowments and annuities.
Much of the sophistication is useful. Some is gloss. Beware of elaborate
financial 'packaging'. Accountants Coopers & Lybrand summed this up clearly
in their recent report on school fees planning: 'Most of the schemes which
are marketed as school fees plans are little more than familiar well-worn
investment products 'dressed up' for this purpose. You should always look
beyond the dressing and ask whether a scheme suits your own circumstances
and investment preferences and whether or not you believe it is the best way
of achieving your objectives.'
As the article below demonstrates, options tighten as your children grow
nearer school age, and capital up front will help. Start saving ten years
ahead of time, if you can.
An example provided by Equitable Life shows why. On the assumption that you
wish to pay school fees of Pounds 1,300 per term - about average for a day
school - and that they will inflate at 10 per cent per annum, the total
amount you will pay for six years of education, starting in ten years' time,
is Pounds 85,852. This can be met with a lump sum outlay today into
Equitable's charitable trust scheme of Pounds 26,418.
The longer you wait, the more you will pay. If junior is already about to go
to secondary school, and you cannot afford to pay the fees directly out of
income, a loan is your only chance. This is very much a last resort, but the
new ISIS School Fees Special Reserve Account, which allows you to draw down
loans when needed from the Halifax building society, and offers a variety of
ways to repay the loan, has made it more feasible.
And also, there is no point in stretching your finances any more than you
have to. The most crucial decision when you are looking for value for money
is your choice of school.
The Financial Times produced a survey - The FT Schools 500 - in March this
year, which assessed the performance and fees of almost 500 independent
schools.
One conclusion is that you do not necessarily get what you pay for. There is
almost no relation between a school's performance and its fees.
In some ways this is scarcely surprising - much will depend on the quality
of teaching, and the teachers' pay only varies by a small amount from school
to school. Also, a school's resources are often affected rather more by its
endowment than by the amount of fees coming in. Some rich foundations can
offer excellent facilities for relatively low fees.
If you are only concerned to give your child a sound academic grounding,
some day schools with excellent A-levels and university admissions results
will offer strong value.
But if you are strongly wedded to the concept of boarding schools, and the
'character-building' ethos which goes with them, be under no illusions - it
will be expensive.
For example, King Edward's Birmingham, and King Edward VI High, Birmingham,
which finished first and second in the survey, charge annual fees of Pounds
3,960 and Pounds 3,381 for day boys and girls. Winchester College, one of
the most prestigious schools in the country, which came fourth, charges
day-boys Pounds 8,100 per year. For boarders, annual fees are Pounds 10,800,
the same as Eton, which came seventh.
High overheads make boarding schools an increasingly daunting financial
proposition. In Bristol three day schools - Bristol Cathedral ranked 201st,
Bristol Grammar, which would rank in the top 100, and Queen Elizabeth's
ranked 83rd - all charge between Pounds 3,288 and Pounds 3,327 a year.
Clifton College, a well-known boarding school in the same area, charges
Pounds 7,200 per year for day boys, and Pounds 10,320 per year boarding
fees. It came 198th in the FT survey.
League tables are not everything, and you should look at several schools
carefully. If your priority is to ensure a good academic education and a
sound grounding for further education, you might get it free. A high fee is
no guarantee that the school will provide what you are looking for.
Few choices are more important than your children's education. But the
stakes are now so high, that you should also be sure not to take on any
greater financial commitments than your child truly needs.

The Financial Times


London Page III

920606

