FT923-15463

FT  02 JUL 92 / BAe in talks with Taiwan Aerospace


   By DANIEL GREEN


BRITISH AEROSPACE is to have talks with Taiwan Aerospace on a possible joint
venture to build regional jet aircraft.
Mr John Cahill, BAe's new chairman, is due in Taipei today as part of a
drive to secure the future of its loss-making regional jet aircraft
business.
Mr Denny Ko, Taiwan Aerospace president, said BAe was interested in the
possibility of co-producing medium-range passenger aircraft for sale in
China and other markets in the region.
The move is one of the strongest indications yet that Mr Cahill, who took up
his post two months ago after a period of disappointing performance for BAe,
intends radical changes for loss-making businesses such as the regional jet
aircraft operation.
BAe has already held talks this year with the big three Japanese
manufacturers - Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and
Fuji Heavy Industries - over a possible partnership in regional aircraft.
The company's regional aircraft business has been in difficulties for some
time.
'There are a number of our aircraft that have been built in anticipation of
rapid delivery and have not been sold. The market is very soft right now,'
said BAe yesterday.
The possibility of a BAe link with Taiwan could ease the worries of the
European Airbus consortium, the commercial aircraft maker in which BAe has a
20 per cent stake.
Airbus is concerned that BAe's talks with the Japanese companies could hurt
the consortium's own efforts to establish a partnership with the three in
research and development for a new 600-800-seat jumbo aircraft.
Taiwan's own interest in super jumbos faltered earlier this year when it
postponed a decision over whether to be involved in McDonnell-Douglas' plans
for a new 400-500-seat aircraft, the MD-12.
Taiwan Aerospace, 29 per cent owned by the Taiwan government, signed a
preliminary agreement last November to buy up to 40 per cent of McDonnell's
commercial aircraft operations for Dollars 2bn (Pounds 1.05bn). However, the
two sides failed to reach a final agreement.
Taiwan Aerospace is also in talks with Russia's aerospace industry and
France's Aerospatiale on joint manufacturing, said Mr Ko.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920702

