FT921-438

FT  28 MAR 92 / Tories in a race against time: The state of play at the end
of the campaign's second week


   By PHILIP STEPHENS


There comes a moment during an election campaign when one side begins to
recognise that it is facing defeat. The Conservatives are perilously close
to that point.
Mr John Major and his colleagues have not given up. Nor do the opinion polls
support Mr Neil Kinnock's claim that Labour is set to win an outright
majority on April 9. After a faltering first two weeks, Mr Chris Patten has
been refocusing the Conservative strategy. The party chairman is promising
an unremitting assault on the opposition and its leader until polling day.
Tax, economic competence and leadership will be kept centre-stage. More will
be made of the Conservative record on defence and foreign affairs.
In Mr Major's speeches around the country ferocious attacks on Mr Kinnock's
judgment have been added to the vision of caring Conservatism that were once
judged the key to victory. After 10 days on the stump, the prime minister
has settled into a more comfortable stride.
Mr Norman Tebbit, the former Conservative party chairman, has been
rehabilitated alongside Mrs Margaret Thatcher in a drive to win back the
skilled working classes who delivered victory in 1983 and 1987. Mr Michael
Heseltine, the environment secretary, has shown he retains a formidable
instinct for the political jugular.
Mr Kinnock, shielded for much of the time from a largely hostile tabloid
press, has looked uncomfortably vulnerable when it has caught up with him.
The election, fired into life by the row over health, is set to get rougher
still.
For much of this week, the heat generated by Labour's emotive election
broadcast on the National Health Service obscured the light shed by the
opinion polls on the progress of the campaign. The dramatisation of a young
child's predicament on an NHS waiting-list moved Mr William Waldegrave, the
health secretary, to summon up comparisons with Nazi propaganda in pre-war
Germany. His opposite number in the Labour party, Mr Robin Cook, was
unrepentant and the election was diverted into a sterile debate about leaks
and the murky world of tabloid witch-hunts.
Neither side knows what impact it has had on the electorate. One cabinet
minister, convinced at first that the row had at last got Mr Kinnock on the
run, was worried a few hours later that Mr Major might be implicated
(wrongly) in central office 'dirty tricks'.
One of the minister's Labour shadows insisted that the controversial
broadcast had succeeded in its central objective of taking health - his
party's strongest card - to the heart of the election battle. Then he
recalled with acute discomfort the television images of his leader's angry
exchanges with the tabloid 'rat pack'. Most voters probably were bemused.
For their part Mr Paddy Ashdown's Liberal Democrats, forced out of the news
for much of the campaign and facing a squeeze on their vote, must hope that
the row will reinforce disenchantment with both main parties.
But, overall, it is the Conservatives who are worried. The threat of
permanent opposition has taught the Labour party how to run election
campaigns. The Conservative effort has looked outclassed and outdated. After
13 years in office, ministers seem to have forgotten how to fight hard
elections.
Mr Major's campaign stumbled at the outset. It started with a Budget that
aimed to steal Labour's clothes by demonstrating a commitment to the
low-paid and with a manifesto designed to distance him from Mrs Thatcher.
But Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, deflated the expectations of those -
including his cabinet colleagues - who had believed that a more handsome
bribe was available to cheer a disgruntled electorate.
The Conservatives were caught off-balance by Mr John Smith's alternative
package. The shadow chancellor reassured the skilled working classes - the
so-called C2s on whose votes the election outcome may hinge - that they
would pay no more in tax.
Mr Patten wasted nearly a week directing his fire at Mr Smith's threat to
the incomes of those earning more than Pounds 20,000 a year. Mr Richard
Ryder, the chief whip and the man charged with knocking heads together at
central office, was not alone in judging that wavering supporters in the
much larger Pounds 10,000 to Pounds 15,000 income bracket would be
unimpressed.
The campaign has been recalibrated. Mr Major's soft-focus vision of the
1990s now runs alongside a Thatcherite onslaught on Labour's 'socialist'
agenda. A costing of Labour's spending pledges has provided the figure -
Pounds 1,250 a taxpayer a year - needed to 'frighten' the C2s.
But the cabinet members who line up daily alongside the prime minister at
Conservative central office are showing signs of strain. They offer
confident claims to the television cameras that the new message will get
through. But the images that stick are those of men who have fired their
ammunition and cannot quite understand why it has not yet reached its
target.
There is a defensive mood. Asked if there were signs of panic, one senior
minister replied simply: 'Not yet.'
There are mutterings among some of his colleagues that Mr Patten has spent
too much time defending his slim majority in Bath and not enough holding
together a shaky operation in the party's Smith Square headquarters.
He has learnt quickly how hard it is to fight an election in the middle of
an economic slump. The sharp rise in living standards during the 1980s has
not tempered the voters' anger with a government that gave them first the
poll tax and then the recession.
The media, once persuaded of the impregnability of his party's reputation
for economic competence, has been unreceptive to the constant attacks on
Labour's strategy.
When the party chairman issued a dire warning this week that a Labour
government would wreck economic recovery, the first question from the media
circus was entirely predictable: 'What recovery?' Conservative canvassers
are finding that the promise of zero inflation does not play well against
the reality of rising unemployment.
Apart from his occasional spats with the Tory tabloids, Mr Kinnock has had a
relatively easy ride. The dire state of the government's finances has
allowed him to escape so far the searching scrutiny of his party's tax and
spending plans which damaged Labour so badly in 1987.
Mr Smith's clever conjuring tricks have obscured the hard truth that the
resources available to an incoming Labour government would not come close to
matching the party's aspirations for the welfare state. Occasional 'gaffes'
by members of the shadow cabinet have provided glimpses of that fundamental
tension. But they have largely been lost in the deepening economic gloom.
Mr Patten and his colleagues have answers for the prophets of doom. They
point to the volatility of the opinion polls, regional variations in the
swing to Labour, dislike of the opposition leader, and a large reservoir of
floating voters. Mr Major believes that commentators have failed to
appreciate the 'incumbency' advantage of Conservative MPs defending marginal
seats.
From canvass returns across the country, the message being conveyed to Mr
Patten is that resentment of the government's handling of the economy is
matched by dislike and distrust of Mr Kinnock. One senior minister returned
from two days' campaigning with the simple message that: 'They just don't
want him (Mr Kinnock) in Downing Street.'
The opinion polls indicate that Mr Major's more aggressive persona on the
campaign trail has taken the shine off his image. But while his ratings have
fallen they remain far ahead of his main rival.
A steady Labour lead in the polls - its standing has remained remarkably
constant at 41 per cent against the Conservatives' 39 per cent - must be
seen alongside panel surveys suggesting that a sizeable slice of the
electorate has yet to make up its mind.
The Conservatives believe that the waverers include large numbers of
disenchanted supporters who can be recaptured closer to polling day by the
onslaught on tax and on Mr Kinnock's judgment. In the phrase of one cabinet
minister, a 'more red-blooded' campaign could detach support from the
Liberal Democrats.
Despite Mr Ashdown's energetic campaigning, his party has yet to make the
impact needed to pitch it into the campaign limelight. Mr Patten will seek
to squeeze its support by warning that a vote for the third party could let
Mr Kinnock into Downing Street.
But the fine print of the opinion polls also has bad news for the
Conservatives. The assault on Labour's plans has not pushed tax above fifth
or sixth in the list of issues uppermost in the voters' minds. Unemployment,
health and education all rank higher. Mr Major's protestations that the
health service is safe in his hands has convinced only a third of the
electorate.
There is time still for the Conservative case on tax, the economy and Mr
Kinnock to sink in. Labour strategists concede they are worried that it may
have a delayed impact. The closer Labour edges towards victory, the more the
voters may worry about their wallets.
But Mr Kinnock can win if Labour does no more than hold on to its present
standing in the opinion polls: a 'hung parliament' would count as victory.
To be certain of remaining prime minister Mr Major needs an overall
majority. He does not have much time to demonstrate that it is still within
his grasp.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920328

