FT922-13323

FT  13 APR 92 / Bosnian leaders agree on ceasefire


   By LAURA SILBER


   BELGRADE


LEADERS of Bosnia-Hercegovina yesterday agreed to a ceasefire from midnight
last night among the warring ethnic groups in the former Yugoslav republic.
Moslem, Serb and Croat leaders agreed terms during peace talks brokered by
Mr Jose Cutilheiro, the European Community envoy.
The agreement called for an end to mobilisation and the disbanding of all
paramilitary groups to be carried out under the control of EC monitors,
according to Tanjug, the Belgrade-based news agency.
It called for 'all activities which endanger the safety of citizens' to be
stopped within 24 hours. These include 'the cessation of sniper
reconnaissance, the search of flats, the withdrawal of all artillery
weapons' - to be placed under the control of EC monitors.
It was unclear yesterday whether any group had the authority to force the
numerous paramilitary groups to comply with the orders to disband.
Fighting in the republic appeared to abate yesterday but many feared it
would resume when EC officials left Sarajevo, the capital. Radio Sarajevo
reported clashes in several towns in east Bosnia, on the frontier with
Serbia. Tanjug news agency said two bridges were blown up south of Sarajevo.
Sporadic shooting, which has become part of every day life, was also
reported.
Dozens of people have been killed in fighting throughout the republic
following the international recognition of Bosnian independence. Moslems,
who make up 44 per cent of the nearly 4.4m population, and Croats, 17 per
cent, support independence, while the Serbs, accounting for 31 per cent of
the population, are against. They want to remain in a federation with
Serbia, and the smaller republic of Montenegro, a close ally.
Tens of thousands of refugees, mainly Moslems, have been fleeing into the
countryside from towns where the violence is worst.
The accord stipulates that refugees should be allowed to return to their
homes. Representatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
at the weekend said the rival ethnic leaders had signed an agreement
promising humanitarian treatment for refugees.
The agreement also states that territorial changes made by force would not
be recognised. This appeared to be aimed mainly at Serb paramilitary groups
and the federal army. Serb irregulars on Friday seized control of Zvornik, a
predominantly Moslem town in northeastern Bosnia.
The accord calls for talks to resume on the division of Bosnia, which the
Moslems oppose. However, Mr Radovan Karadzic, a leader of Bosnia's Serbs,
said earlier yesterday: 'We reached an agreement to start redrawing the map
of Bosnia-Hercegovina very soon.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920413

