FT921-3777

FT  12 MAR 92 / Election '92: Lamont aims to extend 20p lower tax band


   By PETER NORMAN, Economics Correspondent


MR NORMAN LAMONT, the chancellor, yesterday said he hoped in the next
parliament to expand the 20p lower income-tax band proposed in Tuesday's
Budget.
He said that, if re-elected, the government would have the choice of either
lowering the present 25p basic rate or extending the lower tax band to more
than the first Pounds 2,000 of taxable income as a way of fulfilling its
commitment to reaching a 20p basic rate.
The chancellor denied at a Treasury briefing that the new band was a
political ploy to embarrass the Labour party at the beginning of the general
election campaign proper.
He said he had always thought that the 25p basic rate was a high starting
rate of tax for the lower-paid. The new tax rate would give the government
greater flexibility.
It would be able to move towards a 20p basic rate by extending the band in
steps that might only cost the the equivalent of  1/2 p off the present 25p
basic rate.
Mr Lamont warned that it could take longer than the life of a single
parliament to reach a 20p basic rate of tax.
The medium-term financial strategy, published with the Budget, suggests that
the government will not be in a position to make net tax reductions in
1993-94 or 1994-95. It has pencilled in reductions of about Pounds 1bn in
1995-96 and 1996-97.
By that time the government envisages that the public sector borrowing
requirement will have declined from the very high levels envisaged for the
coming two fiscal years.
Mr Lamont said yesterday that the forecast doubling of the PSBR to Pounds
28bn in 1992-93 from Pounds 13.75bn in the current financial year largely
reflected cyclical factors. A 'very rough' calculation suggested that Pounds
12bn of the Pounds 14bn deterioration was due to the effects of the
recession on tax revenues.
He said he believed that the underlying PSBR, after extracting cyclical
effects, was very close to balance. He therefore denied the deficit was a
structural problem that might necessitate tax increases.
Tax changes introduced by Mr Nigel Lawson had increased the 'cyclicality' of
the tax system, particularly of corporation tax, he said.
He appeared unworried about financing the deficits, and said that other
European countries were able to finance higher PSBRs than Britain.
Mr Lamont said the recovery forecast for this year might be 'slightly
sharper' than expected because of the delayed activity. He said earlier on
BBC Radio that there was 'a tremendous amount of pent-up demand in the
economy' and considerable potential spending power because of rising
earnings and lower mortgage rates. He added, however, that uncertainty about
the election could be hurting confidence.
The chancellor did not rule out an interest-rate cut during the election
campaign, but said some people might consider it a 'high-risk' move.
By convention, governments have not cut rates immediately before an
election. There have been exceptions, however. In 1974, the official minimum
lending rate was much more closely linked to market rates than bank base
rates are today, so that a move in market rates triggered an official rate
cut.
In 1979, the Labour government cut rates in the campaign after widespread
expectations of a Conservative victory prompted a large inflow of foreign
funds that was pushing sterling higher.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920312

