FT922-3992

FT  08 JUN 92 / Farm reforms may bring a bitter harvest: Europe's
agrochemical groups face restructuring


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


With annual turnover of more than Dollars 8bn (Pounds 4.3bn), European agro
chemicals are big business. But, since last month's agreement on farm policy
reform, the world's largest market for products from fertilisers to
fungicides, is also in big trouble.
Market growth was minimal even before the agreement. Return on investment is
poor, and the financial risks of research and development high.
Now the reforms, which involve setting aside 15 per cent of agricultural
land from production and a 29 per cent reduction in cereal prices, threaten
to unleash a fundamental restructuring of the sector.
Ciba-Geigy, the Swiss group and the world's largest agrochemical
manufacturer, estimates sales will fall between 5 per cent and 10 per cent
within five years. France's largest chemical group, Rhone-Poulenc, expects a
drop of 5 per cent, while Imperial Chemical Industries of the UK sees a 15
per cent fall within three years.
The difficulty facing forecasters is that details of the reforms have not
been decided. 'A lot depends on how the 15 per cent of land is set aside,'
says Mr Allan Woodburn, director of Allan Woodburn Associates, an
agrochemicals market-research company.
'If the set-aside land is rotated, farmers will need to use herbicides on
it. If it's set aside for good, the consequences for the industry are more
serious,' he says.
The position is complicated by expectations that the reforms will lead to a
sharp fall in the number of farmers throughout Europe. This, paradoxically,
could mitigate the effects on the agrochemicals market.
Mr Walter Ernst, head of Bayer's agrochemicals division, says only 80,000 of
Germany's 400,000 farmers will be in business by the year 2002.
Rhone-Poulenc says the number of French farmers will halve within a decade.
Mr Alain Godard, director general of agrochemicals at Rhone-Poulenc, says
efficient farmers could be tempted to increase yields by using more product
on the 85 per cent of the land they are still able to farm.
However, ICI challenges this view. It fears more farmers, hit by falling
prices, will be tempted to use non-patented and cheap generic products.
Dr Alan Norris, a director specialising in chemicals mergers and
acquisitions at Chase Investment Bank in London, says groups like Schering
of Germany and Atochem of France - whose proportion of sales in Europe are,
respectively, 63 per cent and 62 per cent - have most to lose from the
changes. ICI, in comparison, has a broader base. Its European sales
represent only 31 per cent of turnover.
As volumes decline, a further threat to revenues is that prices might fall.
Ciba-Geigy, for example, is intent on winning market share in the UK and
recognises prices could fall. So far, pricing has been kept disciplined but
whether that can continue is open to question.
The agrochemicals groups nevertheless have to maintain large cost bases to
stay in business.
Research and development, the life-blood of the industry, is expensive and
becoming more so. Farmers demand environment-friendly chemicals to treat
their crops. Insects and fungi build up resistance to existing products. For
the chemicals groups, R&D produces new, patentable products, for which they
can charge a premium.
Bayer estimates its agrochemicals division, with annual turnover of DM3.2bn
(Pounds 1.09bn), spends DM400m a year on R&D, or 12.5 per cent of turnover.
Rhone-Poulenc and ICI both spend the equivalent of 8 per cent of turnover.
ICI says it costs between Dollars 80m and Dollars 100m and between 10 and 12
years to put new chemicals through the necessary regulatory hurdles.
Additional costs have been added by re-registration of old products to
ensure they meet new higher regulations.
ICI estimates it has spent Dollars 100m during the past four years to bring
14 of its 30 products up to new US standards. The EC is introducing similar
regulations. The company believes some groups with less commitment will
conclude that such expenditure is not justifiable.
A shakeout is inevitable. With 30 significant competitors, there will only
be 10 research-based groups left by the end of the decade, warns Mr Ernst at
Bayer.
Most restructuring will involve joint ventures, at least for the largest
groups, believes Dr Norris at Chase. The multiples required to buy a
research-based agrochemicals company are too high for an outright purchase.
He argues the savings through merging would generate significantly higher
margins.
Some companies would like to exit, at the right price. The commitment to
agrochemicals of groups like Germany's BASF, Shell, the Anglo-Dutch group,
and FMC, and Rohm and Haas, of the US, is debatable.
Restructuring has already begun. Schering tried but failed to put together a
venture with Sandoz. Two Japanese groups, Sumitomo Chemical and Ishihara,
have been buying small research and distribution groups. A few groups are
looking at the possibility of building up niches, either geographical or in
particular product areas, says Dr Norris.
Mr Godard is optimistic. He says demographic changes mean increased demand
for food and that oil-bearing crops could be used as alternatives to
fossil-fuels. However, Dr Norris at Chase says the countries with most need
for increased food production are those with least money to pay for
high-margin agrochemicals.
Even if the industry does have the potential to make sustainable profits, it
will first have to be significantly weeded.
 ----------------------------------------------
WORLD'S LEADING AGROCHEMICAL COMPANIES
 ----------------------------------------------
                             Market
Rank    Name share            (%)
 ----------------------------------------------
1       Ciba-Geigy           12.8
2       ICI                   9.2
3       Rhone-Poulenc         8.8
3       Bayer                 8.8
5       Du Pont               7.4
6       Dow                   6.6
7       Monsanto              6.3
8       Hoechst               6.0
9       BASF                  5.5
10      Schering              4.2
 ----------------------------------------------
Sources: Wood Mac and Rhone-Poulenc
 ----------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920608

