FT921-14270

FT  16 JAN 92 / International Company News: Bank of Boston's merger talks
with Shawmut fail


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN


   NEW YORK


TALKS on a merger between Bank of Boston and Shawmut National Bank that
would have created the largest bank in New England, collapsed yesterday
after Shawmut found the terms of the planned merger unacceptable.
Shawmut said the reason it had terminated discussions was the extent of its
financial recovery.
Mr Joel Alvord, chairman of the Connecticut-based Shawmut, said an
improvement in earnings, asset quality, loan-loss reserve coverage and
capital ratios had persuaded the bank that its best interests would not be
served by the merger.
Mr Alvord said Shawmut would next week report fourth-quarter results showing
the improved performance.
Mr Ira Stepanian, chairman of Bank of Boston, said he also expected improved
fourth-quarter results. He said that after an independent review of the due
diligence study of the merger the terms for the proposed deal were found to
be unacceptable to Shawmut.
Both Shawmut and Bank of Boston have been hard hit by the real estate crisis
in New England and both suffered heavy losses in the first six months of
1991, of Dollars 175.4m (Shawmut) and Dollars 138m (Boston). Both banks
achieved a small profit in the third quarter; Shawmut earned Dollars 2.3m
and Bank of Boston Dollars 18m.
Last October, Shawmut entered into an agreement with the Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston that required Fed approval for the payment of dividends and
other decisions. At the time, the merger talks appeared to be on track.
Analysts have said Shawmut and Bank of Boston were having difficulties
assuring bank regulators they would be able to raise an estimated Dollars
625m in fresh capital in conjunction with the merger.
Wall Street nonetheless seemed cheered that the merger was off. Bank of
Boston's stock price rose by 1 3/8 to Dollars 14 3/4 yesterday, while
Shawmut's price jumped by Dollars  1/4 to Dollars 10 3/8 .
Fleet/Norstar, the Rhode Island-based bank that joined forces last year to
acquire the failed Bank of New England (BNE), yesterday reported
fourth-quarter net income of Dollars 35m, compared with a loss of Dollars
59m a year ago.
The bank earned Dollars 98m for the whole of 1991, following Dollars 73m of
after-tax charges related to the BNE acquisition and Dollars 321m of loan
loss reserves.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920116

