FT924-8148

FT  12 NOV 92 / The Matrix Churchill Scandal: Whitehall knew of chemical
weapons link


   By DANIEL GREEN and ALAN FRIEDMAN


THE GOVERNMENT knew in 1988 that Matrix Churchill was selling precision
engineering equipment to a chemicals weapons manufacturer, Industrias
Cardoen of Chile, which was also the main arms supplier to Iraq.
Matrix applied for export credits on behalf of that manufacturer to the
Export Credit Guarantee Department (ECGD), the then government-owned body
which underwrites loans for export contracts.
Previously secret Whitehall documents also note that such equipment was
'essential to the manufacture of nuclear weapons'.
The Department of Trade and Industry nevertheless approved the equipment for
export, saying there was no evidence that the tools were being put to
military use.
But the Foreign Office, objecting to the granting of a licence, said the DTI
arguments were 'to say the least, disingenuous'.
Documents on Industrias Cardoen circulated in January 1989 in the ECGD said:
'Matrix Churchill initially came in for (insurance) cover on (an)
arms/chemical manufacturer in August 1988. It seems they (the arms
manufacturer) are involved in chemicals weapons manufacture.'
Mr Robert Lemin, an associate director of Sedgwicks, the insurance broker to
Matrix Churchill, also voiced concerns to the ECGD that sales to Cardoen
'would be used to manufacture munitions'.
This view was repeated almost two years later at the ECGD's short-term
export credit headquarters in Cardiff in a letter from Mr Paul St John
Miller, regional director of the ECGD's Birmingham regional office.
He wrote: 'Goods were apparently destined for Iraq to be incorporated into a
chemicals weapons factory.'
Industrias Cardoen was one of the leading suppliers of arms to Baghdad
during the 1980s. It is estimated to have sold nearly Dollars 500m worth of
cluster bombs to Baghdad as well as plans for a turnkey bomb factory that
was built in Iraq.
Cardoen has also been rumoured to have had links to a chemical weapons plant
in Paraguay that was assisting Iraq, but has denied such links.
Apart from the logistical reasons for Matrix Churchill's sales to Iraq
through Cardoen, the Chilean company provided a means for the Iraqis to pay
their suppliers.
Mr Miller wrote in November 1990: 'Cardoen would be paid by the Iraqis in
local currency and then use that currency with Iraqi government authority,
to purchase crude oil from . . . Iraq. That crude oil to be on-sold
immediately.'
This allowed Iraq to avoid using hard currency while allowing Cardoen to
receive dollars from a barter deal.
A few weeks earlier a Ministry of Defence working group was drawing
parallels between the British contribution to Iraqi arms manufacturing
capabilities and the 1989 scandal over a German project to build a chemicals
weapons plant in Libya.
The working group singled out 'our machinery manufacturers' as helping 'Iraq
towards the setting up of a major arms R&D and production industry'.
It said that this contribution to an indigenous arms industry was 'often
unwilling, but sometimes not'. It compiled a list of export licences that it
said could have contributed to the setting up of Iraq's arms industry. They
included:
Vacuum precision furnaces for making aircraft components.
Ingot moulds 'to make gun barrels and tank parts'.
An application from Racal to work on a factory producing military radars.
An application from MSA (Britain) of Reading, Berkshire, to make batteries
'used chiefly in missiles and shells'.
An application from Magnum Industrial Products to set up a specialised
military parachute factory.
Matrix Churchill lathes capable of producing 500,000 155mm shells a year.
Such shells could in principle be used to deliver chemicals.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921112

