FT921-513

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Optimists who take their cue from Greenland
 -The capital's gardens


   By ROBIN LANE FOX


THE OPTIMISM of Londoners exceeds their circumstances: they are the
Greenlanders of British gardening. When Peary encountered the most northerly
Eskimoes in Greenland, they told him that all the rest of the world lay in
darkness but only there did light still shine for half an hour on a winter's
day. Clinging on, they thought themselves the most fortunate people on
earth.
In London gardens, the dark factors are obvious: dirt, cars, neighbours'
trees and cats, a heavy clay soil, and access only through the main rooms of
the house. London gardening involves incongruous through traffic, shifting
manure over rush matting and designer carpet. By way of compensation, its
few rays of light are shelter from severe frost and a legacy from great
planters in the past 100 years.
Against the frost, there are walls everywhere, some of them sunny and many
heated from behind. Yellow Banksian roses will run from the basement to the
eaves; little pittosporum will survive beside a flight of steps; myrtles
will usually make it through the winter. As for the legacy, it continues to
increase in public places: a massive new roof garden in Cannon Street and
the new Japanese water garden in Holland Park. The best of it is much older
and will be wonderfully visible during the next two months.
In spring, London still has its areas of sudden loveliness, suggesting a
Chinese hillside among thick traffic and impatient men with briefcases.
Early in the year, crocusses are marvellous from Marble Arch to Kew. There
is a rare form of Ceanothus impressus which flowers even in December in the
charming Physic Garden in Chelsea.
Against the old orangery in Holland Park, the tall pink and white camellias
are looking spectacular; while the garden's box-edged beds of blue, mauve
and yellow polyanthus are a dramatic background for the start of the spring
season's skateboarding and public breast-feeding. On the edge of summer,
lilacs are sensational in W2; when the heat rises I head for the limes in
Hyde Park, buzzing with bees and, consequently, more free from pesterers
than the plane trees in Berkeley Square. I try to avoid Kew because the
bedding-out and border plantings are rather tasteless; I prefer surprises
where gardens have excelled their settings, now or in the past.
The great gale of 1987 caused havoc among many of London's best groups of
trees. Instead, at The Hill in Hampstead, you can admire the very long
pergolas of Portland stone which were constructed for Lord Lever in 1905.
Tree-like, they are a fine memorial to a golden age of gardening before the
onset of socialism and world wars. Throughout June and July, private havens
are thrown open on Sundays to the public for charity. The yellow book of
Gardens Open in 1992 is now on sale: anything marked with a botanical flower
is worth visiting, especially the smaller gardens with an individual use of
restricted space.
Between these expert oases, there are optimistic window boxes, dreaded
hanging baskets, and the great acreage of gardens in London's squares which
committees keep under lock and key. Select groups of residents
disenfranchise those who live near them, and then run these green gardens
with varying degrees of horticultural sense. Members have to own property
within the specified area. My local square has disqualified me: perhaps they
are afraid I will ride in with my horse.
The rest of us can only peer through the privet or off the top of a tall
bus: our public gardens are the royal parks instead. This year, many of them
are being turned over to privatised management with fears that they may lose
their character; my experience is that privatisation speeds and improves
results. Meanwhile, we can sprawl and enjoy them in the lunch hour, shoeless
and nearly topless.
London's great belts of greenery are not a legacy from public-spirited
'amenity' planting. They began as areas of royal field sports. We owe them
to two cultural forces which are loathed by the political left: hunting and
the monarchy. Thanks to both of them, distressed gardeners, trapped in
London, can head south for relief to Richmond. This park has a scope and
wilderness which central spaces lack: it is a network of small woods where
birds, flowers and autumn colours are an encouragement to keen walkers.
Despite the gorse and heather, the happiest patch of former hunting ground
is the Isabella plantation, which is one of the few gardens worth visiting
from the countryside beyond. Since January, there have been great bushes of
flowers among the camellias and rhododendrons in this sheltered wood,
re-planted since the 1950s. April and May are its special moments of glory
and entrance is free, making it London's number one for gardeners who are
feeling frustrated.
What, lastly, about the ultimate secret, the gardens of Buckingham Palace?
Yes, I did go once to a summer garden party; and although I thought that the
display of cherry pie made effective bedding, I felt the borders lacked
flair and class. On an earlier visit in the 1960s, my grandmother was
luckier. She found the ultimate relic of a sudden social crisis: a discarded
meringue in a flower bed, in which was still embedded the upper half of a
set of false teeth.

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920328

