FT923-15679

FT  01 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Wellcome faces further generic competition
over AZT drug


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


WELLCOME, the UK pharmaceuticals company involved in the world's largest
ever non-privatisation secondary share issue, faces further generic
competition to AZT, the HIV treatment and one of its largest-selling
products.
Microbiologica, a Brazilian company established by staff at Rio de Janeiro's
Federal University, has received permission from the Brazilian licencing
authorities to manufacture and sell AZT in Brazil, a country which does not
recognise Wellcome's AZT patents.
The group plans to sell the drug elsewhere in Latin America where patent
protection is weak. It is also looking at the possibility of selling it in
Canada and Spain.
The Brazilian company plans to sell generic AZT at about Dollars 100 (Pounds
54) per 100 tablets compared with Wellcome's price of Dollars 140.
It expects to have production for 80kg a month by January next year,
adequate to supply 60 per cent of the Brazilian market worth Dollars 30m a
year.
Wellcome said yesterday that it did not believe the Brazilian company had
sufficient manufacturing capacity to launch the product in the immediate
future, and that it expected no immediate impact on sales. The world market
for AZT last year was Pounds 177m, making it Wellcome's second best-selling
product after Zovirax, another anti-viral treatment.
Prof Fernando Steele da Cruz, Microbiologica's administrative director, told
Pharmaceutical Business News, a Financial Times newsletter, that its AZT was
100 per cent pure and had been tested in the US and UK.
Wellcome's share price has been highly sensitive to stories about AZT, sales
of which represent about 11 per cent of group revenues.
However, analysts are expecting to hear additional details about the
effectiveness of AZT at the Amsterdam Aids conference taking place during
the last week before the share offer closes on July 24.
AZT is already under pressure in other countries from generic manufacturers.

The Financial Times


London Page 25

920701

