FT924-751

FT  22 DEC 92 / International Company News: IBM seeks help from two retired
vice-chairmen


   By ALAN CANE


MR JOHN Akers, beleaguered chairman of IBM, the US computer company, has
recalled two highly experienced former vice-chairmen to help the company
through its most challenging crisis.
He told senior staff late last week that he had asked Mr Paul Rizzo and Mr
Kaspar Cassani, both several years over IBM's statutory retirement age of
60, to become consultants to the company from January 1.
IBM lost money last year and looks certain to do so again this year
principally from the cost of successive waves of redundancies as the company
attempts to match its overheads to reduced business expectations. Last week
Mr Akers said there would be a further 25,000 job losses costing about
Dollars 6bn in 1993.
The two former executives will act in an advisory capacity and will not
become employees of IBM.
IBM's rule on retirement has been broken more and more frequently in recent
years as the company has sought to hold on to the expertise of its most
experienced officers. Mr Cassani, who was chairman of IBM World Trade for
Europe, Middle East and Africa before his move to IBM's Armonk headquarters
as vice-chairman in 1988, was one of the first to have his tenure extended.
Since retiring from IBM in the late 1980s, both men have taken up posts in
education, Mr Rizzo as dean of the school of business administration at the
University of North Carolina and Mr Cassani as first chairman of the Swiss
business school formed from the merger of IMI and Imede. It is not clear
whether they will continue to hold their academic roles.
Mr Akers said that Mr Rizzo would work directly with him in the US, while Mr
Cassani would work with Mr Renato Riverso, head of IBM Europe.
It is expected that Mr Cassani's advice is being sought over the
'segmentation' process at IBM, dividing the company into smaller,
semi-autonomous business units. Mr Cassani introduced decentralised
decision-making while head of Europe long before the US followed suit.
The appointments inevitably throw up questions about the succession at the
top of IBM. While Mr Akers has been criticised for IBM's problems, there has
been no serious challenge yet to his authority either from fellow board
members or investors. The new appointments will render Mr Akers less
isolated but at the same time more protected from rival bids for his job.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921222

