FT922-7264

FT  19 MAY 92 / Foreign Exchanges: Dollar loses to strong D-Mark


   By JAMES BLITZ


THE DOLLAR sank to three-month lows against the D-Mark and the yen
yesterday, as a wave of news from both Germany and Japan undermined traders'
confidence yet again in the US currency, writes James Blitz.
The news that German employers had reached a pay agreement with metalworkers
boosted confidence in the D-Mark after several weeks in the doldrums. A
currency analyst in London said: 'It had been universally expected that
there would be a strike and that the unions would be settling for 6 per
cent. The slightly firmer settlement agreed by the German employers and
unions dispelled fears that the country might not have inflation under
control.'
Simultaneously, dollar holders could not get out of their heads the fear
that the Federal Reserve might cut rates at the Federal Open Market
Committee meeting today. The combination of factors forced the dollar down
to a low of DM1.5930 in European trading, before closing at DM1.5955. In US
options trading, Dollar/D-Mark volatility was being quoted at 10.7/10.9 per
cent for one to three-month options, up from Friday's 10.4/10.7 per cent.
Yesterday's figures for Japan's trade surplus also knocked the confidence of
dollar investors. Traders were still suffering a hangover from comments made
by Mr David Mulford, the US Treasury undersecretary for international
affairs, who stated last week that the US administration would like to see a
strong yen to keep Japan's trade surplus low. The news yesterday that
Japan's trade surplus for April had risen 13.4 per cent compared with the
same month last year further undermined their confidence. In European
trading the US currency ended at Y128.75, only slightly above the day's low
of Y128.65.
Analysts believe the odds are still against a cut in US interest rates today
because there were good figures for April's retail sales and industrial
production last week. The feeling is these figures lessened the need for the
Fed to stimulate production with another rate cut. In New York the dollar
ended at DM1.5956 and Y128.80.
The D-Mark's stronger performance against the US unit gave it some leverage
against other European currencies too. It ended a pfennig stronger against
sterling, which stood at DM2.9275. An analyst suggested that sterling's
weaker performance may partly reflect disappointment that recent UK
indicators have not shown a stronger upturn in the economy.
The German currency firmed modestly to around FFr3.3579 from Friday's late
FFr3.3566. However, the Swiss franc gained slightly after Switzerland said
it plans an application for EC membership, and the D-Mark eased to SFr1.4695
from SFr1.4714.

The Financial Times


London Page 31

920519

