FT922-7184

FT  20 MAY 92 / People: Watkins heads exodus from Schroder Securities


Richard Watkins, chief executive of Schroder Securities until he left last
week to set up his own Latin American investment banking group, has already
lured with him to the new venture two Schroders colleagues. They are
Swiss-born Pierre Mourgue D'Algue and Per-Arne Johansson of Sweden - two old
friends who were in New York when he was there for Hoare Govett in the
mid-1980s.
Mourgue D'Algue subsequently ran Schroders' Paris office and has spent the
last few months on 'sabbatical' - setting up his own safari park in Kenya.
He is likely to be based in Geneva to handle continental European clients.
Watkins, whose interest in the region was cemented by a spell in Caracas,
also before he joined Schroders, says LatInvest Holdings, initially
capitalised at Dollars 20m, will be run out of both London and New York in
the early days, selling the steady stream of Latin American equity issues to
US and European investors. One of the founding shareholders is Grupo
InverMexico, the Mexican financial services group, and Watkins is now
searching for a Brazilian shareholder.
In time, however, the bulk of the business is likely to be concentrated in
New York; US investors are far more familiar with the Mexican and emerging
Latin American markets than many of their European counterparts.
Watkins' parting from Schroder Securities is said to be amicable; the
latter's strengths are primarily in the Far East, whereas the current
opening offers Watkins the chance to put some of his own capital, as well as
all his time, the way of his Latin American enthusiasms. He hopes to have a
team of 12 executives in place by the end of the year.
He is not being directly replaced at Schroders. Instead, the new chairman of
Schroder Securities is Adam Broadbent, a main board director of Schroders
and group managing director of corporate finance. He has just returned from
two years in New York at Wertheim Schroder.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920520

