FT921-15268

FT  11 JAN 92 / Letter: The link between constitutional reform and Britain's
economic performance


   From Mr ANTHONY BARNETT


Sir, I felt your leader on the honours systems ('An honourable case for
change', December 30) was excellent - excellent, that is, with the exception
of its concluding paragraph, which begins: 'Constitutional reform is not
going to add percentage points to the British growth rate.'
Is Britain's business and financial community really so feeble-minded that
it thinks there is no relation between the country's system of government
and its economic performance?
Just take, for example, the honours system you justly scorn. To paraphrase
it for the sake of those who missed it over the new year, your editorial
argues three things:
First, that the absurd categories and mass of honours should be pruned
drastically; second, as well as being comprehensible, awards should also be
reserved only for those who clearly deserve them. Third, and most important,
'handles would have to go'. Changing people's names and mode of address is
anachronistic, snobbish and open to abuse, made all the worse, your
editorial argues, by the actual powers and influence of the House of Lords.
This is a powerful argument, cogently put. It is bizarre, therefore, that
you should fail to carry it through to its conclusion.
Just imagine a large company that gives special names to some staff and
invests others with life-long influence until they die and does so by means
of a secret committee. Imagine that style, school ties, Oxbridge connections
and connivance all play a part in this. Imagine that while the accountants
get lots of these perks, those who run the warehouse or oversee production
get far fewer and resent it, and have no means to express their resentment
except by 'going slow'.
Yes, you are imagining the civil service. Once, perhaps, it ran well. But
today, when people want to be treated like citizens, when information
technology demands proper training and skills, it is obvious that such a
system - which threatens people's dignity - will lower morale, productivity,
competitiveness and profits.
If no contemporary company could expect to conduct itself according to the
honours system without losing out, is it so difficult to see that a country
that does, also loses out? Anthony Barnett,
co-ordinator, Charter 88,
Exmouth House,
3-11 Pine Street,
London EC1

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920111

