FT921-14199

FT  17 JAN 92 / Baker faces a fear of failure far from home: Lionel Barber
assesses the Washington conference next week on aid to the former Soviet
republics


   By LIONEL BARBER


WHEN Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, called last month for an
international conference on aid to what used to be the Soviet Union, some of
his closest colleagues felt they had been ambushed.
He offered no date, no firm list of invitations, and only a sketchy preview
of the conference's objectives.
Mr Nicholas Brady, US Treasury secretary, was reported as livid at the
failure to consult. European allies scrambled to respond.
Now, with less than a week until the conference in Washington on January
22-23, the mood is more favourable.
Some 50-60 governments are expected to send delegations, supported by the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
Mr Baker can claim to have rounded up an impressive posse.
US officials say the immediate purpose of the conference is practical: how
best to ensure efficient distribution of food, medicine and other
humanitarian supplies this winter and next, amid widespread reports of
official corruption, waste and incompetence in the former Soviet republics.
Western donors have their own problems, too. The flood of well-meaning
visitors to Moscow, Kiev, Minsk and other reformist centres has reached a
point where Soviet reformers risk being smothered with kindness.
'We need an orderly division of labour,' said one US official.
A second US goal is to avoid creating a new bureaucracy to co-ordinate aid.
The Treasury and the State Department are wary of putative efforts by
Europeans to create a new superstructure which could dilute US influence on
the Continent, along the lines of the EBRD.
The picture has shifted since 1989, when President George Bush awarded the
European Commission the task of co-ordinating aid to Poland and Hungary.
Then, Mr Bush wanted to show he was a good European, unafraid of sharing
political burdens with the EC.
On Soviet aid, the balancing act is more difficult: the US remains loath to
cede too much of the initiative to the Europeans.
In his speech at Princeton University last month, Mr Baker staked out a
bolder US policy toward the disintegrating Soviet Union.
He may have been responding to a general drift within the administration as
the senior ranks waited for the resignation of Soviet President Mikhail
Gorbachev, but other observers argue that he wanted to put the US in the
driving seat before it was too late.
Yet Mr Baker's well-honed rhetoric, suggesting that the west had a duty to
respond to the historic opportunities created by the new Russian revolution,
stopped short of a commitment to direct US financial aid. Instead, the State
Department prefers to talk about 'collective engagement'.
Some senior US officials compare this, in glowing terms, to the global
coalition assembled by Mr Bush against Iraq a year ago. Hence Mr Baker's
call for a 'coalition in support of freedom', in support of democracy and
free markets in what was the Soviet Union.
Allies are more sceptical, describing 'collective engagement' as a fancy
phrase to cover up the real goal of using other people's money to serve US
foreign policy goals.
In 1991, the US persuaded allies such as Germany, Japan and Gulf Arab states
to stump up more than Dollars 50bn to pay for the war against Iraq, and to
finance aid to 'front-line' states such as Egypt, Jordan and Turkey. By some
calculations, the US even turned in a small profit.
In 1992, there is a real difference. 'At least the Americans provided
half-a-million troops to fight the war,' said one western diplomat. 'What
are they offering now?'
The US response is that the meeting is not a 'pledging' conference (if
countries wish to offer money, though, they will not be turned down). More
important, officials say, is the US bestowing that rare, elusive quality
called political leadership.
As the self-styled powerbroker extraordinaire, the US may well be best
placed to persuade other countries to agree to a division of labour. One
obvious option is to play on fears about German domination of Soviet aid
policy, says one US official.
Taking a less cynical view, the US could offer, as Mr Baker suggested in his
Princeton speech to launch the initiative, scientific expertise to help the
ex-Soviets dismantle their nuclear weapons; the Nordic countries could focus
on the Baltic states; western US states such as Oregon and Alaska, as well
as Japan and South Korea, could develop the Soviet far east.
The big question next week is whether Mr Baker will put the conference
agenda onto US lines or whether other countries - notably Germany - will
broaden the debate to include a discussion on how the West should support
economic reform in the space vacated by the Soviet Union.
This might include, for instance, a proposal for a Russian Economic
Development Bank pressing micro-economic reform in concert with the
macro-economic efforts of the IMF and World Bank. These and other ideas
about fostering 'grass-roots capitalism' have been floated in recent weeks
in Washington.
So far, the administration is treading cautiously, aware that the mood in
the US has turned markedly introspective and hostile to foreign aid of all
shapes and sizes.
This is mainly due to the sluggishness of the US economy, but it also
reflects a fear of failure in dealing with the gigantic task of overhauling
the economy of its long-time adversary.
Reconciling this fear of failure with the desire for leadership on Soviet
aid will be Mr Baker's trickiest task next week - a task worthy of the
master of political stage-management.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

920117

