FT921-521

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Just a walk on the mild, wild side - Antony
Thorncroft knows a place where you can pretend to be Carmen Miranda


   By ANTONY THORNCROFT


IS THERE life in London after dark? On the surface it is doubtful; by
midnight, the Tube is creaking to a halt, waiters and barmen are reaching
for their coats and the streets are emptying. Below the surface, though, the
lively young - and not so young - are preparing for a good time.
Here is a partial guide for those who have had enough of London's obvious
evening dramas - the theatre, and confronting a restaurant bill - and fancy
a walk on the mild, wild side.
The buzz word is clubs. London clubs, from the anonymous palazzos in Pall
Mall to the latest disco, are discreet - but not exclusive. The recession
has opened many doors. The most elusively exclusive are the peripatetic
disco clubs, which scratch their presence on lamp post and walls with a code
sign letting the elite know time and place. The secret usually gets out and
the clubs become fixed weekly or monthly events.
The most celebrated at present is Kinky Gerlinky, where you are encouraged
to dress to your fantasies, especially if you are a man who would prefer to
be Carmen Miranda. The club attracts drag queens by the score but is by no
means gay; rather, a happy meeting of poseurs and voyeurs.
Kinky Gerlinky has hit the spot so squarely that it surfaces monthly at
London's largest - and, until now, least trendy - disco, the Empire in
Leicester Square. Whether it can remain a cult in such a public place is
doubtful.
There are clubs which stay rooted. Gaunt Road at the Elephant and Castle is
probably the most boring one-way street in London during the day. But pop
down around 3 am on Saturdays and Sundays and it becomes wonderland. For
hidden inside a disused warehouse is Ministry of Sound. It is all of six
months old but still just about smart: London's answer to the legendary
Paradise Garage in New York.
This is strictly a place for dancing, for straight-down-the-middle house
music, although there is a video lounge and (very New York), a VIP room. The
owners, bright young men from the City, reckon the sound system the best in
the land and none of the 1,500 people enjoying their private nirvana on the
dance floor seemed to disagree.
Ministry of Sound is an alcohol-free zone, except for vodka and tequila
flavoured jelloes. The brooding bouncers, who will search you for drugs, do
not look kindly on groups of young men, but generally there is a relaxed
door policy, although you will have to join the club.
North of the river, under Westway, is Subterrania, a club which makes a
virtue out of variety. Each night, there is a different feel. You could
catch the Songwriters' Network, young singer-songwriters trying out new
material backed by top session musicians; or a disco handled by the latest
hot-mixer, Jeremy Healey; or even a hit band, like Shakespear's Sister,
paying homage to its roots. This is a relaxed, laid-back kind of place,
where you need not starve or die of thirst.
Both Ministry of Sound and Subterrania would be surprised to see tourists,
but they are commercial enough to cope. There are clubs, like Wag in Wardour
Street and Milk Bar in Charing Cross Road, where you have to convince the
bouncers that you have the right attitude - sometimes a difficult trick if
you have queued for a couple of hours.
Heaven at Charing Cross is still the main haunt for gays. Other clubs, like
Quiet Storm at Ormonds in Mayfair on Friday nights, probably need
sounding-out during the day. This is very hot at present, with a disco
downstairs and a quieter space upstairs for backgammon. It appeals to that
ageing generation, convinced by their aching bodies that they are bored with
disco sounds, who really just want a club where they can meet friends and
have a quiet snack and drink in the early hours.
This move towards late-night private clubs (which can be relaxed when
strangers drop in) is concentrated in the Notting Hill Gate district where
Beach Blanket Babylon, the Globe, and 192 Kensington Park Road attract media
types and theatricals.
The main discos for visitors in London are the Hippodrome, Limelight and the
Empire Ballroom, all within hip-hop distance of Leicester Square. Nearby, in
Charing Cross Road, is another large dance space, the Astoria, which
attracts a tougher-looking crowd into heavier metallic music. If you can
take the pressure, the customers are considerably more interesting. All
these open, and close, earlier than the hippier clubs.
But what if you think dancing is a bore? Are there no alternatives? Yes,
alternative comedy. The past few years have seen a flowering of comedy clubs
in the capital.
They are often based over a pub and provide much of the camaraderie of a
good pub, plus licensing extensions into the early hours and the chance to
catch the acts of younger, irreverent comedians. Even when they have
progressed to television stardom, many - such as Josie Lawrence, Paul
Merton, Sean Hughes and Jack Dee - still work the circuit regularly.
The Comedy Store in Leicester Square is the most sophisticated venue but
there is, perhaps, more fun at Jongleurs in Clapham, south London, or the
T&C 2 at Highbury Corner, north of the river.
The routine is the same: a succession of, say, four comedians chosen
(ideally) because one is a ballsy woman, one political, one deadpan and one
who thinks he is a Martian. The audience is experienced enough to reward
quality and to hammer pretension. Comedy clubs are as escapist as discos,
but much cheaper, and get the night over with before 2 am.
London after dark is something of a closed oyster for many visitors, but
persevere and you can turn up pearls. There is much to be said for heading
for a lively 'village' - Notting Hill, the Angel Islington, the Fulham Road
and Earl's Court are the best bets - and then flowing with the tide, taking
in the tapas bars (invariably providing Latin music), the pubs with
entertainment (anything from karaoke singalongs to punk) and the late-night
bars.
Acquire a copy of Time Out, the best listings magazine, which tells you
which clubs cater for house music or funk, for gays or rhythm and blues
freaks, and take an all-night bus map. The Tube might close early but, these
days, there is a network of all-night buses which will get you home to
Bromley before dawn.

The Financial Times


London Page VIII

920328

