FT922-13402

FT  11 APR 92 / Books: This royal throne of myth - A L Rowse takes the Poet
Laureate to task for his view of Shakespeare


   By A L ROWSE


SHAKESPEARE AND THE GODDESS OF COMPLETE BEING by Ted Hughes Faber & Faber
Pounds 18.99, 517 pages
THE Poet Laureate's book stems from two sources, he tells us: 'The first of
these was my sustained interest in the mythologies and folklores of the
world, which had long preceded my interest in poetry and had in a way led me
to poetry.'
The second arose from an 'old notion of the last fifteen plays, hugely
shuffled and re-arranged to make a perpetuum mobile maze of metamorphic
episodes, play dissolving into play, characters going through their
transformations, in and out of each other's worlds, like supernatural, dying
and resurrected in a real myth.'
So we have been warned: we are dealing with a mythical Shakespeare. The
author admits engagingly, 'in the end, of course, all this is speculation',
and that 'almost anything can be projected into Shakespeare'. He therefore
proceeds to project it, for more than 500 pages.
He is concerned only with the last 15 plays, with the notion of turning them
into facets of one myth, as it might be one long Indian epic.
He informs us that Myth predominates over Plot - as it does with him, if not
with Shakespeare. This is, as he says,'always setting the histories aside.'
But the real world of history occupies more than a third of the Plays, and
Shakespeare was the most historically minded of dramatists, concerned to
depict the real world as well as an imaginative (rather than a mythical)
one.
All these later works, we are told, go back to the two early narrative poems
and the myths that are supposed to lie behind them. 'The myth behind Venus
and Adonis operated as the 'myth' of Catholicism, while the myth behind
Lucrece operated as that of Puritanism.'
Venus and Adonis is to be regarded as a 'shamanic initiation dream.'
Shakespeare is a shaman - as Hitler and Stalin were; caught in the
'crucible' of the Elizabethan age, he was also a 'salamander.' This is a
poetic idea, if hardly recognisable to common sense.
What this leads to reads sometimes absurdly. It is well known that
Shakespeare, as a country man, was 'sportive,' addicted to country sports.
The poem includes a realistic depiction of hare-coursing. What this becomes
in this reduction of everything to myth is the following:
'The hare, in all mythologies and spontaneous dream life, is the mystic
animal of the menstrual cycle, the self-sacrificial victim and divinity of
the womb's ritual of reproduction, the moon's own magical love creature, in
oestrus, passive, appealing.'
After this anything may happen, or become anything else - and it does. We
are told that, 'reincarnating Wriothesley (ie Southampton) as Adonis, he
reincarnates himself as Venus. Shakespeare has identified himself, that is,
at what was evidently a most inflammable moment of his life, with the Great
Goddess of Love possessed by a hopeless passion for Adonis/Wriothesley.'
I do not like to call this nonsense, but it is the exact opposite of what
Shakespeare himself tells us. He says that Nature 'by addition me of thee
defeated / By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.'
All would be well if the effeminate-looking young man were indeed a woman,
but he has a prick, which is nothing to William's purpose. Hence 'since she
pricked thee out for women's pleasure / Mine be thy love, and thy love's use
their treasure.' Let the women have him - Shakespeare's hopeless passion was
for his dark young mistress; everything in his work, as in his life, shows
that he was a heterosexual family man.
As for his relations with his young patron, John Donne at the time knew what
the situation was. 'And they who write to Lords rewards to get - / Are they
not like singers at doors for meat?' Others have noticed that not very kind
comment; but it is the truth about the matter - Shakespeare needed the young
patron for support during those plague years.
There is a similar inversion of sense when we come to All's Well that Ends
Well. Hughes views it autobiographically: no objection to that, except that
again he gets it wrong. Young Count Bertram is reluctant to marry (like
Southampton), flings off abroad (like Southampton), shows courage in
fighting there (as Southampton did in Ireland); Shakespeare is obviously
recalling the young patron's record. Hughes would see Shakespeare as young
Bertram] - ludicrous: nobody else would.
To understand Shakespeare one needs a good, sound commonsense knowledge of
the time he lived in. To Hughes, it was 'a supernova moment, which, it
seems, can happen only once in a nation, as in a star. And while the Red
Giant swelled towards the ultimate explosion, disintegration and collapse,
Shakespeare's dramas incarnated the chemistry of the whole process.'
Celtic exaggeration is the idiom of the book: 'explosions' occur frequently,
the myth of the Boar - 'that holiest of Celtic beasts'  - a hundred times,
Mythic and Tragic Equations a couple of hundred.
Better to get the facts right. Burghley was not a patron of poets, as
Spenser found to his cost. Archbishop Whitgift was not a Puritan but their
greatest enemy. 'Confidence' was precisely what Elizabeth I did not have in
Raleigh.
And so on. But what is the use in the stratosphere? What we need is
down-to-earth facts and evidences, interpreted by Elizabethan scholarship,
for common sense about Shakespeare.

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920411

