FT923-15570

FT  01 JUL 92 / Arts: Fuente Ovejuna - Theatre


   By DAVID MURRAY


There is still a chance to catch Lope de Vega's 1619 play at the National
Theatre before it travels north. Theatre-lovers who missed it last time
round should pick up the telephone and book in haste. Except for young
children and persons of especially timid disposition (there is a certain
amount of rape and murder), it is hard to imagine that anyone could fail to
find it both stirring and rewarding.
The strong story is archetypal, or over the centuries has come to seem so,
though Lope lights up his characters with individual touches. A Commander in
the service of Ferdinand and Isabella, who has the village of Fuente Ovejuna
as his fiefdom, is a voracious tyrant who at last goes too far. The village
summons its collective courage to assassinate him, takes the cruel
consequences, but survives through heroic solidarity: when the Inquisition
comes to seek out the culprits, even under torture, nobody - man, woman or
child - will say more than 'Fuente Ovejuna did it]' To our great relief they
get away with it, but it is touch-and-go, and the 'happy ending' casts
troubling shadows.
Declan Donnellan's production has lost none of its cutting edge in this
revival. It plays for just under two hours without an interval, seizing
one's attention from the start and never letting go. Many of the original
players remain: again James Laurenson's monstrous Commander is exquisitely
detestable, and again Rachel Joyce plays his chief victim with disarming
plainness and wrenching force. Her calf-eyed fiance is still Wilbert
Johnson, funny and honestly touching.
As the incorrigible village debater Mengo, Clive Rowe (who also sings, to
excellent purpose) somehow manages to look exactly like Lenny Henry and Dawn
French, which makes him irresistible. Pamela Nomvete's Pascuala is a match
for him - but one ought to be praising everybody here: each of the many
roles, large or small, is addressed with terrific commitment. Adrian
Mitchell's colloquial-modern Englishing serves them and the drama well
(unlike his recent version of Lope's Columbus play The Discovery of the New
World, where the sacrifice of period rhetoric and dignity was a dull loss).
The several elements of the show - Nick Ormerod's tellingly simple designs,
Mick Hughes' bold lighting, above all Paddy Cunneen's toughly 'ethnic' music
and Jane Gibson's direction of the massed parades and dances - meld into an
indissoluble whole. Donnellan has imposed a tight theatrical form upon it
which would probably have surprised the playwright (taut structures seem not
to have concerned him much), but does him magnificent justice. The close-up
vignettes live and breathe, within a stern formal plan that grips like a
vice.
Sponsored by Marks & Spencer In repertory at the Cottesloe until July 30;
then at the Edinburgh Festival

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920701

