FT921-14176

FT  17 JAN 92 / Arts: Spread a Little Happiness - King's Head Theatre, N1


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Sweet, funny, and occasionally surprising touching, this show does just what
its title purports, and then some. Thanks to Sting, you've heard the song
'Spread a Little Happiness' a hundred times, of course: it's a honey. But
you may well have forgotten, or not have known, that its tune was written
for Mr Cinders by Vivian Ellis, whose career in the London musical theatre
began in the glorious 1920s and continued till well after the Second World
War. He is still very much alive, and made a graceful speech on Tuesday's
opening night.
Spread a Little Happiness honours Ellis by showing, in more than 30 songs,
how much good work he has written. The pleasures it gives are largely mixed
with surprise: the 'So he wrote this' surprise on the one hand, and the 'Why
haven't I heard that before?' on the other. This celebration was devised by
Sheridan Morley, who narrates with just the right combination of information
and urbanity. It is deftly directed (by Dan Crawford), stylishly
choreographed (by David Toguri) and handsomely performed by six singers.
Ellis began under the aegis of Jerome Kern and grew in the great age of CB
Cochran's revues. One of the songs here - 'Wind in the Willows' - was
originally staged in 1930 by the greatest choreographer of the century,
George Balanchine, and another - Dancing with a Ghost from the 1934 Jill
Darling - was arranged by the greatest British choreographer, Frederick
Ashton. Sometimes he himself wrote the words for his own songs, but he
worked with other fine lyricists, including - for the post-War musicals The
Water Gipsies, Bless the Bride and more  - AP Herbert.
In fact, it is the lyrics that are the greatest factor of this evening's
success. Sometimes they are cleverly wordy, like 'On the Amazon' with its
list of the 'philosopedes,' 'isosceles' and 'hypodermics' that make the
Amazon so dangerous. Sometimes they're just jolly skits: 'I'm Horsa,' 'I'm
Hengist,' 'We're coarser than Genghis,' 'I'm Hengist,' 'I'm Horsa,' 'We're
mentioned in Chaucer.' Sometimes they're charmingly satiric, as in 'A Small
Abode off the Finchley Road,' the plaint of the lady who, from her married
exile in Eaton Square, pines for her native Cricklewood.
Ellis does not emerge from this as a great melodist, and yet he seems a
light year away from the decadence of the lyric-led shows of the Sondheim
school. Ellis's songs are all so shapely, singable, grateful in their vocal
lines, and they beam with freshness and innocence. They are sophisticated
without cynicism. (To my ear, however, his style loses its contemporary
spirit in the last show represented here, Bless the Bride, which reverts to
an operetta prettiness that I find resistible - even though 'This is my
Lovely Day' has the evening's finest melodic line.)
The cast catches all the charm and tone of these songs. The two most
experienced performers are Frank Thornton and Thelma Ruby; their timing and
manner are perfect. Ray C Davis is the most skilful dancer present, throwing
a neat double air turn and landing the moment before he starts to sing.
Maurice Clarke sings the tenor solos musically, but his style is more
pinched and nasal than suits these tunes. I think that music like Ellis's
can teach singers how to use their voices freely, without squeezing or
falsetto.
As you can hear with Rachel Robertson, who is the evening's best discovery.
Picture-pretty in a rather Olivia Newton-John way, she is 19 years old but
already able to phrase and point a song with skill. Her voice opens out in
the bigger lines (though at moments it is slightly too breathy), and she can
make much out of not a lot: eg 'Me and My Dog'. 'I've got a dog. Me and my
dog - Are lost in the fog. Can't any kind gentleman show me the way home?'
For me the great event of Spread a Little Happiness is the way she weights
those rhymes and repetitions - plaintive, winsome and yet deadly.

The Financial Times


London Page 15 Photograph Rachel Robertson, Frank Thornton and Fiona Sinnott
(Omitted).

920117

