FT924-6084

FT  23 NOV 92 / Season of goodwill and runny noses


   By PAUL ABRAHAMS


WINTER IS upon us and tissue manufacturers are praying for a stream of runny
noses.
It is three years since the UK last suffered a big flu epidemic and in the
meantime the market for facial tissues has suffered, with volume sales down
2 per cent on last year.
'I hate to say it, but we are sitting with our fingers crossed for a really
good cold season,' says Mr Paul Southern, product group manager for facials
at Scott, the US paper group. He believes that the market for facial tissues
 -worth about Pounds 140m - has been static for 10 years and is now in
decline.
Mr Southern laments: 'Tissues are a discretionary purchase. People are using
toilet tissue or kitchen towels instead.'
Toilet tissue is not designed for nose-blowing, warns Mr John Waters, trade
market manager for facial tissues at Kimberly-Clark, the US group that sells
Kleenex.
Tissue manufacturers' hopes for a good winter are shared by cold-remedy
manufacturers. So far, the flu figures monitored by Meditex, a London-based
research group, are marginally up on last year.
'It's looking encouraging - at least from our point of view,' says Mr Roger
Crow, marketing manager at the consumer division of Wellcome, the healthcare
company.
At stake is a market for pharmacy-based remedies worth about Pounds 68m a
year, according to Ms Lesley Spokes, product manager for Sudafed, Wellcome's
decongestant remedy and the market leader in the UK. That market is more
resistant, with growth of 1 per cent by volume and 8 per cent by value.
'It's a one-off distress purchase.'
The price of the cold is more than just the cost of tissues and remedies. It
is the world's most expensive disease. SmithKline Beecham, the
Anglo-American healthcare company, reckons a fifth of the UK population
suffers from a cold or flu during any week in the winter. Colds account for
more days off than all other diseases combined.
Increased consumption of hot toddies, a well-known palliative for colds, may
be behind the fact that two thirds of Scotch whisky sales are in the last
third of the year.
However, the Scotch Whisky Association reckons the increase is more likely
to be related to Christmas festivities than the cold. More than 40 per cent
of all alcohol sold in the UK is shipped during the last quarter of the year
 -the season of goodwill and excessive alcoholic intake. And 40 per cent of
all hangover remedies are sold in the four weeks around Christmas.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921123

