FT924-11911

FT  23 OCT 92 / International Company News: Efim creditors to give plan
verdict


   By HAIG SIMONIAN


   MILAN


FOREIGN bank creditors to Efim, the Italian state holding company put into
liquidation in August, will today give a preliminary judgment on the
government's plan to repay all the debts of the group and its wholly-owned
subsidiaries.
Though welcomed in principle, bankers have expressed caution ahead of
details of the government's proposals. Though some had hoped to find fuller
information in the decree published earlier this week, it shed little light
on how creditors will be treated.
'In principle, it's a good thing,' said Mr Guido Rosa, the chairman of the
foreign banks' association in Italy. 'But there are so many things yet to be
defined that all options are open.'
Bankers want to know how much of Efim's debts the government intends to
repay in cash. They would also like to know how the remainder, probably in
the form of bonds, will be paid. An earlier proposal to offer bank creditors
lira and Ecu bonds at interest rates well below market rates aroused
protests.
'We want to know what sort of bonds the government will issue, the interest
rates and maturities,' said one banker. 'And many lenders are concerned
about the treatment of loans to subsidiaries of Efim, like the Agusta
helicopters group, which are not 100 per cent owned by the parent company.'
Bankers will be able to discuss the matter at a November 3 meeting with Mr
Alberto Predieri, the special administrator running Efim.
Further information could emerge around mid-month, when the government is
expected to disclose how the group will be restructured, while the treasury
itself may also issue further technical details on the treatment of
creditors.
The government has already revealed preliminary plans to break up Efim's
industrial activities. Siv, its big glass making subsidiary, is to be
auctioned. The company could interest a number of Europe's leading glass
producers.
Efim's aerospace and defence businesses, concentrated in Agusta and Oto
Melara respectively, will be transferred to the IRI state holding company on
a fiduciary basis, pending an eventual sale. The two companies, whose debts
will be assumed by the government, are likely to come under the wing of
Finmeccanica.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921023

