FT924-968

FT  21 DEC 92 / Arts: Hamlet - Barbican


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


Adrian Noble's new production of Hamlet at the Barbican must be among the
best you are likely to see. One of the main reasons why is that Noble plays
the text in full - the performance lasts 4 1/2 hours. As a result, not only
do you learn more about Hamlet the man, but also about the society in which
he lives.
It is only possible to mount a production like this if you have supreme
self-confidence. Noble has confidence in every word of the text, in the
actors, in the designer and above all in his own ability to see the play as
a whole.
He directs Hamlet as if it were a symphony with some startling changes of
pace and an eye for detail down to the smallest player.
It is a very moving play, to be sure, but this is the first Hamlet where you
might be tempted to weep at the death of Gertrude.
Noble works by symmetries. One of the most notable is Polonius and his
family. Although there is no mention of a mother, it is obviously a happy
one which knows its place in the court: below the royals, but above much of
the rest - hence Ophelia's Christian burial.
David Bradley's wonderful Polonius is not a buffoon, but a well-educated
civil servant plainly regarded as efficient by the king. When Hamlet says of
him in front of the players 'He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he
sleeps', we know that the prince is being unfair. Polonius also has genuine
fears that his daughter is getting out of her depth by being wooed so close
to the throne.
The first time we see Ophelia (Joanne Pearce) she is in a nursery bedroom,
with an upright piano, painted in nursery colours, in the background. She is
a young girl growing up and only beginning to use powder and paint. Only a
few signs, but there are enough, give a hint of future turbulence. Ms Pearce
knows how to conserve her energy: the mad scene when it comes is
devastating.
Hamlet refers to the symmetries himself when he says of Laertes 'For by the
image of my cause I see the portraiture of his' - another family broken up.
And even Claudius, in lines that are sometimes cut, acknowledges that the
Queen has removed herself from him, 'But that I know love is begun by time
 .' The remarkable fact about this court is that everybody thinks and
broods.
The symmetries come out in the language as well. Horatio's 'Good night,
sweet prince' echoes Ophelia's earlier 'Good night, ladies.' Every word
counts, every word fits. The sets by Bob Crowley never intrude too much.
Only once does Crowley go for the spectacular when the court of Denmark
turns out to have its own red and gilt theatre for private performances. At
the front of the stage is a slightly overgrown miniature cemetery. It serves
for Ophelia to pick her flowers.
There are innovations as well as fidelities. In the play scene, Kenneth
Branagh's Hamlet takes the word 'merry', which is how Ophelia describes him,
literally. He appears to be drunk. And when the play within the play reaches
a climax, Hamlet commits the crime himself. When he declines to kill
Claudius while the king is at his prayers, he leaves his sword behind for
Claudius to see. He plays the early part of the nunnery scene with Ophelia
as if he genuinely wants her to be looked after; only when he senses the
presence of Polonius does he become rough.
There are some magnificent details. One incident requires no words, but
speaks volumes about Horatio (Rob Edwards). He may be a learned man and a
good friend of Hamlet, but he is not at home in evening dress. Look at the
way he wears the waistcoat and tails which have clearly been hired for the
court dinner.
Then there is Osric, played by Guy Henry who will be remembered for his
Ananias in the RSC's splendid production of The Alchemist. This is not the
customary fop, but a courtier of some dignity capable of standing up to
Hamlet's insults and discharging his duties.
In almost any other production, one would have discussed Hamlet first, and
indeed Branagh's performance is faultless. He looks young, has short hair,
but I suppose Hamlets are getting younger. There is no doubt of his love for
Ophelia, but he is also capable of being cruel and arrogant. He is perhaps
not quite as different from the rest of the court as is sometimes supposed.
The principal triumph, however, is not to steal the show.
Only two quibbles. It is surprising that in the line 'Madness in greatness
must not unwatched go' Noble allows the word 'unwatched' to be pronounced as
if it had only two syllables. And judging by the sound effects, Hamlet
appears to set off for England by train. The production is financially
supported by Unilever.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921221

