FT924-12140

FT  22 OCT 92 / Leading Article: Aid matters


WHEN THINGS are going badly, householders kick the cat and chancellors the
overseas aid budget. There is thus a depressing predictability about the
leaks, which began last month, that the Treasury is looking for a 15 per
cent cut (about Pounds 250m) in Britain's aid budget over the next three
years. Since some 40 per cent of the total is already committed in foreign
currencies through the European Development Fund and other multilateral
agencies, and has therefore just been sharply increased as expressed in
sterling, this would imply an even bigger cut in the bilateral aid
programmes which are often the most imaginative.
The reaction has been equally predictable. Churches and charities have
rushed to the defence of a budget whose inadequacy they are usually the
first to point out. More significant, in the light of recent events, is the
fact that 33 Tory MPs signed an advertisement opposing the cuts.
Certainly the proposed cuts would be hard to reconcile with earlier pledges
of an increase, notably in the Conservative election manifesto and in the
prime minister's speech to the Rio earth summit.
The position of Baroness Chalker, the overseas development minister, will be
very unenviable if the cuts go through. And her colleagues defending the
Maastricht treaty 'line by line' in the House of Commons might suffer some
embarrassment when they reach Article 130 U, dealing with co-operation and
development policy. In that article the EC and its member states promise to
respect the undertakings and objectives they have accepted in the UN
framework: an allusion to the long-declared aim of industrialised countries
to raise aid disbursements to 0.7 per cent of their annual gross national
product. In reality, the UK has slipped from 0.51 per cent in 1979 to 0.28
per cent this year, and these cuts would take it lower still.
What is curious about this depressing argument is that all parties to it
agree that aid flows are a mere drop in the ocean in their effect on
long-term development compared with the damage done by tariff and non-tariff
barriers to south-north trade. The overall cost of northern protectionism to
third world exporters is estimated at about Dollars 100bn a year, without
counting the damage done through unfair competition from subsidised northern
food exports. Developing countries are constantly urged to earn their way
out of debt and poverty through exports. Yet when they add value to their
products before exporting them (for instance, by turning cocoa beans into
powder) they run into a much higher tariff wall.
Particular culprits are the multifibre arrangement and the EC's common
agricultural policy. Reforms in both are frequently promised, but those that
would actually help third world imports are constantly postponed - the
current excuse being the need to resolve north-north arguments in the
Uruguay Round first.
If Britain could use its EC presidency to break this logjam, those concerned
with third world development might forgive the small-minded cuts the
government is thinking of making in its inadequate aid budget.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921022

