FT921-14254

FT  16 JAN 92 / World Stock Markets: Italy and Germany lead the volume
declines in 1991 - Review of last year's European trading, which petered out
after an exciting first half


   By WILLIAM COCHRANE


Convergence may be a pattern to look forward to on European bourses,
according to some theorists, but the main similarity in their trading
statistics in 1990 and 1991 was that each year enjoy-ed an exciting first
six months, followed by an increasingly morose second half.
History can be blamed for that. The year before last started in a fever of
excitement over German reunification, and palled in a nervous autumn after
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Last year built up rapidly from the outbreak
of the Gulf war on January 17 and fell away later, dramatically in some
cases, as the growth rate in Germany began to slow down and recessionary
clouds started to gather elsewhere.
Mr James Cornish of County NatWest, which produces the figures, has provided
monthly averages for 1990 and 1991 which show severe falls in trading levels
in Germany, Italy and Switzerland; marginal declines in three more, Belgium,
France and the Netherlands; and useful gains for Spain and the UK.
Germany dropped 22.5 per cent to a 1991 monthly average of DM104.8bn,
falling from a high in July and, more worryingly, by nearly 28 per cent to
DM66bn in December, its lowest since March 1989.
Part of December's problem, says Mr Cornish, was an exaggerated Christmas
effect, traders and investors using the approaching holiday as an excuse to
do nothing while the domestic economy suffered in the aftermath of the
reunification boom, wage demands mounted and the Bundesbank eventually
bumped up interest rates on December 19.
While German share prices rose in late-December, lifted by the
record-breaking climb on Wall Street, the real recovery in volume was
delayed until this week as strategists decided that wage rises were going to
be constrained in 1992 and that European interest rates, as a result, were
likely to ease this summer.
Italy was even more severely depressed last year, the monthly average
dropping by 37 per cent year to year, and running latterly at less than
one-tenth of the daily peaks of L700bn to L800bn which it reached in 1986.
The Milan equity market has had little to cling to in the face of sick
national and corporate economies, the latter reflecting poor to
near-disastrous performances by Italy's big industrial blue chips such as
Fiat, Pirelli and Olivetti. The succession of stockbroker bankruptcies,
which disrupted the running of the equity market, were an almost continuous
drain on sentiment.
Switzerland's monthly average fell by 18.6 per cent to SFr11.3bn. Here, says
Mr Cornish, the economy was a mix of high inflation and almost nil growth
with very low unemployment, making it hard for the national government to
take any initiative but to defend the Swiss franc by keeping interest rates
high.
In the middle, France recovered in rising volume towards the end of
December. For a long time, people have been saying that it is a cheap
market, looking at domestic political worries but also at a prospective 12
per cent earnings per share growth this year. Mr Cornish thinks it 'the most
attractive market in Europe'.
As for the two 1991 winners, the UK, for a lot of the year, reflected the
belief in an 'Anglo' economic recovery, the theory which expected both the
US and UK economies to pick up. In that context, British equities attracted
both domestic and quite a lot of international investment; the market was on
a 5 per cent dividend yield and this, historically, seems to have been a
good anchor for equity levels.
Spain, in December, repeated what it did in 1990. Fund managers seemed to be
buying blue chips to dress up their portfolios for the year-end; however, it
did appear that there was a genuine surge of investment interest in Madrid
in the second half of December, as ordinary investors came bargain hunting
after a steep fall in share prices, in low volume, early in the month.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

920116

