FT924-6428

FT  21 NOV 92 / US farmers outraged at burning flags in Paris: Agricultural
lobby feels wronged by comeback on 'patience and generosity'


   By DAVID DODWELL


DOWN on Bluebird Farm, near Tallahassee, north Florida, Mr Steve Yoder has
seen his soyabean acreage steadily dwindle over the 1980s - from 1,300 acres
a decade ago to 450 acres today.
'While we were having to address the problems of surplus production in the
world, the Europeans were continuing to take advantage of that situation,
flooding the world with their oilseed surpluses,' he said in Washington
yesterday, furious over reports of French farmers burning the US flag in
protest at demands for reform of the EC farm subsidies regime.
The five-year oilseeds dispute, which has been at the heart of a wider US-EC
battle over Europe's farm subsidies, has for two years blocked progress
towards settlement of the Uruguay Round.
The ambitious plan to liberalise international trade would boost world trade
by Dollars 200bn a year by the end of the century, economists say.
Worse still, the US threat to impose punitive sanctions worth Dollars 300m a
year, mainly targeted at EC white wine exports, in retaliation for losses it
says US farmers suffer as a result of EC subsidies, brought the world's main
trading powers to the brink of a potentially calamitous tit-for-tat trade
war.
Mr Yoder, who is president of the American Oilseeds Association, was
ensconced in a suite at the down-at-heel Washington Hotel - its only virtue
being closeness to Blair House, where US and EC trade negotiators were
wrestling on Wednesday and Thursday this week to settle the dispute.
He was seeking to exert whatever pressure he could on negotiators to avoid a
US 'sell-out' on oilseeds, although he acknowledged that the American
government represents more than just farmers, who would not get all they
wanted.
What most inflames Mr Yoder is the suggestion that US 'inflexibility' on the
oilseeds issue has triggered an international trade crisis.
From his point of view, US farmers are on the side of the angels - or at the
very least have shown the patience of Job: 'We have been extremely patient,
working on the issue for six years, playing everything by the book,
following the rules of the Gatt.'
When the US first took a complaint to the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade in Geneva, subsidised EC oilseeds output stood at around 5m tonnes a
year. Binding agreements made in the early 1960s essentially made oilseeds
subsidies illegal.
So US farmers see themselves not as inflexible, but as generous in the
extreme, when they say they are willing to set a ceiling of 8m tonnes on
subsidised EC production.
The fact that EC production has risen to more than 13m tonnes a year since
1985, with French farmers enraged at the prospect of lowering the ceiling
even to 10m tonnes, should not weaken the justness of the US demands for
deeper cuts, Mr Yoder argues.
US soyabean farmers say the EC oilseed subsidy regime costs them Dollars 2bn
a year in lost sales and lower prices.
They have taken their case twice to Gatt, where independent dispute
settlement panels have endorsed their claims, and condemned EC practices.
In the meantime, US farmland under oilseeds has fallen from 76m acres to 57m
acres, and they have been prevented from growing other crops by long-term
set-aside schemes and restrictions on land sown to corn, wheat, cotton or
rice.
Oilseeds were once the US's largest export earner, with the second largest
acreage of any crop in the US, he says.
Conceding that EC farmers, including those in France, are likely to feel
pain as a result of production cuts resulting from the US-EC settlement of
the oilseeds dispute, he insists: 'We are not asking European farmers to do
anything that we have not already been willing to do ourselves.'
'It is not US farm policies that have created this crisis, but European
ones,' he says.
'We absolutely refuse to accept blame for the damage European farmers are
doing to the international trading system. The US is not the guilty party
here: the Europeans are the ones that have violated an international
agreement.'
Unable to find words that match his frustration and anger at the
anti-American antics of French farmers on the streets of Paris, Mr Yoder
simply says it is 'totally amazing' that US farmers should be accused of
unreasonableness after six patient years of pressing their case through
international legal channels, when French farmers are assaulting the US
embassy in Paris, and threatening sanctions against US farm exports, just
weeks after they detect that planned farm reforms may hurt their
livelihoods.
Let European farmers take their case against the US to the Gatt, wait six
years for two favourable rulings, and then threaten counter-retaliation, he
says.
'Then I would support them 100 per cent.'

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921121

