FT922-4343

FT  05 JUN 92 / Administrators take legal action in US to unravel Maxwell
assets


   By ALAN FRIEDMAN,  and BRONWEN MADDOX


   NEW YORK, LONDON


UK ADMINISTRATORS of the collapsed Maxwell empire are pursuing a legal
action in New York to try to obtain details on millions of dollars of assets
they believe were transferred to Liechtenstein-controlled companies from
Headington Investments and other Maxwell companies.
The US legal filing was made by Arthur Andersen which serves as joint
administrator of the private side of the Maxwell businesses. It represents a
stepping-up of efforts to unravel the web of companies and Liechtenstein
entities.
The action, which began with a filing in March and has only now come to
public attention, is a US extension of action already taken in the UK. It
also demands that Mr Sheldon Aboff, the former chief US aide to the late Mr
Robert Maxwell, be ordered to answer questions.
Mr Aboff's appearance which, along with the entire filing, was contested by
his lawyers during hearings late last month, was requested as part of the
administrators' search for Maxwell company funds they believe were
transferred to companies controlled by the Liechtenstein-based Maxwell
Foundation.
The administrators believe the fund transfers occurred both before and after
Mr Maxwell's death last November.
The news of the action came as Maxwell pensioners in the UK intensified
their campaign to persuade MPs to change the law to limit the losses faced
by thousands of pensioners. They want to become creditors with a call on
Maxwell assets.
Although not named in court, two companies - Pergamon Holdings (US) Inc, a
US company controlled by Swico Anstalt, a Liechtenstein company that is part
of the Maxwell Foundation, and Sphere Inc, a California computer games
business also controlled from Liechtenstein - are the focus of the legal
action.
The original petition - filed on March 10 under a section of US bankruptcy
law allowing a non-US representative to seek US court assistance - was made
in the US bankruptcy court of New York southern district.
Judge Tina Brozman has given both sides until June 19 to file papers
supporting their cases.
New details emerged yesterday about the London office of a
Liechtenstein-controlled company with links to the Maxwell family which the
Financial Times discovered has been used by the Maxwell brothers, Kevin and
Ian.
Completion of a leasing agreement between Hazelmere Estates, owner of a
building at Wardrobe Place, off London's Ludgate Hill, and Sphere was
confirmed on May 11. Mr Robert Maxwell bought an 80 per cent stake in Sphere
which is held by the Liechtenstein-based Maxwell Charitable Trust.
Both Hazelmere and Sinclair Goldsmith, the estate agents acting for
Hazelmere, have made it clear that at no stage prior to the signing of the
agreement did they suspect Sphere was linked to the Maxwell family.
Maxwell MPs to inform ombudsman of DTI role, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920605

