FT923-10973

FT  28 JUL 92 / Call for joint action on R&D


   By ANDREW BAXTER


A JOINT EFFORT by government, academia and industry is needed to boost
investment in engineering research and development, the Institution of
Mechanical Engineers urges in a report today.
The proposal for a forum to co-ordinate action is one of 10 recommendations
by the institution in a report highlighting the lack of investment in UK
engineering R&D compared with countries such as Germany and Japan.
The institution, which represents more than 78,000 engineers, says
investment in R&D is of critical importance in the coming decade and beyond
for improving the inadequate performance of manufacturing industry.
It says the UK's R&D total expenditure in the period leading to the 1989
Cabinet Office R&D Review was about 2.2 per cent of gross domestic product.
Civil R&D spending was only about 1.6 per cent of GDP, compared with about
2.8 per cent in Japan.
This is compounded, says the report, by a falling proportion of UK
government funding available for civil R&D from around 0.7 per cent of GDP
in 1981 to about 0.5 per cent in 1989.
'These statistics all point to a reduction in the nation's R&D effort,' says
the report. 'It is belived this has an ultimate relationship to the
commercial exploitation of technology and consequently is at least partially
responsible for the slippage of the UK in the international scene.'
Among other concerns raised by the report are the recent limitation of
funding for the Science and Engineering Research Council and lack of
substantive support for small and medium-sized firms in securing European
R&D funds.
The current support for 'pre-competitive' research and lack of funding for
'near-market' projects also affects engineering research particularly
adversely, says the report.
Apart from proposing an Engineering Research Forum to help develop coherent
R&D funding policies and actions, the institution also wants industry to
make a commitment to increase R&D funding.
It says government funding for R&D and training sponsored through the
Department of Trade and Industry and SERC should be increased, while
consideration should be given to consolidating engineering R&D grants under
one body.
The report also says the Government should promote and fund specific
programmes to support R&D in small companies, where that R&D is directed
towards innovative products. In addition, industry bodies are urged to set
up and support a unit to help small companies approach the EC for R&D
funding.
IMechE Statement on Research and Development, Research and Standards
Department; Institution of Mechanical Engineers, 1 Birdcage Walk, London
SW1H 9JJ. Free.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920728

