FT924-6127

FT  23 NOV 92 / European Government Bonds: Investors favour safe haven of
D-Mark bloc


   By SARA WEBB


THE weekend realignment of the European exchange rate mechanism, which saw
the devaluations of the Spanish peseta and the Portuguese escudo by 6 per
cent each, is unlikely to relieve the tensions in Europe's currency grid
unless German rates are cut soon.
Economists expect further weakening in some of the high-yielding European
government bond markets as dealers and investors continue to favour the safe
haven of the D-Mark bloc.
While Spain and Portugal may escape further speculative pressure in the
foreign exchange markets this week, the other weaker EMS currencies - the
Irish punt and the Danish krone - could still come under attack, analysts
warn.
'The changes (at the weekend) were too piecemeal to be sufficient to
forestall further pressures,' said Mr Avinash Persaud, senior currency
economist at UBS Phillips & Drew.
Last week's currency turmoil started in Sweden, and as the Swedish krona
buckled, the wave of speculation spread to the lira - no longer in the ERM -
peseta, escudo, Danish krone and punt. In the bond markets, investors
continued to favour the safety of the D-Mark bloc at the expense of
peripheral European bond markets.
While the decision by Spain and Portugal to devalue within the EMS was
welcomed, bond analysts warned question marks still remained over the
ability of the Irish and Danish currencies to weather the latest turbulence.
Spreads of Spanish, Portuguese and Italian government bonds over German
bunds are likely to remain wide, as fears of further currency weakness
prevail.
Mr George Magnus, economist at S. G. Warburg Securities, said Denmark may
escape further speculative pressures following Friday's decision to raise
domestic interest rates to 15 per cent. However, other economists warned the
weaker currencies were likely to remain under pressure in the next few days,
particularly if German interest rates are unchanged.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921123

