FT921-15188

FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: Black theatre shapes up - The problems facing ethnic
drama companies


   By CLAIRE ARMITSTEAD


THE RISING star of Britain's black theatre community comes to rest next
month on the expensively refurbished Cochrane Theatre in Central London when
its new occupant, Talawa, opens a show there for the first time. By then,
another black company, Temba, will have set off on the first tour of its
20th anniversary year devoid of the grant that has kept it going up to now.
Talawa is the current apple of the Arts Council's eye, while Temba is out of
favour, losing its funding to a couple of younger, smaller companies.
The Arts Council's decision would seem to signal a generational change in a
sector still largely dominated by the people who set it up 20 years ago. The
growing acceptance of multiracial casting, and the eagerness of
traditionally 'white' theatres to seek out new black work, has thrown the
black theatre community back on its haunches. It has responded, not by
seeking out and nurturing new black British writing talent, but by looking
increasingly towards a nebulous repertory of 'world' classics.
Temba's latest production, A Killing Passion, which opened this week at the
Lyric Studio, Hammersmith, is an Asian adaptation of a German story (Thomas
Mann's The Transposed Heads) performed by an afro-Caribbean cast. The same
sort of synthesis has been in evidence at the South Bank, where the
repertory of the Cottesloe could be read as a stock-taking exercise. After
The Coup, which teamed up the West Indian veterans Mustapha Matura and
Norman Beaton in a political fantasy based on Trinidad's history, came
Jatinder Verma's production of the Sanscrit classic The Little Clay Cart and
Yvonne Brewster's transportation of Lorca's Blood Wedding to
pre-revolutionary Cuba - both with mixed race casts.
As a snapshot of current fortunes within the black sector, the impression
left is revealing. Matura, who wrote The Coup, and Beaton, who starred in
it, are its elder statesmen, consistently successful. Beaton worked for the
National first in Measure for Measure 11 years ago; Matura, who co-founded
the Black Theatre Co-Operative in the late 1970s, was writing for the Royal
Court as long ago as 1971.
Verma and Brewster arrive on very different trajectories, as pillars of
their own establishments. Verma's South London-based Tara Arts, one of only
a couple of Asian companies in the country, whose funding was cut off by
Wandsworth Council this year, but has had its fortunes shored up by the Arts
Council. It cannot afford to use its own theatre any more, but has a healthy
touring life and is about to embark on its first co-production with the
Theatre Royal, Stratford East.
Brewster's Talawa is the rising star of the day. Its opening at the Cochrane
after the completion of a Pounds 350,000 facelift, is a resounding vote of
confidence by the Arts Council. Fortune, however, is a fickle thing and
especially when it comes to funding. The grand launch of the Cochrane in
December was observed with ironic grimaces by two directors who have lost
out in the last funding year: Temba's artistic director Alby James, who has
put together a scaled down year's programme thanks to backing from British
Telecom; and Anton Phillips, whose Carib Theatre Company was reponsible for
a splendid revival of James Baldwin's gospel musical The Amen Corner, but
went down last year after the withdrawal of its funding from Brent Council.
While knocking Temba off its books, the Arts Council has held out the arm of
revenue funding to the promising Black Mime Theatre, which appears at the
Young Vic next week, and the Rastafarian ensemble Double Edge. Black Theatre
Co-op is also giving itself a timely shake-up in anticipation of its next
application for Arts Council funding. It is currently looking for a new
artistic director to steer it into the 1990s - though when Temba advertised
for a new director in the summer when Alby James briefly resigned, no-one
could be found to replace him.
Temba has developed a somewhat meandering policy and although still capable
of producing good work, it has neither the radical sharpness of Double Edge,
nor the consistently canny eye for vote-winners that Talawa has
demonstrated. While keeping itself staunchly Afro-Caribbean, Talawa has
veered fashionably towards adaptations of world classics. Its first Cochrane
season opens with well-judged conservatism, with a rediscovered piece, The
Road, from the Nigerian Nobel prize-winner Wole Soyinka.
The installation of Talawa in the Cochrane has inevitably raised hackles in
a community which, at the start of the 1980s, was looking to a multi-million
pound national theatre of black arts at the Roundhouse in North London's
Chalk Farm. The repercussions of that fiasco in which millions of municipal
pounds were poured down the drains of a magnifient engine shed, are still
being felt four years after the project finally failed. It has cast doubt on
the competence of the black theatre community, many of whose leading lights
felt from the start that the Roundhouse project was setting off along the
wrong lines, in the wrong hands, on the wrong side of town.
The basic trouble, according to a longtime observer of black theatre, is the
sector is still so small that if one company goes under, the whole
establishment is rocked. New writing is particularly risky and therefore
particularly badly affected by insecurity. A generation of actors and
directors are moving on to television and film.
It took a couple of Americans, Charles Augins and Clarke Peters, to put
together Five Guys Named Moe, the West End stayer which began its winning
streak at Stratford East. Philip Hedley, the theatre's white director, is
philosophical. 'What has happened is that there has been a breakthrough in
acting talent, followed by some writers and directors. They are just
beginning to bang their head against a ceiling because as yet they don't
have any producers.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVIII Photograph Catherine Coffey in Temba's 'The Killing
Passion', which has just opened at the Lyric, Hammersmith (Omitted).

920111

