FT924-12022

FT  22 OCT 92 / Competition review clears detergent makers


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Consumer Industries Editor


THE OFFICE of Fair Trading said yesterday it had decided not to ask the
Monopolies and Mergers Commission to investigate competition in the laundry
detergents market.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director general of fair trading, said he had seriously
considered the case for a monopoly reference. He had decided against it
after a review by the OFT found no evidence of anti-competitive behaviour by
Procter & Gamble of the US and Lever Brothers of the UK, which dominate the
business.
Sir Bryan said he would continue to watch out for evidence that P&G and
Lever Brothers were abusing their market power. The two companies account
for about 90 per cent of laundry detergent sales, worth more than Pounds
800m a year.
Sir Bryan said detailed financial information provided by the companies did
not show that price competition was ineffective and he was encouraged by
recent improvements in productivity.
The OFT has monitored the detergents market since 1981 when P&G and Lever
Brothers, part of the Anglo-Dutch Unilever group, were released from
undertakings imposed after an MMC investigation in 1966.
The OFT launched a more detailed review almost two years ago, prompted by a
sharp rise in the two companies' advertising expenditure.
According to Register-MEAL, a market research company, total advertising
spending on laundry detergents rose to Pounds 69m last year from Pounds 12m
in 1982, with a particularly sharp increase in the past five years.
Sir Bryan said he had been concerned that high levels of advertising
spending might prevent new competitors from entering the market. He had
noted the companies' argument that the spending was needed to support a
faster rate of product innovation.
Sir Bryan said: 'At the present time, competition between Procter & Gamble
and Lever Brothers appears to be active, and there is also competition from
retailer own-label brands.'
The announcement was welcomed by the companies, which had argued that
competition between them had intensified recently due to heavy investment in
research and production equipment to expand and modernise their product
ranges.
The OFT yesterday accepted undertakings from Anthony Green & Co and Lavery
Rowe, its advertising agency, that they would stop publishing misleading
advertisements for depilatory products.
The action followed a complaint by the Advertising Standards Authority,
which had sought unsuccessfully to get the companies to drop from their
advertisements claims that the products retarded the re-growth of hair.
The OFT said it would consider court action against advertisers making
misleading claims.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921022

