FT922-4041

FT  08 JUN 92 / International Bonds: Sweeping change forces traders to
adjust tactics


   By TRACY CORRIGAN and SARA WEBB


IN THE aftermath of Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht treaty, bond
traders are rapidly adjusting trading techniques and valuation methods, in
order to adapt to a changed environment, in which the theme of convergence
is no longer relevant.
The most common convergence trade has been a bet that the spread between one
of the high-yielding markets, such as Italy, Spain and Portugal, will narrow
relative to a low-yielding markets, such as Germany. Last week many of these
positions were unwound and in some cases reversed.
In a convergence trade, the view that the spread between Italian bond and
bund yields is set to narrow is expressed by selling bunds (or bund futures)
and buying Italian bonds. The opposite view is a divergence trade, which
involves buying bunds and selling Italian bonds.
In the options market, implied volatility - which pushes up the price - has
risen as a result of last week's turbulent conditions, but dealers say that
options still offer reasonable value, considering the increased levels of
risk now present in the market.
There has been buying interest in options offering protection against
further weakness in the Italian bond and currency markets. For example,
dealers reported buying of put options on the Italian lira, which can be
exercised if the lira falls below the bottom of its range in the exchange
rate mechanism.
In the Ecu bond market, investors are no longer prepared to pay a
substantial premium to theoretical yields on expectations of benefits from
monetary union.
Ecu bonds may have further to fall, as traders revalue their Ecu bond
holdings in the wake of last week's turmoil, with greater attention to the
theoretical yield models based on the value of the component markets.
'The theoretical yield curve is one aspect of how the Ecu market is traded,
just as purchasing power parity is taken into account in the foreign
exchange market,' said Mr Jim O'Neill, international economist at Swiss Bank
Corporation. 'But if European monetary union is derailed, the market will go
through the theoretic yield curve.'
Real yields have already tightened to 10 basis points below theoretical
yields, and Mr O'Neill predicts that real yields will soon offer a premium
of around 15 basis points.
With prospects for supply in the sector dwindling, investors will demand a
liquidity premium for buying Ecu bonds, as well as a premium for economic
and political risk.
FOR MANY international fund managers, the past week has been a nightmare.
Denmark's rejection of the Maastricht treaty caused pandemonium in the
European bond markets, writes Sara Webb.
The uncertainty which hangs over some of the European bond markets is
forcing many fund managers to reassess their investment strategy. Some are
considering reducing their European exposure in favour of US, Canadian and
Australian dollar investments.
The Danish vote means the prospects for the convergence of bond yields have
diminished. Whereas during much of 1991 investors piled into high-yielding
European bond markets, such as Spain and Italy, in the hope of gaining from
converging interest rates, they will now have to be more discerning about
the European bond markets.
Mr Nick Henderson, head of fixed income at Gartmore says: 'Post-Maastricht,
there is a greater need to differentiate between the markets. Convergence
towards German bond yields will still occur in those countries where the
economic fundamentals justify it, but we will have to be more careful about
those markets where it was just a convergence play.'
Spain, Italy and the Ecu bond markets will continue to suffer. These markets
were the worst hit last week as dealers switched into D-Mark and guilder
assets, and the high-yielding markets are likely to drop further.
'We're advising clients to sell Italian, Spanish, Swedish and Ecu bonds
because we think yields will rise further in the near-term, but then we
could see a good buying opportunity for these markets after a few weeks,'
says Mr William Ledward, European economist at Nomura International.
Although there was a burst of activity in the bond markets last week, some
fund managers are still assessing their investment strategy.
'Most of the transactions haven't happened yet. Fund managers haven't taken
their decisions yet - in situations like this, fund managers often just sit
on their hands,' says Mr Steven Bell, economic adviser to Deutsche Bank's
gilts operations.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920608

