FT921-15449

FT  10 JAN 92 / Apple to move into consumer electronics


   By LOUISE KEHOE


   SAN FRANCISCO


APPLE COMPUTER plans a big thrust into the consumer electronics market from
the second half of this year in a bid to expand its sales. The group's plans
include the launch of consumer versions of its personal computers and the
development of a range of electronic products which it calls 'Personal
Digital Assistants'.
Mr John Sculley, Apple chairman and chief executive, said the company would
begin by establishing its presence in consumer electronics sales channels in
the US later this year.
He said Apple's entry into the consumer business would be 'additive and
complementary to its core personal computer business, and is part of the
company's phased approach to expanding its markets'.
Apple plans to introduce new versions of its Macintosh personal computers
with built-in compact disc players offering video, as well as sound,
graphics and text. Mr Sculley said these 'multimedia' systems were expected
to be available in the US for the 1992 Christmas selling season.
From the end of the year Apple also plans to offer the first of its new
Personal Digital Assistant products. Mr Sculley said these products would
have specific consumer applications, unlike general-purpose personal
computers.
He said products Apple envisaged launching over the next few years included:
electronic books, display telephones, interactive 'multimedia players'
offering high-quality video, sound, graphics and text, wireless
communicators combining telephone and computer technology, and personal
organisers that could fit in the palm of the hand.
Alliances with established consumer electronics companies would be a key
element of Apple's strategy to enter the field, Mr Sculley said. Apple was
building such relationships with several companies, he added.
'New products base on Apple-created software technologies will be introduced
in 1993, both under the Apple brand and also by several other companies
under their own labels,' he said.
Although Mr Sculley declined to identify Apple's new partners, they are
expected to include several of Japan's leading consumer electronics
manufacturers.
He added: 'We are interested in playing an important role in creating
easy-to-use devices for digital-based consumer information services.'

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920110

