FT922-737

FT  26 JUN 92 / An urge to privatise: Sally Bowen assesses the Peruvian
economy


   By SALLY BOWEN


AS the Peruvian economy sinks further into fiscal deficit and balance of
payments crisis, the political will to privatise seems at last to have
hardened. The government has given its blessing to debt-equity swaps in what
now promises to be a speedy programme of state sell-offs.
'With debt paper, we increase demand and speed up the whole process,' says
Mr Carlos Montoya, a privatisation specialist with Latin American experience
and executive director of Copri, the government's streamlined commission for
promotion of private investment.
Copri's pledge to complete an average of one sell-off a week means,
according to Mr Montoya, that by August or September 1994 the state will no
longer own any of the businesses which Copri chief Jaime Yoshiyama claims
costs the state Dollars 10m a day.
Some 55 public sector companies already have committees working on technical
assessment, legal intricacies and identification of the most desirable
privatisation mechanism, with World Bank technical assistance and funding.
Copri's wide powers, combined with the absence within today's Peru of any
formal political opposition, indicate the path ahead will be unobstructed.
The debt-equity swap mechanism is intended to attract purchasers for
difficult-to-sell companies rather than to dent Peru's overall debt
position. Total foreign debt, according to government figures, amounts to
Dollars 22.6bn - public sector debt is almost 93 per cent of the total and
some two thirds represent arrears accumulated since Peru declared a debt
moratorium in the mid-1980s.
First to be used in the privatisation drive is Peru's short-term working
capital and trade-related debt paper. This amounts to some Dollars 813.5m
and currently trades at between 20 and 63 per cent of face value, depending
on whether interest is being paid. Discounts mean this debt will be quickly
eaten up in the purchase of a handful of big companies.
Once short-term debt is cleared, the government hopes to move on to
medium-term debt. This is syndicated and requires the negotiation of waivers
from lending banks before it can be freed for use. Citibank, leader of the
private banks' steering committee, says one obstacle to this - objections
from a New York bank - are almost cleared.
Principal holders of Peruvian short-term debt paper include Chase Manhattan,
Manufacturers Hanover, Union Bank of Switzerland, Bank of Tokyo, Citibank,
Credit Lyonnais and Midland Bank. The last three are all reported as
expressing interest in swapping some of their paper to buy into Peru's
state-owned banking system, specifically into Banco Popular, which is near
collapse and which Midland is examining closely (see above story), and into
the healthier networks of Continental and Interbanc.
Further interest in debt swaps is expected from Peru's supplier creditors
who are owed Dollars 1.4bn. The Japanese have been important creditors since
the construction of the northern Peruvian oil pipeline and are reported to
be behind some of the bigger current purchases of Peruvian paper on the New
York secondary market. They, the German company Ferrostal, supplier of
submarines to the Peruvian navy in the 1970s and Yugoslavian Energoprojekt
account for the lion's share of supplier debt.
Citibank, itself the holder of some Dollars 100m in Peruvian debt paper and,
through Citicorp in New York one of the recently active dealers in debt
paper, is 'very eager to get involved in privatisation', according to Lima
branch manager Rafael Venegas. He intends to bring together holders of debt
paper into consortia under a specialist 'operator', as the bank has done in
other countries.
'It's a bit trickier in Peru because of the country risk element,' Mr
Venegas admits. Japanese creditors are likely to seek only a small
percentage in some of Peru's giant state mining companies.
Mr Montoya expects that Peruvian privatisation bargains will be snapped up
primarily by Latin Americans. 'What we've mostly got is state companies
worth between, say, Dollars 20m and Dollars 50m - not big enough to interest
the major transnationals,' he says. 'But they'll be attractive to
neighbouring countries who are looking to expand and build up networks.'
Much remains to be done in selling the privatisation philosophy to unions
and workers in Peru, but the government hopes its plans to hand over 10 per
cent of state shareholdings directly to workers, on completion of
privatisations, will defuse opposition.
'The best guarantee of the non-reversibility of the process is to turn
workers into popular capitalists,' says Mr Montoya.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920626

