FT923-15528

FT  01 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: CAP reform threatens tractor
makers


   By ANDREW BAXTER


THE RADICAL overhaul of the European Community's common agricultural policy
will accelerate the restructuring of Europe's farm machinery industry, said
Mr Riccardo Ruggeri, chief executive of NH Geotech, yesterday.
The CAP reforms, agreed in May and fiercely opposed by some farmers in
continental Europe, would force machinery producers to put further emphasis
on cost reductions. That would lead in turn to more job cuts in the
industry, said Mr Ruggeri at the London headquarters of NH Geotech, one of
the world's largest farm machinery producers.
Employment at the company has fallen from just over 30,000 when it was
formed in May last year - from Fiat and Ford's earthmoving and agricultural
businesses - to a little over 20,000. Mr Ruggeri would not quantify any
further job cuts but said that the restructuring of the company's
manufacturing operations would continue.
He warned that the CAP reforms, which included a 29 per cent cut in cereals
prices over three years and compensation to farmers for taking land out of
production, could force the collapse of medium-sized equipment producers
lacking geographical or specialist strengths.
'NH Geotech will definitely survive,' he said. 'And it is possible that some
small specialised manufacturers may continue to serve certain specific
market niches. But there is a significant group in between, serving a more
significant portion of what was until recently a prosperous European market,
which will have very serious difficulties.'
Tractor sales in Europe have plummeted from 301,000 units in 1980 to an
expected 150,000 this year - a figure that includes eastern German sales. Mr
Ruggeri said mid-range 'standard' tractors, the mainstay of European
markets, would be worst hit by the CAP reforms. In the combine harvester
market, where unit sales had dropped from 22,000 in 1980 to an expected
9,000 this year as farmers switched to contractors' machines, the phasing
out of grain production subsidies would worsen the situation. In the much
smaller market for hay and forage machines, the scenario was very bleak,
said Mr Ruggeri.
Overall, the only product line with opportunities for growth were special
tractors for orchards and vineyards.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920701

