FT923-6488

FT  24 AUG 92 / Japanese banks return to favour with investors: Tokyo market
reaction to government statements on the financial system


   By STEVEN BUTLER


IT TOOK just three days last week for Tokyo's sagging Nikkei stock index to
put on 1,907.47 points, or 13.3 per cent to close at 16,216.88.
The broad rally in the market was underpinned by an even more powerful rise
in bank share prices. On Friday alone, the Nikkei bank share index shot
ahead by 8.7 per cent, compared with a 6.2 per cent rise for the market as a
whole. A conviction has quickly spread among investors that something
fundamental has changed in the outlook for the banks, and that the
government is now committed to solving their problems of poor profitability,
inadequate capital and, most serious, the enormous burden of bad debt.
Yet aside from a few measures aimed at tiding the market over the first half
of the financial year, which ends next month, almost nothing concrete
emerged last week to address the bank's deeper problems. It is therefore
important to ask whether the perception that the government has changed its
attitude - followed by a flurry of leaked news reports about measures under
consideration - can justify such a change in market sentiment.
The measures were offered on Tuesday evening by Mr Tsutomu Hata, the finance
minister. Mr Hata said that banks would not have to report and provide for
unrealised losses on securities holdings at the interim, thus reducing
incentives to realise capital gains on other shares to boost profits. Banks
would also be allowed to distribute more than 40 per cent of profits as
dividends, thus allowing them to maintain payout levels without selling
shares for profit.
Mr Hata said he hoped to halt a vicious cycle in the market in which
declining share prices forced financial institutions to sell more shares,
thus driving securities prices even lower. Yet perhaps even more important
for sentiment than the temporary measures offered was Mr Hata's admission
that Japan's financial system was standing on the edge of a precipice,
facing its worst crisis since the second world war.
On Wednesday afternoon, Mr Yasushi Mieno, the central bank governor,
confessed for the first time to concern that the low level of the stock
market was having negative effects on Japan's economy and banking system.
Until then, Mr Mieno has repeatedly said that Japan's financial system was
sound and that the central bank would not save imprudent investors by moving
to shore up sagging share or property prices.
Indeed financial authorities seemed at last to be thinking along similar
lines. Mr Mieno endorsed an idea under discussion to establish a corporation
to purchase land held as collateral by banks for bad loans, and thereby help
to remove bad assets from the banks' balance sheets.
Since then, an avalanche of proposals apparently being drawn up by the
Finance Ministry for inclusion in an emergency economic package to be
announced on Friday have hit the nation's press.
They include:
A corporation to purchase property and possibly bad property loans from the
banks. Most analysts believe banks have between Y25,000bn (Dollars 200bn)
and Y30,000bn of loans, mainly for property, for which no interest is being
paid. Up to Y3,000bn may be unrecoverable, but in the meanwhile banks cannot
get bad loans off their books because the property market is so illiquid.
A corporation capable of buying the property, presumably at a market price
below book value, would at least give the banks the option of choosing
between keeping loans on the books until the market recovers or taking an
immediate capital loss. Another idea is to use the land itself as capital
and to issue mortgage securities to investors. Mr Mieno and Mr Mamoru Ozaki,
vice finance minister, have both welcomed the concept. But neither has
warmed to the suggestion that the government or central bank should invest
in it or provide cheap finance.
Ms Rie Ota, banking analyst at Baring Securities, says: 'Who is going to
bear the cost? That is the key question.'
It would make little sense for the banks to invest in such a company
themselves, unless substantial tax breaks are given to the banks for
disposing of bad loans, which would amount to a government subsidy.
Realising the idea promises to be complex and time consuming, if practical
at all.
Tax Breaks. The Nihon Keizai Shimbun, the economic daily, has reported that
Japan's 11 city banks would add more than Y1,000bn to tax-exempt loan loss
reserves in the current half year, with the blessing of the Finance
Ministry. The ministry in the past has allowed such provisions only after
two years in which no interest has been paid. The ministry is also
considering allowing tax breaks when banks cut interest rates to help out
borrowers.
The problem, however, is that banks are big taxpayers. With tax revenues
expected to be Y6,000bn to Y10,000bn lower because of the weak economy, the
ministry could prove very conservative in using its discretionary authority
to grant tax breaks. And with bad loan costs last year amounting to 175 per
cent of pre-tax profits, banks could still be under tremendous pressure to
sell shares unless the ministry comes up with an extremely attractive, and
costly, package.
Bank operating profits are being helped by lower interest rates, and could
rise by over 20 per cent in the current half year. The ministry has also
basically solved the problem of banks meeting the 8 per cent capital
adequacy requirements set by the Bank for International Settlements by
showing more flexibility in allowing banks to issue relatively high-cost
perpetual floating-rate notes or convertible bonds with mandatory
conversion, counting as tier 2 capital.
It has also proved more flexible in allowing banks to securitise loans and
sell them.
Yet a solution to the banks' more fundamental problem - how to get the huge
volume of bad debt off their books - has been outlined only in the
sketchiest form. Government authorities may have changed their attitude, but
there is plenty of scope for disappointment later this week when the
government unveils detailed proposals to boost the economy. Investors who
bid up bank shares last week are taking a lot on faith.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920824

