FT922-7108

FT  20 MAY 92 / Premier brings touch of glasnost to Whitehall


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR brought a touch of glasnost to Whitehall yesterday by
revealing details of the ministerial committees which underpin government
decision-making.
One of the first insights provided by the published outline of the machinery
of cabinet government was that Mr Michael Hes-eltine has won a partial
victory in his attempts to upgrade the authority of the Department of Trade
and Industry.
As president of the board of trade, Mr Heseltine is listed as a member of an
expanded cabinet committee charged with industrial policy. Senior officials
said the committee would have the brief of taking a Whitehall-wide view of
the impact of government policy on industrial competitiveness.
Mr Major, however, has acknowledged the sensitivities of the Treasury over
Mr Heseltine's ambitions by appointing Lord Wakeham, the lord privy seal, as
a 'neutral' chairman of the committee. Mr Norman Lamont, the chancellor, has
also been given an important role.
Breaking with the tradition of secrecy which has shrouded the cabinet
committee system since its creation after the First World War, the
government gave details of the 26 groups which act for the full cabinet in
deciding policy.
Mr William Waldegrave, chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, also published
the official guidance given to ministers on their conduct in government and
on conflicts of interest in their financial affairs.
Mr Waldegrave, who is charged with leading Mr Major's drive for greater
openness, said publication of the information was an important contribution
to changing the 'culture' of Whitehall. But he rejected calls for a freedom
of information act.
Sir Robin Butler, the cabinet secretary, and Mr Gus O'Donnell, the prime
minister's press secretary, signalled there were strict limits to the new
openness. Sir Robin said he was reluctant to reveal the precise timing of
the establishment of other cabinet committees. Mr O'Donnell indicated
proceedings of the meetings would remain secret, echoing official warnings
that ministers should not reveal details of their deliberations.
The Campaign for the Freedom of Information described the announcements as a
'modest gesture' towards more openness, while Charter 88, the group pressing
for constitutional change, also cautiously welcomed the move.
Inside Whitehall, Page 12
Editorial comment, Page 18
Observer, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920520

