FT922-13394

FT  11 APR 92 / Arts: By George, she's got it . . .


   By MALCOLM RUTHERFORD


SHAW'S Pygmalion reads and looks so like the plot for a musical that, with
hindsight, it is remarkable that more than 40 years elapsed before the
emergence of My Fair Lady. No modern audience can now see the play without
being reminded of the lyrics and probably coming to the conclusion that the
musical is better than the original.
The new production at the Royal National Theatre does not seek to conceal
those facts; it would be foolish to try. Instead it makes a virtue of them:
here is the piece that led to an even greater success in different form and
an invitation to see why.
The attempt is about 90 per cent successful, which is high praise given the
odds against. Oddly enough, Howard Davies' direction is at its weakest when
it seeks to dwell on Pygmalion as some kind of Hollywood ballet, with Eliza
Doolittle drifting through the streets of London, the music playing in the
background, the scenery moving and the lights flickering. One might say the
same about the ball scene.
There is a period early in the second act when there is virtually no
dialogue. However heroic William Dudley's designs and Mark Henderson's - and
both are on the grand scale - this contrasts strangely with what has gone
before.
For Pygmalion, above all, is a play about words and language. That is why
Shaw wrote it and why even the musical depends on having such good lyrics,
some of the lines being taken almost literally from the original play text.
For at least 10 minutes I thought that the production had gone seriously off
the rails before dialogue returned.
And return it does. Pygmalion has a very good plot, with excellent parts all
round. There may be reservations nowadays about Eliza's father, Alfred, just
as there are about Captain Shotover in Shaw's Heartbreak House, which is
currently playing at the Haymarket. When Alfred seeks to make the
distinction between the deserving and the undeserving poor and to moralise
about the role of the middle class, there is a little too much of Shaw the
paradoxical thinker rather than Shaw the brilliant playwright. This element
has not worn well. Although there is nothing wrong with Michael Bryant's
playing of the part, he would be happier in the musical with some of the
lines cut.
One of the smaller parts that is superbly played is Alison Fiske's Mrs
Pearce, the housekeeper. She has a wonderfully indispensable role in the
Wimpole street bachelor house. Watch her putting Eliza in the bath - a
marvellous vignette in itself. It is a great pity that the part disappears
as the play goes on.
Gillian Barge also shows how much can be made of Mrs Higgins, mother of
Henry. She is a formidable lady with all Lady Bracknell's presence, but
without her intolerance.
Alan Howard, as Henry Higgins, is her very boyish son. He is the professor
who never grows up. She knows that; he knows it too, and in the end Eliza
comes to realise it as well. He is a clever, self-indulgent child with the
bachelor habits of premature middle age.
Howard understands the part through and through. Robin Bailey as the older
Colonel Pickering is the perfect foil, and rightly does not attempt more
than that.
That leaves Eliza. Curiously, it is rather a straight part. We know where
she comes from and where she goes. All she has to do is deliver - but the
play would fall if she put a foot wrong. Frances Barber never does. As the
play closes, she radiates self-confidence - both as Eliza and as Frances
Barber.
In repertory at the Olivier Theatre. Sponsored by Digital Equipment Company
Ltd. 071-928-2252

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920411

