FT924-6046

FT  24 NOV 92 / Smaller central banks put up the barricades


   By TOM BURNS, KAREN FOSSLI and KERIN HOPE


   MADRID, OSLO, ATHENS


SPAIN, Portugal, Norway and Greece all raised interest rates yesterday and
Iceland devalued the krona, as Europe's smaller central banks acted to
protect their currencies after the weekend ERM realignment.
Norway claimed some success in the battle against currency speculation. But
other central banks were waiting nervously for signs of whether yesterday's
upsurge of speculation against the Danish krone and Irish punt will ebb.
Iceland's 6 per cent devaluation - matching the weekend moves affecting the
Spanish peseta and Portuguese escudo - was accompanied by a package of
consumer tax increases and cuts in company taxes as part of an attempt to
curb unemployment.
Leading yesterday's action was the Bank of Spain, which raised its benchmark
intervention rate 0.75 points to 13.75 per cent to shield the peseta from
pressure. The move appeared to be an attempt to pre-empt fresh assaults on
the peseta after Spanish exchange controls are lifted today.
The peseta eased yesterday slightly below its new central parity in the ERM
of Pta72.06 to the D-Mark, adding to speculation of a more significant fall
today.
The Spanish exchange restrictions, introduced following a 5 per cent
devaluation of the peseta during September's foreign exchange upheavals, had
already been partially lifted on October 5.
The Bank of Portugal also pushed up domestic money rates, supplying
liquidity to the banks at interest rates of up to 20 per cent, six points
higher than its regular intervention rate of 14 per cent.
Dealers reported Bank of Portugal intervention to protect the escudo's new
ERM parity. The bank declined to confirm the reports, but said it was
'determined to protect the escudo's stability'.
Greece does not participate in the ERM, but since September has pegged the
drachma against the D-Mark. It announced an increase in interest rates on
Treasury bills - the main financial instrument favoured by foreign
investors.
The interest rate on the one-year bill is expected to be increased from 21.5
to 23 per cent next week.
Norway's central bank meanwhile said its strategy to defend the krone
against devaluation had so far proved successful, with currency starting to
flow back into the country.
The central bank raised the key overnight lending rate to 25 per cent
yesterday from 17 per cent on Friday, when it was increased from 10 per
cent. It currently stands at its highest level since 1986, when it was
briefly increased to 50 per cent, just before the country's last
devaluation.
The central bank also limited the banks' access to borrowing by imposing a
40 per cent interest rate penalty if daily borrowing exceeds the limit.
Norway was the first Scandinavian country to link its currency to the
European currency unit, from October 1990. Sweden abandoned its Ecu link
last Thursday.
Yesterday the Norwegian krone strengthened to NKr8.00539 per Ecu, or some
0.14 per cent below the central Ecu rate, after falling 0.71 per cent below
the rate on Friday.
Dealers said the Bundesbank had helped support the krone and the Bank of
Norway had used NKr20bn-NKr40bn last Thursday and Friday to defend the
currency, but this could not be confirmed.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921124

