FT922-7228

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of Courier and Express Services (2): Range of
services widens - Logistics are still a problem across European borders


   By PHILLIP HASTINGS


INCREASING demand from multinational companies for fast, high-quality
international delivery performance is creating important new business
opportunities for the providers of express services.
Manufacturers using JIT (Just-In-Time) logistics systems, for example, like
the ability of leading express operators to control the total door-to-door
movement of goods. And organisations developing centralised warehousing
systems in Europe want fast delivery services to ensure they can serve the
whole market efficiently.
'There is a major move in Europe to centralise stocks and distribute parts
from one, strategically-located site,' confirms Mr David Burton, general
manager of intra-European express delivery company XP Express Parcel
Systems.
'What is now wanted is a means of making this transition, with all the
apparent cost savings which can result, without any decline in the level of
service a company can provide to its customers.'
Responding to those changes, express companies which initially made their
mark on the international distribution scene by offering a set menu of fast,
door-to-door delivery services, are now refocusing much of their development
effort on the provision of custom-designed services geared to meet the often
complex requirements of modern logistics operations.
Among the big four integrators, for example, TNT and Federal Express have
established separate logistics divisions; United Parcel Service has set up
logistics teams all over the world; and DHL has this month announced the
formation of an 'Interface' team to work alongside leading customers.
Meanwhile, Emery Worldwide, one of the pioneers of international integrated
door-to-door express delivery services, is looking to transplant its US
Warehouse Inventory System Express (WISE) into Europe. And airfreight
forwarder Air Express International (AEI) is improving its intra-European
express delivery system Pandalink to meet customers' expanded logistics
requirements.
The reasons for that sort of express industry development become clear as Mr
Tony Keating, head of European logistics for UPS, explains why that company
has established its logistics teams.
'More than 35 per cent of the total potential package market UPS is
interested in is in the hands of the multinationals. Having established
that, we decided we had to do more about meeting the requirements of those
customers,' he said.
As an example of the sort of operation which has evolved, Mr Keating points
to a contract UPS has with Fujitsu subsidiary Poqet. Basically, the latter
brings computers from Japan and peripherals from the US into the Netherlands
for distribution throughout Europe.
'We handle the computers from Japan using our Japanese joint venture company
UniStar and the peripherals from the US using our expedited service. Once
the products arrive in the Netherlands, we move them under bond to a bonded
facility at Tilburg in the south of the country,' says Mr Keating.
'European customers transmit their orders electronically to the company in
the US and they then transmit the information back to us in the Netherlands
by 0800 hours. We then pick and pack, undertake certain simple quality
control procedures, carry out the customs export procedures and then
distribute the products throughout Europe by air and ground service.'
TNT and Federal Express have adopted a slightly different approach to
meeting the logistics demands of multinational companies. The former, for
example, runs TNT Contract Logistics as a separate operation.
'We may use other parts of the TNT organisation such as air express, road
express or courier services but we are not asset-driven. By that I mean we
are not trying to fill up TNT's aircraft or trucks - if that happens, it is
purely coincidental,' comments Mr Brian Bolam, managing director of TNT
Contract Logistics Europe.
'We basically start with a blank sheet of paper for the design of each
contract and select what are the best options for the customer. And every
customer is different. You cannot make any assumptions. You have to examine
everything in detail.'
Federal Express, too, has established a separate division - Federal Express
Business Logistics. Included in that development has been the establishment
of 'Partsbank' international distribution centres in the UK, continental
Europe and the US. Basically, Partsbank customers buy on a 'pay-as-you-use'
basis from a menu of services which includes collection, storage, stock
control, customs, forwarding and airfreight, plus delivery.
Federal Express Business Logistics is also developing dedicated logistics
operations. Recently, for example, the company announced the formation of a
'global alliance' with fashion and furnishings group Laura Ashley. Included
in that operation will be the sourcing of goods from all over the world,
supply of products to stores and home delivery.
Latest logistics-related development from DHL involves the launch this month
of a programme called Interface. Mr David Stewart, general manager key
accounts for DHL International (UK), describes Interface as 'a concept we
have developed to encourage dialogue and debate with our existing and
potential customers on a number of levels'.
Giving examples of that last point, he cites Interface Arena which 'offers a
means to exchange views and ideas among industry peers'; Interface Team
which 'guides individual clients through the project management process';
and Interface Desk which 'gives selected client sites an enhanced level of
day-to-day customer service'.
Emery Worldwide launched its WISE operations in the US some five years ago
and also now has a WISE-type set-up in Amsterdam specifically to service the
Dutch market. The wider ranging general intra-European operation under
consideration may be based in Brussels.
'WISE depots provide customised inventory management and expedited delivery
programmes for high-value or time-sensitive goods,' explains Mr Roger W
Curry, Emery's president and chief executive officer.
But express industry executives concede that they still have a lot of work
to do to fully provide the sort of distribution systems many of their
customers are looking for. 'Euro-logistics is something we are going to have
to work at. Anyone who says it is already here is probably guilty of
believing their own press,' commented Mr Robert Kelly, marketing director
for Federal Express Business Logistics.
'Companies seeking to operate logistics across European national borders
still face real obstacles - for example, local laws and regulations,
language, culture, customs and practise. They are all very important issues
which will continue to have enormous influence on how a company operates.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

920520

