FT923-15765

FT  01 JUL 92 / European Finance and Investment, Germany (7): Doors open to
reveal hotbed of hostility - Mergers and acquisitions


   By DAVID WALLER


GERMANY has become a hotbed of hostile mergers and acquisitions activity - a
hotbed by German standards, that is.
German companies have traditionally conducted their M & A business behind
closed doors and done their deals on friendly terms. This still remains the
case for the majority of transactions, but at least four recent 'situations'
show how aggressive tactics have started to creep into the German M & A
market place.
The four cases are Pirelli's assault on Continental, a battle between two of
Europe's leading tyre companies; in the insurance sector Aachener und
Munchener Beteilgungs' (AMB) tussle with Assurances Generales de France
(AGF); Krupp's takeover of rival steel-maker Hoesch and - less prominent but
still significant - the takeover of Sabo-Maschinenfabrik - a manufacturer of
lawn-mowers - by the German subsidiary of the US-based John Deere group.
The Conti-Pirelli saga started in late 1990 when Pirelli, the big Italian
tyre company, initiated a campaign to get control of Continental, its German
rival.
The Italian company never went so far as to make a takeover bid, it merely
agitated for control. Meanwhile, Continental fought tooth and nail for
independence, losing a chief executive in the process but ultimately forcing
the Italians to retreat.
On December 1 last year mounting financial problems led Pirelli to withdraw
from talks and consequently from its takeover attempt. However, there has
been a resurgence of hostilities during the past few months.
The two companies, which say they have not ruled out the idea of a full
merger in three or four years' time, are now squabbling once again. Pirelli,
which has a 5 per cent stake in Continental plus options over a further 34
per cent, will early this month launch its second attempt to overturn voting
restrictions which limit a shareholders' vote to 5 per cent no matter how
big that shareholders' stake.
For its part, Continental has hit back by demanding repayment of the
dividend it paid to Pirelli last year.
The situation is complicated by the fact that the two companies are still in
friendly talks over the sale of some of Pirelli's non-tyre businesses -
which Continental would like to buy - and Continental would like Pirelli's
support for a move which allow it to raise its share capital by a nominal
DM150m.
If the Continental/Pirelli saga has been marked by complexity and
vituperation, the AMB/AGF affair has been even more complex and
vituperative. So far, it has proved equally inconclusive.
AMB, Germany's second biggest insurance group, is fighting off the
attentions of AGF, the big state-owned French insurance company which has
amassed 25 per cent of the German company's shares.
AMB first approached the French company in April 1990 with a view to
co-operation in the run-up to a single European market for insurance. When
the French company came up with concrete proposals, AMB decided that AGF
wanted control not co-operation. Then relations between the two companies
became sour, and have become steadily more so.
AMB is now refusing to register the voting rights on the bulk of the AGF
holding - which it is entitled to do under an arcane part of German company
law. AGF is planning to attack Mr Wolf-Dieter Baumgartl, AMB's chief
executive, at AMB's forthcoming annual meeting.
Audit firms have been retained by both parties to prove the legitimacy, or
otherwise, of a series of transactions entered into by AMB. AGF is trying to
bring in Credit Lyonnais, the big French bank, as a buyer for BfG Bank,
AMB's troubled banking subsidiary.
By comparison, the Krupp/Hoesch takeover seems a model of sweet-tempered
co-operation. This is not, however, how it would have seemed to the Hoesch
management board, and in particular to Mr Kajo Neukirchen, who was appointed
chief executive last summer.
Mr Neukirchen had ambitious plans to restructure the group on his own - but
was taken somewhat by surprise last October when he discovered that Krupp
had acquired a 24.9 per cent stake in the company.
At this point, Mr Neukirchen said that Krupp's tactics were 'unfriendly'. He
did not repeat this allegation - probably because he did not have time. Mr
Gerhard Cromme, chief executive of Krupp, said in the autumn that a majority
of Hoesch shareholders were in favour of his plans. By the end of the year,
Krupp had taken its direct holding in Hoesch to more than 50 per cent. There
was little that Neukirchen could do to preserve Hoesch's independence.
Relations between the two companies never degenerated into outright
hostility. Nevertheless Krupp's tactics represented a break with tradition.
Krupp and Hoesch had flirted with the idea of co-operation for decades, and
it is likely that they would have carried on talking for another decade or
two had it not been for Krupp's share purchases. Krupp moved rapidly and
decisively, leaving Hoesch with minimal room for manoeuvre. By German
standards, the stratagem counts as hostile.
The Sabo affair received less publicity than that of Hoesch/Krupp - the
company is small, with turnover of DM125m last year - but its consequences
for the future of German M & A may be far-reaching, too.
In March last year a group of German institutional investors - including the
Colonia insurance company - mounted a successful challenge against Sabo's
voting rights restrictions.
Once these were overturned, it was only a matter of time before the company
lost its independence and in August John Deere of the US announced that it
had bought majority control of the German company.
Like Krupp/Hoesch, the episode was unusual for Germany - first because the
institutions took such an active role in removing the voting restrictions
and, second, since it was done against the express wishes of Deutsche Bank,
Germany's biggest bank, which sided with the management of Sabo against the
insurers at the vote last year.
Scenting that the German M & A market is undergoing a fundamental change,
increasing numbers of Anglo-American investment bankers have set up shop in
Frankfurt over the past two to three years. These include Morgan Stanley,
Goldman Sachs, Wasserstein Perella and Kleinwort Benson.
Whether there is enough work to go round, is another question: German
companies rely on their commercial banks or on in-house expertise and it is
noteworthy that neither Krupp nor Hoesch employed an investment bank until
after Hoesch's fate was sealed.

The Financial Times


London Page 36

920701

