FT921-1176

FT  25 MAR 92 / Pay rises in sector lowest for eight years


   By MICHAEL SMITH, Labour Correspondent


PAY RISES among engineer-ing companies were at their lowest level for at
least eight years in the quarter to the beginning of March, the Engineering
Employers' Federation reported yesterday.
Its latest survey also showed a resurgence in pay freezes and delayed
settlements.
The median settlement between December and the beginning of this month was
4.3 per cent against 4.5 per cent in the three months to the beginning of
last month and 5 per cent between August and October last year.
The lower quartile fell from 4 per cent to 3.4 per cent and the upper
quartile from 5.1 per cent to 5 per cent.
The figures are the lowest since the federation began collating the present
series in 1984.
Postponements reached a record in January of 13 per cent of all settlements.
Their incidence had been declining from the previous record of just over 12
per cent - reached in June last year - until they reached a low of 8 per
cent in November.
Freezes had also been falling as a proportion of settlements before
November. They reached a peak of 13 per cent in July and fell to 7.5 per
cent in November. In January they approached 9 per cent.
The National Metal Trades Federation, representing foundry and appliance
employers, is today due to sign an agreement with unions for a six-month pay
freeze.
Earlier this month, Asda, the supermarket group, announced that it was
freezing pay for 65,000 employees for a year from June, the normal
settlement date.
Footwear manufacturers are seeking a three-month postponement, although
their proposal has been rejected by employees.
Swan Hunter, the Tyneside shipbuilder privatised in a management buy-out six
years ago, announced 95 white-collar redundancies yesterday.
The cuts, affecting management, technical and clerical staff, arise from a
gap in the order book at the company, which won its last ship-building
contract - for three Type 23 frigates for the Ministry of Defence - in
December 1989.
Unions predicted yesterday that a further 121 jobs would be lost in the
BBC's design and engineering division, which now employs 303 people.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920325

