FT921-393

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (23): A
promising opportunity - The EC Single Market


   By TIM DICKSON


THE approaching single market is both an opportunity and threat for European
insurers. There seems little doubt, though, that Lloyd's, which specialises
in large non-life risks, ought to gain handsomely from Brussels' efforts to
break down national barriers.
As Mr David Coleridge, Lloyd's chairman, observed recently in a speech to
Greek practitioners: 'When it (the third non-life insurance directive) comes
into force, the insurance markets of Europe will have undergone a
revolutionary transformation within a relatively short space of time. EC
insurers will be free to transact non-life insurance business in any of the
member states, and regulation will be administered by the insurers' home (as
opposed to host country) authority.'
The so called third 'framework' directive to which Mr Coleridge was
referring - it got the political nod from EC countries just before
Christmas, but will not be implemented until 1994 - is one of the most
important pieces of insurance legislation in the single market programme.
Its significance for Lloyd's is that Lime Street will be able to write all
non-life business throughout the EC from London - without having an
establishment office on the ground - subject only to having local
claims-handling facilities for third party motor insurance.
The chief benefits of the directive, which also apply to business written
through local establishments, will be:
Technical reserves, which all insurers have to set aside to cover the risks
they are writing, will no longer have to be kept in local assets.
Insurers will no longer have to submit statistical information to host
country insurance supervisors, though some records may be required for
paying local premium taxes.
Prior approval of contract wording and rates by local regulators will not be
required. Policy conditions will still have to be notified, but only for the
purpose of ensuring that the 'general good' has been observed in compulsory
classes of insurance.
In future, therefore, the Department of Trade and Industry alone will be
responsible both for Lloyd's supervision and for receiving statistics of
Lloyd's EC business.
According to Mr Barry Gibson, general manager of the international
department at Lloyd's, there will still be snags for those engaging in cross
frontier business.
The main one will be the tax on premiums levied by many European
Governments, notably in Italy, Germany and France, but not by the UK. 'These
can vary quite a lot', explains Mr Gibson. 'The insured has to pay, but
under local law it is ultimately the responsibility of the insurer that he
does. It means having some local mechanism in place.'
About 16 per cent of Lloyd's total premium income already comes from Europe,
both in the form of direct insurance and reinsurance. Official attitudes
have varied from country to country, but the Lloyd's strategy since the
introduction of an EC directive permitting freedom of establishment in 1973
has been to seek Government licences in the more important centres. This has
often been a time consuming process, as illustrated by negotiations with
Italy and Germany which did not bear fruit until 1986 and 1989.
Licences have often been restricted to certain classes of business.
Non-marine was only added in Greece in late 1991 - though the ability to do
marine business is long standing - while extensions in Italy to cover
aviation, marine, and motor were agreed in mid February this year.
Since July, 1990, Lloyds has been able to do business with most EC countries
under the second non-life insurance directive, which extended service
freedoms to large non-marine, and marine, aviation and transport risks. As a
result, of this an increasing amount of business previously done under
licensing arrangements has been carried out directly with the Lloyd's
market.
London's pre-eminence as a financial and insurance centre - there are 140
foreign owned insurance companies in the UK - should provide a significant
edge in the more open European market created by the third non-life
directive . But as the acquisition strategies of the big French, German and
Italian players demonstrate, gaining a foothold in each territory may be the
key to winning profitable business. inhibited from making takeovers, but
there is no reason why bigger managing agents cannot show the way.
One interesting development has been the recent decision by Sturge Holdings,
the biggest managing and members' agency group, to acquire the British
American Insurance Agency, a Dusseldorf based insurance agency, for around
Pounds 1m. The deal represents the first direct entry by any Lloyd's agency
group into the German market, and follows Sturge's entry into the French
insurance market last year.
BAI, which formerly underwrote on behalf of the Prudential Corporation of
the UK, specialises in the insurance of small and medium sized commercial
risks in the North of Germany. Sturge's German and French ventures are
relatively small. But the important thing, according to Mr James Macdonald,
a director of the company, is to get a foothold.
Continental European business still has to be routed through Lloyd's
brokers, but this is one area which could see change. As the Rowland task
force report pointed out, 'the Lloyd's broker network (in Europe) is less
well established (than in the US). At present a managing agent may have to
use a small Lloyd's broker to guarantee premiums from a major European
broking firm. The commercial rationale for this current requirement is not
clear.
It added, 'Therefore, the taskforce believes that Lloyd's should 'accredit'
a select number of European broking groups with which Lloyd's syndicates
could deal direct outside of the London market without interposing a Lloyd's
broker.'

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920330

