FT923-11034

FT  27 JUL 92 / Leading Article: Controlling EC mergers


BY CHALLENGING Nestle's recent takeover of Perrier on the grounds that it
would result in a duopoly of the French mineral water market, the European
Commission has significantly broadened the scope of EC merger policy in a
way that will potentially affect a wide range of industries. Brussels argues
that the consumer interest is served by strengthening controls to cover
deals that would create duopolies as well as those which give just one
company a dominant position. However, the methods it has used to assert this
principle, and its application in the specific Nestle-Perrier case, raise
serious concerns.
Sir Leon Brittan, the competition commissioner, says he is merely fleshing
out the 22-month-old EC merger regulation by bringing it into line with the
practices of national merger authorities, notably in Germany and the UK. He
has also indicated his intention to apply the new principle pragmatically.
The creation of a duopoly would not, as in Germany, automatically give rise
to a presumption that a merger should be prohibited. Instead, Brussels would
in each case base its judgment on the likely impact on future competition.
This was broadly the approach adopted in the Nestle-Perrier merger. However,
the Commission's methodology and judgment appear curiously inconsistent. For
instance, it cites the relatively low prices of mineral water in France as
the reason why there is little competition from 'parallel' imports there.
Yet the thrust of the Brussels objections was that the merger could result
in higher prices, which would be likely to encourage such imports.
Limp slap
Brussels also says the high marketing costs of developing new brands inhibit
market entry. However, its remedies require Nestle to dispose only of some
minor brands and unexploited springs. Finally, Nestle and BSN of France have
been left controlling together about three-quarters of current French
mineral water sales. After all Brussels' strictures about duopoly power,
this outcome seems a limp slap on the wrist.
But the most serious issue is not whether Brussels is applying its new-found
duopoly criteria too leniently, but whether it has the authority to invoke
them at all. The merger regulation speaks only of controlling
'concentrations' which create or strengthen a dominant position. Sir Leon
insists this wording covers duopolies. However, many independent lawyers
disagree. They argue that if the authors of the regulation had intended it
to be used in this way they would have said so explicitly - as is the case
with German competition law. In the circumstances, it is particularly
unsatisfactory that the Commission should assert the duopoly principle by
introducing it without warning into a pending merger case. Nestle is
justified in complaining that Brussels has unilaterally moved the goalposts
while a game is in progress.
Unpredictable manner
At the very least, this turn of events threatens to create heightened
business uncertainties. Because the new approach to duopolies has not been
spelled out as a general principle, but has grown out of one specific case,
prospective acquirers in the EC cannot be sure how it will apply to them.
Furthermore, the Commission's conduct on this occasion raises the unsettling
possibility that it will use future cases in an equally unpredictable manner
to establish other precedents which expand its power.
The situation demands urgent clarification by the European Court of Justice.
However, no party to a merger is likely to seek such clarification unless
the deal has been blocked by the Commission. So the only way to guarantee an
early test of the new policy may be for an EC member government to exercise
its prerogative to appeal to the Court.
Ideally, the Commission itself should request a speedy Court review of its
interpretation of the regulation. Indeed, it is in Brussels' own interest to
do so. For merger control to command confidence, it must operate within a
framework that ensures that it is fair, consistent and accountable. Any
suspicion that Brussels is intent on enlarging its power by taking
controversial policy decisions on the hoof undermines those objectives.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920727

