FT922-4524

FT  05 JUN 92 / FT Law Report: Insolvency statement is admissible


   By RACHE DAVIES, Barrister


REGINA v KANSAL
Court of Appeal (Criminal Division):
Lord Justice Russell, Mr Justice French and Mrs Justice Ebsworth:
May 12 1992
SELF-INCRIMINATING statements made by a bankrupt at his insolvency
examination can be used in evidence against him in any other proceedings,
including criminal proceedings for obtaining property by deception.
The Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) so held when dismissing an appeal by
Mr Yash Pal Kansal against convictions under the Theft Act 1968 and the
Insolvency Act 1986.
LORD JUSTICE RUSSELL said that in February 1992 Mr Kansal was convicted of
obtaining property by deception contrary to section 15(1) of the Theft Act
1968, in that he dishonestly obtained cheques of Pounds 150,000 and Pounds
116,250 from the Halifax Building Society by falsely representing that his
annual income was Pounds 90,000, that he had never been bankrupt, and that
he had no loans or credit card debts.
He was also convicted of the offence of a bankrupt removing property
contrary to section 354(2) of the Insolvency Act 1986, in that he removed
Pounds 104,356 held jointly by himself and his wife, possession of which he
would have been required to deliver up to the Official Receiver or trustee
in bankruptcy.
His wife was acquitted of aiding and abetting.
Mr Kansal came to the UK from India in 1967, and qualified as a pharmacist.
In 1977 he formed a company which flourished until, by 1983, it operated
some 20 chemist shops. At about that time he purchased a house with a Pounds
60,000 mortgage.
In 1986 the house was remortgaged. The original mortgage was paid off and
the balance invested in the business. By then Mr Kansal was encountering
financial problems. In February 1986 a finance company obtained judgment
against him in respect of a Pounds 4,000 loan, and the company went into
liquidation in February 1987.
On March 11 1988 a bankruptcy order was made against Mr Kansal. Five days
later the Halifax advanced Pounds 150,000 on the security of the house, and
a further Pounds 116,250 a week later.
Those advances formed the subject matter of the Crown's allegation that he
had misled the building society.
On March 23 his wife collected Pounds 104,356 in cash from the bank, being
part of the building society advance, and took it in a bin liner to India.
The Crown alleged that was done at Mr Kansal's instigation with knowledge
that the money should have been delivered up to the Official Receiver or the
trustee in bankruptcy.
On May 20 Mr Kansal made a statement of affairs pursuant to the Insolvency
rules 1986, and a narrative statement to the Official Receiver's examiner.
On July 29 at the Romford County Court, his public examination took place.
The Official Receiver asked him a number of questions and elicited
incriminating answers.
At Mr Kansal's trial the Crown intended to produce a transcript of the
public examination, and the bankruptcy file. Judge Rucker ruled that the
documents were admissible.
Mr Kansal's appeal basically was against that ruling.
The appeal turned on the proper construction of section 31 of the Theft Act
1968, and the impact of section 433 of the Insolvency Act 1986.
Section 31 provided that a person was not excused on the ground of
self-incrimination under the Act from answering any question put to him 'in
proceedings for the recovery or administration of any property, for the
execution of any trust . . . ', but that no statement or admission made in
answering the question should 'in proceedings for an offence under this Act'
be admissible in evidence against him.
Miss Arden for Mr Kansal contended that bankruptcy proceedings were
'proceedings for the recovery or administration of any property' or 'for the
execution of a trust'.
Accordingly, she said, while Mr Kansal was not excused from answering
questions in bankruptcy proceedings on the ground of self-incrimination, he
was protected in 'proceedings for any offence under this Act', ie the Theft
Act, his answers being inadmissible against him in those proceedings.
Miss Arden said the bankruptcy process was very much concerned with getting
in and distributing the bankrupt's assets and that the words 'for the
recovery or administration of any property' were apt to cover the duties of
the Official Receiver or trustee in bankruptcy, who also executed a
statutory trust. She said there was nothing in section 31 that excluded
bankruptcy proceedings from the ambit of the section.
Also, she said that the privilege from self-incrimination had been enshrined
in the law for centuries and if it was abrogated there should be a
counterbalance such as was found in section 31 rendering statements
inadmissible in criminal proceedings. She said it was not part of the
bankruptcy process to ensure that bankrupts were prosecuted, and the court
should shrink from the construction of the statute that lent support to any
such result.
Section 433 of the Insolvency Act 1986 provided that 'in any proceedings
(whether or not under this Act)' a statement prepared for the purposes of
the Act 'may be used in evidence against any person making or concurring in
making the statement'.
Miss Arden submitted that that provision must be read subject to section 31
of the Theft Act and that if there was conflict between the two sections,
section 31 must prevail. She said it was a specific provision giving
protection in a limited field, as opposed to the generality of section 433
(see Seward v Vera Cruz (1884) 10 App Cas 59,68; Blackpool Corporation
(1922) 1 AC 34).
Mr Crystal for the Crown submitted that there was no warrant for the
suggestion that section 31 embraced or was ever intended to embrace
bankruptcy proceedings.
He said section 31 related to civil proceedings inter partes, where a claim
was made in relation to property which had been acquired in circumstances of
an incriminating nature. The normal privilege against self-incrimination was
abrogated by the terms of section 31 in such proceedings.
Bankruptcy proceedings on the other hand, he said, had no lis. They were not
adversarial and the whole statutory scheme of bankruptcy had a different
purpose and objective when compared with civil proceedings properly
so-called. The objectives of the statutory scheme for bankruptcy, found in
the 1986 Act and the 1986 Rules, were to enable the bankrupt's affairs and
dealings to be investigated under court control; to provide statutory
machinery for collection and rateable distribution of his available assets;
and to rehabilitate him through the process of discharge.
He said the privilege from self-incrimination was abrogated in bankruptcy
proceedings, not by the opening words of section 31 of the Theft Act, but by
rule 6.175 of the Insolvency Rules - '(1) The bankrupt shall . . . answer
all such questions as the court may put . . . (5) The written record may in
any proceedings (whether under the Act or otherwise) be used as evidence
against the bankrupt . . .' Thereafter section 433 of the 1986 Act rendered
the evidence admissible.
Mr Crystal's submissions were right.
Section 433 was not a provision of general application subject to a special
exemption created by section 31 of the Theft Act.
It was concerned with admissibility of a special class of document derived
from insolvency in 'any proceedings' whether or not under the Insolvency Act
or the Theft Act.
The section was not concerned with privilege, but with the admissibility of
evidence. Its terms were clear, unambiguous, unequivocal and were not
subject to any exceptions.
In Mr Kansal's case, his privilege against self-incrimination was abrogated
by the insolvency legislation. Once that situation arose, section 433 came
into play.
Section 31 of the Theft Act was not capable of protecting Mr Kansal. The
judge was right to admit the evidence. The appeal against conviction was
dismissed.
For Mr Kansal: Mary Arden QC and Richard J Haworth (assisted by the
Registrar of Criminal Appeals).
For the Crown: Michael Crystal QC and Peter Gower (Crown Prosecution
Service).

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920605

