FT923-10951

FT  28 JUL 92 / Letter: Pensions should provide for extreme old age needs


   From Mr DENIS CASSIDY


Sir, John Authers properly drew attention to 'The rising cost of a ripe old
age' (July 11).
The extreme end of that spectrum is the predicament of people who are old,
ie over 80, who are now dependent and yet who are not ill in a conventional
sense. In most cases the spouse has died, which has either caused or
exacerbated the problems of dependence. If they do not have substantial
private means, or a substantial occupational pension income, they are
obliged to sell their home - a difficult process in the past three years -
to release capital to fund residential fees.
Because of underlying changes in the residential housing market, it is
likely that these problems will persist for some time.
It is true that there are some private sector life and health insurers who
have launched 'long term care policies' but the problem with these is that
by the time need is recognised, they have become too expensive in most
cases.
There is therefore clearly a need for the requirements of old age to be
considered much earlier and I believe the process should start with
providing for the need now while simultaneously trying to educate people to
recognise the potential need for the longer term future. I believe that the
most obvious way to do this would be for occupational pension funds to
provide for the most extreme cases of need through pension fund benefits
which would be funded across the entire company membership.
In simple terms, providing for an exceptional occurrence by a modest funding
rate applied to the whole of the employee population in a way analogous to
that of providing for death in service. We should recognise that, although
the number of old people requiring care is increasing, it is still a small
number who survive beyond 80 and who require full time nursing care.
John Authers' article is a very helpful contribution to an overdue debate.
Denis P Cassidy,
The Boddington Group,
75 Baker Street,
London W1M 1AH

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920728

