FT921-1435

FT  24 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Japan's trade 'umpire' thrives on tension
 -FTC chief views corporate complacency as his worst enemy


   By ROBERT THOMSON


DON'T be 'a Ness'. This advice was given to Mr Setsuo Umezawa, chairman of
Japan's Fair Trade Commission (FTC), whose pursuit of cartels and other
corporate foul play has led to comparisons with Elliot Ness, Al Capone's
crime-busting enemy.
Mr Umezawa savours the tension his commission has created among Japanese
companies, and explains that past responsibilities as a tax investigator and
as head of the National Tax Agency had taught him corporate complacency
could be his worst enemy. 'I remember just after the war, we tax officials
were told about the importance of tension, and those words have stayed with
me. There should always be a sort of tension between the investigator and
the investigated.'
The rise of Mr Umezawa, 61, was partly prompted by trade friction between
Tokyo and Washington, which argued that Japanese companies routinely set up
cartels and excluded outsiders from markets. But the chairman argues that US
pressure for a bigger FTC budget and a toughening of his investigation
division had impact, because the demands coincided with similar sentiments
within Japan.
'The US-Japan connection is important. We in Japan are a part of the world
economy and have to be in harmony with international standards. At the same
time, Japanese government policy is becoming more consumer-oriented.
Japanese industry was encouraged and the economy developed, but consumers
didn't feel they had benefited.'
Consumers may feel the wealth are yet to be fairly shared, but Japanese
companies have been startled by the determination of Mr Umezawa and his
investigators. In 1988, a year after he became chairman, the FTC launched
126 investigations and issued five cease-and-desist orders. Last year, there
were 155 new cases and 24 formal orders. The commission imposed Y11bn
(Pounds 48m) in surcharges last March on cement companies for price fixing.
Criminal charges were filed in November against plastic wrap makers and
their employees for fixing foodwrap prices. The eight companies, controlling
97 per cent of the Japanese market, admit they held meetings to discuss
market trends and plan price rises.
While the FTC has been accused by Japanese executives of working in
Washington's interests, US officials are not satisfied by the monitoring of
anti-monopoly laws and want the commission to tackle the keiretsu, the
Japanese corporate families. There are two main types: the vertical, where a
top industrial company has layers of contracted suppliers filling its orders
and of distributors selling its products, and the horizontal, where an
industrial group has extensive cross-shareholdings and management ties with
a family of companies.
Mr Umezawa insisted the keiretsu were not a violation of anti-monopoly laws.
He said a US study had shown the structure of Japanese car makers' keiretsu
was not founded on exclusion, but on efficiency. 'For some US people, the
word means monopoly. But the structure of the keiretsu is very different,
and corporate groups have loose ties. We have looked at the
manufacturer-type (the vertical) distribution, and we told car makers they
couldn't require retailers' prior consultation on selling other vehicles.'
That FTC instruction resulted in changes to contracts between maker and
retailer not long before President Bush's controversial trip to Japan, but
US manufacturers say that while the words are different, the spirit of the
exclusive relationship stays unchanged. Mr Umezawa is aware of the
criticism. 'We will survey actual conditions as well as contractual
clauses.'
He has just finished several weeks' talks with the ruling Liberal Democratic
Party on toughening fines for anti-monopoly violations, which the FTC
reportedly wanted to raise from the present maximum Y5m to Y300m.
Corporate executives had demanded the LDP intervene, and senior party
members began talks with the FTC. The result was a Y100m maximum fine, which
the US called insufficient, but which Mr Umezawa considers the result of
compromise needed to ensure the legislation would be considered by MPs. 'The
new fine is 20 times higher than the previous maximum, and we established an
important consensus about the need for tougher punishment.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920324

