FT921-3729

FT  12 MAR 92 / London Stock Exchange: Election news prompts heavy setback


   By TERRY BYLAND, UK Stock Market Editor


CONFIRMATION yesterday that a general election will be held in the UK next
month fuelled increasing doubts in the stock market regarding the
vote-winning capacity of the government's Budget measures. Mounting concern
among market firms prompted the biggest one-day fall in the FT-SE 100 Index
since last year's failed coup in Russia.
In the late afternoon, after Mr John Major, the UK prime minister, had
announced that April 9 would be general election day, share prices went into
almost free fall, and the Footsie closed 52.4 down at 2,522.4, or about 2
per cent lower.
The City's relatively negative view of the Budget put forward by Mr Norman
Lamont, the UK chancellor of the exchequer, was quickly translated into
doubts over the electoral chances of the governing Conservative party.
However, the market's fall was restrained at first by a steady performance
from sterling.
Belief that it will now be difficult for UK base rates to be reduced ahead
of the election reinforced worries over the government's prospects of
remaining in office. Tomorrow is expected to bring the results from first
post-Budget opinion polls; the last opinion polls ahead of the Budget showed
the government dragging three points behind the opposition.
The setback in the Footsie largely reflected heavy arbitraging between stock
index futures and the underlying equities. At the close, the March contract
on the FT-SE Index was at a 10-point discount to the index itself.
While some lines of stock did come on offer, there was no great sell-off in
the share market. At last night's close, the FT-SE Index was only 11 points
below Friday's closing level.
A senior trader at one leading UK house commented: 'The market was telling
us that the pre-Budget rally should never have happened.' Nearly half of
yesterday's fall represented a correction of the 24-point gain in the
Footsie on Budget Day, when equities brushed off the less favourable
performance from government bonds.
As expected, equities opened lower and the Footsie was 12 points down in
early trading, although turnover was light at that stage. At Strauss
Turnbull, traders were advised to 'sell into any rallies'.
With sterling steady at first, some analysts suggested that base rates might
be cut during the election campaign - April 9 had long been pencilled in as
general election day by most of the leading UK-based securities trading
firms.
Share prices tried to rally but soon lost heart again as it was confirmed
that the election date would be announced at midsession. Firmness in the
pound failed to shake the views of many equity strategists that base rates
could not be cut this side of the election, and shares began to give ground.
Once the market started to slide, it was clear that there were few, if any,
buyers around. Tuesday's gains in interest rate-orientated stocks, such as
stores and building material groups, and also in brewing shares, were
sharply reversed. There were losses in the privatisation issues, which are
always highly vulnerable to fears that a Labour government might seek to
reverse their status.
Seaq-reported trading volume rose to 554.8m shares from the subdued total of
431.7m recorded on Budget Day.

The Financial Times


London Page 42

920312

