FT921-14177

FT  17 JAN 92 / Arts: Dillis, an unexpected talent - Susan Moore visits
Munich in an attempt to solve the puzzle of a polyglot early 19th century
artist


   By SUSAN MOORE


One of the great revelations of the last 50 years is the extent to which the
revolutionary visions of Constable and Monet were foreshadowed in the oil
sketches of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. The oil sketches made in
Rome in the 1780s by Pierre-Henri de Valenciennes were rediscovered in 1930;
and contemporaneous sketches executed in Rome and Naples by the Welsh artist
Thomas Jones turned up in the saleroom in 1954, and were exhibited in 1970.
Their immediacy, swiftness of execution and sensitivity to atmospheric
effects confounded audiences who regarded Valenciennes as a reactionary
neo-Classical landscape painter, and Jones as a dull pupil of Richard
Wilson.
As unexpected as the Valenciennes and Jones sketchbooks was the cache of
drawings and oil sketches exhibited in Munich for the first time in 1959.
They were by Johann Georg von Dillis, an amateur artist more widely
remembered as the keeper of the royal collections for the Crown Prince,
later King Ludwig I of Bavaria, and the first director of Munich's Alte
Pinakothek. As an artist he was something of a conundrum. His landscapes
were quite unlike any other painted in Germany in the late 18th and early
19th centuries.
A new exhibition at the Neue Pinakothek in Munich, organised to mark the
150th anniversary of his death, attempts to solve the Dillis puzzle. The
artist is placed firmly in an European context, and he emerges as an
intriguing Germany progeny of the parallel traditions of English and French
naturalism.
To understand Dillis it is essential to known something of his extraordinary
career. He was priest (briefly), painter, cicerone and connoisseur, gifted
linguist and bureaucrat. In 1784 he came into contact with the remarkable
Anglophile American Sir Benjamin Thompson, later Graf von Rumford, an
economic and social reformer and philanthropist in the employ of Karl
Theodor of Bavaria. Rumford introduced to Munich the notion of Picturesque
gardening in the form of the Englischen Garten, and Dillis to the art of the
English watercolour. He promoted Dillis's official career and his travels
abroad, recommending him as a travelling companion to English Grand
Tourists.
Most notable among them was Viscount Palmerston whose son, the future Prime
Minister, Dillis drew in 1794. Thomas Jones described the the former as a
'gentleman of taste', and it is quite plausible that he acquainted Dillis
with the work or Wright of Derby, William Pars and the other watercolourists
who had made the journey to Rome in the 1770s.
Dillis was to travel extensively in Germany, Switzerland, Austria and Italy.
In Rome and Naples in 1805 he met Angelica Kauffmann, Gavin Hamilton, Sir
William Hamilton and Turner's American pupil Washington Allston. From the
first, certainly, his work shows an English bent. There is a specificity of
place and time and light that is absent in contemporary German art.
An atmospheric townscape by moonlight in grey wash could almost be by JR
Cozens, his manner of drawing foliage akin to that of Thomas Hearne. His
high-key 'Et in Arcadia Ego', set perhaps the Englischen Garten, is complete
with classical temple, grazing cattle and figures under a tree: Munich
through the eyes of Claude.
It is possible to walk around the show seeing a variety of masters guiding
the hand of Dillis. Such is his experimentation that his technique changes
from exhibit to exhibit. With a few notable exceptions, the less finished
and formal watercolours and oils are by far the more pleasing.
If Dillis's somewhat old-fashioned drawings are indebted to the English
watercolourists, his oil sketches - in Italy and at home - owe more to the
predominantly French community of artists working in Rome and Naples at the
turn of the century. Tree studies and rocky outcrops abound. He paints broad
hoary vistas, and light catching the tumbling forth of waterfalls, as did
his friend the Belgian Simon Denis, and Biddauld, Michallon and Corot.
Particularly close in spirit as well as technique to Valenciennes are the
three large and impressive panoramas of Rome painted in softening early
morning light from a vantage point at the Villa Malta.
Dillis is not the South German Friedrich as suggested, or even a Bavarian
Corot. He is, nonetheless, a fascinating witness to the flourishing exchange
of ideas in Europe at the turn of the 19th century.
Dillis: Landscapes and Portraits, plus a separate exhibition of Dillis
studies of Bavarian folk costume and landscape, continues at the Neue
Pinakothek in Munich until February 9. It can be seen at the Albertinum in
Dresden, March 1-May 3.

The Financial Times


London Page 15 Picture 'The Hanging Rocks of the Hesselberg', 1801, by
Johann Georg von Dillis (Omitted).

920117

