FT921-14317

FT  16 JAN 92 / Arts: Interlocking hearts face difficulties - Cinema


   By NIGEL ANDREWS


FRANKIE AND JOHNNY (15) Cannon Trocadero
MISSISSIPPI MASALA (15) Curzon West End
LITTLE MAN TATE (PG) Odeon Haymarket
FREDDY'S DEAD: THE FINAL NIGHTMARE (18) Odeon West End
DERSU UZALA (U) ICA
'Frankie And Johnny were lovers, Frankie and Johnny . . .' And there memory
fails me. What else were Frankie and Johnny? What else did they do in their
short but chart-topping lives?
According to Frankie And Johnny the film, their pop song fame created the
coup de foudre conditions whereby Al Pacino as a short-order cook called
Johnny met and fell in love with Michelle Pfeiffer as a plain (sic) waitress
called Frankie. The scene is a Brooklyn greasy spooner called the Apollo
Cafe. Here hamburgers and eggs-n-fries and patty melts keep whizzing past
director Garry Marshall's camera as if to show that two hearts in love had
better get a move on if their arteries are not to clog up first with
saturated fats.
Meanwhile down in the Deep South in Mississippi Masala, directed by Mira
Nair of Salaam Bombay, two more hearts try to interlock in the face of
difficulties. Mina (Sarita Choudhury), an Indian girl from Uganda, loves
Demetrius (Denzel Washington), a black carpet cleaner from Greenwood,
Mississippi. But tribal factionalism is rife in the South, even among
immigrant brethren. So a one-night passion in a motel brings the young
couple's dynastic worlds crashing around them. Aunts and uncles throw fits
and brothers and cousins throw fists.
Each of these love stories sets its alarm clock by the 'two hours' traffic'
(give or take five minutes) of Shakespeare's influential Romeo And Juliet.
But while this is a short time in which to watch passions flare and clans
clash in old Verona, it seems like forever when watching trumped-up screen
romances where Love's Tragic Obstacle, hereinafter referred to as LTO, seems
either non-existent (Frankie And Johnny) or politically contrived
(Mississippi Masala).
Hollywood - meaning Frankie And Johnny - specialises in invisible LTOs. As a
critic you have to hit yourself over the head with your press handout to
remind yourself that Michelle Pfeiffer is meant to be unattractive; hence
the hesitancy and 'last chance' element in her romance with Mr Pacino. For
the poor girl, we are told, has not had a serious date in three years. (In
Terrence McNally's original stage play Frankie was played more plausibly by
pudgy Kathy Bates of Misery).
So please ignore Pfeiffer's Gene Tierney bone structure and perfect lips and
concentrate on her hair. This has been made telegraphically dowdy. Except
when she curls it for a mid-movie night out and looks fit to slay le tout
Brooklyn. For this occasion her gay flatmate also picks out for her the One
Wearable Frock in her wardrobe, another slayer of course, hereinafter
referred to as the OWF. But love is blind. Peering through the New York
night or through the Apollo Cafe steam as he swings his big cucumber
chopper, Mr Pacino, acting with a charm far beyond the call of duty, sees
only an ugly duckling awaiting his transformative kiss.
Of course the OWF helps to overcome the LTO - except that we keep forgetting
what the LTO is, having been socked between the eyes by the form-fitting OWF
 -and Frankie and Johnny end up effecting the destined emotional merger.
The film, I may have indicated by now, is almost completely dotty. When not
focusing on Mr P and Miss P, director Marshall (late of Pretty Woman) whirs
around the cafe taking in such only-in-a-movie lovables as owner Hector 'I
breeng you all the way from Greece' Elizondo and his wife; easy-lay waitress
Kate Nelligan, plus heart of gold; and assorted wacky customers. And just
when you think sentimental folly can go no further, we have Mr Marshall's
one bid for stylistic virtuosity. This is a tender-talking street scene
between Pacino and Pfeiffer in which the couple's words sonically dissolve
into music while a florist's lorry behind them opens up to reveal a million
flowers. Oohh. Aahhh.
Mississippi Masala is, as one would expect from the British-produced item in
the week's romantic twin-pack, at once more serious and less fun. No
Hollywood schmaltz, no peak-condition screen goddesses playing plain Janes.
The LTO is racial bigotry and OWF stands not for One Wearable Frock but for
Only Way Forward. The OWF in the world today, as Sir Richard Attenborough
has so often told us, is for creeds and colours to unite. And here is Sir
R's very own Cry Freedom star Denzel Washington playing the nice black boy
who will rescue our Ugandan-Indian heroine from the
coloureds-versus-coloureds prejudice of his and her families.
A running joke is provided for American audiences, who need of course to be
told what an Indian is. So people keep saying 'Send them back to the
reservations' and Mr Washington keeps saying 'How many times I got to tell
you, they're not that sort of Indians.' And so the long day wears on.
Unlike Salaam Bombay, Mira Nair's new film is painfully alphabetical in its
guide to modern-day race attitudes and painfully contrived in the way it
routes its central romance through the appropriate stations of bigotry. In
Sooni Taraporevala's screenplay the message clearly took shape first, the
plot and the people second: always an error in priorities.
The week gets worse, I fear. Little Man Tate is the directing debut of
actress Jodie Foster. She also stars as the mother of an infant prodigy
(Adam Hann-Byrd) who could read at one, write poetry at four and play the
piano at competition level at six.
We meet him at seven, which should be about drinks time in a life as
hard-working as this. But despite Miss F's profession as a cocktail waitress
 -somewhere in Chinatown to judge by the Shanghai Lili dress she wears to
and from work - the boy is a goody two-shoes and so, alas, is the film. Like
a television problem-of-the-week movie, it slaloms between triumph and
tragedy, plinked out with piano music and with lines like 'Oh, what have I
done?'
This last is uttered by Dianne Wiest as the boy's unthinkingly cerebral
teacher-guardian. An ex-prodigy herself, she is America's answer to a
Hampstead intellectual. She feeds Fred macrobiotic drinks (he throws up),
pushes him into university ten years before his time (he is miserable) and
is then surprised that she has a crisis on her hands.
Happily - for Fred, that is, we the audience being too numbed to care - Miss
Foster rushes into the waiting emotional vacuum in the last scene and clasps
the boy to her bosom. The boy, still the only sensible presence in the film,
looks as intelligently frightened as he has throughout. Like us he seems to
be thinking: Why are two Oscar-winning actresses running around inside this
stalled vehicle trying to make it move by footwork alone? Scott Frank of
Dead Again wrote the script; the video is due out later this year; you may
wait.
Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare is the latest and we are assured the last
visit from Old Pizza-Face. I have a dreadful feeling that I enjoyed this
film. For 90 minutes I was in the presence of a ghoulish janitor who, if he
ever met an infant prodigy, would know what to do with him.
This adventures climaxes with a 3D sequence in which various creatures come
out from the screen and dip their toes in your 7-Ups. You need to don the
cardboard glasses, which I perched precariously on my spectacles, but it is
only for ten minutes. Prior to this it is a walpurgisnacht for special
effects and the plot bravely tries to keep up.
I shall miss Freddy Krueger, played here with even more relish than usual,
not to mention more pizza toppings, by Robert Englund.
Finally, one from the arthouse. Kurosawa's 17-year-old Dersu Uzala, sombre
and resplendent, unfurls at the ICA. Made in Siberia, this tale of snowbound
friendship between a Russian explorer and a peasant has a rough majesty that
keeps out sentimentality and an epic humanism that never keeps out humour.
Do not wait for the video.

The Financial Times


London Page 19 Photograph Michelle Pfeiffer and Al Pacino in 'Frankie and
Johnny' (Omitted).

920116

