FT922-7330

FT  19 MAY 92 / Who might be who as a Number Two: The field of possible
choices for the Clinton and Perot campaigns


   By JUREK MARTIN


THE MOST intriguing political news story of the week was to be found in the
New York Post, not normally a reliable source. It reported that Mr Ross
Perot, Texas businessman and president aspirant, had held secret talks with
Mr Mario Cuomo, governor of New York, and dangled in front of him the
prospect of the Number Two slot on the independent ticket.
The Hamlet of the Hudson confirmed the conversations and went on to say that
the Texan 'has more credibility than politicians'. But then, typically, he
deflated the balloon. The vice-presidency had not come up because 'Perot
knows I'm a Democrat and I will support Clinton'.
But, with the two main nominations sewn up, barring accidents, and Mr Perot
free to make his own choice, attention inevitably turns to who runs with
whom. President George Bush will go with a known commodity, Vice-President
Dan Quayle, but Governor Bill Clinton, who will be the Democratic party's
candidate, and Mr Perot have to find somebody capable of making a
difference.
So seriously is Mr Clinton taking the issue that he has asked Mr Warren
Christopher, one-time deputy secretary of state, Washington lawyer and
author of last year's devastating report on the Los Angeles police
department, to head a search committee.
The pundits' choice is Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey. He would bring
regional balance, national stature (greatly enhanced by his prescient speech
on race relations in March), sporting fame, political compatibility, the
lot. The popular view is that he would have made a stronger presidential
candidate than Mr Clinton.
But Mr Bradley did not run for the nomination and insists that he is going
to live up to his promise to serve out his Senate term, which expires in
1996. Mr Clinton said he would serve out his term as governor of Arkansas,
but the suspicion is Mr Bradley means it.
There is a growing assumption that Mr Clinton will need someone with
Washington experience, and there are more heavyweights in the Senate than in
the House, which is in any case mired in scandal. The Senate short-lists
normally include Jay Rockefeller from West Virginia (safe pair of hands,
good name, lacks fire, from a small state); Tom Harkin from Iowa (early
candidate, liberal credentials not necessarily an asset); Bob Kerrey from
Nebraska (also failed candidate, better in print than in the flesh); John
Kerry from Massachusetts (smart, ambitious, not well-known outside New
England).
Also Harris Wofford, the new man from Pennsylvania (a northern Catholic, but
liberal compared to Mr Clinton); Paul Simon from Illinois (ran in 1988, from
a critical big state, but again rather liberal); and George Mitchell from
Maine (majority leader, once a judge, ability not in doubt, but from a very
small state and a real Washington devil in the Republican lexicon.)
Democrat Paul Tsongas, who once posed the biggest threat in the primaries,
probably would not accept, in the unlikely event he was asked, and seems
intent on launching a fiscal responsibility lobby with Republican Senator
Warren Rudman from New Hampshire, who has announced his retirement in
disgust with the ways of Congress. Mr Cuomo might be approached, despite his
rudeness to Mr Clinton, but an answer might not be forthcoming before the
election.
Mr Clinton will undoubtedly consider some state governors and some women
but, needing the south as he does, will not be seeking a black. Also, no
Asian or Hispanic automatically springs to mind.
Mr Perot has a 'temporary' running mate, retired Admiral William Stockdale,
but he was named only to overcome technical problems getting registered on
state ballots. Beyond that there are few clues to his thinking, though
Senator Rudman's reputation for plain speaking might appeal, and Governor
Lowell Weicker, the maverick liberal Republican turned independent from
Connecticut, is sounding more like Mr Perot every day.
If he is looking for a woman, Ms Jeane Kirkpatrick, UN ambassador in the
Reagan administration, is on record as saying that 'if Ross Perot were to
ask me, that would be very serious'. Ms Ann McLaughlin, former Republican
secretary of labour, has also reportedly been sounded out.
One equally delicious theory, on a par with the Cuomo flier, has Mr Perot
picking retired General 'stormin' Norman Schwarzkopf to help sort out the
national mess. However, General Curtis 'bombs away' LeMay added little to
the last potent independent candidacy of George Wallace in 1968.
Mr Perot could stick to his last and pick a businessman, but the corporate
heavyweights are not all enthusiasts. Mr Robert Allen, chief executive of
AT&T, noted the other day: 'It would be refreshing to hear Ross ask for some
advice.'

The Financial Times


London Page 5

920519

