FT924-11388

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of International Fund Management (2): Forecasts for
1993 are bleak - The performance of equity markets has been disappointing
this year


   By ANTONIA SHARPE


THE slow pace of economic recovery in the United States and the German
Bundesbank's reluctance to reduce interest rates are to blame for the
disappointing performance of global equity markets this year.
The fluctuations of leading stock market indices also suggest that
international fund managers were too quick to anticipate a US-led global
economic recovery as well as lower interest rates in Europe.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average hit its record high, of 3,413.21, on June
1, the culmination of a 7.3 per cent rally which started in the early days
of April. The rally was mainly fuelled by what turned out to be short-lived
signs of an upturn in economic activity.
The realisation that the US economy was still far from recovery and
uncertainty ahead of the presidential election in November eroded the gains
in the Dow Jones over the summer, and the index is now languishing just
above the year's low of 3,136.58.
Similar patterns are evident in the UK and German stock markets. The
FTSE-100 also reached its record high of 2,737.80 on May 11 in the wake of
the Conservative Party's fourth general election victory. But the index fell
back over the summer as fund managers decided that the economic fundamentals
were unchanged.
Germany's DAX index climbed to a 1992 high of 1,811.57 on May 25 on hopes
that Germany would lead the way for lower interest rates. Cyclical stocks
were particularly in favour as fund managers took the view that they would
be the first to benefit from stronger demand in global economy.
But disappointing interim results from the corporate sector, and the
Bundesbank's grudgingly small cut in interest rates, in spite of growing
signs that the German economy was slowing down, brought the DAX index down
to the year's low of 1,420.30 in early October. It has since recovered
slightly.
Tokyo's equity problems, on the other hand, had a limited impact on stock
markets in the rest of the world, in spite of a fall of 40 per cent in the
Nikkei average in the first eight months of the year, from 23,801.18 to
14,309.41. The index has since recovered, thanks to government support
measures, to trade around the 17,000 level by late October.
Equity strategists say that the fall in Japanese equities did not have a
'domino' effect on other leading stock markets because the reasons for the
fall - a slowdown in the economy, and the bursting of the property
speculation bubble - were seen as the country's specific problems.
Furthermore, many international fund managers had reduced their exposure to
the Japanese equity market late in 1991 because of what they regarded as
excessively high valuations.
However, strategists are concerned about the effect of attempts by Japanese
institutions to correct their over-extension into foreign capital markets.
Ms Lisa Hosking, strategist at Credit Suisse First Boston in London (CSFB),
fears that the repatriation of Japanese funds, as well as a flight of
capital into the D-Mark and the Swiss franc during the currency turmoil in
the European exchange rate mechanism (ERM), means that there is less capital
available for second-line markets in Europe, such as Spain and Italy, in
Scandinavia, and for markets in the Far East.
One exception to this scenario is Hong Kong, which rose to a record high of
6,162.53 on the Hang Seng index in mid-July, a jump of 43 per cent since the
start of the year. Hong Kong's closeness to China, whose economy is starting
to grow rapidly due to a change of direction on economic reform, has been
the main attraction for international investors.
The Hong Kong stock market fell back slightly in the late summer but news in
mid-October of a trade agreement between China and the US, designed to open
China's markets to foreign goods, is expected to revive investor interest
once again.
Looking towards 1993, projections from some brokers point to an
outperformance of bonds and cash, and have therefore increased their
weightings in these instruments at the expense of equities.
Mr Andrew Garthwaite at SG Warburg says in his international asset briefing
for the fourth quarter that even though a 5-10 per cent recovery in earnings
in most equity markets would return bond-to-earnings ratios to reasonable
valuations, a much stronger recovery is needed to rebuild dividend cover, as
well as to secure sufficient dividend growth to bring bond-to-dividend
ratios back to 'fair' values.
This view is echoed by County NatWest, which has raised its cash allocation
to 10 per cent, against a benchmark of 5 per cent, and bonds to 30 per cent,
mainly at the expense of European equities. Although the broker expects
equity returns to outpace those available on cash and bonds, the margin is
not sufficient to compensate fully for the higher risk attached to equity
investments.
But for those fund managers who require a weighting in equities, Ms Hosking
would recommend the safer markets in Europe, which should benefit the most
from the expectation of falling interest rates next year. Her preferred
markets are the Netherlands, France, the UK and Switzerland.
This scenario is now plausible after the recent plunge in continental
bourses caused by the severe tensions in the ERM and the resulting
devaluations of the lira, sterling and the peseta. However, County NatWest
warns that the boost from falling interest rates will have to be balanced
against a deteriorating earnings profile, especially in Germany.
The imminent presidential election in the US - and the prospect of a victory
for Mr Bill Clinton, the Democrat candidate - has increased the risks
attached to US assets. Even though strategists believe that the financial
markets would welcome a change of administration, they fear that Mr
Clinton's commitment to infrastructure spending will add to the budget
deficit at a time when international capital is harder to attract.
A more pressing problem for equity markets, however, is the growing
consensus that the US is unable, and perhaps unwilling, to continue to be
the engine of economic growth for the rest of the world. Its would-be
successor is either Germany or Japan, but neither country has yet come
forward to assume the responsibility.

The Financial Times


London Page II

921026

