FT923-6366

FT  25 AUG 92 / Cost constraints prompt a continental shift: LSI's decision
to close its German plant shows the problems facing high-tech manufacturing
in Europe


   By LOUISE KEHOE


The decision by LSI Logic, a US semiconductor maker, to close its
state-of-the-art plant in Germany, demonstrates the problems faced by
European manufacturers of high-technology, capital-intensive goods.
Balancing the superior productivity of Far East factories against the
advantages of 'local' manufacturing to serve the European market, LSI was
driven to an inevitable decision. The plant will be phased out over the next
six months with the loss of more than 250 jobs.
'We have agonised over this for years, probably much longer than we should
have,' says Mr Wilfred Corrigan, chairman and chief executive of the
company, based in Silicon Valley. It specialises in 'application specific
integrated circuits', chips tailored to meet the needs of individual
customers.
But in the end, says Mr Corrigan, 'we came to realise that our strategy of
local manufacturing, in Europe, the US and Japan to serve our major markets
was not going to work'.
LSI's retrenchment reflects rising concerns throughout the electronics
industry. Several other electronics manufacturers with plants in Europe have
expressed similar doubts about whether the costs of their operations offset
the benefits.
Although LSI's German plant is one of the most advanced semiconductor
assembly and test facilities in the world, low productivity has made it
uncompetitive in the global chip market (see chart).
'The German management is good and the workers are good. It is not their
fault,' says Mr Corrigan, who blames the decision to close on the relatively
high cost of operating in Europe. LSI would probably have had to close down
its European operation in whatever country it had been located, he adds.
LSI chose Bruanschweig, near Hanover, in 1985 as the site for its first
European 'assembly and test' plant. At the time, the company was committed
to a strategy of serving its principal markets with local manufacturing
plants in the US, Japan and Europe. Like other electronics manufacturers,
LSI was seeking the advantage of proximity to customers to achieve better
distribution and service.
LSI originally chose Germany as the site for its first European plant after
a lengthy evaluation of several European locations. Ultimately, the company
was lured to Germany by generous tax incentives and its highly skilled
workforce.
But the issue that led to the closure of the plant is common throughout
Europe. The problem, says Mr Corrigan, is that European labour practices,
and in several cases legislation, prevent round-the-clock operation of the
plant. With high capital costs for production equipment, the goal is to run
the plant non-stop. This is possible in Japan and the Far East, where plants
typically operate on a three shift system. In the US, LSI achieves non-stop
operation by having two shifts with workers putting in a 12-hour day.
In Europe, however, most plants are fully operational less than half of the
time. 'The net result is that in Europe you get 10 shifts per week versus 21
in the US, Japan or the Far East,' Mr Corrigan says.
'The cost of capital equipment is largely the same, wherever you operate,
but in Europe productivity of the plant is halved. No matter how efficient
you are, you cannot compete.'
According to Mr Corrigan, the principal difference is cultural. 'Our workers
in California like the 12-hour shift system  - they work three days one
week, four the next. They can avoid commuting in rush hour and it enables
working mothers, and that is most of our workers, to make regular
babysitting arrangements.'
Labour costs are a second factor. Total labour costs in Germany, including
pension and health contributions, are about Dollars 20 an hour compared with
less than Dollars 3 an hour in Hong Kong.
The rising value of the D-Mark against the dollar  - which has increased the
operating costs to the US company  - was the final factor. When LSI built
the plant in 1985 the D-Mark was at about Dollars 2.50. Now the German
currency has fallen to well below Dollars 1.50.
According to Mr Corrigan, the decision to close the plant does not signal a
lack of interest in the European market. Of total group sales of Dollars
698m (Pounds 357.9m) in 1991, 15 per cent came from Europe. LSI is a leading
supplier of application-specific integrated circuits to European
telecommunications equipment makers.
He acknowledges, however, that demand for LSI products in Europe has matched
expectations. 'The European computer industry has not expanded as we
anticipated. There is very little personal computer or computer workstation
manufacturing in Europe.'
EC trade policies designed to encourage European production of
semiconductors do little to change the economic equation.
'The market is not willing to pay (the added cost) for local production,' Mr
Corrigan observes. Despite 14 per cent EC import tariffs on semiconductor
devices made outside Europe, it is cheaper to produce them elsewhere, for
instance South Korea, Hong Kong or Malaysia.
The Pacific Rim economies, and in particular Japan, also enjoy an advantage
in the supply of sophisticated machinery for semiconductor production.
Simultaneous with its announcement that it would close its plant in Germany,
LSI also said that it would shift the bulk of its wafer fabrication
operations  - the process of etching circuits onto a silicon wafer  - from
the US to Japan. This decision demonstrates that in the US, as well as
Europe, certain, high-technology manufacturing processes may be coming under
threat.
Japanese labour rates are similar to those in the US but productivity is
higher, Mr Corrigan says. 'This is not because Japanese people work harder,
but because of the greater availability of automated semiconductor
production equipment,' he explains.
Output per hour per person at LSI's Japanese plant is twice as high as at
its US plant, Mr Corrigan says. 'And our new plant, currently under
construction in Japan in a joint venture with Kawasaki Steel, will be twice
as productive again.' With a fourfold improvement in productivity at stake,
the US plant was at too great a disadvantage.
By the mid-1990s, the cost of building semiconductor plants is expected to
more than double, to as much as Dollars 1bn, as the complexity of chip
manufacturing rises. Even the world's largest semiconductor companies will
not be able to afford many new plants, Mr Corrigan predicts.
In response, LSI's strategy is to form partnerships with other chip makers
to share the costs of new facilities. Already, Mr Corrigan says, he has
found 'no shortage of people willing to talk about the possibility'.
The output of the next generation of chip plants will be so large that
companies in the industry expect that only a few will be needed to meet
international demand for semiconductor chips.
The location of these plants is likely to be determined more by regional
productivity rates than by the size of local markets. As a result, LSI may
be just one of the high-technology manufacturers to give Europe the cold
shoulder.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920825

