FT923-6594

FT  24 AUG 92 / UK Company News: A case of getting the timing right - The
prospective flotation of Woolcombers


   By DANIEL GREEN


'KARATE helps keep me calm in stressful situations', says Mr Alan Lewis, a
black belt, second dan, who trains three times a week with the top rated
karate teacher in the UK.
He is also a committed Christian, head of CBI Eastern Europe - established
to boost trade with eastern Europe - and a Lancastrian who controls a string
of textiles companies in the traditional enemy heartland of Yorkshire. Next
month he plans to float on the stock market a minority stake in part of his
textiles empire.
It may not be an easy task, even for as resolute and stress-free a man as Mr
Lewis.
He has a strong track record in his favour. At 54, he has had almost four
decades of picking bright business ideas and turning them into a lot of
cash.
He left school in 1953 at 15 and, after training in printing, made his first
fortune by car dealing and redeveloping depressed garage sites.
He then bought loss-making textiles companies, moving them into the property
business or making them profitable and selling. His timing was spot on: he
got out of markets just before the crash of 1973 and moved to Barbados.
He returned in 1975, when the recession was at its deepest, to buy property
shares. The remnants of the Slater Walker financial empire now form his
Anglo-Manx Bank.
In 1979 his ambitions settled on a troubled giant of the textiles world,
Illingworth Morris. The company had fallen on hard times, beset by
interminable squabbles between the board and 46 per cent shareholder Mrs
Pamela Mason, a Hollywood chat show hostess and former starlet who had
married actor James Mason.
She had inherited control of the company from her father, Isadore Ostrer, a
penniless Lithuanian Jew who had arrived in Britain at the turn of the
century. He rose from clerk to merchant banker (Ostrer Brothers) and ran the
Gaumont British Picture Corporation cinema concern before it was sold to J
Arthur Rank.
Ostrer died in 1975 and his heir's eclectic ownership style include board
appointments such as Mr Caspar Weinberger, who left to become President
Reagan's defence secretary, and Mr Tommy Yeardye, a hairdressing tycoon and
former escort of British film sex symbol Diana Dors.
As the company's share price and profits slid, and death taxes officials
pressed their claims on Mrs Mason, the corporate predators closed in.
It took four years for Mr Lewis to win the takeover battle. He outlasted
rival bidders, endured the Mason family's court battles over control of the
inheritance, and emerged triumphant from a Monopolies and Mergers Commission
investigation.
His record during Illingworth's relatively stress-free quoted days was one
of shareholder-pleasing profits growth. In 1982, Illingworth shares traded
at 18p. In 1989 he paid 185p a share to take the company private, promising
to one day return it to the market.
But Mr Lewis's effectiveness stands in sharp contrast to the patchy
investment record of the textiles industry.
There were only a handful of flotations in the 1980s and most hit trouble.
One clothing manufacturer, Babygro, was sold within a year for one third of
its initial market capitalisation. Others fell into loss, were forced to
restructure or to pass dividends.
The company Mr Lewis intends to float, Woolcombers Group, is a different
beast. It deals with raw materials rather than clothing. It never assumes
ownership of the wool in its charge, rather it earns a 'tariff' per
kilogramme to turn raw wool into a material suitable for spinning into yarn.
This means that turnover and profits are related to volume of business
rather than the wool price. The link to volume is one of two main reasons
for the timing of the flotation.
Most textiles companies suffered badly over the past three years as a
halving of wool prices played havoc with the valuation of stocks.
But the price falls have helped sustain demand at levels about 10 per cent
below those in the late 1980s. Low prices should mean steady demand and high
volume, the right formula for Woolcombers.
The second reason is that the company has only just emerged from another
Monopolies and Mergers Commission investigation, this time into the
acquisition of Jarmain, a commission wool scouring company that is now one
of the three divisions of Woolcombers Group.
Mr Lewis's strategy - 'to become number one in the UK and Europe' - worked
too well, according to the MMC. It found that his companies had 52 per cent
of the UK commission wool scouring market. Between 1990, when Mr Lewis took
control, and this year, Jarmain increased annual turnover by 43 per cent to
Pounds 6.4m but trebled operating profit to Pounds 733,000.
In July this year, after more than two years of MMC probing, Mr Lewis agreed
to mothball one of his wool scouring lines for a year - another running
alongside is now operating 24 hours a day, seven days a week - and for two
more to be closed or sold.
He still controls enough of the industry to implement scouring tariff rises.
July's 8 per cent increase, the first in two years, will be followed by
another in January. The combination could double operating profits.
Woolcombers Group also dominates other markets. It has 84 per cent of UK
lanolin production and about 15 per cent of the Pounds 35m world market. It
has patents to a treatment called Superwash that makes wool shrink
resistant. Superwash has 72 per cent of its market in the UK. Capacity has
just been doubled with a new line and the company has licensed the
technology to Italy and the US.
Mr Lewis is resigned to further encounters with the MMC. 'We are major
players in these sectors. We are bound to come across them again.' he says.
His record of profitability and success in dealing with the MMC may be
enough to persuade the City to dip into the purse for the first textiles
flotation of the 1990s.
But there will be two prejudices to dispel first: a decades-long mistrust of
the textiles industry based on disappointing financial performance, and a
more recent fear of tycoons with quoted companies who maintain parallel
private and offshore vehicles. The Lewis empire now consists of several
offshore vehicles including the Anglo Manx Bank, as well as 55 UK private
companies in property, finance and textiles.
The fact that he intends to keep majority control of Woolcombers Group is
unlikely to reassure fund managers.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920824

