FT921-15192

FT  11 JAN 92 / Arts: 'Cosi' revived


   By MAX LOPPERT


   THE LATEST Royal Opera Cosi fan tutte


first shown three years ago, revived for the first time on Thursday - is a
curious and (to my taste) unpleasing combination of knockabout and
sour-tasting pessimism about human nature. The action begins with a super
elaborately falling down drunk, twice, and ends with the lovers resolutely
unreconciled: no purist nonsense about taking seriously the words of the
opera's very last line.
In between, there is much skittishness and tomfoolery, carried out in a
horribly ugly box-set, biscuit-coloured when not Stygian black, which only
becomes bearable in Act 2, when an exotic coloured tent descends to
ameliorate the worst of the decor's eye-straining and voice-dissipating
properties. The producer, Johannes Schaaf, seems to have conceived of the
opera as a dry philosophical proposition argued out in theatrically
semi-abstract terms; the indoor and outdoor physical charms of the music are
slighted, and the overall gain seems little more than a slick
late-20th-century knowingness about human relations which amounts, in the
end, to a failure of emotional understanding.
It is, however, an intelligent, consistent production - however much I
dislike Schaaf's work, I have to admit that he sticks to his guns. And there
can be no question that the 1992 realisation of this Cosi proves infinitely
preferable to the 1989 original. It is sung and acted with no less fluency
and infinitely more dramatic responsiveness; the conductor, Carlo Rizzi,
though as yet insufficiently ready to acknowledge the bubbling good humour -
laughter, even - in Mozart's scoring, times the dramatic unfolding with
whip-cracking alertness and an Italianate fizz that maintains unbroken
momentum throughout Act 2: a notable achievement.
The most startling improvement comes with the Fiordiligi, Margaret Marshall.
Three years ago she showed us a miniaturised character, full of wispy-voiced
'melting' mannerisms; on Thursday she seemed a singer transformed, boldly on
the verbal and vocal attack, confident and commanding. The basic seriousness
of the dominant elder sister and the suggestibility of the flighty younger
(Diana Montague, first-rate after a cloudy start) are beautifully
intertwined. The no less plausible matching of the male pair - Kurt Streit
(Glyndebourne's Ferrando in his house debut), tall, romantic, the most
seductive and stylish of today's Mozart tenors, and William Shimell
(Guglielmo), dark, volatile, his baritone much less stentorian and more
mellifluous than usual - lends the opera a variousness of character and
personality that comes near to balancing Schaaf's fidgety notions.
This time Anne Howells's glorious mature-woman Despina, a perfect gem of
golden wit, elegance and fine timing, is partnered with the Alfonso of
Stafford Dean. Bald-pated, a clubbable English gentleman in frock-coat and
top hat, he gives a subtle, many-layered account of the role, vigorously
sung - the surface all unruffled, smiling good manners, the core hard and
unbending. It is, in sum, an exceptionally well-assorted Cosi sextet; in
this particular production, the many compensatory pleasures it provides are
received with special gratitude.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII Photograph Diana Montague and Kurt Streit in the current
Covent Garden production (Omitted).

920111

