FT922-4321

FT  05 JUN 92 / International Bonds: National & Provincial braves unsettled
sterling sector


   By SIMON LONDON


NATIONAL & Provincial Building Society yesterday braved an unsettled
sterling bond market to raise Pounds 100m capital with an issue of
long-dated, subordinated bonds.
The deal adds to recent heavy supply of subordinated debt from UK banks,
other building societies and insurance companies. The biggest issue of all
could be yet to come: if Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation wins its
bid for Midland Bank, up to Pounds 450m subordinated bonds will be issued to
Midland shareholders.
The paper offered yesterday carries a 10 3/4 per cent coupon and has a
maturity date in 2011. However, N&P is likely to call the bonds after 14
years.
If it does not exercise the call, the coupon will be re-set to pay 225 basis
points over five-year sterling swap interest rate - a punitive level for the
issuer given that its cost of capital is currently around 60 basis points
over Libor on a swapped basis.
Investors were yesterday pricing the paper as if it had a 14-year maturity.
The bonds were re-offered to investors at a fixed rate of 155 basis points
over long-dated government bonds. Hongkong Bank has said that it will issue
10-year paper at a yield spread 240 basis points over gilts.
Lead manager Samuel Montagu said that placement was restricted to UK
institutional investors such as life insurance companies with long-dated
liabilities.
The issue counts as Tier II or non-core capital for N&P, which has only one
other subordinated debt issue outstanding, maturing in 1998. Under
regulations set by the Building Societies Commission, the industry
regulator, subordinated debt gradually ceases to count as capital five years
prior to maturity. Hence, the N&Ps capital position will start to
deteriorate from next year and yesterday's issue was made to offset this
erosion of balance sheet strength.
Elsewhere, dollar and Canadian dollar sector continued to benefit from the
weakness of European markets. Toyota Motor Credit, the US consumer finance
arm of the Japanese car company, launched a Dollars 200m four-year deal.
Lead managed by Wood Gundy, the bonds were priced to yield 40 basis points
more than Canadian government bonds, seen as fair by participants in the
deal. Syndicate officials reported strong buying from European retail
investors.
Having been re-offered to investors at a fixed price of 99.50, the paper
traded up to 99.65 bid, where the yield spread over government bonds was 39
basis points.
The flow of Eurodollar floating rate note issues continued, with Credit
Lyonnais of France and Unibank of Denmark raising Dollars 250m and Dollars
100m respectively.
Both deals were lead managed by Merrill Lynch and offered unusually high
margins over Libor. The Unibank paper pays a margin of 105 basis points, but
is subordinated. The Credit Lyonnais notes pay a margin of 37.5 basis
points, but subject to an fixed cap.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

920605

