FT924-1052

FT  19 DEC 92 / Fashion: Weaving that old black magic - Evening wear that
puts other dresses in the shade


   By AVRIL GROOM


IF NAVY has been this half-century's safely elegant choice for women in
daytime, there is no doubt about its after-dark equivalent. At night, one is
seen in black.
Although black is every designer's choice for evening versions of this
winter's fashion themes, you cannot say that black is back. It has never
been away. In British stores, at least, little black dresses, long black
dresses and black evening separates far outsell any other colour every
winter.
At Fenwick, in London's Bond Street, the figure is three to one. At Harvey
Nichols in Knightsbridge, buyer Yasmin Yussuf estimates her sales of black
equal those of red, purple, cobalt and gold put together.
Those bright shades read like a list of also-rans. At some point, each has
been touted as the evening colour of the season, only to founder among the
black shadows. This year it is the turn of gold, but you are more likely to
see it on fashion pages than at parties. Yet, all those colours look very
good as a highlight to a predominantly black outfit.
Indeed, that is one of black's enduring strengths - it is a brilliant foil
for the vivid little item, such as a bag or scarf, that individualises a
simple dress and, most of all, for jewellery. Not for nothing do jewellers
display their best pieces on black velvet.
Buyers and designers say the greatest appeal of black is its versatility.
'It dresses up or down as much as you want,' explains Yussuf, 'and,
therefore, you only need buy one evening outfit, especially as the long slim
dress is now acceptable wear from cocktails to grand balls.
'It can be low-key or, if a woman enjoys really glittering costume jewellery
or has wonderful real jewellery, nothing will set it off to better
advantage. And black is the most slimming colour.'
There is also the question of investment value. 'Because the accessory
variations are limitless,' says Yussuf, 'you can keep on bringing out a
black dress and, even more so, interchangeable black evening separates. But
that stunning red dress is once seen, never forgotten.'
For designer Donald Campbell, who has many private customers for whom he
makes to measure, it is a matter of discretion. 'This is not the time for a
grand statement in flamboyant colours,' he says. 'I have had many orders for
simple black dresses but the fabrics - silk, crepe or velvet - are very rich
and feel wonderful to wear. It is a time for private luxury, not public
display.'
As Emanuel Ungaro showed in his couture collection for this autumn, you can
confect a complex mix of velvet, lace, taffeta, beading and ribbons and,
provided everything is black, the result is charmingly tasteful.
Try that in red or gold and you would be fit only for the stage at the royal
variety performance. It is also very hard to put a price tag on a plain
black dress, as even inexpensive fabrics have a knack of looking better in
black than any other colour.
Apart from the grand ball dress, all the clothes photographed here are
priced moderately - but they give maximum value for glamour and good taste.
They also illustrate the chameleon ability of black to slot into any of
fashion's present moods. The grand dress is the place for mixing texture,
fabric and decoration to great effect; and the quality of fitting and
finish, plus the craftsmanship of the detail, mark the special effort from
the common herd.
Conversely, the new, slim, long dress is the plainest canvas to decorate
with your own fashion fantasies, from jewellery to a bright chiffon or
velvet scarf (or, if you have the face, figure and confidence, to wear in
minimalist mode with nothing but clean hair and a naked smile).
The full, long skirt is a less demanding option but here, too, fashion
decrees a low-key pairing, with a simple Lycra 'body' or a slip of soft knit
 -plenty of opportunities to bring in colour here - rather than the big
organza shirt or spangled corsetry of last year.
Short dresses may have been declared passe by the pundits but they are still
many women's choice and look fresher for evening than for day. Provided the
shape is simple, you can load on the glitter here - the black, sequinned
shift dress has become a modern classic.
Finally, this year's emphasis on mannish styles has turned the spotlight on
another classic, the dinner suit. Worn with cascading hair and wicked
womanly touches such as delicate mules or a transparent chiffon shirt, it
can look more beguilingly feminine than the flounciest of frocks.
But the last word should go to a designer who is not a single-minded
supporter of black. Amanda Wakeley, a rising young star of evening wear and
winner of the glamour section of this year's British fashion awards,
produced much of her winter collection in deep navy or chocolate brown.
'I see them as alternatives which fulfil the same function as black,' she
says, 'All are very subtle and can be dressed up with jewellery, and some
women find the others suit them better.'
She adds, though: 'Black is still the best-seller when I wholesale to stores
because it's the safe option, the colour everyone has accessories to go
with. But my private customers who come for special orders often want
something different.'
FOR alternative looks for those alternative evenings:
Tuxedos: wool crepe with sequinned lapels, Pounds 75 from Fenwick; velvet
smoking jacket with beaded tie-belt, Pounds 450 from the Harvey Nichols
Collection.
Longs: short-sleeved round-necked cheongsam, Pounds 179 from Jaeger; stretch
jersey with twist front and long sleeves by Jasper Conran, Pounds 330 from
Harvey Nichols.
Grands: a selection at Donald Campbell, Chelsea Manor Street, SW3; Chelsea
Design Company, Sydney Street, SW3; David Fielden, Fulham Road, SW3. Price:
the sky is the limit.
Fulls: black and purple satin stripe by Monix, Pounds 89.99 to order on
081-531-6622; selection at Tatters, Fulham Road, SW3 and Harrods, SW1,
prices from about Pounds 500.
Shorts: all-over beaded vest dress by John Charles, Pounds 130 from House of
Fraser; sequin T-shirt dress, Pounds 179 from Jaeger.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

921219

