FT921-15230

FT  11 JAN 92 / Markets: Engineering a way out of the doldrums - The Bottom
Line


   By JANE FULLER


THE NEWS coming out about engineering companies recently cannot have been
good for shareholders' blood pressure.
The Engineering Employers Federation has said that output continued to fall
in the last quarter of 1991 and no upturn is expected until the end of this
year. About 170,000 of the industry's workers lost their jobs last year,
nearly three times as many as in the previous two years put together.
In the latest edition of the The Engineer magazine, a survey of confidence -
or lack of it - showed that after a breath of hope in the autumn, sentiment
had reverted almost to the 'appalling' levels prevailing in December 1990.
It is little comfort that shareholders should already have been braced for
bad news not only by the general back-pedalling on dates for a UK recovery,
but also by the more engineering-sensitive forecasts from the Confederation
of British Industry: fixed investment in manufacturing down by nearly 20 per
cent in 1991, with a further fall of 4.4 per cent pencilled in for this
year.
In the City, the accompanying round of profits downgrades and deepening
anxiety about dividend prospects have caused the general engineering sector
to have a price-earnings ratio nearly 20 per cent below that of the
FT-Actuaries Industrial Group, while the yield is appreciably higher.
So is it not time for those with strong nerves to start taking a different
view? The comparative cheapness of the sector might make it worth buying for
the profits to be made out of the recovery.
Not necessarily, according to John McGee, an analyst at SG Warburg. He
points to the underperformance of general engineering compared with the
all-share index over the past 15 years, as shown in the accompanying
illustration. 'People didn't make a lot of money out of recovery stocks in
that sector 10 years ago.'
Nor was any compensation gained via the dividend. For most of the last
decade, engineering companies yielded less than the market.
Timing is also difficult. It takes a while for investment abstinence to feed
through to actual workload, or for engineering contracts to be completed,
many companies in the sector were relatively late entrants into the
recession and may also be late out.
For those prepared to take a longer view, however, a much more positive
picture can be painted. Mark Radcliffe, deputy director general of the CBI
and head of its National Manufacturing Council, said the 'massive
restructuring carried out by many companies in the 1980s has made them much
better.' He cites improvements in productivity and the strengthening of
positions in international markets.
As an industrialist, he was quizzical about the stock market's perception of
engineering companies. However, some analysts are also making encouraging
noises about the medium-term outlook.
Jonathan Getz, at Birmingham-based Albert E Sharp, says the UK's attractions
within Europe - illustrated by Japanese investment - include more
accommodating employment laws and relatively low labour costs.
Yet judging the sector continues to be a difficult task because of its
diversity. Mr Sandy Morris, at County NatWest, says: 'It is not quite right
that all engineering companies get tarred with the same brush.'
There is some convenience in the separation of aerospace, motors and metals
companies into their own little sectors, especially as each has its peculiar
problems. Aerospace and metals were among the five worst performing sectors
in 1991, while motors has joined steel in providing analysts with big
dividend worries.
Companies will pay uncovered dividends for one year, but not two, is the
expected rule of thumb.
In the general engineering sector, the companies with the best prospects
include those which have spread their activities overseas. Siebe and TI
Group have strong positions in the US and both showed relatively modest
profit declines in the first half of 1991.
Among those that have weathered this recession much better than the last one
is Weir Group. Rescued by its banks last time, it has kept cash in hand
through this downturn.
Weir raised interim profits by more than a third and it was far from alone
in continuing to make progress. In a cursory glance at the list, some of the
others that raised their last pre-tax figures are: Babcock, BM, EIS, Halma,
Powerscreen, TT and Whessoe.
Those companies which cut their costs in 1991 - IMI, for instance, with
1,200 redundancies - should also have laid the foundations for a better
performance.
Although it is early days for any necks to be stuck out, the scene should be
set for a better share price performance from the engineering companies in
the 1990s.

The Financial Times


London Page II Graph (Omitted).

920111

