FT922-4336

FT  05 JUN 92 / UK Company News: 'Tactical error' by Lloyds as arbitrageurs
gather - Price rises 10p to 467p as 18m shares traded, three times the
normal volume


   By NORMA COHEN, Investments Correspondent


INSTITUTIONAL shareholders in Midland Bank believe Lloyds Bank may have made
a tactical error in its effort to acquire its smaller rival by not
immediately announcing a new, higher bid to cap that offered on Tuesday by
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank.
The Lloyds board is meeting today and is expected to improve on its existing
Pounds 3.9bn proposed offer, announcing enriched terms which will become a
formal bid if its approach is cleared by the Monopolies and Mergers
Commission in August.
The enhanced bid from HSBC has encouraged arbitrageurs to buy Midland
shares. Because arbitrageurs buy shares for short-term profits, not
long-term gains, they are expected to tender the shares to HSBC and could
tip the scales in favour of the Hong Kong-based bank.
Midland's shares yesterday closed 10p higher at 467p, with 18m shares traded
 -roughly three times the normal volume. Market sources also said that HSBC
had apparently been buying shares in recent days and may have accounted for
as much as a third of yesterday's activity. HSBC's stake in Midland stood at
15.9 per cent yesterday morning.
HSBC's new bid offers speculative investors the opportunity to buy shares
with a guarantee that they will be purchased later at a higher price.
The new offer values each Midland share at about 480p. When it was first
announced on Tuesday, Midland was trading at 452p.
Shareholders said the mechanical difficulties of conducting a classic
arbitrage between HSBC and Midland shares had dampened activity until now. A
classic arbitrage would have encouraged shareholders to sell HSBC shares
short while buying Midland at a lower price. Eventually, the shares would be
transferable to HSBC at a higher price.
However, UK institutions generally report difficulties with selling foreign
stocks short and on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, shares may not be sold
short. If they are sold short in London, settlement periods are far longer
than those in Hong Kong where shares must be paid for two days after the
transaction. By comparison, Midland shares bought in London on Thursday do
not have to be paid for until the end of the current account period on June
22.
Shareholders said that much of the arbitrage activity in HSBC and Midland
shares was occurring in New York markets where it is possible to sell short
the American Depositary Shares of HSBC. With settlement periods for a short
sale of HSBC and a purchase of Midland shares coinciding, the transaction
becomes easier to complete.
See Lex

The Financial Times


London Page 23

920605

