FT923-9852

FT  03 AUG 92 / Arts: Building with an eye on history - Architecture


   By COLIN AMERY


WAS MODERN architecture designed to be part of history? The answer has to be
yes and no. Many of the pioneers of modern architecture derided history and
were determined not to build for a long future. Many modern architects in
this century have associated the idea of creating monuments with tyranny,
privilege and the class system. They wanted, instead of being part of the
weight that architectural history and preservation lays upon the earth, to
be lightweight, functional and part of the motion of change.
Many architects who have been working in the UK in the recent past must have
been surprised to find that their buildings are the subject of examination
by official historians for the purposes of statutory listing and protection.
Last week English Heritage and the Royal Commission on the Historical
Monuments of England presented an exhibition and held a Seminar at the Royal
College of Art in London on the subject of the listing of post-war
buildings. The exhibition, 'A Change of Heart - English Architecture Since
The War, A Policy for Protection' - is open on weekdays from 10 am to 8 pm
at the Royal College of Art, Kensington Gore, London, SW7. It is going on
tour to Chelmsford, Birmingham, Bradford and Exeter. It is sponsored by
Pearson (owners of the FT) and the Obayashi Corporation - the two most
recent owners of the first post-war building to be listed, Bracken House in
the City of London, once the home of this newspaper.
The period under examination is 1945-1975 - a period that it is hard to
think of as history. A new approach is needed for post-war architecture
because, unlike so much of the architecture of the past, it concerns not
just a relatively few listed buildings but often a mass of housing estates,
new towns and whole universities.
It is a period that is difficult to look at with clear, unprejudiced eyes,
and it will take time to analyse and establish objective standards of
judgment. The fact that many of the creators of the post-war environment are
still alive makes it more interesting, but in my view much more difficult
for historians to make totally independent judgments.
At the seminar in London, attended by historians and architects, there was
clearly already a division of opinion about the best way to proceed on this
thorny subject between Miss Jennifer Page, chief executive of English
Heritage, and Mr Martin Cherry, who is in charge of listing buildings. Miss
Page stressed the importance of the political context and demonstrated her
own lack of political skills (or was she showing how independent a quango
English Heritage has become?) by making invidious and personal remarks about
a previous Secretary of State for the Environment and his attitude to
listing. English Heritage's role is to offer the best impartial advice to
ministers on historical matters, not to bite publicly the hand that feeds
it.
Mr Cherry seemed to feel that politics is not the most important aspect of
the context of post-war buildings and that the listing criteria should be as
historically objective as possible and based upon sound art-historical
principles. He is a medievalist and so his historical training would seem to
lend his judgments the appropriate distance. Miss Page has done good
service, I suspect unwittingly, by demonstrating the dangers of sullying the
purity of debate by playing politics.
The modest exhibition, and Mr Andrew Saint's brightly argued booklet that
goes with it, both show the need for a debate on this delicate subject. It
was Sir John Summerson, writing about the past in the future in the 1940s,
who saw that preservation was susceptible to 'fatuity, hypocrisy,
sentimentality of the ugliest sort and downright obstructionism.' Anyone
thinking about how to make an objective list of post-war buildings that
should be preserved should remember Sir John's thoughts.
What is the point of preserving the recent past? It must be to show our own
humility as a minute part of the flow of human history. We acknowledge the
moments where we think human achievement has reached an honourable level -
we cannot really do more than salute them. Ruskin was clearer on the subject
because he thought that we had no right to touch the buildings of past
times: 'they are not ours. They belong partly to those who built them and
partly to all the generations of mankind who are to follow us.' I long to
know what Ruskin would have thought of (a) a bureaucracy of historians and
(b) post-war architecture]
The exhibition includes some excellent new photographs taken by the Royal
Commission on Historical Monuments of some of the important buildings of the
period. It must be the design of the exhibition that did not allow for large
pictures - it is a pity that the excellent arguments are poorly served by
postage stamp sized photographs. I liked the historians' categories of
modern architects, from 'Ancients' who maintained the flame of tradition,
through 'Herbivores', to 'Modernists' and 'Team Men'. Examples of their work
include Bankside Power Station in London, Nottingham Polytechnic, Stevenage
Town Centre, war-time prefabs, the ghastly Trellick Tower in Kensal Green,
London, and even some developers' rubbish from the 1980s.
But some examples apart, the proposed three-year study of the period has to
be applauded. I would rely on historians such as Andrew Saint to ensure its
total objectivity. But I would not rely on a quick reform of public opinion
on this subject, or a sudden change of heart by ministers when it comes,
say, to the preservation of an empty Bankside Power Station that occupies
one of the most valuable sites on the Thames.
At the moment I would find it hard to see the Barbican as a conservation
area, but I am prepared to consider a change of heart given adequate time to
consider whether or not modern architecture ever wanted to become part of
the aspic-laden world of the preservationists. After all, many modern
buildings would make wonderful ruins once the inhabitants have been
released.

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920803

