FT921-419

FT  30 MAR 92 / Call for resignation of German defence chief: Stoltenberg
embroiled in tanks export scandal


   By CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BONN


THE second German arms export scandal in six months has led to calls for the
sacking of Mr Gerhard Stoltenberg, defence minister, and has undermined the
CDU's prospects in next Sunday's state election in Schleswig-Holstein.
Pressure from the opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) grew after it
became known that 15 Leopard I tanks had been shipped to Turkey last autumn
in defiance of a parliamentary committee ban in place since last year. The
minister was embroiled in a similar row late last year when armoured
vehicles, labelled as farm machinery, were discovered in Hamburg docks on
route to Israel.
News of the shipment emerged on Friday after the Bonn government suspended
all military dealings with Turkey, its Nato partner, because German arms
were being used against Kurdish communities.
Mr Stoltenberg, a close cabinet ally of Chancellor Helmut Kohl and former
chairman of the CDU in Schleswig-Holstein, said at the weekend he was
'disturbed' by the news, although refused to comment on the calls for his
resignation.
His parliamentary state secretary, Mr Ottfried Hennig, has also come under
heavy fire for allowing exports discipline to slip.
He is the party's leading candidate in the Schleswig-Holstein poll, standing
against Mr Bjorn Engholm, chairman of the SPD and prime minister of the
state.
The mood in the SPD, which took 54 per cent of the votes in the last state
election in 1988 and was already clear favourite to maintain power after
next week's vote, was bolstered by the disarray in Mr Kohl's government and
the likely reinforcement of Mr Engholm's status as a leader.
Mr Engholm is the opposition candidate for the chancellor's post in the 1994
federal elections.
The CDU, meanwhile, is more concerned about the loss of face for Mr Kohl if,
as the polls suggest, the CDU loses its absolute majority in the southern
state of Baden-Wurttemberg, which also votes next weekend. The state is the
last one in former western Germany where the conservatives rule alone.
CDU Bundestag members said at the weekend that it was unlikely that either
Mr Stoltenberg or Mr Hennig would go before next week's election.
The chancellor is planning a cabinet shuffle later this year, and has
promised several 'new, young faces'.

The Financial Times


International Page 3

920330

