FT924-6246

FT  23 NOV 92 / Brussels confident on EC-US farm trade agreement


   By Our Foreign Staff


SENIOR European Commission officials were confident at the weekend that
there was enough political momentum behind last Friday's EC-US farm trade
deal to overcome French attempts to block it.
The agreement, which settled long-running disputes over subsidised food
exports and opens the way to concluding the six-year-old Uruguay Round
negotiations on liberalising world trade, has overwhelming support inside
the EC, officials said. This view was endorsed in London where the fierce
French opposition has done little to dent optimism that the way is now open
for a conclusion of the Uruguay Round.
Meanwhile, the French government this weekend came under intense political
pressure to reject the deal as angry French farmers threatened to step up
protests against the agreement. These will culminate in a nationwide day of
action on Wednesday and other strikes and stoppages planned by workers on
the Paris subway, French railways and Air France, the state-owned airline.
The beleaguered government is not expected to take a final decision on the
farm trade deal until a debate in the National Assembly on Wednesday. Mr
Pierre Beregovoy, the prime minister, has criticised the deal as
'unacceptable', and claims it contravenes last May's reform of the EC's
Common Agricultural Policy.
But Mr Ray MacSharry, EC agriculture commissioner, says 'we have no
difficulty whatsoever' in demonstrating that the EC-US accord is within the
price and production cuts agreed by the Community - including France - in
this year's radical reform of the CAP.
France's partners, one official argued, would not accept any new risk of a
transatlantic trade war. Nor would they support French opposition when they
feel the agreement is in key respects better than even France had expected.
'It's going to be difficult for France to oppose (the EC-US settlement) on
its previously stated grounds', he said.
The British judgment is that France would not veto the US-EC agreement. UK
ministers say that French anger has been entirely predictable, and expect
Paris to allow itself eventually to be 'outvoted' by its partners.
Mr MacSharry says the farm regime which EC states wish to preserve could not
survive in the absence of a Uruguay Round agreement guaranteed by the
108-nation General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. 'We are satisfied we have
a deal which will consolidate the benefits to EC agriculture agreed
unanimously by the member governments.'
Officials in Brussels believe the matter will be settled at the summit of EC
heads of government at Edinburgh on December 11-12. Some note that French
ministers are using the present furore to establish credentials as
intransigent defenders of French interests. France's staunchest ally,
Germany, has also failed to reinforce Paris on the Gatt front.
US officials were keeping a low profile over the weekend, making no public
statements about the disarray within the EC, conscious of the danger of
inflaming their own farmers, many of whom said on Friday they were deeply
disappointed with the deal.
The Bush administration, which leaves office on January 20, will not be able
to complete the passage of any Uruguay Round package through Congress. But
President Bush has vowed to negotiate until January 20, and president-elect
Bill Clinton has carefully avoided any words or actions that might undermine
this final burst of activity by his predecessor.
Onus on Brussels to square deal with CAP, Page 4
French ponder rejection of farm deal, Page 4
Now the tough talks can begin, Page 14
Editorial Comment, Page 14

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921123

