FT921-14219

FT  17 JAN 92 / Yeltsin vows to fight 'sabotage' of reforms


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


PRESIDENT Boris Yeltsin yesterday vowed to speed up privatisation and smash
monopolies in the face of what he called 'sabotage' by powerful forces,
including former communist officials.
Defending his cabinet of economic reformers, he also dismissed attacks,
including a resignation call by Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, the Russian
parliament's ambitious chairman, as 'unacceptable' attempts to reap
'political dividends' from present difficulties.
'The market is being set up in difficult conditions - economic crisis,
collapse of the union. . . . the resistance of mafia structures striving to
retain dominance in distribution, open sabotage by the former party
nomenklatura,' he told parliament.
Warning that the reforms were not yet irreversible, he urged deputies to
show 'real support, mutual trust and joint action'. He said, for instance,
that in an attempt to bring down prices, he would cut the profit margins
allowed producers to half of their costs.
Just back from a national tour, Mr Yeltsin said lower-level authorities had
failed to pay salary increases for state employees and subsidies for the
poor in many parts of the country - fuelling discontent.
Mr Yeltsin said special committees were being set up in 40 regions to
oversee the implementation of reforms. In another measure likely to prove
popular, he announced that Communist party money frozen in Russian bank
accounts would be used to finance social welfare for those hit hardest by
price reforms.
In the parliament yesterday Mr Khasbulatov sneered as Mr Yegor Gaidar, the
deputy prime minister responsible for economic reforms, spoke. But his
deputy, Mr Vladimir Shumeiko, said that parliamentary and government leaders
had met the previous day to narrow their differences.
He described legislation to put trade on a market footing as excessively
bureaucratic, but Mr Gaidar countered that it had produced results. Out of
70,000 state shops in Russia, said Mr Gaidar, 20,000 had already opted for
'commercialisation' - the right to act as independent legal entities,
concluding their own contracts and holding their own bank accounts. He also
said that a budget for 1992 had been submitted to parliament for approval.

The Financial Times


London Page 2 Photograph A Muscovite whistles her support for an anti-black
market demonstration outside parliament yesterday (Omitted).

920117

