FT921-15529

FT  09 JAN 92 / Economic Viewpoint: Better Frankfurt than Liverpool


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Let us suppose that the different states of the US still had their own
currencies, which they had linked together in an exchange rate regime, and
hoped eventually to fuse into a single dollar. Let us go back one step and
assume that there was not yet a Federal Reserve Board, but a series of
regional Feds which had to follow New York. There would then surely be many
vociferous complaints that other states were being forced to accept
excessively high interest rates based on the needs of New York.
Yet in practice Florida, California, Wyoming and the rest might benefit more
from a zone of currency stability than from the ability to have their own
nominal interest rates. And if New York had a good sound money record, the
other states could improve their own anti-inflationary credentials by using
it as an anchor.
This comparison has been provoked by the renewed campaign to cut Britain
free from the strings of the ERM. (The biggest non-surprise of the new year
is the report that Mrs Thatcher has been expressing similar views. It would
be astonishing if she had not been.) Let no one suppose that a mere
realignment - that is, a devaluation within the ERM - would give the UK
freedom to slash interest rates. Rates would still have to stay competitive
with other European centres, plus an additional devaluation risk premium.
Mr Nicholas Ridley believes that the ERM has 'overkilled' UK inflation,
which is now 'zero or even negative'. I only wish this were true. He is
right to say that the retail prices index is misleading; but that is because
it now understates inflation, the underlying rate of which is 5 1/2 to 6 per
cent.
A plausible case can be made that both core and headline inflation will be
down to 3 per cent or less by the end of this year. But we are not there
yet. It would take only a few signs that the UK was once again
devaluation-happy to reignite inflationary psychology.
What is disagreeable about the alarmist talk is the implication that there
is nothing that business and workers can do to help themselves, such as to
stop pricing themselves out of work. In a previous article I instanced the
Ford pay settlement at a rate well above inflation and in defiance of the
glut of workers asking for jobs. So long as this 'going rate' mentality is
prevalent, unemployment will be high whether the UK is on a fixed or
floating exchange rate, inside or outside the ERM, and irrespective of which
party is in power.
Now for another example. I have a friend who has behaved like a textbook
employer, reducing pay in his factory by 10 per cent before contemplating
short time or redundancies. But his cost-cutting efforts have been
undermined by a ground landlord who demands hefty increases under a
five-year rent revision clause, on the assumption that high inflation is
here to stay. My friend has been advised to tell the landlord to jump into a
lake.
These incidents are part of the human friction involved in the transition
from a fixed price (or cost-plus) economy to a flexible price one. The
transition would be stopped in its tracks if the government panicked over
recession - too late in any case to do itself any electoral good.
Incidentally, it does not take much imagination to see how John Smith would
have the government for breakfast if it embarked on any form of devaluation.
One way in which self-correcting economic forces can work in a large
economic area is for the recessionary region to lower its costs and prices
relative to the anchor state. If a monetary policy, decided in New York in
my hypothetical case and Frankfurt in the actual one, were to depress output
in the outlying states, the latter could emerge from recession by improving
their competitiveness and increasing market share.
But would all these efforts be offset by the inability of the outlying
states to reduce interest rates - which would actually rise in real terms if
inflation rates fell? History suggests that they need not be. In the second
half of 1981, in the early stages of UK recovery from the 1981 recession
(and when Sir Alan Walters was advising Mrs Thatcher at No 10), base rates
had to be jerked sharply upwards in reaction to monetary tightening in the
US; and they did not return to their starting point until July 1982.
Moreover, because of dropping inflation, real UK interest rates rose even
more sharply, and increased further in 1982-83.
Yet these developments did not prevent a recovery in British output starting
in the middle of 1981 and gathering force in 1982-83. High real interest
rates are compatible with economic recovery, even though they are hardly
welcome; and the period of negative real interest rates in the mid-1970s was
a gloomy one for growth.
If the calls to slash interest rates, irrespective of the exchange rate
consequences, were coming from unreconstructed Keynesians, I could
understand. What is difficult to take is when they come from economists such
as the 'Liverpool Six', headed by Prof Patrick Minford, many of whom claim
in their academic capacity that the main influence of monetary policy is
over inflation and any effects on output and jobs are transitory. Indeed
Minford himself is known for his belief in both 'rational expectations' and
'new classical' doctrines.
What these doctrines were supposed to mean, unless I totally misunderstood
them, was that output and employment could only be influenced by surprise
changes in macroeconomic policy, and that the real economy would soon adjust
to any stable monetary policy regime, once that was credible and understood.
Within this method of thinking, the debate between using a fixed exchange
rate against a low-inflation country and relying on internal monetary rules,
was a second order one in which reasonable monetarists could disagree with
each other, and the answer might depend on circumstances of time and place.
Now all these teachings have been thrown out of the window as the Liverpool
Six outbid the crudest Keynesians in their calls for reflation.
The fundamental question is how worried we should be that monetary policy
throughout Europe is increasingly decided by the Bundesbank. I can think of
a good many worse bodies to decide it. The implication, so resented in the
Thatcherite camp, is that businessmen and workers in Britain , as in most
other European countries, should be so intimately affected by the
Bundesbank's efforts to contain the inflationary impact of German unity.
In the words of CS First Boston Economics: 'That in turn makes the coming
German wage round assume trans-continental importance. Whether German unions
know it or not, their irresponsible demands are pricing British, French,
Italian and Spanish workers out of jobs. The Bundesbank is only helping to
make it crystal clear to all the political leaders of the EC. So whether the
German unions like it or not, and they clearly don't, they will be under
immense outside pressure to settle for wage increases near the 5 per cent
level they currently say is unacceptable. And employers seem ready for
strikes . . .
'We think it highly likely the unions will lose out, and thus there may be
room for the Bundesbank to take the first cautious step towards easing
surprisingly early in the second quarter . . . and German short rates may
move rather more than the markets expect by year-end - probably to somewhere
near 8 per cent.'
I am sure that CSFB is right about the causality and hope that it is right
about the outcome. There is in any case no way that British policy can
escape the impact of events on the Continent. The ERM supplies a coherent
framework and a device for ensuring that we obtain some counter-inflationary
benefits from it.

The Financial Times


London Page 17 Graph (Omitted). Graph (Omitted).

920109

