FT921-1188

FT  25 MAR 92 / Peru's 'Babyface' holds up better than economy: Economy
minister thought 1992 would be a hard year - and it is


   By SALLY BOWEN


AFTER 13 months in one of the world's least enviable jobs, Mr Carlos Bolona
 -'Babyface' to friend and foe - is showing fewer signs of strain than the
Peruvian economic programme he administers.
Fiscal measures in the past month, partly modified under pressure of public
opinion, have brought renewed calls for his immediate departure, from
outraged businessmen and union leaders alike.
'We always knew 1992 was going to be a hard year,' smiles Mr Bolona, economy
and finance minister. 'And every month there are demands for my
resignation.'
The tax-raising measures which aroused national fury were primarily intended
to combat the minister's principal preoccupation - a troublesome fiscal
deficit amounting to more than Dollars 2bn for 1992. Congressional decisions
plus various miscalculations have meant that planned expenditure this year
is equivalent to 12 per cent of gross domestic product while tax collections
hover around 8.3 per cent.
'We are still in time to correct this,' says Mr Bolona, 'but it means
collecting at least 1 per cent more in taxes as well as cutting costs.'
The measures proposed a raising of the general sales tax from 16 to 18 per
cent, a 20 per cent tax on dollar savings deposits and 50 per cent tax on
insurance premiums. They would have eliminated long-standing tax exemptions
on certain basic foodstuffs and products from Peru's economically depressed
frontier and jungle zones.
However, the government was forced to drop plans to tax basic foodstuffs,
although it has levied a 5 per cent tax on some basic foods and applied the
18 per cent tax for imported foods. It halved the insurance tax and dropped
the plan to tax savings.
The tax on savings, advocated by Mr Victor Joy Way, industry minister, and
opposed by Mr Bolona, had been intended not to raise revenues, but to
discourage speculative short-term capital. This has been flooding into the
country to the tune of Dollars 120m (Pounds 69.3m) a month, attracted by
interest rates double international averages. Oversupply of dollars, added
to an unquenched flow of greenbacks from the illegal drugs trade, has kept
the local currency stubbornly strong - to exporters' despair.
Mr Michel Camdessus, International Monetary Fund chief, on a visit to Lima
in mid-February, underlined the importance of boosting government revenues
in calling for 'battlefield surgery' to stop a 'haemorrhaging' budget. But
it will take time to convince Peruvians, accustomed to low taxation and high
evasion, of the importance of paying taxes.
It is not just the deficit that is causing concern. After several months of
improvement, economic indicators are troubling. Inflation in February rose
again to near 5 per cent after seven months' decline. With steep food price
rises this month as a result of the lifting of sales tax exemptions,
accumulated inflation for first-quarter 1992 is now certain to top 15 per
cent, making the budget target of 37 per cent for the year look
unattainable.
Worrying, too, is January's dip in output, admittedly by a small 0.7 per
cent over January 1991, but still a hefty 8 per cent down on January 1990,
which was at the end of the economically chaotic and recessionary Alan Garca
administration.
Both exporters and domestic manufacturers are continuing to suffer the
effects of a damagingly overvalued local currency. The sol remains at a
stubborn 0.95 to the US dollar while manufacturers and exporters calculate
parity at about 1.60 to the dollar at current cost levels. Central bank
attempts to weaken the local currency by buying dollars - Dollars 40m last
month alone - have failed to produce any improvement. In another attempt to
stem the flow, the government has agreed with leading banks to lower bank
deposit rates. Most exporters claim to be losing money hand over fist; only
two mining concerns, for example, announced profits for last year.
Since January, manufacturers have had to face competition from newly
tariff-free imports from Andean Pact neighbours Colombia and Venezuela.
'At this rate, the entire productive apparatus of Peru will go bust,' says
Mr Carlos Meneses, managing director of one of the country's oldest and
largest metal-working concerns. Not so, counters the government. It points
to a small, but measurable 2.6 per cent growth in output last year, though
over a heavy recession in 1990. Falling interest rates are starting to
reduce heavy financing costs.
According to Mr Bolona, businesses are experiencing a sharp fall in
traditionally generous profit margins. 'But they are learning to adjust and
become more competitive,' he claims. 'Let us not deceive ourselves: despite
all the clamour, Peruvian businesses never actually go bust.'
Long-promised privatisation looks at last to be getting under way. Fourteen
state-owned companies are scheduled to go under the hammer within the next
two months and Mr Bolona is determined to speed the process. Revenue from
privatisation is hard to predict but getting rid of loss-makers will close a
deficit which even last year reached between Dollars 500m and Dollars 700m.
Despite the modifications to his proposals, Mr Bolona says he is not
dissatisfied. Relations with Congress are more conciliatory, and his
ministry is at last able to fulfil its financial commitments to the social
emergency programme for the poor.
'You win no applause doing my job,' he says, 'but that doesn't bother me.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920325

