FT921-15358

FT  10 JAN 92 / Labour attacks compulsory council tendering plan


   By ALISON SMITH


THE government's plans for extending compulsory competitive tendering to
professional local authority services are seriously undermined by a
previously secret report published yesterday, Labour has claimed.
Releasing the document - a study for the government by PA Consulting -
Labour called on the government to drop its proposals to widen compulsory
competitive tendering (CCT) as set out in the Local Government Bill,
currently before the House of Lords, and in a consultation paper released in
November.
The bill would give ministers powers to impose CCT with the addition of a
'quality threshold' in local authority services beyond those such as refuse
and street cleaning.
The government plans to reverse a Lords' decision that the quality threshold
should apply to all CCT.
The PA report says voluntary competitive tendering in corporate services has
produced very little evidence of clear financial benefits and warns of
higher costs from contracting out legal, accountancy and secretarial
services.
It points to danger that CCT could reverse moves to decentralisation of
local government services and says there are difficulties with introducing
these changes while local government is being reorganised.
To meet this point, it suggests a differential timetable with areas not
affected by the reorganisation, such as London, going first.
Though the report says areas such as corporate strategy production,
committee administration and services to council members are not good
candidates for CCT, the government's consultation paper says some aspects
could be carried out by private consultants, even though it does express
reservations if these are 'substantially' contracted out.
Similar recommendations and reservations applied in the case of financial
planning, where PA sees a risk of compromising statutory duties.
Lord McIntosh of Haringey, Labour's local government spokesman in the House
of Lords, criticised the government for rejecting the proposals in the PA
study recommending an 'integrated package' of measures to include looser
rules allowing local authorities to trade with each other across boundaries.
This was intended to deal with the problem caused by the lack of a strong
external market in some local authority professional services.
The Association of Direct Labour Organisations, representing 165 authorities
opposed to privatisation, condemned the government's 'hypocrisy' in keeping
the report secret.
The Department of the Environment said local authorities that took part
asked that the report remain confidential.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920110

