FT922-7402

FT  19 MAY 92 / Roll up] Roll up] for the curate's egg: A distinct feeling
of nervousness is evident among the shoppers inspecting British Coal


   By JULIET SYCHRAVA


If the UK government's privatisation programme were a rummage sale, British
Coal would be that box of curios on the white elephant stall that nobody is
quite sure if they want to buy.
Oil, gas and electricity have been snapped up by consumers, and the proceeds
spent. But British Coal sits there, shrinking by the month as pit after pit
closes, waiting to see how the stallholder will get rid of it.
British Coal, the state-owned coal company nationalised in 1947, is due to
be sold off next year, almost definitely to trade purchasers. The company is
already a shadow of its former self. In 1947 it owned 1,400 pits, today it
has 49, a number that is still falling.
Although it is smaller, it is more profitable. Ever since the government
restructured the company in March 1990, it has cut costs dramatically, and
last year earned its first profit - Pounds 80m - for 13 years. This year
profits will be up again.
But in spite of this, British Coal's peculiar nature could mean it is left
on the government shelf. It is peculiar in world terms because it sells most
of its 91m tonnes of coal output to the UK electricity industry, on
long-term contracts. Because electricity was privatised last year, the
future of these contracts is uncertain. And, in spite of British Coal's
powerful presence in the UK, it mines coal that would be considered
uneconomic outside Europe.
That is not to say that companies have not expressed interest in British
Coal. For instance, Mr Richard Budge, chairman of the private coal company
Budge Mining and of the Federation of UK Coal Producers, is prepared to buy
the whole thing.
Budge may be small, but it is robust, with a turnover of Pounds 100m and a
profit so healthy Mr Budge is reluctant to let his customers know what it
is.
He is also reluctant to put a price tag on British Coal.
'It is very difficult to value - it could be completely worthless. It
doesn't make any money, and the coal will be vested in the state. The value
is really the right to work the coal reserves.'
Rival predator Mr Crispian Hotson, chairman of private UK coal company Ryan
Group, goes further. By selling its coal at world market prices British Coal
could generate revenues of more than Pounds 1bn, he says.
But, however keen UK private coal companies such as Budge, Ryan and Young
Group, another strong contender, may be, it is by no means clear they could
all afford to buy.
Ryan has been highly geared since a difficult management buy-out in 1989 -
an interest charge of Pounds 20m wiped out its profit last year. It has just
restructured its finances to be able to bid for British Coal, securing
Pounds 50m in equity and Pounds 65m in debt from a City consortium.
Meanwhile, Young Group last month arranged a refinancing package led by Sir
Ron Brierly's BIL Securities which brought it back from the verge of
collapse.
Whether richer international companies will want to bid for British Coal is
an open question.
Companies such as RTZ, Shell and Anglo-United, acknowledge they might be
interested in the right package. But the fact remains that most UK coal is
uncompetitive on the world market.
'The UK is one of the world's disaster areas in terms of capital cost
compared with other investments you can make,' the coal director of one
company said. Whereas a mine in Australia could produce 50 tonnes per
manshift, British Coal mines were lucky to manage 12 tonnes.
'Even the 12 mines identified by NM Rothschild (the merchant bank advising
the government on privatisation) as profitable are only competitive if you
deliver coal to a nearby station,' he added. 'And once you get into the
other mines you are into really bad geology.'
The heart of the problem, the companies say, is that British Coal is a
curate's egg. Bits are good, bits are bad, and bits are downright inedible.
'Say you get five mines, and have to shut four down to get one that
survives, that's a deterrent,' one company said.
What most of the companies seem to agree on is that they could run pits more
cheaply than British Coal.
Mr Budge says he could cut 20 per cent of costs, and the Union of Democratic
Mineworkers (UDM), which hopes to stage a management buy-out of all or part
of the company, is understood to have a similar figure.
But the critical question facing potential buyers is whether the contracts
British Coal is due to sign with the electricity industry can be transferred
to successor companies. Mr Malcolm Edwards, formerly commercial director of
British Coal, says: 'The company is only interesting if you can transfer the
order books at the price signed in the new contracts.' The price, he
explains, will include a premium the electricity industry has always paid
for British Coal.
There is no reason to believe that premium will be transferable, he
believes. Without it, interest in British Coal will evaporate.
But one coal industry executive dismisses this as 'utter rubbish'. 'The
reserves, and the position of UK coal in Europe makes it strategically
important. Coal is so important in Europe, that anyone in coal must take
Europe seriously,' he says.
For instance, British Coal could make a profit exporting into Germany if the
country stopped protecting its market with subsidies, he points out.
Meanwhile, US companies with UK connections such as Peabody might, if
permitted, simply want a foot in the UK door while, Mr Edwards suggests,
South African companies could see it as a way of buying respectability.
But there is a distinct feeling of nervousness among the shoppers inspecting
British Coal. One sign of that is widespread reports that they are
considering forming risk-sharing consortia which could buy up groups of
assets and split them later.
There is also anticipation, as the companies wait for the government to
decide how it will divide British Coal.
Young, Budge and Ryan work as contractors for British Coal opencast or
surface mining business and would like a slice of this appetising part of
British Coal which makes around Pounds 150m a year, compared with British
Coal's Pounds 80m.
But it is not clear whether this will be sold off separately, or mixed with
less profitable deep mines. Nor is it known how the deep mines will be
split, although the likelihood is a rough north/south division.
But who will get the valuable British Coal ivory, and who will land the
elephant's foot waste paper basket, remains to be seen.

The Financial Times


London Page 21

920519

