FT921-531

FT  28 MAR 92 / Finance & The Family: Legal right is under threat - Agents
try to erode cooling-off rules


   By BARBARA ELLIS


EROSION of the statutory right to cancel investment policies appears to be a
growing side-effect of the slow housing market, with salespeople finding
various ways to claim lost commission from customers who change their minds
during the cooling-off period.
Dr Julian Farrand, the insurance ombudsman, said he had dealt with a number
of complaints concerning tied agents. Typically, they involved someone who
was buying a house from an estate agent being invited to step into the next
room for advice on a mortgage - from an agent selling exclusively for one
insurance company.
Invariably, the agent would recommend an endowment policy. As part of the
formalities, he would get the buyer to sign an agreement to pay a mortgage
arrangement fee, to be waived provided he kept up the policy. When the
cooling-off notice arrived and the buyer decided to cancel, the agent began
pressing for payment of the mortgage fee, sometimes threatening to sue.
'The view I have taken is that it is contrary to the spirit of the
cooling-off notice to have any financial penalty attaching to the
cancellation,' said Farrand.
'I don't have any jurisdiction over mortgages; but if a tied agent is
selling an investment product that is so wrapped up with a mortgage, the
insurance company should be responsible for all of it.'
Farrand explained that these rulings did not feature in his annual report
(see Page IV) as the complaints had never become formal cases. When
contacted by the ombudsman's bureau, the insurance companies concerned
agreed to tell their tied agents to drop the claims against customers.
Late last year, the regulatory bodies Lautro and Fimbra both put out
guidance to members on mortgage arrangement fees and fee waivers. Fimbra,
which covers independent salespeople, stressed that members should make sure
any waiver agreements were not perceived as prejudicing an investor's right
to cancel any investment contract under the SIB rules.
'Members must satisfy themselves that the terms of the agreement and the
sales practices associated with it are consistent with their over-riding
obligation to ensure fair treatment of investors,' said Fimbra.
But there are more ways of making up for lost commission than simply
substituting a mortgage fee. In a county court claim filed at the beginning
of last month, Abbott Financial Services of Farnham, Surrey, based a claim
for Pounds 1,535 commission from a client on its terms of business which
explained:
'We retain . . . commission (from companies with which investments are
arranged) and therefore make no charge to clients for our advice and
services . . .'
'In the event of you ceasing payments of premium on these policies within
the commission period, we reserve the right to claim from you that
proportion of commission reclaimed from Abbott Financial Services.'
The client concerned is expected to point out that the policy was cancelled
within the cooling-off period - before the commission period  - and that no
premium was paid.
Alan Newell, deputy director for membership at Fimbra, said that members did
not have to tell the organisation what their arrangements with clients were,
and added that lost commission was a difficult area as a firm might have
been involved in a lot of preparatory work.
'They have the right to charge, provided they make it quite clear to clients
what their terms are - not necessarily in the terms of business,' he said.
But Newell stressed that members must not interfere with the cooling-off
process or withdraw the right to cancel.
Without commenting directly on the position of Abbott Financial Services,
Newell said he thought it would be difficult for an intermediary to sustain
a claim referring solely to a commission element unless there were some
other arrangement involved - perhaps verbal.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920328

