FT924-11241

FT  27 OCT 92 / Technology: Time to act on careers in research - Technically
Speaking


   By CLIVE COOKSON


THE career structure for academic scientists in the UK has deteriorated
alarmingly over the past 15 years. Judged on a combination of factors,
including pay and security of employment, university research is now one of
the least appealing professions open to bright young graduates.
The root cause of the problem is the surge in short-term (two- or
three-year) research contracts, which has not been matched by any expansion
in permanent jobs. In 1978, 13,451 scientists and engineers had permanent or
long-term posts in British universities and 3,905 had short-term contracts.
By 1991, the number of long-term posts had fallen to 12,716, while the
short-term total more than doubled to 9,930.
In personal terms, these statistics mean that researchers have to stagger
through their late 20s and 30s - and sometimes even into their 40s - on a
succession of short-term contracts. The result is low morale and a lot of
time wasted worrying about where the next contract is going to come from,
instead of concentrating on the research itself.
However, there are encouraging signs that the UK research establishment is
preparing at last to tackle the academic career crisis. Senior figures are
speaking out about the need to look after people better.
Most outspoken is Bridget Ogilvie, new director of the Wellcome Trust. This
summer's sale of shares in Wellcome, the drug company, will double the
trust's research spending to more than Pounds 200m a year - not far short of
the government's Medical Research Council budget - and give her a powerful
influence over academic careers.
'It seems obvious that drastic action is needed to stabilise careers and
secure Britain's science base, particularly if the brain drain is to be
reversed. It is not fair to treat people as short-term disposable assets,
and it is unwise for the health and future of the nation,' she believes.
Although the Wellcome Trust is not big enough on its own to shift the whole
UK system to more long-term funding, Ogilvy is likely to find allies within
the state-funded research councils.
Another powerful call for change comes from the Royal Society, the country's
senior scientific body. Its report on the future of the UK science base,
published last month*, focuses particularly on the need to improve research
careers - and puts forward some excellent proposals for reform.
According to the Royal Society, it is reasonable for young researchers to
undertake one or two short-term contracts after completing their PhD
studies. But promising scientists should then be rewarded with long-term
support including 'benefits good enough to compete with careers in other
sectors'.
The support should take the form of a personal fellowship 'guaranteeing
salary and research expenses for at least five years'. The scientist could
use his or her funds to work at any approved institution - in contrast to
today's contracts which are tied to a particular project. One beneficial
side-effect would be to make universities compete more actively to attract
good researchers. Ideally, the fellowship would end with the scientist
finding a permanent research position.
At the same time, universities and funding agencies need to set up a system
for advising young researchers about their future. Many scientists find
today 'that they are funded by one organisation and employed by another,
with neither taking an interest in their careers,' as the Royal Society puts
it. People who turn out not to be suited for long-term careers in academic
research must be helped to transfer to different employment.
Reform along the lines suggested by the Royal Society would only work well
if it were taken up enthusiastically by the government, the research
councils and Universities Funding Council, as well as the Wellcome Trust and
smaller research charities.
Fortunately, the government has a chance to give the reform process real
momentum when it publishes the promised White Paper on Science and
Technology next year. Improving career patterns may not be the most exciting
issue on the agenda but it is one of the most important for the health of
British science.
*The Future of the Science Base, Royal Society, Pounds 11.50.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

921027

