FT923-10767

FT  29 JUL 92 / FT Law Report: Lloyd's review is set aside


   By RACHEL DAVIES, Barrister


REGINA v LLOYD'S AND OTHERS, EX PARTE BRIGGS AND OTHERS Queen's Bench
Division (Divisional Court): Lord Justice Leggatt and Mr Justice Popplewell:
July 17 1992
LEAVE TO apply for judicial review will be set aside if the application for
leave was out of time and counsel failed to apply to extend time, and if
leave would not in any event have been granted had counsel disclosed that
the parties and issues overlapped with those of earlier parallel
proceedings.
The Divisional Court so held when granting an application by the Corporation
of Lloyd's and others to set aside leave granted ex parte by Mr Justice
Potts to six Lloyd's Names, Mr FC Briggs and others, to apply for judicial
review to quash cash call statements and auditors' reports issued by
Lloyd's.
LORD JUSTICE Leggatt said that on May 19 1992 the six Lloyd's Names
including Mr Briggs obtained ex parte from Mr Justice Potts leave to apply
for judicial review against Lloyd's, its committee, chairman, deputy
chairman and a company called GW Run-Off Ltd.
In earlier parallel proceedings by representatives of 800 Lloyd's Names
against members' agents, Mr Justice Saville had refused applications for
interlocutory injunctions to restrain the agents from drawing down on the
applicants' deposits. He took the view that on the material before him there
was no legal basis for restraint.
Lloyd's now applied to set aside the leave granted by Mr Justice Potts.
Rules of Court required that an application for leave must be made within
three months.
The application was to quash cash call statements and auditors' reports, all
issued more than three months before May 19. The Names were out of time and
no application was made to extend time.
The first main ground for applying to set aside was that the Names did not
make full and frank disclosure of the overlap between the present
proceedings and those that had been before Mr Justice Saville.
At the beginning of the hearing Mr Justice Potts asked counsel for the Names
about the earlier proceedings, of which he had learned from newspaper
reports.
Counsel asserted that the applicants were wholly different and that there
could be no overlap of issues because the proceedings before Mr Justice
Saville concerned private law rights, whereas the present proceedings
concerned public law.
He did not know that any of the present Names were parties to the earlier
action. Because no hint of overlap was given he took it as implicit that
there was no overlap.
He failed sufficiently to comply with his duty to the court.
With regard to private and public law wrongs, he 'considered that the issues
raised could not directly overlap'.
But that proceeded on a superficial comparison between the two actions, and
a failure to analyse the issues properly.
Three of the Names were plaintiffs before Mr Justice Saville.
Counsel made no enquiry to ascertain, as was an obvious possibility, whether
there was any overlap of parties.
His assumption that there was no overlap was wholly unjustified.
On the present application to set aside, Mr Colman for the Names was obliged
to accept that there was non-disclosure or misrepresentation to Mr Justice
Potts in three respects: duplication of identity of three plaintiffs in the
earlier action and three Names in the present proceedings; overlap of
issues; and participation by Mr Briggs, before the hearing, in the voluntary
draw-down procedure.
In relation to each, however, he contended that the misrepresentation was
immaterial.
Where an extension of time was necessary in which to apply for judicial
review there was an obligation on counsel to apply for it. If a judge gave
leave, he was not to be taken by implication to have extended time.
The relevance of the fact that three of the Names had been plaintiffs in the
other action was that if Mr Justice Potts had realised they were common to
both sets of proceedings he would obviously have considered carefully the
content of Mr Justice Saville's judgment.
If he had read the judgment, he would have realised the issues were kindred,
and that the remedies sought were similar in effect.
In those circumstances it was unlikely he would have given leave, especially
when he realised that Mr Briggs had already submitted voluntarily to the
draw-down system.
The second main ground for the application to set aside was Mr Colman's
abandonment of the essential case by which the Names had been successful.
Before Mr Justice Potts, counsel had argued that the Lloyd's regulators had
used their discretionary powers contrary to the policy and objects of the
private Act which vested them with their statutory powers, in particular the
Lloyd's Act 1871, section 10.
Mr Colman sought to have the application treated as though founded on a
wholly new case not hitherto considered.
He contended that although there was no overriding duty owed by Lloyd's to
the Names, it owed different duties to different groups - policyholders,
brokers, agents and names - and that it was its responsibility to strike a
balance between the duties owed so as to protect the interests of each
group.
But it was unclear why and in what respects the cash call system
demonstrated such failure to look out for the interests of Names as to
attract judicial review.
No bad faith was imputed; there had been no failure to exercise statutory
power fairly; Lloyd's had not paid regard to irrelevant considerations or
failed to pay regard to relevant considerations; its decision had not been
made with manifest unreasonableness; and there had been no failure to
observe proportionality.
Since the main ground on which leave was obtained had been abandoned, unless
the court were to exercise its discretion with untoward beneficence, the
leave thus obtained must be set aside.
The third ground for applying to set aside was that the names' motion was
doomed to failure or was not seriously arguable.
Mr Colman argued that Lloyd's had by its conduct under its 'old system'
given rise to a legitimate expectation in the minds of Names that the same
specificity in the sums of money required by cash call statements and the
same 30-day notice to draw-down, as opposed to the revised practice of
accelerated draw-down, would continue to be given.
None of the Names was shown to have conducted himself in consequence of his
knowledge of the old practice, or on an assumption that it would continue.
Styling the Names' complaints as 'legitimate expectations' did not so alter
their character as to permit the invocation of public law remedies by way of
judicial review.
The fourth ground for applying to set aside was that, because the rights
relied on and the remedies invoked were not in truth matters of public law,
Lloyd's was not in this context amenable to judicial review.
Even if Lloyd's did perform public functions - for example, for the
protection of policyholders - the rights relied on in the present
proceedings related exclusively to the contract governing the relationship
between Names and their members' agents, and in some instances their
managing agents.
That had nothing to do with public law.
Lloyd's operated within one section of the market. Its powers were derived
from a private Act which did not extend to any persons in the insurance
business other than those who wished to operate in the section of the market
governed by Lloyd's, and who committed themselves by contract.
Neither the evidence nor the submissions suggested that there was such a
public element about the relationship between Lloyd's and the Names as to
place it within the public domain and render it susceptible to judicial
review.
Most of the submissions made by Lloyd's in seeking to set aside, led to the
same conclusion - for a variety of reasons Mr Justice Potts would not have
granted leave had he been told what he should have been told about the
earlier proceedings.
Leave to apply for judicial review was set aside.
For Lloyd's: Gordon Pollock QC, Mark Havelock-Allan and Alison Foster
(Lloyd's solicitors)
For the names: Anthony Colman QC (who did not appear in the court below) and
Richard Gordon (Bentleys Stokes & Lowless)

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920729

