FT922-4409

FT  05 JUN 92 / Executives named in US insider trading lawsuit


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


   NEW YORK


THE Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday filed one of the biggest
insider trading cases ever brought by the US government, charging seven
prominent businessmen with insider trading offences.
The filing named, among others, Mr Martin Revson, a former chief executive
of Dell Labs and brother of Revlon co-founder Mr Charles Revson, and Mr
Edward Downe, a former director of New York broking house Bear Stearns. It
alleged the seven were part of an insider trading ring which made millions
of dollars in illegal profits during the late 1980s.
In a separate criminal action, Mr Downe yesterday pleaded guilty to tax
fraud and securities law violations related to his attempts to conceal
illegal profits from insider trading. He will be sentenced in September and
faces up to five years in prison and Dollars 500,000 (Pounds 275,000) in
fines.
The five other businessmen named in the SEC suit are: Mr Steven Greenberg, a
former chairman of Anametrics, a New York public relations firm; Mr Thomas
Warde, a Los Angeles property developer; Mr Milton Weinger, a broker with
securities house Oppenheimer & Co; Mr David Salamone, a London-based broker
with Drexel, Burnham Lambert; and Mr Fred Sullivan, former chairman of
manufacturing and service company Kidde.
In a statement last night, Mr Weinger 'categorically denied all charges'.
The lawsuit, filed in a New York federal court, alleges that between 1987
and 1989 the men were involved in a scheme which traded the securities of
several US companies, including Bear Stearns, Revlon and Gillette, mostly
through a Bermuda-based company called Broadsword, claimed to have been set
up by Mr Downe and Mr Salamone to handle the secret trades.
The SEC said it had discovered a 'pattern of purchases in advance of
disclosure of material corporate events', and in each case Mr Downe 'had a
friend who was an insider to the acquiring or target company'. The SEC
alleged that Mr Downe made illegal profits of more than Dollars 8m, Mr
Greenberg Dollars 6.1m and Mr Weinger Dollars 2.3m. The other members of the
ring were also alleged to have made significant profits.
The SEC will seek the return of all the alleged profits, including any money
made by those, such as Mr Sullivan, who allegedly supplied inside
information.
Mr Sullivan submitted an offer of settlement to the SEC, neither admitting
nor denying liability, which would involve making a Dollars 59,000 payment.
This was awaiting a response from a judge last night. SEC officials said the
offer was likely to be accepted.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920605

