FT923-9824

FT  03 AUG 92 / Simmering row comes into the open: Review of British Gas
could lead to a radical shake-up


   By NEIL BUCKLEY


A radical shake-up in the UK gas market may follow the decision by Mr
Michael Heseltine, trade and industry secretary, to ask the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission to conduct a comprehensive review.
Meanwhile, British Gas shareholders, employees, customers, and competitors
may face more than a year of uncertainty, which could bring the share price
under pressure and delay development of competition.
The utility has long complained that sometimes conflicting demands from the
industry regulator Ofgas, the Office of Fair Trading, and the department of
energy, was making it impossible to plan effectively.
British Gas came close to calling in the MMC last year when it was forced by
Ofgas to submit to a tough price-capping formula soon after agreeing to OFT
demands to halve its share of the industrial gas market and hive off its
pipeline and storage business.
British Gas felt the pressure those agreements would put on future earnings
meant it should be allowed to earn a reasonable rate of return on its
pipeline business. It was failure to reach even a compromise agreement on
this with Ofgas that led to the MMC being called in.
Observers suggest the promotion of Mr Cedric Brown to chief executive was
also an important factor. While Mr Brown said on his appointment he wanted
to 'build bridges' with the regulator, he is known to be combative and
uncompromising.
After three meetings with Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, the
two concluded agreement was impossible.
'In fairness, Sir James McKinnon was caught between the devil and the deep
blue sea,' a British Gas source said yesterday. 'On one hand he had the
Major Energy Users Council asking him to keep the rate of return at the
present 4.5 per cent to keep prices down. On the other, he had independent
suppliers who want to build their own pipelines asking for an even higher
rate of return than British Gas.'
Sir Bryan Carsberg, OFT director-general, said in spite of the inevitable
period of uncertainty, he broadly welcomed the MMC inquiry which would be
'an opportunity to go over the whole field and establish a stable regime for
some years.'
'I don't think one should regard it as a failure of the (regulatory) system.
The MMC is part of the system, it is planned for, and I think the public
will benefit from references like this from time to time.'
However, if regulatory changes made medium and long-term planning difficult
for British Gas, the MMC investigation will make it virtually impossible.
Aside from uncertainty about the findings, the review will put heavy demands
on management time.
Planned changes may have to be put on ice. A thousand British Gas workers
are already refusing to move from London to Solihull as part of a management
shake-up because of fears of further restructuring.
The share price, too, could languish or begin a long slide.
The City of London has reacted positively to rumours of voluntary
restructuring by British Gas. But the length and unpredictability of an MMC
inquiry is likely to have the opposite effect.
'I think people are inevitably going to start dumping the shares,' one
analyst said yesterday. 'Even though the MMC report could eventually bring
good news, it will be a long time to wait.'
The Department of Trade and Industry said on Friday the MMC was required to
report within nine months, but observers felt an extension may be necessary.
The last MMC inquiry into the industrial gas market - with a narrower scope
than the coming review - began in November 1987 but did not report until
October 1988. Even if the MMC reports within nine months, the government
will need time to assess its findings.
Industry observers believe the government is committed to radical
restructuring of the gas market, and would impose sweeping changes if the
MMC report supported these.
It has already attempted to accelerate competition. Mr Tim Eggar, energy
minister, moved quickly after the Conservatives' general election victory to
announce that British Gas's monopoly threshold would be lowered from 25,000
therms a year to 2,500 therms a year. This would allow 200,000 smaller
commercial and industrial consumers, and bodies such as schools and local
authorities, to receive gas from independent suppliers.
Mr Eggar said he would consider opening the household market to competition
in May next year - three years earlier than expected.
More recently, at a conference of the Major Energy Users Council in London,
a DTI official outlined a radical programme of possible changes in the gas
market, including developing a spot market for gas trading, promoting
competition in transportation and storage and opening the market to more
imports from Europe.
Mr Jonathan Stern, a gas consultant and industry researcher, suggests that
at the least, the MMC will modify arrangements to introduce competition into
the market. It may propose a further review of the progress of competition
after, say, five years, with the threat of breaking up British Gas then if
progress has been too slow.
'But there is a more than 50-50 chance it will recommend the immediate
break-up of the company,' Mr Stern added.
The MMC could recommend British Gas hive off both its regional supply
businesses and pipeline arm. The government might then use competition laws
to persuade British Gas to sell these businesses.
There are dangers with such an approach. One is that supply companies in
Scotland and eastern England could charge less for gas because of lower
transportation charges, while those further from North Sea terminals would
have to charge customers more. Protests from customers about such moves
could increase the political controversy which already exists over gas
supply.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920803

