FT923-10685

FT  29 JUL 92 / EC members prove out of tune on VAT harmony: Numerous
disputes could yet derail five years of talks on bringing indirect tax rates
into line


   By ANDREW HILL


OUZO manufacturers have had a reprieve, angostura bitters are safe and the
black beer drinkers of Yorkshire can sleep easily in their beds.
They would be among the myriad beneficiaries of Monday's provisional EC
agreement on indirect taxation, which would impose a legally-binding minimum
standard rate of value added tax across the Community.
A standard VAT rate - 15 per cent for four years from January 1993 - is the
simplest and most prominent of the measures as the agreement is hedged with
a series of exemptions and delays, some so tiny as to appear absurd.
Ouzo, for example, would be allowed to retain a reduced VAT rate. Such
exemptions are the most obvious symptom of the political wheeling and
dealing which has been a feature of indirect tax discussions over the last
five years. The horse-trading is not over. Member states are still trying to
resolve a number of disputes, any one of which could derail the entire
package.
As always in Community affairs, the idea was simple at the outset - to
encourage members to harmonise their indirect tax rates as a pre-condition
for removing frontier controls on January 1, 1993.
The European Commission figured that if VAT and duties were not brought
broadly into line, member governments might maintain controls to prevent
shoppers taking advantage of lower rates in neighbouring countries.
In 1987, Lord Cockfield, then internal market commissioner, proposed two
rates - a standard rate of 14 to 20 per cent and a lower rate of four to
nine per cent. Six categories of goods, including food, water and books,
would be eligible for the lower rate.
Indirect tax purists insisted the simplest system would be the best system.
Federalists within the Commission saw it as a chance to extend central
executive powers over national fiscal sovereignty - one of EC governments'
most jealously guarded rights.
Five years on, the provisional agreement would feature a minimum rate within
the Commission range, but no maximum and a series of reduced (5 to 15 per
cent), 'super-reduced' (1 to 4 per cent) and zero rates - applied to 17
categories of goods.
In fact, the purists and federalists were always bound to compromise because
Commission proposals on fiscal matters, however trivial, have to be approved
unanimously. While that condition remains, it will be difficult to argue
that 'Brussels' has real power over national fiscal policy.
That is one reason why the provisional agreement leaves the existing system
of VAT rates and excise duty in Europe almost unchanged. Many member states
had acted or promised to act on a non-binding rates agreement reached in
June 1991.
As a result, ministers have been able to set in stone what had already been
achieved. Only Germany and Spain will have to raise standard VAT rates, as
they had promised; a handful of countries, including Spain, Italy and the
Netherlands, will have to increase the price of cigarettes to meet the new
harmonised 57 per cent duty; no country will be forced to change its duty on
spirits.
Much still remains to be done. Agreement on another VAT directive, which
would cover second-hand cars and artworks among other items, has been
separated out from the eight-directive package, as has an accord on the
rating of gold. Both will involve long and difficult negotiations.
EC companies, meanwhile, are less concerned about the political agreement on
rates, than about the earlier, almost unnoticed accord on a transitional
system for the collection of VAT, which would last from 1993 to 1997. They
say it will greatly add to the administrative burden on businesses.
The priority, however, is to achieve formal unanimous approval of Monday's
deal. Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor who presided over Monday's
meeting, described the package as a 'house of cards'.
Ironically, until recently, he was thought most likely to bring it tumbling
down with British objections to a legally-binding rate.
But the UK's acceptance of that principle now means that other member
states, in particular France, could hold the British presidency of the EC to
ransom over their particular concerns.
Ministers have given themselves until midnight tomorrow to find a solution
allowing all eight directives to be approved unanimously. Only then will the
ouzo-makers be able to relax.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920729

