FT924-941

FT  21 DEC 92 / Isosceles recruits Storehouse director


   By MAGGIE URRY


ISOSCELES, the heavily-indebted parent of the Gateway food retail chain,
will announce the appointment of Mr David Simons, finance director of
Storehouse, as group chief executive this week.
The news should coincide with a standstill agreement with its 38 banks,
expected on Tuesday. The standstill will defer interest payments running at
Pounds 9m a month, and principal repayments due in the spring. The group has
loans of Pounds 1bn from banks and Pounds 375m from mezzanine lenders.
Unusually under the standstill banks will give up their 'on demand' rights,
which should reassure Gateway's suppliers to continue extending trade
credit. At any time Gateway can have more than Pounds 300m of stock on
credit. Without the standstill Gateway could go into receivership, risking
40,000 jobs.
If agreed, the standstill would give Isosceles, its banks and shareholders
six months to arrange a financial restructuring tied to a strategy for the
group, which is being advised by Coopers & Lybrand, the management
consultants.
A business plan should be finalised by the end of January. The banks have
already been persuaded that Gateway's performance can be rapidly improved
through relatively low-cost actions such as tightening control of stock,
shrinkage and wages. Despite its problems, Gateway's operating profits are
still running at more than Pounds 100m a year.
Mr Simons, who is 45, is likely to receive a contract with a substantial
success-related element, perhaps tied to any exit given to banks and
shareholders such as an eventual flotation.
Storehouse, the retail group where Mr Simons has been finance director since
May last year, will release him from a commitment to stay with the group
until March next year. He will join Isosceles, with effect from January 1,
replacing Mr Alistair Mitchell-Innes. Mr Mitchell-Innes may stay on the
Isosceles board until March, having already announced his intention to
leave.
Mr Simons is expected to spend the bulk of his time at Gateway's Bristol
headquarters, and to move the Isosceles head office to Bristol as well.
Isosceles also owns the Herman's chain of sporting goods shops in the US,
which has been up for sale since the Pounds 2.1bn buy-out of Gateway in
1989.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921221

