FT923-10895

FT  28 JUL 92 / Desperate famine stalks the forgotten Somalis: Julian
Ozanne, recently in Baidoa, finds aid is not reaching those in need


   By JULIAN OZANNE


DR Said Musa gestured towards a group of gravediggers. 'There are no
ceremonies for the dead in Baidoa,' he said. 'We have to dig wherever we can
and bury as fast as possible. The world has turned its back on us in
Somalia. People are dropping like flies.'
Grief and hunger are the only commodities in large supply at Baidoa, a town
250km west of the war-shattered Somali capital Mogadishu. Up to 50,000
people have staggered into the town from the surrounding villages in a
desperate search for food.
This struggle is being repeated across Somalia, where aid workers say
thousands are dying daily and 4.5m people are in critical need of emergency
food aid.
All relief efforts thus far have become lost in the nightmare of Somali
politics. Aid officials must negotiate the passage of grain through fiefdoms
controlled by Somali warlords. Bandits on the roads, even in Mogadishu
itself, make a mockery of the most carefully negotiated arrangements.
The officials say Mogadishu is the key to any future relief effort. A
successful distribution programme there would enable aid agencies to build
up food stocks and to establish a base from which to move out to the
countryside, reversing the mass migration of refugees.
Across the pillaged town of Baidoa small pieces of wood stuck in mounds of
freshly turned earth marked the graves of children caught up in Somalia's
latest tragedy.
Countless children are dying of starvation in the ruins of a crumbling city
gutted by feuding gunmen. The graves are surrounded by the rubble of
buildings razed by mortars and grenades. Most wars are senseless, this one
more than most.
Inside a makeshift feeding centre run by the Irish charity Concern hundreds
of emaciated infants, muscles wasted to the bone, cling to their mothers
waiting to be fed. Many are almost lifeless and can only manage a pitiful
moan caused by acute hunger.
For some, with matchstick arms and thinning hair, it is too late. In a
corner of the compound one mother sits by the corpse of a four-year-old
lying under a dirty cloth. Her grief is blunted by her own hunger and the
worry that her other three children may die soon.
Emergency food aid is trickling into feeding centres run by Concern, the Red
Cross and Unicef but it is not enough to stop people dying of diarrhoea and
dehydration. Many of the Somali staff working in the feeding centres have
been contributing food from their own supplies but every day more and more
people in the last stages of malnutrition are struggling into town lured by
the prospect of relief.
'Things are getting worse every day,' said Ms Anita Ennis, a nutritionist
working in Baidoa for Concern. 'There is too much talking, too many meetings
among donors and not enough response. We need massive quantities of food and
medicine urgently.'
In another feeding centre crammed with people clustered round an oil drum of
rice and beans an elderly looking woman in rags pulls out her withered
breast, points to the wailing baby in her arms and puts her hand to her
mouth, begging aid workers to give her food.
Outside, a mother shows the scarred hand of her child burnt because the boy
was too hungry to wait for his high protein porridge to cool before he dug
his hand in.
Most of the original inhabitants of Baidoa fled to Mogadishu during the
height of the war.
People whose livestock and grain stores were looted and destroyed by
marauding soldiers take shelter in the bombed out buildings.
Children are so exhausted by the long trek to town that they die in the
ruined houses before they can reach a feeding centre.
Those that make it face an uncertain future in a town struggling to exist.
The water and electricity plants were destroyed by departing troops of
former dictator Siad Barre.
Water is now transported around the city in donkey-drawn carts but it is
seriously polluted by people washing and defecating near the spring which
serves the town.
In recent days, Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, the United Nations' Egyptian
secretary-general, angrily accused Security Council members of ignoring the
plight of the Somalis.
Meanwhile, in Baidoa's only hospital nurses try to force open the teeth of
an infant to force-feed it a rehydration formula.
'This one isn't going to make it,' says a doctor.
The hospital, which is treating infected bullet wounds as well as children
in the final throes of malnutrition, is desperately short of IV fluids,
antibiotics, oral rehydration salts and glucose.
'Pain relief in this hospital is one Panadol three times a day,' said Ms
Ennes.
Relief workers believe that Somalia's tragedy could be stopped from
escalating further if the world turned its attention to the suffering.
But, if much greater quantities of food and medicine are not airlifted
urgently to towns like Baidoa, tens of thousands of starving people will
attempt the long and desperate walk to Mogadishu with fatal results.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920728

