FT921-11782

FT  30 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Gardiner's Pounds 6m falls short of
expectations


   By PEGGY HOLLINGER


GARDINER, which claims to be the world's largest independent distributor of
security products, yesterday announced the departure of its finance director
as it revealed pre-tax profits of Pounds 6m - well below City expectations.
The shares tumbled 22 per cent to 42p following the announcement.
Analysts, expecting profits of between Pounds 7m and Pounds 8m, were
surprised by the difference in the actual results, which appeared to stem
from an error in calculating margins during the final quarter, as well as
recessionary factors.
'We established in mid-January that our accounts were based on some
over-optimistic assumptions,' said Mr Yashar Turgut, managing director.
Mr Ian Nellist, who had been with Gardiner for three years, resigned by
mutual consent, said Mr Turgut.
He will assume the finance director's responsibilities until a suitable
replacement can be found.
The decline in the share price cast a shadow over the actual 15.6 per cent
increase in profits and the 15.5 per cent rise in the dividend to 1.3p.
Turnover rose by 46 per cent to Pounds 60.6m.
Mr Turgut said that Europe had provided the strongest growth with sales up
22 per cent, excluding acquisitions.
The UK, however, had been hard pressed during the recession, with comparable
sales up just 2 per cent. Gardiner took a Pounds 400,000 provision - the
first since 1985 - for bad debts in the UK. Mr Turgut warned that the core
UK intruder business 'continues to be unpredictable'. Britain accounts for
some 55 per cent of group sales.
On the brighter side, the closed circuit television division experienced
above average growth. The acquisition of Multi-Video in June for Pounds 6m
had brought Gardiner into the higher specification end of the market, Mr
Turgut said.
'It is the high technology-led sectors of the security industry, in
particular CCTV, which have the most exciting potential,' said Mr Turgut.
The group is introducing CCTV operations into each of its European
subsidiaries.
During the year Gardiner also bought AW Alarm Systems of Denmark for Pounds
1.6m.
Debt at the year-end was Pounds 5.1m, while gearing had fallen from 80 per
cent to 26 per cent. However, interest payments were only slightly lower at
Pounds 1.48m (Pounds 1.53m).
Earnings per share tumbled from 5.07p to 4.25p, partly due to the effects of
the group's Pounds 10.6m rights issue during the year.
COMMENT
Had Gardiner warned in September that profits would not meet expectations,
there would be a few happier analysts in the City. But had the company been
aware of the error on gross margins, it might have been able to act earlier.
As it is, investors will be watching closely to see if the 5 per cent price
rise implemented in January will stick. The shares are likely to languish
under the loss of credibility until the next set of results. The important
thing to remember is the basic strength of the business. Gardiner would
appear to be the main, if not only, security products distributor in Europe,
so there is plenty of growth left there. CCTV should bolster a depressed UK.
Forecasts range at about the Pounds 7m mark. The prospective p/e of over 10
looks cheap for a basically sound company.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920130

