FT924-6323

FT  21 NOV 92 / Finance & the Family: Mortgages - fixed as low as they can
go?


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


ABBEY NATIONAL yesterday withdrew its 6.99 per cent mortgage fixed until the
end of January 1995 launched just five weeks ago, because of the level of
demand.
After a period in which borrowers have opted for variable rates, the Abbey
sell-out indicates that borrowers are beginning to feel that the new fixed
and capped rates on the market are about as low as they are going to get.
The main benefit of a fixed rate is to enable mortgage-holders to budget
with confidence, since monthly payments will be fixed for a guaranteed
period. This argument will be of little comfort to those who took out one of
the many fixed-rate mortgages of more than 10 per cent a year ago.
The main drawback of these loans is that you are taking a gamble on the
direction of interest rates. The standard variable mortgage rate a year ago
at Halifax, the largest lender, was 11.5 per cent.
So, a fixed 10 per cent appeared an excellent deal, especially since
mortgage rates had been above 15 per cent for most of 1990. People flocked
to take advantage.
Yet, despite fixed rates of 7 per cent, few lenders had reported a rush,
although interest has picked up lately, as the Abbey offer shows. 'People
have short memories,' said David Duncan, of mortgage broker Chase de Vere.
'When rates are falling, they think that they will fall further.'
Walter Avrili, of mortgage broker John Charcol, also believes it would be a
mistake to hold off in the hope of lower rates. 'People will wait for
another base rate cut but they will be disappointed,' he said.
Lenders arguing in favour of taking a fixed rate now say they have not been
this low for the past 15 years. But a year ago, they were saying a 10 per
cent fixed rate was the lowest for a decade.
In any case, borrowers may be wrong to assume that mortgage rates will
follow base rates down to the same degree.
In recent years, the standard variable mortgage rate has been about 1.5
percentage points above the base rate (although in November 1971, when base
rates were 4.5 per cent, Halifax's standard variable rate was 8 per cent - a
full 3.5 percentage points higher). And, as Halifax's Mark Hemingway said
this week: ' We still have to maintain rates for our savers.'
The money markets play an important role in determining mortgage rates.
Lenders fund a fixed-rate mortgage by borrowing a tranche of funds on the
money markets; Abbey National, for example, borrowed funds at 6.45 per cent
to offer a fixed rate of 6.99 per cent to homeowners.
But sterling money market rates changed direction this week by charging
interest above the 7 per cent base rate, with dealers taking the view that
the next base rate cut might not happen this year.
If this mood persists, lenders might be unable to offer lower fixed-rate
mortgages for the time being than the ones now on offer.
The table shows a number of fixed and capped rates on the market. John
Charcol recommends the Halifax's 9.29 capped rate until the end of January
2000 as an outstanding scheme. This is because it runs for a relatively long
period and gives borrowers the benefits of lower variable rates while
setting a ceiling of only 9.29 per cent if base rates increase.
But borrowers should know that fixed and capped rates carry a fee, and that
they impose early redemption penalties of three months or more.
Finally, do not be lured into a short fix with a lender which does not have
a competitive standard variable rate. You might get a good rate for a year
or two - but what about the next 20?

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921121

