FT924-6469

FT  20 NOV 92 / Survey of Home Entertainment 4: Spectacular growth as Europe
catches fever - Video Games


   By MICHIYO NAKAMOTO


WHILE the consumer electronics industry as a whole has been suffering from a
dearth of new products to whet the appetite of increasingly sophisticated
consumers, the video games market has been enjoying spectacular growth and
the fever is far from abating.
The video games market has grown over the years into a Dollars 14bn industry
and is increasingly attracting the attentions of large consumer electronics
manufacturers, which are suffering from sluggish demand in their traditional
markets.
The appeal of the video game compared with television or music, is that it
is active and interactive, says Mr Chris Anderson, managing director of
Future Publishing, which publishes specialist magazines for video game fans.
Japanese and American consumers have been under the spell of Nintendo's
Super Mario II game for several years now, with Nintendo regularly appearing
on the charts of most popular toys.
Europe has been somewhat slower to catch the video games fever but having
taken both Japan and the US by storm, Nintendo and Sega, its main
competitor, are currently replicating their success in Europe.
Sales in the UK are expected to nearly double from about Pounds 550m to
Dollars 1bn next year.
The appeal of video games is not limited to their games contents. The
synthesized music that accompanies Super Mario games and Tetris have been in
the pop charts and recording companies are said to be looking at the games
industry as a source of added revenue.
Meanwhile, Mario will become the hero of a film to be released next year
featuring Bob Hoskins.
While the growing European market has helped maintain a strong worldwide
rise in the video games market, it is inevitable that once markets mature
interest will die down.
However, fierce competition between Nintendo and Sega, the two leading
forces in the market, is fuelling innovation in both hardware and software
that has kept interest strong.
By continually developing new technology and new games titles the two have
been able to defy sceptics who say that the fad for what, after all, is just
a game, is bound to die sooner or later.
'If there wasn't any evolution in hardware, the software available would
inevitably become boring,' says Mr Philip Ley, marketing director of Sega
Europe.
Sega's drive to break Nintendo's pre-eminence in the market has led it to be
the first to introduce two of the latest state-of-the-art formats which are
keeping sales surging.
Sega was the first to introduce more powerful 16-bit technology in its Mega
Drive (known as Genesis in the US), which allows faster and more realistic
games to be played than on the previous generation of 8-bit machines.
It has also taken the lead in introducing a system based on compact discs,
which takes game-playing a significant leap forward by bringing increased
information storage capacity, quality digital sound, stunning graphics and
realistic motion video to the screen.
Amid much fanfare, Sega announced the launch of a CD-ROM attachment which
can be connected to the Mega Drive to play games on CD rather than
conventional cartridges and demonstrated its potential on an enormous 750 sq
ft screen in New York's Time Square.
Nintendo, meanwhile, has announced that it will also be launching a CD-ROM
system.
Together with Sega's announcement, it also confirmed expectations that the
future of video games lies with CD-ROM. 'Games will undoubtedly move to
CD-ROM,' says Mr Bob Tomalski of What Video, an industry magazine.
The disc format provides greater speed and that is what video games fans
want.
Another attraction of CD-based games is that because CDs are capable of
storing a much larger amount of information, and thus detail, the quality of
the visuals is much better than in cartridges.
Using CD-ROM also opens up the avenue to multi-media, the combination of
digital quality sound, graphics, still photography and moving video, thus
taking game-playing onto another level of interactivity.
In addition to graphics, the Sega CD-ROM games will use what it calls 'true
video,' or video that is close to television quality.
Software using footage from well-known films such as Batman Returns which
will involve the player in fights with the Penguin as played by Danny de
Vito, is in the pipeline - as are music games that allow players to make
their own music videos using film from the live concerts of popular bands.
Sega has invested Dollars 5m in Sega Multimedia Studio in Redwood,
California, where it will produce not only computer-generated animation but
also original movies for its interactive games.
It is working side by side with producer Steven Spielberg filming on the set
of his next film to produce a game that will be released at the same time as
the film.
Sega's aggressive move into new technologies is essential for it to gain
what market share it can from Nintendo and keep its rival on its toes.
For consumers, the battle between the two giants which keeps the search for
quality games and newer and better technology going, should be good news.
However, by moving into CD-ROM, Sega and Nintendo are treading on dangerous
territory. There are already many computer games based on CD-ROM widely
available, most notably Commodore's Amiga games which already have a strong
installed base in some countries and sales equivalent to Nintendo or Sega in
the UK.
Philips, meanwhile has introduced a CD-based entertainment system and the
wide variety of CD-based products available could create market confusion.
As the technology improves, 'you eventually get into the realms of virtual
reality (VR),' says Mr Ley.
When that happens, although it may be difficult to imagine today, we may
very well no longer be tapping away at games consoles but donning a VR
helmet with sensor pads attached to our eyelids and temples to enjoy a
virtual trip through space cities and fight intergalactic wars with our
minds rather than our fingers.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921120

