FT924-6392

FT  21 NOV 92 / Stranded on the road to Split: In Bosnia, David White
witnesses a desperate exodus by 'displaced persons'


   By DAVID WHITE


Aid lorries and British military vehicles ploughing their way daily up the
rough mountain backroads into central Bosnia meet buses struggling the other
way, with optimistic signs reading 'Linz' or 'Vienna'.
More than 1.5m Bosnians, one in three of the population, are now considered
'DPs' - displaced persons - within the former territory of Yugoslavia. This
is roughly the same as the population of Northern Ireland. Of these, some
800,000 are still in Bosnia-Hercegovina itself.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) puts the total of people
uprooted by the Croatian and Bosnian wars at 2.1m. In addition, there are
more than 550,000 ex-Yugoslavs classed as refugees in Germany, Switzerland,
Sweden, Austria, Hungary and other countries.
The wanton internecine conflicts of former Yugoslavia have created the
biggest dislocation of population in Europe since the second world war. This
was something people said should never happen in Europe again.
This week's argument over 175 or so Bosnians expecting entry to Britain and
stuck on the Austrian-Slovenian border was only an indication of the strains
the exodus is likely to create in Europe. The number seeking refuge abroad
could reach hundreds of thousands in the coming months. How many depends on
the fighting - there are signs that it could get worse rather than better -
and how severe winter is. Both these affect how much aid, even with UN
military escorts, can reach stranded and displaced populations, and how far
they can cope by themselves.
In some high places temperatures have already fallen as low as - 20 degrees
Celsius.
Local UNHCR representatives say only half the aid needed has been getting
through. The only hope for transporting sufficiently large supplies is by
negotiating safe conduct by main roads that are now crossed by battle lines
or exposed to Serb gunfire. Convoys under British, French and Spanish
military escorts all came under fire in different parts of Bosnia this week.
Most immediate of the refugee organisations' tasks is dealing with men
released from prison camps. The International Committee of the Red Cross
knows of 41 Serb, Moslem and Croat camps where there are some 6,500
prisoners left - about half of them at one Serb camp, Manjaca - but there
are thought to be more. European countries have offered a total of 3,700
places for the detainees. Britain has proposed taking 150, with their
families.
Others trying to emigrate face a series of frontier barriers, unless they
have visas to another country further on. The first barrier is Croatia,
which already has 340,000 Bosnian refugees to cope with. But UN officials
say they have indications of a 'mercenary trade' getting people out through
unofficial networks, in some cases by way of Macedonia, Bulgaria and
Romania.
Moslems and Croats from 'ethnically cleansed' Serb-held areas pour into
central Bosnia and western Hercegovina. A principal stress point is the old
Ottoman town of Travnik. Once the seat of the Turkish viziers, it is the
setting of a famous novel by Ivo Andric, the only Yugoslav ever to win a
Nobel literature prize. The high school he attended has now become a
Dickensian-style hostel, where the heating does not work and 40 to 50 people
live to a room. Shells fall on the town almost every night.
Refugees come through Travnik, sometimes in surges, before being channelled
to other centres. The Croats are more likely to find shelter with host
families. At the 'collective centres' 90 to 95 per cent are reckoned to be
Moslems.
The Moslems - southern Slavs whose families converted during the 500 years
of Ottoman rule - are categorised as such because, unlike the other main
groups in former Yugoslavia, there is no substitute ethnic, national or
linguistic epithet to distinguish them. They were the least ready for this
war and stand to fare the worst from it.
The people stranded at the centres are peasants, modest townspeople and
middle-class families. At the refugee centre in Posusje, in the Bosnian
Croat heartland, where living conditions are visibly worse than at Travnik,
one family said they used to have two houses and three cars.
They leave their homes with what possessions they can grab. Few have money,
unless they managed to keep savings abroad. In Bosnia savings have become
meaningless. The banking system has collapsed. Seven different currencies
are in use, depending on the part you are in. In much of the
Croat/Moslem-controlled area of central Bosnia, the currency is not
Bosnia-Hercegovina's own dinar but the Croatian dinar or, preferably, the
D-Mark.
Aid workers say most displaced people want to remake their lives in Bosnia.
But, while peace negotiators in Geneva hold to the principle that people
should be able to return to their homes, many have no homes to return to. It
is difficult for refugees to envisage ever rebuilding the mixed communities
that existed before.
At Kiseljak, a spa town west of the Bosnian capital where the UN has
established a military headquarters, two sisters had arrived from Sarajevo
in a 14-bus convoy. 'It's so strange not to hear shells and bullets,'
14-year-old Jesenka said.
Every day for seven months they had gone to the cellar for shelter. 'You are
not safe in the house, not safe in the street,' said Vedrana, 19, an
economics student. They lived on rice, macaroni and beans. Electricity came
on a few hours every week. For a month there had been no running water.
They had been allowed to take two bags each. They had left behind their
parents and Vedrana's boyfriend, a member of the Croat militia. At a Serb
checkpoint, they had been surprised to be classed as Moslem, because of
their family name. They had been brought up to consider themselves Yugoslav.
They were heading for Split, had papers to get them to Czechoslovakia and
aimed eventually to make it to France. It was at least something to hope
for.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

921121

