FT922-4056

FT  08 JUN 92 / Heron to suspend interest payments


   By ANDREW JACK


HERON INTERNATIONAL, Mr Gerald Ronson's troubled UK property and finance
company which is seeking to reschedule nearly Pounds 1.2bn of debts, is to
suspend interest payments on a portion of Pounds 700m in bank loans from the
beginning of July.
The company said yesterday: 'We are paying interest now but we have
concluded that it would be inappropriate to pay interest after the end of
the month in those parts of the group in which cashflow is insufficient.'
The action has been taken in consultation with the banks involved in lending
to the most illiquid parts of the group. However, Heron declined to say
which divisions or which banks would be affected.
Heron did not disclose how much of its Pounds 700m bank debt would be
covered by the suspension of interest payments. It will not affect Pounds
450m in bond market debt, also being rescheduled.
Heron was forced to attempt to reschedule up to Pounds 1.15bn of its Pounds
1.45bn debt after its estimated net assets collapsed to Pounds 115m at the
end of March and put it in breach of covenants.
Unaudited accounts for the year to March 31 this year show a pre-tax loss of
Pounds 124m before exceptional items - of which Heron said about Pounds 118m
was in interest payments - compared with a re-stated Pounds 59m loss the
previous year.
More than 80 banks are still digesting a report commissioned by KPMG Peat
Marwick, the accountancy firm, circulated on Friday, which included a Pounds
1bn valuation of the group's worldwide property portfolio. That contrasted
with a valuation in March of Pounds 1.3bn in a report from Price Waterhouse
using other surveying firms.
Heron said the Peat Marwick report confirmed its own recommendation for a
controlled disposal of its investment properties over a number of years.
Heron warned bondholders in April that a 'fire sale' of assets would result
in a shortfall of at least Pounds 550m.
It said yesterday it hoped its re-scheduling would be completed by autumn,
ahead of the next payments to the holders of its Pounds 450m in Eurobonds.
The five banks on the steering committee dealing with Heron are Barclays,
National Westminster, Bank of America, Royal Bank of Canada and Chemical
Bank.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920608

