FT921-570

FT  28 MAR 92 / International Company News: Chrysler halves Mitsubishi stake


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


CHRYSLER'S sale of just under half its 10.99 per cent stake in Mitsubishi
Motors was privately welcomed yesterday by the Japanese car maker, whose
executives have been angered by Chrysler's demands for limits on the sale of
Japanese-badged vehicles in the US.
The US maker sold 43.6m shares for Y27.5bn (Dollars 205m), leaving it with
5.88 per cent of Mitsubishi Motors, whose share price has been under
pressure in expectation that the financially stretched Chrysler would
off-load part of its stake.
Officially, Mitsubishi said the two companies would maintain a 'strong and
co-operative relationship', but unofficially, the Japanese company was
delighted to see Chrysler slip to third in its shareholder rankings, behind
Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (MHI) and Mitsubishi Corporation, the core
company of the group.
Chrysler invested in Mitsubishi Motors in 1971, and the company was run for
15 years as a joint venture between the US maker and MHI. In 1985, when
Mitsubishi Motors was listed, Chrysler had a 24 per cent stake, which was
reduced to 10.99 per cent in September 1989.
Last October, Chrysler sold to Mitsubishi its 50 per cent stake in Diamond
Star Motors, the companies' production joint venture in the US, raising
Dollars 100m. That venture was formed in 1985, but Chrysler's investment
could not keep pace with Mitsubishi's ambitious expansion plans.
Of the 43.6m shares, about 33.6m were sold in Tokyo, and apparently most
were taken by Mitsubishi group members and life insurance companies. The
remaining shares were sold in Europe to a range of investors.
Relations between US and Japanese car makers have become particularly
prickly in recent months, with President George Bush accompanied on a Tokyo
visit by US car company executives, who mocked a planned reduction in
Japan's self-imposed ceiling on car exports to the US.
Mitsubishi executives have been openly critical of Mr Lee Iacocca, the
Chrysler chairman, who has demanded limits on Japanese vehicle sales in the
US.
Publicly, Mitsubishi executives have said that Mr Iacocca's comments are
'disappointing' and, privately, they have used far stronger terms.
Mitsubishi yesterday said it 'understands' that the share sale is 'aimed to
strengthen Chrysler's financial position', and that the move 'will not
affect' their business relationship. However, the sale is another sign of
the weakening links between the two.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920328

