FT922-13424

FT  11 APR 92 / Travel: Wild times when the Little Doctor cuts up rough -
Close to nature in Canada's northlands


   By MICHAEL WIGAN


WILDERNESS travellers exchange the previously learned for the recently
learned. They go to new places to summon old reflexes, atavistic instincts.
Take Little Doctor Lake in the Nahanni range of Canada's largest and most
northerly province, Northwest Territories. Far across the expansive flats
west of the Fort Simpson Indian reservation rises a range of ancient white
mountains 70 miles long, towards the north end of which is a geological
anomaly.
The range has been cleft asunder so violently that the lake which bisects
the mountain range, Little Doctor, is over 700 ft deep. The lake is
lightbulb-shaped, the bulb spreading over the eastern tree-clad plains, the
neck sticking out the other side into the foothills of Canada's most
dramatic national park, the Nahanni.
Nahanni park is where I was meant to have been, goggling at the 5,000 ft
vertical canyons of the Ram river - deep ice- rimed caves strewn with
10,000-year-old mountain sheep carcases - and that mad canoeist's
dream-fantasy, the Virginia falls, a waterfall that dwarfs Niagara in
height.
But rigid scheduling is inimical to Canada's outback. My host was a province
away fighting forest fires (a civic obligation in Canada's northlands), and
my 12-year-old son and I were swooping down on to Little Doctor equipped
with those two wilderness necessities, a latch-key and a bag of groceries.
The cabin stood off the water-edge in the trees. A rough lawn had been sown
in front, on which stood a skin-drying rack. Flensing instruments made of
bone and spades hung on the wall.
Two boats were hauled up, one aluminium with a 20 hp outboard, the other a
two-man pink canoe. The facilities included an outdoor 'long-drop' toilet,
three gas canister cooking-rings, a table facing the lake, shelving, and a
loft in which squirrels were busy disembowelling the insulation (later they
turned on our supplies).
As the floatplane's engine droned into silence, a new wave of sounds flowed
in. Unconsciously, I began sorting one from another: the rusty bickering of
the squirrels, the gentle belling of a blood-hungry mosquito, splashing
lakewater, then, at 4am, a bear crashing through the undergrowth.
The nearby sandbar was a visitor's ledger of recent traffic. Here were
footprints from the big moose, such a heavy animal that even below the
waterline its deep treads persisted a day later. The bear's deep-digging
claws were unmistakeable. Beavers had lopped trees and saplings randomly,
and along the surf-edge were dragonfly corpses and the bodies of little
silver minnows.
The neighbourhood wanted to know who this addition to the community was,
dropped unceremoniously from the sky. The black bear which strolled by in
mid-afternoon had my son springing off the porch. The bear sniffed
scent-traces on the trees unhurriedly with his large and finely-tuned
proboscis, his fur gleaming glossily in the sunlight.
At dawn a female moose materialised on the water-edge over the glassy lake,
looking our way. We boarded the canoe, wobbled furiously about, then
commenced a slow approach. The prehistorically-proportioned animal stood
broadsides, occasionally flapping her frond-like ears, small eyes gazing
steadily as we slid up to her. She tore foliage off the saplings and her
hind leg lifted to scratch her flank in complete unconcern.
That first day, nature swarmed at us thick and fast. The haunting cries of a
great northern diver echoed round the water, and then he surfaced so close
by our paddles that I could see his red eye. Sandpipers apparently fearless
of man skittered in front of our boots on the spindrift.
We paddled into the forbidding chasm, awesome cliffs on one side and a shale
apron below rock ramparts the other, to get a closer view of the mysterious
Dall's sheep. These shy, white, high-legged mountaineers eke out a living
above the treeline.
They say in Canada: If you don't like the weather, wait ten minutes. But you
seldom have to wait so long. High winds and instant waves hit the millpond
calm with push-button suddenness. The temperature of over 100` F on the
first day fell to 44` F by the second.
The chasm turned into a choppy maelstrom, the wind pushing along the whole
face of the Nahanni bluffs, funnelling into that one outlet, capable of
throwing a boat in the air. Once we used the big motorised boat and in spite
of flat calm only half-a-mile away, the chasm was roughing up nastily second
by second, with grit off the rockface stinging our faces.
This country produces its own characters, shapes them. On a lake further
north a hardened bush-hand spent his living ferrying mail-order wives into
his isolated cabin. One begged to be released after a single day; a more
stalwart candidate visited for two summers. I met 92-year-old Gus Kraus, a
strong-shouldered fur-trapper who knew the ways and foibles of wolverine,
beaver, otter, muskrat and lynx; also of marten, of which he used to catch
up to 300 in a season, at their peak valued at CDollars 1,000 (Pounds 485) a
pelt.
He recalled hooking pike out of the lake of over 40 lbs, and shooting them
with a .22 as they came into the shallows. Little Doctor, he told me, was
called by the Indians Moving Water Lake, because of its deceptive current
and freak winds.
Then there is the legendary, recently-deceased Albert Faille, a mechanic
obsessed by the fate of two early prospectors found bound together without
their heads, who left notes claiming to have found gold on the Nahanni
river. Faille struggled for eight weeks upriver through the sheer Nahanni
canyons and stayed for several years, an almost superhumanly arduous trip
performed eight times, lastly aged 72.
His determination was kept alive by once having located the gold, a bonanza
aborted when a woodpecker ate his prospecting map. The Nahanni park's
pristine emptiness and untouched grandeur may owe much to that woodpecker.
We were evacuated, as it turned out, by the last aircraft that could have
reached Little Doctor for several days. Clouds came down, rain came in, all
in a season (August) usually clear and fine. Our bush senses were not tuned
to red alert, but they had stirred.
From the UK, visits to Little Doctor, together with canoeing and rafting
trips in the Nahanni park - anything, in fact, except finding the gold - can
be fixed through Alistair McLean at Accessible Isolation Holidays, Midhurst
Walk, West St, Midhurst, W Sussex GU29 9NF, tel: 0730-812535, fax:
0730-812926.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920411

