FT924-11418

FT  26 OCT 92 / International Capital Markets: Selsdon Man buried yet again


   By ANTHONY HARRIS


REMEMBER Selsdon Man? He was the new, bone dry Tory model designed in the
1960s by Sir Keith Joseph, and originally personified by Sir Edward Heath.
He ran into a nasty economic recession, and was quietly buried.
Eight years later he was reincarnated, as a woman. Same story. Unexpectedly
deep recession, float the pound, dash for growth, inflation. Finally we got
the slimline Major version, whose batteries ran down in less than six
months. If this was purely a British story, one might simply conclude that
Selsdon Man was a fraud, and leave it there. But there is a significant
under-theme. Each time Britain suffered unforeseen recession, or dashed for
growth, it did so in good company.
In 1972, nearly all developed countries were on the same track; in the
mid-1980s, most of the English-speaking world; and this time, the biggest
economies. Naive people might be comforted to know that our 'new' policies
are so fashionable. (I suspect that Mr Major thinks like that.)
But any well-trained NCO knows that when you are all crossing a bridge, you
must break step. Apparently stable structures can be shaken to bits if
everyone moves at the same moment, so that each impact reinforces all the
rest. This analogy helps to explain why the recessions and the subsequent
inflations were so much worse than forecast.
Normally, a large part of the impact of any shift in domestic policy is
absorbed overseas, with little effect. Sometimes, indeed, domestic actions
seem to have no effect at all, and officials suffer nasty turns when they
may even doubt their own existence. (The British treasury is just trying to
get over this feeling, and told the House of Commons it could not influence
the whole economy only days before it agreed to have a try.) When economies
make the same move at the same time, it is another story. The effects of
change are not absorbed, but reinforced from abroad, so even modest actions
are liable to have surprising effects.
What our analogy fails to explain is why everyone moves in step in the first
place. There is no sergeant yelling 'LEFT, left, left-right-left]' But there
is fashion; and there is a bureaucracy which loves parade-ground discipline.
What the sergeant would call smartness, they call convergence.
In the 1960s these disciplinarians were to be found in the IMF. They noted
that cyclical divergences tended to produce current account deficits in
expanding countries and surpluses in sluggish ones. They had to finance
imbalances - which was what they were paid to do. However, they decided that
divergence was a Bad Thing, and tried to prevent it; with disastrous
success.
In the 1980s it was the fashion for deregulation which produced the
destruction in the English-speaking world. Europe might have been largely
immune, had it not been for the misguided effort to achieve economic
convergence. This was meant to open the road to monetary union, but what it
has achieved, quite predictably, is convergent deflation and monetary
disunion. Meanwhile, the US is showing that monetary union without
convergence works much better; some states in the US are in slump, with
others booming.
Will the third act in this tragi-comedy end like the first two, in
overheating and inflation? There is reason to hope that it won't, though not
through good management. The slump in banking confidence is so deep that
fiscal stimulus may work only haltingly; or better yet, it may work in some
countries but not in others. Some officials will be unable to carry out
misguided orders because others, the prudential supervisors of the banks and
thrifts, failed in theirs.
A final irony: all this nonsense has been perpetrated in the name of
trusting the markets. Yet in the event our rulers have trusted markets which
are inherently unstable, and need supervision, while they only fitfully
trust markets which are in the end self-stabilising. If Selsdon man had a
sense of humour (doubtful, this) he must be laughing in his grave.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

921026

