FT922-4555

FT  05 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: Kohl and Major look for way to
stay on road to Maastricht


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


AGAINST a background of growing popular scepticism in Germany about European
integration, Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Mr John Major will today seek to
co-ordinate their response to the Danish vote.
There is a clear division among top government advisers over whether it will
be possible to press ahead with the plans without Denmark, or whether
changes will have to be made to enable a new Danish referendum to be held.
The key is whether it will be possible to separate the Maastricht treaty on
economic and monetary union (Emu), and on political union, from the existing
Rome Treaty. For any amendments to that treaty would normally require
unanimous ratification.
Some top German EC negotiators believe that it would be possible to press
ahead with Emu outside the Rome Treaty, removing all references to existing
EC institutions. They see this as a clear step towards a Community based on
'variable geometry' - different combinations of member states for different
functions - which they regard as inevitable in the light of the queue of new
entrants.
Thus those countries carrying on to a single currency would become an inner
core of the EC. Those who wish to pursue a closely-integrated common foreign
and security policy could also provide another. And outer rings might be
formed by eastern European countries wanting more than association, but less
than full membership.
However there are also German advisers who believe it will be possible to
accommodate the Danes without stepping outside the Rome Treaty. 'We have
some ideas, but we are waiting to see what the legal advisers in the Council
of Ministers' secretariat say,' one official said yesterday.
The official line from both the German and UK leaders is that the other 11
member states must press ahead with ratification, or lose the momentum of
the integration process. But they know that the uncertainty will cast a
shadow over the two other main issues on the EC agenda: enlargement and the
Delors 2 budget package to provide increased financial resources.
Mr Major is in an unusually strong position in relation to Mr Kohl, in the
wake of his election victory, and with Britain in a better position to
ratify the Maastricht treaty than Germany. In Bonn, the affair has become a
serious constitutional struggle between the central government and the 16
Lander, seeking to assert their control over EC policy.
While the two appear to share much common ground on the need to press ahead
with ratification, Mr Major has the more difficult and delicate task of
persuading the Chancellor not to undermine European co-operation by pulling
out of the European fighter aircraft project. But Mr Kohl is under heavy
domestic pressure to cancel the deal, widely seen in Germany as unnecessary
since the end of the cold war.
In Germany, public and private comments on the Danish vote have been
remarkable for their tone of understanding, if not open relief. In spite of
the commitment to European integration in all the main political parties,
there is an awareness that the public mood is increasingly sceptical.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920605

