FT922-621

FT  26 JUN 92 / Surprise but little regret among institutional investors


   By NORMA COHEN and MAGGIE URRY


THE sudden resignation of Mr Robert Horton immediately hit the group's share
price in New York trading.
The shares - traded as American Depositary Receipts in New York - closed
Dollars 5 1/4 down at Dollars 49 1/8 , equivalent to about 216p a share.
They had closed in London at 243p before the resignation was announced.
Analysts and institutional investors reacted to the resignation with
surprise but no great regret. Mr Horton, they said, had been an effective
manager with an abrasive and aloof personal manner.
While there had been little love lost between Mr Horton and his largest
institutional shareholders, they said his departure was a boardroom coup
rather than a shareholder revolt.
Mr Horton's downfall, according to brokers and shareholders alike, had been
his increasingly untenable commitment to maintain the company's dividend in
real terms. 'The assumption is that he made the dividend a resignation
issue, and lost,' one said.
The immediate cause of the share price fall was uncertainty over the group's
dividend, which is now expected to be cut.
With Mr Horton gone, analysts thought BP would now cut the payout, which is
only about half-covered on forecasts of 1992 earnings.
The dividend cost Pounds 905m in 1991 and analysts are forecasting earnings
of about Pounds 450m in 1992.
Earlier this year Mr Horton was forced to modify his dividend commitment,
but reassured shareholders that the payout policy aimed for real growth over
time.
However, shareholders and analysts believe that BP cannot keep that promise
without sacrificing critical spending on exploration and development and
damaging the company's future.
'He seemed prepared to jeopardise the company's long term future just to
maintain the dividend,' said one large shareholder.
Low oil prices and recession pushed BP into its first historic-cost loss in
the first quarter of the current year.
BP has cut capital spending and costs, and made redundancies. Among
employees, the policy earned Mr Horton the soubriquet 'Hatchet Horton'.
Shareholders said that tales of badly sagging morale were emerging from BP.
'Matters had come to a head,' said one institution. 'Morale had reached a
very low point.'
This appears to have been aggravated by Mr Horton's personal style.
Shareholders yesterday expressed satisfaction at BP's decision to split the
roles of chairman and chief executive between Lord Ashburton and David
Simon.
In meetings with Mr Horton earlier this year, investors had raised the
matter with him and asked him to separate the roles.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920626

