FT921-3998

FT  11 MAR 92 / The Budget (Government Statements): Monthly returns rule to
be changed - Large Traders


THE chancellor announced that large traders would not be required to submit
monthly VAT returns from autumn 1992. Instead, they will be required to make
monthly VAT payments on account from October 1992; they will continue to be
required to render VAT returns quarterly.
Provision for monthly payments on account will be made in the Finance Bill
and present legislation will not be used.
From January 1 1993, for most Single Market goods, there will no longer be a
requirement for businesses to submit official documents at the time of
importation or to pay (or defer) the VAT due on goods before they are
released from Customs' charge.
VAT due on purchases from another member state will be accounted for under
the Postponed Accounting System (PAS) on the businesses' usual VAT return.
The PAS arrangement will mean that businesses no longer have to fund the tax
payment for imports before they are able to reclaim the tax as an input tax
deduction under the normal rules. This will give an advantage to businesses
engaged in intra-Community trade.
The postponed accounting arrangement means, however, that in the fiscal year
1992-93 there will be a considerable shortfall to the Exchequer. This is
because businesses will not be paying import VAT at the time of importation
(or up to six weeks later under the present system of deferring payment). To
offset this cost, very large VAT payers will be required to make payments on
account for each of the first two months of every quarter.
Very large traders are those who currently make quarterly VAT returns and
payments and whose total VAT liability exceeded Pounds 2m over the period
covered by their last four quarterly returns up to and including March 31
1991.
The chancellor has agreed that monthly VAT payments on account will be
required, instead of monthly returns and payments, with the first payments
on account due in the month of November, December or January depending on
the timing of the VAT returns cycle for each trader.
The chancellor also proposes to raise by Pounds 50 a month the level below
which deductions under Pay As You Earn and National Insurance contributions
can be paid quarterly rather than monthly. For deductions made in periods
beginning after April 5 1992 employers will be able to pay quarterly if
their average monthly payments are less than Pounds 450.

The Financial Times


London Page 39

920311

