FT921-516

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Dining room with a view - Le Pont de la Tour
near Tower Bridge


   By NICHOLAS LANDER


OF COURSE you should visit Le Pont de La Tour. Its position on the south
bank of the Thames, beside Tower Bridge, should be sufficient attraction for
any proud Londoner or visitor to the capital.
The approach, from the north bank of the river, is captivating. On my first
visit, the Tower was spotlit. Just walking across the bridge is a boost to
the appetite.
But the conversion of Butler's Wharf, a former tea warehouse, into flats,
offices and a substantial restaurant hides more than appears. The complex
almost encapsulates London's present financial and transport difficulties.
Its conversion preoccupied Sir Terence Conran from the mid-1980s.
Unfortunately, even his copious talents could not buck the financial and
property markets: Butlers Wharf Ltd, the property company which has
developed the site, went into administrative receivership, following
London's property slump. Outline plans for the rest of Butler's Wharf, which
include cafes and a small hotel, remain a memorial to the optimism of the
late 1980s.
And London itself has done little to add substance to Conran's vision.
Butler's Wharf is badly served by public transport. Car parking, although
cheap and adjacent, is hard to reach. Pont de la Tour has been trying to get
its own stop on the underused Thames riverbus service - the simplest, and
most environmentally sound solution to the transport problem in this area -
for some time, without success.
Yet it is not as if London has so many first-class eating establishments -
and Le Pont de la Tour created 120 new jobs in the middle of a recession -
that the city can afford to be so indifferent.
And though Pont de la Tour boasts a restaurant seating 104, a 65-seater bar
and grill, and a private dining room for 20, it also offers a wine shop
which a leading wine merchant describes as 'a delight' (I bumped into him,
lunching with his supplier from Alsace), and a food shop where you can buy
wonderful bread baked on the premises.
But you should not visit Pont de la Tour with too high expectations of the
food.
So much thought and effort has gone into the restaurant design, its wines,
its bread and improving its service (shaky at the beginning), that its
cooking has been left behind.
I have not eaten badly there - just not as well as I expected and the prices
suggest. Two renditions of crab mayonnaise were bland; the fish soup was
anaemic; a herring salad was amateurish. Two other starters, Piedmontese
peppers and a tomato and buffalo mozzarella salad, lacked bite and flavour.
Main courses provided a little more excitement. The roast sea bass was fine,
but the cod portion was small - even for our recessionary times. A grilled
Dover sole was burnt on one side. Chicken and rabbit dishes lacked
conviction, and the calves liver was over-cooked. The star was the pastry
section. The three desserts - lemon tart, a chocolate cake and creme brulee
 -were first class, although the waitress tried to spoil their flavours by
serving coffee first, American-style.
The problem faced by the Pont de la Tour kitchen is that it is being asked
to do too much too often. Preparing large quantities of shellfish (the
'plateau de fruits de mer' is excellent) requires a great deal of careful
preparation before the restaurant doors open. Selections from the menu then
demand a wide range of very rapid cooking techniques, particularly for the
grills. At the same time, some dishes need long, slow cooking - the osso
buco Milanese, for example. To do just one of these styles of cooking
spectacularly well requires great skill - but the Pont de la Tour now serves
2,000 customers a week.
Still only in its sixth month of business, the restaurant is serving so many
customers not only because of its attractive location, but also because it
is responding to rising fixed costs with longer opening hours. It offers
lunch and dinner seven days a week; last orders are not until midnight. This
gives the kitchen little pause for thought and reflection.
The situation will scarcely improve as summer approaches and the restaurant
adds 100 to the seating capacity with tables outside.
Sir Terence Conran has equipped the restaurant with an experienced
management team which should overcome its problems with time. And for anyone
with a sense of history and an interest in the best wines of the world at
fair prices, Au Pont de La Tour is worth a visit.
Le Pont de la Tour, Butler's Wharf, London SE1. Tel: 071-403-8403. Bar,
Pounds 20 for three courses; restaurant set lunch, Pounds 21.50; dinner,
Pounds 35 plus wine and 15 per cent service. Access and Visa cards only.

The Financial Times


London Page IX

920328

