FT921-505

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: Bland architectural monuments to Mrs T - The
fruits of market-driven building


   By COLIN AMERY


CAPITAL CITES around the world bear the marks of their governments and
rulers. In Paris, Presidents of France have always followed in the footsteps
of Louis XIV and found architectural ways of expressing 'la gloire'. In
Bucharest, President Ceaucescu used architecture to wipe out the past in
Romania and to build avenues to the empty triumphs of socialism. Today in
Spain, a World Fair and the Olympic Games are both producing monuments that
celebrate the end of restrictive government and the arrival of democratic
freedoms.
Where do you look in London for the monuments of the Thatcher era? As a
leader not entirely immune to a touch of 'la gloire' herself, she seems to
have been happy to let the market produce the monuments rather than dictate
her own vision in architectural terms. There were many occasions in the last
decade when Mrs T could be seen at the wheel of a bulldozer launching the
construction process surrounded by mere men in their hard hats.
Any Thatcher tour would have to begin at Broadgate by Liverpool Street in
the City, where the Prime Minister, after driving the earth mover a few
yards, shouted at the assembled power brokers of the property world that she
would be back to declare the finished development open.
The Broadgate development and the new Liverpol Street station form one of
the better monuments of the era. They also show off perfectly the
architectural and stylistic debate of the times. From the restraint of the
early phases designed by Arup Associates and Peter Foggo, the whole scheme
moved into the overscaled post-modernism of the Bishopsgate buildings
(designed by the American firm of Skidmore Owings and Merrill) that tower
over bedraggled Spitalfields.
Travel further East and you are soon in the heart of Thatcherland. Her
government's idea of the Enterprise Zones where planning and rating
procedures were suspended to encourage development, can be seen in its built
form in London's Docklands. Here is the habitat of that endangered species,
the yuppy: carefully designed brick boxes where he and his mobile telephone
lay down to rest for few hours between deals. Here is the leather chair in
the loft where the Nescafe was sipped while property prices boomed and
burst. Here in Mrs Thatcher's dreamland, the view from the yuppies' window
is a sad expression of non-planning and virtually non-architecture.
Far away from the City, on every yuppy's horizon, is that strange empty
giant obelisk of Canary Wharf. This is perhaps her biggest monument and the
most poignant. It stands in the only part of Docklands that has been well
planned but it is as isolated from the reality of London as Ceaucescu's
dreams of a socialist heaven were from the reality of daily life in
Bucharest.
Canary Wharf remains a practically unreachable dream: who knows whether the
Tube will ever get there or whether the Docklands Toytown railway will ever
stop breaking down?
To rival the easy-going development of Docklands in Mrs Thatcher's years,
the City of London encouraged massive quantities of office building.
Architecturally, almost all of this commercial development is without
distinction. Perhaps Lloyds of London's high-tech dream by Sir Richard
Rogers is the only significant, advanced architectural monument from those
heady years. But Lloyds is not without its enemies. It has the controlling
power of a great machine and many people find its demanding environment hard
to work in.
To see the great commercial explosion in London - the 1980's South Sea
Bubble of architectural development - conducted Thatcher tours would have to
go down the Thames. At almost every bridge from Vauxhall to the Tower,
nondescript office blocks wearing veneers of granite gaze blankly into the
waters.
Stylistically varied from Aztec post-modernism to juvenile undigested
classicism, the new Thatcher city is a visual nightmare of indifferent
architecture. Perhaps the saddest monument is the crumbling landmark of
Battersea Power Station - which was also the scene of a stage-managed
appearance by Mrs Thatcher. Here, at a launch for its refurbishment, she
spoke of her hopes that the powerhouse of the 1930's would be rejuvenated as
a great leisure centre for the capital. It is now a collapsing ruin. Lector,
si momentum requiris, circumspice. . .

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920328

