FT922-13412

FT  11 APR 92 / Gardening: A self-starter that makes the mowing easier -
Tools designed to help gardeners


   By ARTHUR HELLYER


I HAVE BEEN using one of the latest Flymo lawn-mowers, the RRL429 Powerdrive
Electrostart, which must surely be the smallest machine of its kind to have
electric self-starting at the turn of a key. The rotary blade gives a 15in
cut and would be suitable for the smallest of gardens; yet, because of its
speed and easy operation, it will also tackle quite large areas.
This machine has all the refinements of much larger lawn-mowers, including
rear pick-up of cut grass into a conveniently detachable box; a full-width
rear roller to give the admired stripe effect when the grass has been cut;
and screw-adjusted height setting with a scale showing the height that has
been selected. (This ranges from under 1in to a remarkable 7in, enabling
enable the machine to be used for trimming meadow-length grass.) The
four-horsepower, four-stroke Tecumsah engine has power to spare and is
quiet, too.
This is a wheeled rotary grass cutter, not an air-cushion machine, and is an
illustration of the way in which the old, rather pointless controversy
between the manufacturers of these two types of powered lawn-mower has been
ended peacefully. Each system has its uses in the right places and
circumstances.
This new little Flymo is likely to make many friends. It is supplied
complete with an electric charger which can be plugged into any mains socket
for occasional topping-up of the starter battery; but there is also a
charger built into the engine so that replenishment of the battery goes on
continuously whenever the machine is being used. The price, complete with
all this equipment and including VAT, is Pounds 475.
I believe that the greatest acceleration in garden machine sales is
occurring with shredders, those invaluable devourers of woody waste in the
garden which make it possible to dispense with bonfires. Power-driven
shredders will convert all prunings and hedge trimmings into
instantly-usable mulches for flowers beds and borders, or for spreading
around individual trees and shrubs.
The old idea that such woody waste was bad for plants and soil has been
exploded. Huge quantities of commercially-produced wood chips and shreds are
being used in public parks, National Trust properties, botanic gardens and
those of the Royal Horticultural Society, to name just some. I have been
using shredded bark for the first time this winter and am very pleased with
the results.
Home shredders will not cope with the heavy wood used in
commercially-produced chips and shreds but, according to the size and power
of the machine, they will deal efficiently and speedily with the prunings
and hedge trimmings which make up the bulk of the woody waste in gardens.
Some machines are powered by electric motors and some by petrol engines, the
former recommended for town gardens because of their relatively low noise.
Petrol is to be preferred in big country gardens in which it can be
convenient to take the machine to the work rather than the reverse.
The nylon cord rotary grass trimmer, or strimmer, is another tool that has
found favour with the gardening public. It has taken all the difficulty out
of cutting grass close to walls, trees and other hard objects. The
fast-rotating nylon cord is so flexible that, although it cuts through the
toughest grass and quite a lot of even tougher weeds, it is turned aside
harmlessly by any hard objects.
Again, there is a choice between electric motors and petrol engines, most of
the latter serving the dual role of grass trimmers and brushwood cutters
when fitted with some type of metal blade in place of the nylon cord.
In this development, they must be regarded as potentially dangerous tools,
suitable for use only by trained people and with full safety precautions.
But, for nylon cord trimming, the petrol-engined machines are just as safe
as the electrically-driven ones.
They have the advantage that they can go anywhere, irrespective of an
electric supply being available. Certainly, these large machines have solved
the rough grass-cutting problems of many large gardens and parks.
I have found that some of the very small, low-priced electric nylon cord
trimmers have inadequate power to deal with anything tougher than fairly
soft grass - but with more power, the densest grass and quite tough weed
stems can be slashed through. It is the speed of rotation of the nylon cord
that makes it effective as a cutter, and that is what an under-powered motor
cannot supply.
Some nylon cord trimmers have heads which can be rotated through 90 degrees,
making it possible to use them in the vertical position to cut lawn edges as
well as in the horizontal plane for the flat lawn. I find this a
considerable time saver.
Power-driven hedge trimmers tend to get a bad press on the score of danger
and, undoubtedly, too many accidents do occur. Yet I could not manage my
garden without one of these tools, and it is really a matter of taking all
the necessary precautions and of buying a well-designed machine with
adequate safety checks.
Again, you have the choice between electricity and petrol as the source of
power although, with electricity, there is the added risk of cutting through
the cable while using the machine. But proper earthing and cut-out devices,
plus a safe method of trailing the power cable over the shoulder, will
reduce any dangers to a minimum.
There are many small hand tools and other pieces of equipment which, while
seldom written about, will save a lot of time and trouble in the garden. One
is a pair of secateurs small enough to be slipped easily into the pocket so
as to be available at any time for jobs as varied as cutting string to light
pruning.
There is also an ingenious little tool called the Widger, which I thought
had dropped out of use until I came across it in the big sundries catalogue
of Joseph Bentley Ltd, Barrow on Humber. This is a metal and plastic dibber,
seedling transplanter, tiny trowel and weeder all in one; so small that it
can live in your gardening coat.
Lopping shears can be great time-savers but they must have strong handles
and powerful blades. Too many fail to cut easily and the handles bend when
cutting really thick stems.
It is worth spending up to Pounds 40 for a good pair of loppers. It does not
matter if the blades are of the anvil or the bypass type; I use both and
have no preference.
Hoes need careful choice to suit personal preferences for easy use and
movement. I still like the old Wilkinson Swoe, a dutch-type hoe with the
handle attached only at one end of the blade which, in consequence, can be
hooked firmly around tough weeds to cut them off or drag them out, and can
also reach behind plants to stir the soil.
I find a spring-toothed grass rake useful for much gathering of rubbish in
addition to that for which it is primarily intended; namely, the cleaning
and aeration of lawns. A pair of long-handled hedging shears can still be
the best tool for trimming grass in awkward places and, even if you have a
hedge trimmer, shears are a necessity for some jobs. When shopping for
these, hold them in the hands and test them for weight and balance before
deciding which ones to buy.
Many garden chemicals now come ready-packed in the small, flask-type
sprayers operated by a trigger. I keep a supply of spare flasks for special
purposes, one for glyphosate herbicide for the difficult weeds; another for
Weedol, especially for cooch and other grasses; and a third in spring and
summer for a harmless greenfly killler such as perimicarb. The plastic pumps
of these sprayers do not last for long, but they are cheap to replace and
most handy to use.
Finally, in a garden of any size you must have a wheelbarrow. For the rough
and heavy work, I use an ordinary navvy barrow; but for all other jobs I
like a barrow with a ball-shaped wheel which will ride easily over all the
bumps and up and down any steps.

The Financial Times


London Page XII

920411

