FT924-6361

FT  21 NOV 92 / International Company News: Taking a slice of Hungarian
salami


   By NICHOLAS DENTON


   BUDAPEST


HUNGARY has launched the privatisation and stock-market flotation of Pick
Szeged in the hope investors will extend their taste for public offerings to
the company's famous spicy salami.
James Capel, the UK brokerage which has advised on and managed the
transaction, announced yesterday that the issue was fully underwritten and
that the international part of the placement was comfortably oversubscribed.
Members of the syndicate for the Hungarian offering, for which subscription
begins on November 27, said initial indications of domestic demand were also
encouraging.
The placing price of Ft1,200 (Dollars 14.45) per share represents a ratio to
prospective 1992 earnings of 7.8, compared with a Hungarian market norm of
11-12, and values the company at Ft2.72bn (Dollars 33m).
The managers of the offering are placing 30-40 per cent of Pick with
institutions in the US, the UK and Germany.
It is matched by an allocation of 10-15 per cent for Hungarian cash
investors and a further 20 per cent to be distributed over time in exchange
for 'compensation coupons'.
The state plans to retain a 5 per cent stake and veto rights over the use of
the Pick trademark. The remaining shares will be distributed among Pick's
two primary creditor banks, local authorities and employees.
The Pick launch marks a revival of privatisation flotations after a drought
of more than a year.
Subscription for Pick shares will be followed three days later by that for
Danubius Hotels, one of Hungary's three large hotel chains.
Brokers say both issues have to overcome the aversion to Hungarian
flotations among investors who were burnt by the collapse in the share price
of Ibusz, the travel agency which was the first Hungarian state company to
go public, in 1990.
James Capel executives say Pick differs because the government is firmly
behind the flotation and has granted a 10 per cent discount to small
investors.
In addition, the lead-managers have carefully prepared the after-market to
prevent a spike in the share price, and Pick is widely regarded as one of
Hungary's most promising companies.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921121

