FT923-15755

FT  01 JUL 92 / Brussels lets UK off hook on court cases


   By DAVID GARDNER


   LUXEMBOURG


THE UK presidency of the European Community, which starts today, is likely
to be saved considerable embarrassment following the Commission's decision
to postponepending European Court cases for alleged British environmental
infractions.
Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission president, will, moreover, be handling the
environment portfolio personally, following the departure of Mr Carlo Ripa
di Meana, the environment commissioner, to join the new Italian government.
Mr Ripa di Meana was perhaps the sharpest Commission thorn in the UK's side,
leading to the celebrated remarks of Mr Douglas Hurd, the foreign secretary,
before last December's Maastricht summit that Brussels was seeking to 'exert
its influence in every nook and cranny of daily life'.
Officials in Brussels and Luxembourg made clear yesterday that the
Commission was anxious to help the UK presidency, which has the uphill task
of steering through ratification of the Maastricht treaty after Danish
voters rejected it on June 2.
At the Commission's request, the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg has
postponed hearings, scheduled for today, on the UK's alleged failure to
comply with an EC directive on bathing water purity. Brussels is also likely
to hold off on other cases which Mr Ripa di Meana had been preparing,
notably the UK's alleged failure to carry out environment impact assessments
before allowing through road and construction projects. These have not yet
reached the Court.
'We wouldn't like to see the Court sentencing the UK at the very moment the
Commission is meeting the British government in London,' an EC official
explained. The Commission and the British government kick off the UK
presidency at a special meeting today.
The Court invariably grants the request of either of the litigants if they
request postponement, provided the other agrees. This usually signals an
out-of-court solution and lightens a heavy workload.
In the bathing water case, however, legal sources, Commission and UK
officials concur that Brussels and London have cut a political deal to
smooth Maastricht's ratification, probably following last week's meeting
between Mr Delors and Mr John Major, the British prime minister.
The bathing water case was rescheduled once before, prior to April's general
election in the UK. See supplement - Europe: state of the union.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920701

