FT921-11820

FT  30 JAN 92 / World Trade News: EC food credits to Moscow hit by delays


   By DAVID BUCHAN, LEYLA BOULTON and QUENTIN PEEL


   BRUSSELS, MOSCOW, BONN


POLITICAL confusion in Moscow, compounded by wrangling between the European
Commission and bankers in both east and west, has seriously delayed use of
the EC's Ecu 1.75bn (Pounds 1.24bn) food credits for ex-Soviet republics.
The longest delay concerns the Ecu500m credit guarantee. It was agreed by EC
leaders in December 1990, formally signed last November, but has since run
into problems. Counting on this credit, a few Western exporters and Russian
importers started shipments last month, and many more have contracts ready
for delivery before end-February.
'There is no doubt in my mind that some (European) traders are in difficulty
and are losing money,' said an EC official yesterday. Meanwhile, the
Russians are wondering where their EC food is, just when the EC has been
vaunting its predominant share in worldwide aid to the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). By contrast, US food credit to the CIS seems to be
moving smoothly.
There is less controversy over the direct EC food loan of Ecu1.25bn to which
EC ministers gave the go-ahead last month, though this, too, has hit
problems. The EC has decided to disburse this to individual CIS states, with
a first Ecu500m slice going to Russia. But it refuses to pay over this
tranche until Russia produces a financially satisfactory agent for the loan
and agrees to waive its sovereign immunity and submit to any dispute to
outside arbitration.
More troubled has been the history of the Ecu500 commercial bank credit
which the EC promised to guarantee more than a year ago. 'We lost seven or
eight months last year,' an EC official said, due to a variety of factors.
Strong-arm Soviet tactics in the Baltic region last spring caused the
European Parliament to delay approving the credit guarantee. Last summer,
some banks defected from the Deutsche Bank-led credit syndicate. It was only
two months ago that the complex web of EC-Deutsche Bank-Vneshekonombank
agreements were finally signed.
But Vneshekonombank, the foreign trade bank of the old Union, failed to ask
to draw down the loan until after Christmas, by which time the Soviet Union
had folded. And, when at the turn of the year, Vneshekonombank paid all the
fees and asked for the money, the Deutsche Bank consortium had fresh doubts
about the former's status.
The Brussels Commission has since strongly urged speed on Deutsche Bank. EC
officials believe that with Brussels guaranteeing 98 per cent of a loan,
which includes a large, fixed rate interest amount, the commercial banks
have little cause for fear. Only Ecu370m of the Ecu500m will be available
for actual CIS food purchases; the other Ecu130m is to cover interest and
freight charges.
But a Deutsche Bank official said yesterday that, according to decrees this
month of the Russian Supreme Soviet, Vneshekonombank was no longer legally
able to take on new loans, but was merely an agent for servicing old debts.
Representatives of several ex-Soviet republics were meeting in Moscow
yesterday to plan future borrowing.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920130

