FT921-1120

FT  25 MAR 92 / Government Bonds: Investors and traders relieved by European
recovery


   By RICHARD WATERS and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


YESTERDAY brought some respite to the battered European government bond
markets.
After the bad news of recent days - which have seen closing yields on
10-year German bonds climbing above 8 per cent for the first time since
January 3 and yields on comparable French bonds hitting a high for the year
at more than 8.75 per cent - the relief among traders and investors alike
was clear.
The recovery seemed to be driven as much by technical factors as by any
sense that the mark-down in prices had been overdone, observers said.
In the German and French futures markets, the fact that many traders had
gone short was said to have accounted partly for some sharp upward swings
during the day.
UK gilts meanwhile, continued to follow the mood of the political opinion
polls in the run-up to the general election. Underlying economic factors
seemed to have little immediate influence on the day's trading.
IN GERMANY, M3 money growth during February was confirmed at 8.5 per cent,
close to the level indicated at the start of the week and down from the 9
per cent growth in January.
The fall in M3 brought little consolation to the government bond market,
where a greater reduction had been looked for in some quarters -
particularly when the figure is set against the Bundesbank's target range of
3.5 to 5.5 per cent for the year.
The market is far more interested in the latest German inflation figure, due
later this week: one analyst said yesterday this was likely to show
inflation peaking at 4.7 per cent.
Early weakness in the bond market was reversed sharply in the afternoon, due
both partly to technical factors and partly to a confident start in the US.
The yield on 10-year government bonds ended the day at 8.024 per cent, down
from Monday but still well up on the beginning of the month, when it stood
at around 7.85 per cent.
FRENCH government bonds recovered strongly from Monday, in the process
narrowing the yield spread against German bonds.
At 73 basis points, this had opened up to its widest since last summer and
well outside the recent trading range: yesterday, it closed back to 70 basis
points.
Figures released yesterday revealed the French trade surplus had narrowed to
FFr407m in February, from a revised FFr3.53bn in January.
In a busy day on the futures market, with 167,000 lots traded, the June
contract closed up one-third of a point on the day, at 107.40.
A sharp bear squeeze, with some traders caught with short positions,
accounted for much of the rise, traders said.
The yield on 10-year bonds closed at 8.72 per cent, down from 8.77 per cent
on Monday.
AFTER a quiet opening, news of weak car sales and strong demand for the
afternoon auction of two-year notes sent US Treasury prices soaring
yesterday and pushed the yield on the long bond back below 8 per cent.
In late trading, the benchmark 30-year government issue was up 1 1/32 at 100
19/32 , yielding 7.941 per cent. The two-year note was also markedly firmer,
up  5/16 at 99 11/32 , to carry a yield of 5.720 per cent.
At first, trading lacked a firm direction in the absence of economic
figures, and activity was subdued amid concern about the impact of fresh
supply on the market.
News of weak mid-March car sales, however, boosted sentiment just before
noon, but it was not until after the sale of Dollars 14.75bn in two-year
notes that prices took off. There was good demand for the new issue,
especially from dealers. The sale was completed at an average yield of 5.85
per cent and with a high bid/cover ratio, both of which were better than
market expectations.
THE UK government bond market continued to anticipate the outcome of the
general election on April 9. A Harris opinion poll indicating a five-point
lead for the Conservative party brought some cheer back to the market, which
duly market longer-dated gilts up several points on the day. 'All we're
doing is trading opinion polls,' one observer said.
The benchmark 9 per cent gilts due 2011 rose  7/32 of a point on the day, at
95 3/8 , giving a yield of 9.52 per cent. A rise of similar proportions was
recorded by the 11 3/4 per cent gilts due 2003/07, which ended the day at
around 112  17/32 , a yield of some 9.8 per cent.
At these levels, the market is already largely discounting a victory by the
opposition Labour party, or a result which leaves no clear majority party,
traders said. But, most agree yields could yet breach 10 per cent if a
Labour victory looks likely.
JAPANESE government bond prices hardly shifted yesterday, as the end of the
Japanese fiscal year continued to suppress activity in Japan.
Despite the expectation of a discount rate cut, the market appears to lack
direction. The no 129 benchmark issue ended unchanged at 105.88.
With no sign of investor demand, traders, many of whom are holding long
positions, are apt to stay out of the market. However, the outlook could
improve, if cash balances are allocated to bonds once the new financial year
is properly under way.

The Financial Times


London Page 28

920325

