FT924-11997

FT  22 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Morrison sticks to the simple truths - John
Thornhill tracks the impressive growth of food retailing's 'fashionable
frump'


   By JOHN THORNHILL


IN MANY ways Wm Morrison Supermarkets is the 'fashionable frump' of the food
retailing sector.
Largely unsullied by the temptations of publicity or the fleshpots of the
City, the northern grocery chain remains the repository of some simple
old-fashioned retailing truths which have served it extremely well since it
began trading from a Bradford market stall early this century.
Morrison's strong family culture, its obsession with providing good-value
foods at keen prices, and its recent aggressive organic growth have enabled
it to prosper in spite of the ever-growing power of the national grocery
groups.
While other regional grocers have suffered, Morrison has been able to lift
pre-tax profits from Pounds 25.7m to Pounds 62.6m between 1988 and 1992 and
last month reported a 34 per cent improvement at the interim stage. Analysts
are forecasting a rise to Pounds 84m for the full year.
The company's impressive progress has led many commentators to label it the
'Sainsbury's of the North' although in some respects even this compliment
underrates its recent achievements. Since the beginning of the year,
Morrison's share price has outperformed that of its illustrious southern
rival by 19 per cent. Its shares have outperformed Tesco by 47.5 per cent
over the same period.
It is, of course, often easier for a smaller and relatively immature company
to grow at a faster rate than a much bigger one, but Morrison's recent turn
of speed is nonetheless eye-catching.
And even in spite of the strong share price performance, Mr Bill Currie,
food retailing analyst at stockbrokers Barclays de Zoete Wedd, claims
Morrison is still 'the cheapest stock in the sector' predicting it is one of
the very few companies likely to sustain 20 per cent earnings growth for the
foreseeable future.
'Morrison's offer the deepest range, the best service and the cheapest
prices in the sector and that is a pretty powerful combination,' he says.
But Morrison has not always received such rave ratings - especially at the
beginning of the 1980s when it consistently underperformed its peers.
After opening its first supermarket in a converted cinema in 1962, Morrison
grew very slowly in its early years and - in spite of going public in 1967 -
was rapidly outpaced by its Yorkshire rivals, Asda and Hillards.
Unlike its competitors, Morrison insisted on buying the freeholds on all its
stores and funded expansion out of cashflow. 'We were against borrowing
until the mid-1980s and were quite happy knowing that nobody could take away
what we had got. But I suppose we came round to the view that there was
merit in gearing up and speeding the business up a bit,' says Mr Martin
Ackroyd, finance director.
Confident in the strength of its format and bolstered by the cash from last
year's Pounds 98m rights issue, Morrison has now markedly accelerated its
opening programme and is currently opening stores at a proportionately
faster rate than even the likes of Sainsbury and Tesco.
The company currently has 59 stores and says it will open seven or so stores
a year for the foreseeable future.
Joining the great superstore building game comparatively late has given
Morrison several advantages. Its geographical concentration in Yorkshire and
the north of England has eased its distribution arrangements. And, unlike
its competitors, the company does not possess a straggling tail of high
street stores.
About a third of Morrison's trading space is now less than three years old
enabling the company to operate more efficiently, generate higher margins
and better resist competitor openings. Its average store size is 34,000 sq
ft stocking about 14,000 lines. 'We run the 59 shops as one,' says Mr
Ackroyd. 'We have one product list and most of the product range is based on
unitary pricing.'
The company is well known for being mean about what it will pay for sites
and the average full cost of building its stores is very low at Pounds 13m
apiece. The company scours northern towns for suitable opportunities, but
does not indulge in the sophisticated site selection processes of the
national chains. 'There is one thing we need when we open a store and that
is chimney pots. Where there are chimney pots there are likely to be
people,' says Mr Ackroyd.
Morrison believes that its stores should cover their costs - including
interest - from day one and immediately contribute to profits. Unlike the
national chains, it has also adopted the highly prudent accounting policy of
depreciating its land assets.
Mr Ackroyd says he is staggered by some of the prices that some of the other
supermarkets pay for their stores.
'Some of the site prices you see being bandied about are incredible. I could
not pay those prices and make any money out of them. I can never see the
turnover to justify the prices they pay for their sites,' he says.
He accepts that Morrison's stores are affected by competitor openings but
stresses that 'we refuse to allow anyone else to run our business for us'.
The comparative savings that the company can make in building its stores can
be passed to customers in the form of lower prices helping to defend its
market share.
'We do not worry about what the competition is doing. There is only one
thing that matters and that is providing consistent value. You can never con
your customers,' he says.
'They are the ones who decide what value means. It might mean free car
parking. It might be they like the staff. It might be the products. But
every week they look at the bill and feel that is what they have got for
their money and they have got to feel satisfied,' he says.
Such views and values have been instilled in the company by the chairman, Mr
Ken Morrison, who has worked in the business for 40 years and whose family
still owns 39 per cent of its shares. 'Ken Morrison is the boss first,
second and third. He is intimately involved in every aspect of the
business,' says Mr Ackroyd.
True to the company's priorities, perhaps, Mr Morrison was not available for
a tentatively-promised interview - he had gone off to open another store
instead.
Yet his influence is still the guiding spirit of the company and one of the
few reservations expressed by the company's investors is what will happen
when he retires.
But judging by the approach of those who are left in the company's
headquarters, investors have little to fear.
'Our customers are the only people who matter. If we can satisfy them then I
can assure you we will satisfy the shareholders,' says Mr Ackroyd.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921022

