FT923-9789

FT  03 AUG 92 / Croatian refugees go to polls


   By LAURA SILBER


   ZAGREB


REFUGEES in a desperate plight in Croatia were yesterday divided over who
would be the best new leader for their war-torn republic.
'Franjo Tudjman will lead us out of the crisis. . . If he hadn't been
president Croatia would never have been recognised,' Mrs Anka Capan, a
refugee for 10 months, said yesterday.
The war and the need for Croatia to gain control over its territory
dominated the elections. Mrs Capan and other refugees from the village of
Slunj have been living in Karlovac, 50km from Zagreb, in homes previously
owned by Serbs. Shrapnel-scarred buildings, sandbags and boarded-up windows
indicate the fears of renewed violence between Croat and Serb militias.
Yesterday, many refugees said they had voted for the 70-year-old former
communist army general in Croatia's first elections since winning
independence from Yugoslavia.
Mr Tudjman was yesterday already claiming victory for himself and the ruling
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ).
However, a poll in Slobodna Dalmacija, an independent Croatian daily, has
predicted Mr Drazen Budisa, president of the Croatian Social Liberal party
(HSLS), the strongest opposition party, will win in the second round, if the
Croatian president fails to gain over 50 per cent of yesterday's vote.
Some of Croatia's 750,000 refugees yesterday said Mr Budisa would bring
change faster than Mr Tudjman. Mr Zlatko Druzar, a refugee from Toranj now a
soldier, said the HSLS and the Croatian People's party (HNS) were more
'democratic' than the ruling HDZ.
Another opposition party is the Croatian Party of Rights (HSP); its members
claim to be the followers of the pro-Nazi Ustashe, who during the second
world war killed hundreds of thousands of Serbs, Jews and gipsies.
Special polling stations have been set up for refugees in the parliamentary
elections for the 124-member lower chamber, but balloting is not being held
in the zones now patrolled by the United Nations.
The exact number of voters is unknown but it is estimated at some 3.5m.
It could not be confirmed yesterday whether the poll was being held in
Bosnia-Hercegovina, whose inhabitants were recently granted dual
citizenship. First unofficial results were expected today.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920803

