FT921-11946

FT  29 JAN 92 / Africa's economic success story encounters a darker chapter:
Thriving Botswana is facing harder times


   By CAROLINE WEBB


AFTER MORE than two decades of substantial growth, Botswana's economy is
having to adapt to harder times.
The diamond boom that boosted growth is levelling out, efforts to encourage
development of the non-mineral sectors of the economy face formidable
hurdles, and unemployment is rising.
Judged by yardsticks applied to the rest of the continent - or elsewhere for
that matter - Botswana continues to thrive. After 25 years of independence,
the country remains a stable multi-party democracy, with a hard currency and
GDP growth over the past two years of around 7 per cent.
But this figure is less striking when compared with the 13.5 per cent rate
in 1988-89, and the nearly 16 per cent annual average achieved between 1968
and 1978.
Diamond revenue, making up nearly 50 per cent of GDP and about 80 per cent
of export earnings, may have reached a plateau. Low prices are expected to
offset the recent expansion of Jwaneng diamond mine.
'Any growth in revenues from diamonds in the medium term will have to come
from increased values rather than increased volumes as in the past,' says Mr
Festus Mogae, the minister of finance.
The dominance of diamonds will be reduced when the Dollars 490m Sua Pan soda
ash plant, opened last year, reaches its capacity of 300,000 tons of soda
ash and 650,000 tons of salt annually. But this will not be until the
mid-90s, and most of the export receipts in the intervening years will be
used to repay loans.
Meanwhile the country's 1.3m population is growing at 3.5 per cent a year,
producing 25,000 new work-seekers a year.
Agricultural potential is limited in a country that is largely arid, while
there are increasing environmental problems caused in part by the country's
2.6m cattle herd.
Hence the warning in the National Development Plan for 1991-97 that the past
rate of economic development cannot be sustained.
Accumulated reserves, which reached Dollars 3.3bn in mid-1991, the
equivalent of around two years' imports, will cushion the belt-tightening
strategy outlined in the plan, the seventh since independence in 1966.
Nevertheless tougher times lie ahead.
What Mr Mogae calls a transition to 'more moderate and sustainable growth'
includes cuts of more than 40 per cent in development spending in the second
half of the plan period.
By reducing government spending on administration, nationalised industry and
parastatals, which together employ well over a third of the workforce, Mr
Mogae hopes to free enough funds to restore development spending to previous
levels - but not until 1997, when the next development plan will be in
place.
The impetus for growth in the coming years, say government officials, must
come from the non-mineral private sector.
In an attempt to stimulate the sector, the government has provided
incentives for would-be domestic and international investors in Botswana.
The Financial Assistance Policy (FAP) has been providing grants for new or
expanding businesses since 1982, establishing more than 20,000 jobs. The
incentive package offered to foreign companies in the export-processing-zone
mining town of Selebi-Phikwe includes a grant covering half the costs of
training citizens over the first five years.
It has so far attracted three textile companies, which have invested 10m
pula (Dollars 5.43m), and provided jobs for more than 1,600 people. The
scheme is expensive, with the Bank of Botswana estimating an eventual P18m
cost. But if it can survive competition from South Africa and boost
non-mineral exports, it will be worth the price, say officials.
Past efforts in job creation, however, have a mixed record. Many of the
smaller-scale projects using FAP resources have failed. Officials running
the programme blame 'general lack of business acumen, especially in the
areas of finance and marketing'. Low labour productivity and lack of local
managerial experience are recognised as serious obstacles to private-sector
expansion.
But private-sector ambitions must take into account the industrial dominance
of neighbouring South Africa.
Ultimately, Botswana's medium- to long-term prospects depend on political
stability in the region, and that rests on developments in South Africa.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920129

