FT921-3755

FT  12 MAR 92 / Bush and Clinton look to crucial Midwest primaries


   By JUREK MARTIN, US Editor


   WASHINGTON


US PRESIDENT George Bush and Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas yesterday set
their sights on the industrial Midwest after convincing victories in
Tuesday's round of presidential primary elections.
Mr Bush, conspicuously relaxed at a press conference, avoided direct
reference to Mr Clinton or his Republican challenger, Mr Patrick Buchanan,
preferring to direct his fire at the Democrats in Congress.
In sweeping all eight Super Tuesday party primaries and winning nearly 400
delegates to Mr Buchanan's 30, the president is about halfway to the 1,105
delegates he needs for a first ballot nomination in Houston in August.
Mr Buchanan, acknowledging that Mr Bush had done well, nevertheless pledged
to make a big fight of it next Tuesday in Michigan, which has a high rate of
unemployment and is therefore discontented with the administration's
economic policies.
On the Democratic side, Mr Clinton took eight of 11 primaries and caucuses
and won about 430 delegates, compared with just over 200 for former
Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas and 25 for former California Governor
Jerry Brown. However, with just over 700 delegates, he is only one third of
the way towards the 2,145 needed for the nomination.
Mr Tsongas yesterday said he would not allow Mr Clinton to 'pander' his way
into the nomination by appealing to everyone. He also said that his national
credentials were better than those of Mr Clinton because he had won more
primaries outside his home base than the Arkansas governor had outside the
south.
On Tuesday Mr Tsongas won the Delaware caucuses, as well as the
Massachusetts and Rhode Island primaries, while Mr Clinton swept the south,
Florida and Hawaii.
For all the candidates, next week's Illinois and Michigan primaries are
important. Mr Bush could reduce Mr Buchanan into a polemical irritant, and
Mr Clinton, whose organisation is far better than his rivals, could leave Mr
Tsongas trailing so badly that money and support will dry up.
Mr Brown, however, survives on less financial support, appeals to a big
dissident Democratic minority, and will undoubtedly continue. For the
Democrats, the battle is for the union vote in these two states.
At his press conference Mr Bush was happy to float above the partisan fray,
apart from his criticisms of Congress. In particular he distanced himself
from a recent and controversial Pentagon study paper which foresees the US
doing whatever is necessary to maintain its status as the sole military
superpower.
He also said he did not disagree with ex-president Richard Nixon over the
importance of helping the states of the former Soviet Union, adding that his
administration was studying issues such as a rouble stabilisation fund.
Bill Clinton: The man who would be king, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920312

