FT923-15357

FT  02 JUL 92 / Technology: Ceasefire a vain hope in PC war


   By LOUISE KEHOE


This is a great time for personal computer bargain hunters. Almost every
day, it seems, another PC manufacturer slashes its prices. During the past
month, the cost of many popular models has fallen by as much as 30 per cent.
What is behind these price cuts and how much longer can the turmoil in the
PC market continue? Theories on what ignited the PC 'price war' abound.
Compaq Computer's recent launch of a new range of low-cost products has been
widely cited as the first volley. In the UK, International Business
Machines' move to establish a subsidiary to sell industry standard 'clones'
under the Ambra brand name is also likely to place downward pressure on
prices.
Yet the root causes of the PC price battle lie with the proliferation of
Asian-built PC 'clones' and radical changes in the distribution channels
that deliver PC products to end users. The onslaught of Asian competition in
the PC market has long been anticipated by US and European manufacturers,
but it only materialised on a large scale recently.
That was because the primary distribution channels for PCs were controlled
by established manufacturers. PCs were sold either directly to the end user
by a computer manufacturers' sales force, or through third party 'dealers'
who were given strong incentives in the form of discounts and advertising
support to remain loyal to established suppliers.
Enter the computer 'superstore'. Selling PC's like cornflakes, or any other
'commodity' product, superstores advertise 'special discounts', bundle
hardware and software, and place brand name computers alongside their own
'generic' lower-priced products bought in bulk from unheard-of and mostly
Asian manufacturers. Along with 'direct' selling, by telephone or mail
order, superstores have fractured traditional PC sales channels, providing
new entrants with an opportunity to penetrate the market.
Former market leaders now face competition from a raft of Asian clone
manufacturers, as well as from ambitious US and European companies. Lacking
well recognised brand names, these new entrants have chosen to compete on
price, drastically undercutting the 'big name' PC makers. Hyundai, of Korea,
last month slashed prices of its US PC products by 40 per cent and began an
aggressive telemarketing campaign.
Dell Computer, a pioneer of direct marketing whose success during the past
two years has demonstrated the importance of new distribution channels, has
this week announced deep discounts and in the US will offer a new range of
cheaper PCs aimed at the 'price sensitive' segment of the market.
IBM, Compaq Computer and other long-time market leaders are being forced to
respond. Yet even as they do so, cheap clones are getting cheaper.
Ironically, the companies that for so long dominanted the dealer channel are
now facing the challenge of adapting to selling through superstores and mail
order, following in the footsteps of their upstart competitors.
In this turmoil, the customer is the winner. Sales volumes are soaring in
the US and picking up in Europe, according to industry executives, but few
are celebrating the market revival, which has been accompanied by a sharp
reduction in profit margins and mounting concern about cost cutting.
One consolation for US and European manufacturers is that it is difficult
for their aggressive competitors to maintain a cost advantage. Automation
has reduced the labour costs of PC manufacturing. Today it costs little more
to build PCs in Scotland or Silicon Valley than it does in Singapore or
Taiwan.
The price cutting cannot go on for ever, although industry executives expect
the trend to continue for several more months. Ultimately, the PC must cost
slightly more than the sum of the components it contains, but this too is a
moving target. Prices of microprocessor chips, the 'brains' of a PC, are
tumbling as Intel, the leading supplier, fights off a band of new
competitors who are offering their own versions of the Intel chips.
New technology will ultimately halt the PC price slide. Multimedia
capabilities including video and sound, as well as improved communications,
are going to make today's cheap PCs look like yesterday's left-overs. Buyers
will be drawn to consider the features, rather than merely the price, of a
personal computer. That, at least, is what the PC industry is hoping.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920702

