FT922-670

FT  26 JUN 92 / International Company News: Misawa advances results after
shares plummet


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


MISAWA Homes, the Japanese house builder, yesterday announced its
consolidated results a day early following a plunge in its stock price after
rumours of financial problems.
Jitters over Japan's property-related companies have been souring investor
sentiment. Last week, rumours of problems at Daikyo, the leading condominium
builder, sent the stock plunging, and the Tokyo market with it.
Misawa, following Daikyo's example last Thursday, yesterday denied rumours
that it faced financial difficulties stemming from deteriorating business at
its resort and golf development subsidiaries.
However, the announcements were far from reassuring. Mr Bernard Siman,
property analyst at Jardine Fleming in Tokyo, said: 'Assurances are not
enough to calm worries; the only way to convince investors is real
disclosure.'
Misawa's stock price fell by its daily limit of Y210 to Y940. The share
price of Daikyo, although recovering from its all-time low, remains 27 per
cent lower than 10 days ago. The prices reflect worries over problems at
Japanese property-related companies, notorious for shuffling their books.
Many investors are still shocked by last year's failure of Maruko, a company
specialising in one-room apartments and listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange.
Following market rumours of bankruptcy last summer, Maruko announced a
restructuring plan. However, it went under a few days later.
Misawa's consolidated pre-tax profits for the year to March plunged 38.6 per
cent to Y12.7bn (Dollars 1bn) on a 0.7 per cent rise in sales to Y473.2bn.
On a consolidated basis, the company's short-term borrowings rose 34.4 per
cent to Y234.7bn during the year, and interest payments increased by 34.8
per cent to Y15.5bn.
After-tax profits plunged 94.8 per cent to Y236m, due to a Y1.1bn
extraordinary loss on redemptions of its convertible bonds.
Daikyo, despite denials of severe financial problems, is no better off. The
company carries 1,800 units in completed inventories, and at the end of last
March, held Y214.8bn in short term borrowings and Y431.7bn in long term
debt.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920626

