FT922-13256

FT  13 APR 92 / City struggles to beat bomb: Two buildings face demolition
as total damage is costed at Pounds 1.5bn


   By CATHY MILTON, JIMMY BURNS and RICHARD LAPPER


THE CITY of London will today struggle to work in the wake of the IRA bomb
which killed three people and injured dozens of City workers on Friday
night.
Up to 14 buildings suffered severe structural damage in the attack. At least
two - the Baltic Exchange and the Chamber of Shipping, both in St Mary Axe -
face demolition, according to City surveyor Mr Ted Hartill.
Fears that the attack will damage the City's position as a financial centre
were dismissed yesterday by the lord mayor of London, Sir Brian Jenkins. 'It
is appalling and horrific but I don't believe it will have any effect on
this great financial centre,' he said.
Sir Brian said efforts were being made to find accommodation for companies
whose offices were destroyed. He said the surplus of office space in central
London was making the task easier. The City corporation has already
re-located 85 per cent of affected businesses
The Baltic Exchange, which arranges most of the world's freight chartering
and more than half of the world's ship sales, took the full force of the
explosion. Mr Peter Tudball, the exchange's chairman, said: 'It looked to me
like a film set for an earthquake. Somebody else said it looked like
Beirut.'
The bomb, contained in a van, was the biggest on mainland Britain since the
Second World War and injured 91 people.
The Chamber of Shipping, whose building stands next to the Baltic Exchange,
seems likely to be demolished. The 50 staff at the chamber, which is the
trade association for UK companies that own and manage ships, have been
offered accommodation in west Smithfield.
The future of the Commercial Union tower, also in St Mary Axe, also appears
to be in doubt. CU, one of Britain's biggest insurance groups, intends to
move its 650 staff who worked in the building to six sites, four of them in
Croydon, south London, and two elsewhere in the City.
Official estimates yesterday put the total number of affected businesses at
36, in some 40 buildings. Surveyors and engineers who spent the weekend
inspecting the damage caused to some 1m sq ft of office space estimated the
cost of repairs at Pounds 1.5bn.
The Bank of England has opened an emergency advice line (071-601 4444),
manned by banking experts and other City specialists, to advise foreign
exchange dealers facing problems as a result of damage. Staff are advised to
call their companies to find out where they should go. A public information
point will be set up at Guildhall, Gresham Street.
British Telecom, which said up to 12,000 lines served by its exchange in the
area were disrupted by the blast, will be re-routing calls to companies
forced to relocate.
The Association of British Insurers said companies would be paying out under
explosion insurance which covered acts of terrorism.
The only business in the severely damaged buildings that declared itself
unable to operate today was the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, whose 400 employees work in a building between the Commercial
Union Tower and Lloyd's.
Mr David Coleridge, chairman of Lloyd's, said he believed the bombers had
intended to target the insurance market. The Lloyd's building was virtually
unscathed and, pending police approval, intends to open this morning.
Mr Coleridge said he intended to offer space at Lloyd's to the Baltic
Exchange.
Police manned security cordons in the City over the weekend although by this
morning only an area immediately around the centre of the blast will remain
closed to allow police to continue forensic investigations.
Another IRA bomb early on Saturday which damaged a road at the south-west
corner of Staples Corner roundabout in north-west London is expected to
cause up to 12 months of delays.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920413

