FT924-959

FT  21 DEC 92 / Secrets of the heart


   By SAMUEL BRITTAN


Despite decades of brain-washing, I have never been able to persuade myself
that discussing the advice given by officials to ministers is like revealing
the secrets of the confessional. An unusual light on the issue is shed by
the humorous writer Michael Frayn who has, among his other accomplishments,
intimate knowledge of Whitehall, including the lay-out of its buildings,
corridors and, above all, skyline.
I have been reading three of the books he has written since he resumed novel
writing in 1985. The first, The Trick of It (Penguin), is on a different
topic - an academic critic who lures the subject of his life work, a female
novelist 'JL', to his rather shabby university to give a talk; the
relationship ends (in every sense) in marriage. There are many delicious
paradoxes. The critic has intimate knowledge of every word JL has written.
JL, on the other hand, has never read a single bit of her companion's work,
which he composes downstairs while she is writing upstairs.
The book which deals most directly with official secrecy is the latest,
called Now You Know (Viking). Its central character, Terry, who runs an
anti-secrecy campaign, is described on the dust-jacket as something of a
wide boy. 'OK, maybe he does come across as a headline-grabbing charlatan
sometimes but he is a bit of a charmer all right - ask anyone.' In a seedy
office behind the Strand, Terry has accumulated quite a large staff with a
telephonist, librarian, secretary and so on - all of whom respond to callers
with the word 'open' and who have as many secrets from each other as any
group of establishment politicians and officials.
One secret, revealed at the end, is who is financing the whole show. Rather
more intriguing is why a straight-laced Whitehall high flyer, Hillary Wood,
who initially despises Terry and everything he stands for, leaves the Home
Office to join his organisation. The obvious answer is that Terry may be her
father but I'm not sure this is correct. There are moments of high farce,
for instance when she takes part in a demonstration outside her old
permanent secretary's house in Chorley Wood - now there's an idea. Despite
all the high jinks at the expense of the anti-establishment, the reader
cannot forget that there has been a cover-up over the death of a man in
police custody, a cover-up supported by the sensible, educated Home Office
types which many readers will know from their own acquaintances.
I suppose the moral is that we all carry an Official Secrets Act in our own
heads. Frayn is, however, at his most successful in the second of the three
novels, A Landing in the Sun (Penguin), which is the funniest yet also the
most realistic and serious. A civil servant, Stephen Summerchild, is
appointed secretary of a committee set up by Harold Wilson in 1974 to
examine the quality of life. Its chairman is Dr Serafin, a female Oxford
philosopher of Russian extraction. Wilson is preoccupied with the economic
crisis of the time, and when Serafin tries to see him she bumps into the
governor of the Bank of England on a more urgent visit. She decides to go
ahead just with Summerchild, not bothering to appoint any more committee
members (another good idea). At first, the meetings proceed like a tutorial
designed to elucidate the concept of 'quality of life' - for example, 'you
notice the central heating if it is turned off. You notice it if it is not
there to be noticed,' an analysis interrupted when Serafin has to get away
to prepare her boy's dinner or some other domestic chore.
She gradually becomes less analytical and more Russian. She and Summerchild
eventually establish a love-nest in their attic office, outside which there
is a protected ledge useful for sun-bathing. The idyll comes to an end when
the permanent secretary, on a goodwill tour, finds the office locked against
him. Much more happens which the reader must explore for himself.
Before anyone dismisses Frayn's world as fanciful entertainment, I must
mention my own experience at the Foreign Office a few days ago, where the
uniformed guardian disclaimed all knowledge of a party to which I had been
invited. While this was being sorted out, a senior flunkey announced he was
going to Bosnia the next day - whether this was meant as a joke I do not
know. But a departing mandarin off for his weekend in an open-necked shirt
responded: 'I hear the skiing in Bosnia is rather good at this time of
year.' Maybe if I had not been reading Frayn I would concentrated on the
more highbrow conversation at the policy analysts' party. At the very least,
his books are an antidote to end-year depression.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

921221

