FT921-3931

FT  12 MAR 92 / World Trade News: Canada toughens line against US in Gatt


   By FRANCES WILLIAMS


   GENEVA


CANADA yesterday seized the opportunity of a debate on US trade policy in
Gatt to pursue simmering trade grievances against its powerful neighbour.
Mr Gerald Shannon, Canada's ambassador to Gatt, said the US, once the
leading champion of international trade liberalisation, appeared
increasingly to be drifting towards managed trade and greater protectionism.
He singled out US anti-dumping and countervailing duty laws, which had
become the 'instruments of choice for US industries seeking protection',
citing, among other criticisms, 'arbitrary and capricious' findings of
injury, dumping and subsidy.
Mr Shannon's remarks were made against the background of rising trade
friction between Ottawa and Washington. The Canadian government was
yesterday considering retaliatory action against the US for its imposition
last week of countervailing duties against allegedly subsidised softwood
lumber exports from Canada. The US move came despite a decision last
December by Gatt's subsidies committee to set up an independent panel to
rule on the dispute.
Ottawa is also fuming over a recent US customs decision that Honda cars
assembled in Canada do not qualify for tariff concessions under the
US/Canada free trade agreement, and is at odds with Washington over
cross-border beer sales.
Mr Shannon said the US was increasingly resorting to managed trade deals
such as 'voluntary' export restraint arrangements for machine tools,
electronics, meat and cars, as well as the car parts pact President Bush
brought back from Japan in January.
The EC expressed concern yesterday over US pursuit of trade aims through
unilateral and bilateral actions that could discriminate against other
trading nations. Mr Roderick Abbott, for the EC, said Brussels was worried
by moves in Congress to curb foreign investment in the US. The report by the
Gatt secretariat on US trade policies will be published today.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920312

