FT921-15485

FT  10 JAN 92 / Russia's new economy chief warns west on aid


   By LEYLA BOULTON


   MOSCOW


THE Russian government may not survive unless it gets rapid help from the
west in pushing through bold market reforms, according to Mr Peter Aven,
Russia's new foreign economic relations minister.
Mr Aven warned yesterday that unless Russia obtained further debt relief,
the west could soon be dealing with a communist regime again, but a much
tougher one.
He said that even after the deferral of principal payments on medium- and
long-term loans finalised with the Paris Club last week, Russia and the
republics have to pay Dollars 9bn (Pounds 4.9bn) to creditors this year.
None of the other republics have so far honoured a pledge to share
responsibility for foreign debt obligations.
Mr Aven said Russia wanted a Dollars 4-Dollars 5bn stabilisation fund to
make the rouble convertible at a pegged exchange rate this year. It was also
seeking balance of payments loans, more direct food aid credits, and a
lifting of western trade barriers - for instance to sell uranium on the US
market.
The 36-year-old economist displayed all the cheering characteristics of
Russia's first post-communist government: youth, intelligence, ability, and
self-confidence.
He said, however, that many westerners were still nostalgic for 'the older
friendlier government bureaucrats' who were swept from office with the
collapse of the union. Another problem was westerners' lack of knowledge
about the severity of Russia's economic crisis, partly because 'we have a
great tradition of lying to the west about how great this country is, and
about how many tanks and gold we have'.
Mr Aven hoped the stabilisation fund advocated by Professor Jeffrey Sachs,
architect of Poland's shock therapy and now part of a team of western
economists advising the new government, would be forthcoming in March or
April. By then the government would have freed the domestic price of oil and
stabilised prices.
With a western stabilisation fund behind it, the government wanted to
introduce a stable exchange rate. Mr Aven said the rate was bound to come
down from its current rate of around Rbs100 to the dollar - he hoped to
between Rbs15 to Rbs35 to the dollar.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920110

