FT921-366

FT  30 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Industry's fear of the unknown - Credit
controls - Tax incentives to encourage investment - Takeover curbs - Levy to
support training


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER, Industrial Editor


LEFTWINGERS used to accuse Mrs Thatcher of turning Britain into the 51st
state of the US. Rightwingers might soon be accusing Labour of wanting to
turn Britain into Germany's 17th land.
For if there is a guiding inspiration to Labour's industrial strategy it is
the stable, regulated, and highly productive German manufacturing sector.
Among business executives, Labour's plans excite nervous apprehension, laced
with ignorance and spiced by a dose of self-interest about their tax bills.
Labour's strategy has four main ingredients:
The focus would shift to supply-side policies to stimulate investment and
promote training as macro-economic policy would be anchored to sterling's
ERM membership.
Direct state intervention and public ownership have largely given way to
regulation of business. The labour market would be regulated by a minimum
wage and a levy to support training; oversight of the privatised utilities
would tighten; competition policy would restrict takeovers in 'the public
interest'; banks and borrowing could be regulated by credit controls.
To offset the risk that the economy would be made less flexible by
regulation, Labour hopes that it would make the economy more productive by
offering tax incentives for investment, and by spending more on education,
training and infrastructure.
Labour would seek to emulate the consensus of Germany's social market by
building a partnership between the public and private sectors, for instance
through private investment in railways and a national investment bank to
gather private investment for public infrastructure projects.
The impact on business would depend on the interaction of these ingredients
over the short, medium and long term.
In the short-run the main risk would be heavy foreign selling of sterling
assets, bringing pressure on the pound and interest rates. If Labour had to
put up interest rates for more than three months the consequences could
become very serious, especially for construction, property and retailing.
Should Labour get through the first few months without its plans being
derailed, business would start to feel the medium-term effects of the
party's industrial strategy.
This package is crafted to deflect business criticism. Labour would carry
over key measures from last month's Budget - a reduction of the uniform
business rate and a halving of the car tax. Many other measures are drawn
directly from proposals made by business groups.
The most potent and costly would be a one-year increase from 25 per cent to
40 per cent in tax allowances for manufacturing companies to invest in plant
and equipment.
This could provoke a temporary surge in investment. Mr Sushil Wadhwani,
director of UK and European Equity Strategy at Goldman Sachs, estimates it
would reduce the cost 1.2 per cent to corporate profits. The National
Institute of Economic and Social Research estimates the move would cost
about Pounds 1.3bn in a full year and increase the level of investment by
6.5 per cent.
These allowances would mainly benefit the motor, chemicals and food
manufacturing industries but bring little joy to brewers and metals and
electronics groups.
Labour estimates that a permanent tax credit worth 25 per cent of any
additional research and development spending would cost Pounds 120m a year
if it boosted business R&D by 10 per cent. This would benefit
science-intensive sectors such as electronics, pharmaceuticals and
engineering.
A scheme to encourage engineering companies with fewer than 500 employees to
invest in new production processes by providing grants worth 25 per cent of
the outlay would have a marginal effect. Its cost, Pounds 40m a year, is
equivalent to just one day's investment by the engineering industry.
House builders, particularly in the south-east, would benefit from Labour's
plan to allow councils to use receipts from council house sales to fund new
building. About Pounds 4.5bn of the Pounds 8bn receipts are held by councils
in the south-east. Construction companies should also benefit if Labour
delivers its commitment to fund extra public infrastructure work.
The utilities, spared the threat of renationalisation, could suffer from
tighter regulation. The 'RPI-minus-X' price formula could be tightened and
Labour might cap the rate of return that utilities can earn to curb
'excessive profits'.
This could hurt British Gas and the water and electric companies, but might
benefit big industrial consumers, such as the steel and chemicals
industries, which complain about electricity prices.
Restrictions on takeovers might be a blow to young acquisitive groups such
as Williams Holdings and Tomkins, which aim to follow the likes of Hanson
and BTR by growing big through acquisition. The restrictions might be
welcomed by some of the managers of the smallest quoted companies - the
bottom 60 per cent - which face the highest probability of being taken over.
Life for small takeover targets might become easier.
Small businesses would be most worried by a Labour victory. Labour plans
streamlined advisory services, measures to combat late payment by big
companies, and technology audits. However, small businesses would gain least
from measures such as higher capital allowances and would suffer most from
the cost of a minimum wage, although this may well only become effective
midway through a Labour government.
Many industrialists will privately admit that for a period of up to two
years Labour might be better for their companies - if not for their own
pockets. They claim their real worries are about the long-term change to the
business climate.
They have two concerns. The first is that Labour has not changed, that
leftwingers and unions would gain influence, public spending and borrowing
would let rip, inflation and interest rates would rise as the work ethic
declines and authority slips from managers.
The second, and more realistic, anxiety is that Labour has changed but its
reformed policies would bring a new hazard: business could be burdened by
regulations which would slowly sap entrepreneurial dynamism while Labour's
supply-side policies prove ineffective as a counterbalance.
In this scenario, business could get German-style regulation without the
compensating benefits; German costs without German levels of productivity.
If Labour were installed on a strictly short-term basis to lift
manufacturing out of recession then a significant minority of industry might
vote for it. But Labour wants more than that: it wants a framework for
business modelled on continental Europe as an alternative to the free-market
capitalism of the 1980s. That would require not grudging acquiescence but
enthusiastic co-operation from business.
As business got used to Labour, with European monetary union in prospect,
perhaps the culture would change. But it seems unlikely. As one of Labour's
economic advisers put it: 'The package will work; Labour has changed. The
problem is that British industrialists have not changed and they do not want
to let it work.'

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920330

