FT924-6370

FT  21 NOV 92 / UK Company News: Caird shares hit by warning


   By RICHARD GOURLAY


SHARES in Caird Group almost halved to 17p after the waste management
companyitny issued a warning about profits and said it would not pay a final
dividend.
Mr John Ashton, chairman, said the City had been expecting pre-tax profits
for the year to be above Pounds 6.9m but that Caird would only make Pounds
4.5m.
The group would still pay the interim and preference dividends and would
look at the ordinary payments again next year.
Mr Ashton said the decline in profits was due to new sites coming onstream
more slowly than expected and falls in the price of landfill of up to 50 per
cent in certain areas.
The slide in the ordinary shares from 33p was accompanied by a 15p fall to
51p in the 7 per cent convertible preference shares.
'We have a highly geared effect,' said Mr Ashton. 'The preference shares are
taking the first Pounds 2.5m of post-tax earnings which is not helping
earnings per share and the ordinary shares.'
'We are going to have to batten down and run the business for cash,' he
said.
Yesterday's profits warning is the latest in a long line of surprises that
Caird has sprung on the City since Mr Peter Linacre, chief executive and a
former stockbroker, began transforming the sleepy property company in 1987.
In October 1989, it raised Pounds 34.5m in the form of convertible
preference shares. While the proceeds enhanced earnings per share by
repaying debt that was costing 16 per cent, these shares have become an
increasing burden now that profits growth has run into a wall.
A year after the rights issue Caird's market value fell 44 per cent as Caird
reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 5.4m, some Pounds 3m lower than
previously expected for the year to June 1990.
Three weeks later Severn Trent, the then recently privatised water company,
launched a Pounds 78m bid for Caird.
Mr Linacre escaped Severn Trent's clutches by deploying the unusual defence
of refusing to confirm a profits forecast made before the bid. Severn Trent
lapsed its bid.
Mr Ashton said Caird's current problems stemmed partly from changes in the
waste disposal site licensing laws which come into effect next April as part
of the 1990 Environment Protection Act.
Before March 31, operators of landfill sites are free to relinquish their
licences and avoid environmental liabilities that should subsequently
emerge. According to Mr Ashton, less scrupulous operators 'are filling their
sites like mad and undermining the price structure'.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

921121

