FT922-7238

FT  20 MAY 92 / Survey of World Banking (8): Low inflation a mixed blesssing
 -UK clearers face two serious post-recession problems


   By PETER MONTAGNON


LAST YEAR was not one which UK bankers will care to remember. After
provisions against bad and doubtful debts of Pounds 6.8bn, the nine English
and Scottish clearing banks made pre-tax profits of just Pounds 2.3bn,
according to a calculation by the US investment bank Shearson Lehman.
It would be nice to think, that, as the economy starts to show signs of
recovery, management could now could sit back and look forward to better
times ahead.
Unfortunately life is not as kind as that. The clearing banks are emerging
from the recession with two serious problems on their plate.
One is their continuing troubles with loans to the property sector, which
may now take many years to sort out. The other is still more fundamental,
and has been thrown into sharp relief by the debate over the future of the
Midland Bank. The banks must somehow find a way of making a satisfactory
return in an overcrowded market where loan demand looks set to remain
sluggish at best.
The environment in which these problems must be resolved is not particularly
propitious. The prospect of low inflation, which should follow from the UK's
membership of the European exchange rate mechanism, may be, as the
government claims, a prerequisite for sustained economic growth.
For a banking industry struggling to come to terms with the
over-indebtedness of its customers, however, it can be more of a hindrance
than a help.
Unlike previous recessions in the property market, inflation is not floating
the sector off the rocks. Property prices, both commercial and residential,
have actually fallen in nominal terms during the recession, exposing lenders
in an unaccustomed way. As real interest rates remain high, the chances of a
speedy turnround look remote. The consequence for the clearing banks looks
likely to be another year of high provisions in 1992, slowing their recovery
from the recession.
Though base rates have fallen by 5 percentage points from their peak of 15
per cent, they remain positive in real terms by some 6 per cent. That means
that loan demand is unlikely to revive strongly in the foreseeable future,
limiting the prospects for the industry to raise its profits from other
forms of lending to offset provisions on property loans.
In the admittedly recessionary year of 1991, the domestic loan books of UK
clearing banks grew by only 2 per cent. The recovery might bring some
improvement, though this may also be offset by a growing trend for large
companies - especially those with the best credit ratings - to re-finance
their debt at attractive fixed rates in the bond market.
The banks are also squeezed, in two ways, by the fall in nominal interest
rates.
First, it reduces the profit they can make by lending out their so-called
'free-capital', such as retained profits. Second, the determination of the
government to track falls in money market rates with politically attractive
cuts in base rates has limited the scope for interest margins to increase as
rates have declined. The situation in the UK is in stark contrast to that in
the US, where the federal funds rate has been cut far more sharply than bank
prime rate.
Worse still, the banks face a competitive environment which requires them to
pay interest on their current accounts. It is thus hardly surprising that
they are now scrambling for other ways of boosting profits and rebuilding
capital after the ravages of the recession.
One consequence is an obsession with boosting fee income, notably through
increased emphasis on life assurance products which can be easily
distributed through the branch network. The clearing banks' collective ratio
of non-interest income to total income rose to nearly 41 per cent in 1991
from 38 per cent in 1990.
There is a limit, however, the extent to which fee income can offset the
impact of a basically stagnant loan book. Clearing banks have come
increasingly under fire for imposing apparently arbitrary and heavy charges
on their retail customers, for example, for unauthorised overdrafts. Small
businessmen, too, have complained vociferously about higher charges.
The best scope for improving underlying profitability thus probably still
lies with further effort on cutting costs, which is where the debate on
Midland's future comes in. Both Lloyds and Midland managed to keep total
operating costs broadly unchanged last year, while those at Barclays rose by
14 per cent and at National Westminster by 7 per cent. As things currently
stand, however, there is not much scope for further cuts. Announcing its
annual results, Midland pointed to the need to spend to maintain and improve
the quality of its services.
The message for the industry is clear. A more radical rationalisation is
needed if efficiency gains are to be realised. The scope for savings could
be enormous, as the Lloyds bid proposal for Midland shows. Lloyds suggests
that annual savings of some Pounds 700m could be generated by amalgamating
the two banks, though 20,000 jobs and perhaps up to 1,000 branches would
disappear in the process.
Whatever the outcome of the LLoyds bid, it seems likely that the process of
rationalisation and branch closures will continue. That is one reason why
many senior executives, even among Lloyds' competitors in the industry,
privately admit to hoping the UK bank will win. A victory for Hongkong and
Shanghai Banking Corporation would strengthen one of the weaker players in
the marketplace, putting everybody else under even greater pressure to
rationalise.
That, more than anything else, is testimony to the sorry state of an
industry, which now sees cutting costs as its best hope for increasing
profits.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920520

