FT924-6179

FT  23 NOV 92 / Leading Article: Last push for Gatt


EUROPEAN COMMUNITY and US farm trade negotiators, not to mention their
leaders, deserve credit for last week's agreement on farm trade. After six
years, the most controversial single topic in the Uruguay Round has almost
been settled. Much needs to be done, not only in farming, but still more in
other areas of the negotiation. Yet the agreement on farm trade shows that
where there is a will, a way can also be found. The remaining obstacles
should yield to comparable determination.
US and EC negotiators will now need the support of the so-called Cairns
Group of agricultural exporters. This they should obtain. Agricultural
exporters may not see this agreement as a giant step for farm policy, but it
is a significant one for the trading system. After 45 years of failure, farm
subsidies are at last subject to internationally agreed limits.
Pressure will now fall on Japan and, to a lesser extent, South Korea. These
hugely successful exporters of manufactures will point to the central place
in their culture played by the cultivation of rice. Negotiators who have
given short shrift to the sensibilities of la France rurale must ignore this
special pleading.
Completion of the farm package is almost the least of the problems. Less
than two months remains if these negotiations are to be completed by January
20, when the American side leaves office. Little more than another month
would remain before the package must be notified to Congress under the
administration's 'fast track' authority.
Acceptable package
It is important that nobody questions the 'draft final act' put forward by
Mr Arthur Dunkel, Gatt director general, a year ago. The US should, for
example, avoid reopening protection of intellectual property. What would
then be left is market access in goods and services, the core of trade
liberalisation. Complex bilateral negotiations have to be completed. But the
chances are good that a one-third cut in tariffs, plus significant
liberalisation of services - both, for the first time, on a global basis -
can be achieved.
The question now is not so much whether negotiators can reach the end of
their negotiation. They can, at the price of giving up their holidays over
Christmas and New Year. The question is rather whether a politically
acceptable package can be agreed.
In the first place, an enfeebled Japanese government might fail to agree to
the required liberalisation of the market for rice. The question, however,
is not whether the Japanese establishment wants to refuse, but whether it
will dare to do so.
In the second place, the job of selling any package to Congress will fall to
Bill Clinton. But he will almost certainly be able to do so if he wants and,
in all likelihood, he will want to. If the worst came to the worst, Mr
Clinton would probably be able to obtain an extension to the 'fast track'
authority as well.
EC agreement
In the third place, the EC might fail to agree to the package at all. In
particular, France might decide that farm liberalisation should be vetoed
under the 'Luxembourg compromise'. The constitutional status of that veto is
uncertain. Yet without it, the deal will be subject to qualified majority
voting. France would lose, unless it were to gain German support, which
seems most unlikely.
Nobody can be unaware of the difficulties the French government faces.
Nevertheless, it must know that this deal will demand few, if any, changes
beyond those already agreed in reforming the common agricultural policy.
Attempting a veto would also be against the interests of France.
Economically, excessive subsidies to agriculture are as costly to France as
to most other EC countries. Politically, veto of an agreement wanted by the
majority of its partners would deal the EC a blow from which it might not
recover. Ratification of the Maastricht treaty by the UK might be
impossible. If the principle of qualified majority voting were flouted in
traditional areas of EC responsibility, Mr Mitterrand's European policy
would be in tatters. Europe is worth a farm deal.
With the end of the Uruguay Round at last in sight, success is desperately
needed. This is not because the round will go near to solving all the
problems of the trading system. Nor is it because figures of Dollars 200bn
for the increase in world trade are more than educated guesses. It is
because a world with a functioning trading system offers hope of a better
future to billions of people. What is needed now is a last big push.

The Financial Times


London Page 14

921123

