FT922-13387

FT  11 APR 92 / The movement that lost its soul: Martin Jacques, former
editor of Marxism Today, on Labour's defeat


   By MARTIN JACQUES


UNTIL THOSE opinion polls on the eve of the election, I, like many others,
thought Labour would form the next government. It was the first time since
1974 that I have thought this. Ever since the Thatcherite revolution of the
1980s, I have been a pessimist about Labour's chances. The attempts at
renewal always seemed to fall far short of what was needed. History demanded
something special, something profound. What was offered always seemed too
narrow and pragmatic. But this time, I thought, maybe . . . I was wrong.
The reason for Labour's defeat does not lie in this campaign. We have to go
back to that crucial period of the 1980s when the relationship between left
and right was redrawn. Thatcher recognised that the Labour movement was
losing its popular base. She comprehensibly took it on and thereby
transformed the parameters of politics. The reason for her success was a
combination of ideology and material change, not least the decline of the
old working class.
Labour's initial response was in kind: it came under the sway of Tony Benn,
who argued that Labour had lost in 1979 because it had strayed from the
verities of socialism. The 1983 election proved this to be unsustainable.
Along came Neil Kinnock who, in his own pragmatic way, saw that many of the
old socialist nostra now had a distinctly hollow ring. Out went public
ownership, 1970s style interventionism, opposition to the European
Community, and unilateralism. The unions and the producer interests were
consigned to the back seat.
There is no doubt that Kinnock was basically right. The problem, though, was
one of motivation and effect. The changes were driven by electoral
exigencies. One by one, those branches of Labour's tree that were deemed to
be electorally unpopular were lopped off. But these amputations left the
patient lifeless. Labour lost its soul. The process was a product of two
factors: electability and a Thatcherite agenda. In so far as it had
intellectual roots, they belonged in the past: to Croslandite revisionism
and the SDP. There was nothing wrong with that - except that its inspiration
derived from the 1950s or 1960s. In contrast, Thatcherism was much more up
to date. So a momentous change was made without an accompanying revival of
intellectual dynamism or energy. Labour's repositioning was, above all, a
marketing exercise.
The evidence is legion. Labour has sought to convey the impression that it
is pro European. Yet in this election it it failed entirely to talk
seriously about the European issue. It has edged towards a radical position
on the constitution, but only the Liberal Democrats were prepared to argue
the case. As the party which has championed the public sector, Labour has
steadfastly clung to a conservative view of reform in the sector. Here is a
party which, rightly, has begun to see itself as a modernising, European
social-democratic party, but which has not been prepared to come out of its
corner, work out exactly what that means and share it with the electorate.
In a situation where Labour has abandoned its past, and the ground rules of
politics have been transformed by the Thatcherite revolution, that is
utterly inadequate.
Labour now faces a task which is truly monumental. With this victory the
Conservatives are now more than half established as the permanent governing
party. This election was the true test. It is not just the magic figure of
four consecutive victories. Even more important is the fact that the Tories
won after they had made the transition from Thatcherism to something rather
wetter. They themselves provided the country with the political choice. It
will now take something truly historic and momentous to shift them. The era
of pragmatic modernisation, which is how one might describe 'Kinnockery', is
not up to the task.
The Kinnock era provided one crucial point of departure. There can and will
be no return to traditional socialist politics. Those days are over. But the
task of defining a progressive, post-socialist alternative to Conservatism
is clearly only beginning. Electoral reform and the new convergence of the
Liberal Democrats and Labour is one prerequisite. But the problem is not
simply electoral arithmetic, as the extraordinarily resilient Conservative
share of the vote demonstrates. A successful progressive alternative will
need to slice into that vote, not simply bring together those who are
already non-Conservatives.
There is one sense in which this election has been part of the European
landscape. Although Europe was barely mentioned in the campaign and there
was no hint of the fragmentation evident in recent elections in Germany,
France and Italy, these contests all have one thing in common. Everywhere
the left is in trouble. The search for a progressive alternative has an
international dimension.
As I contemplated the results of the election on the morning after, my mind
suddenly flashed back to my time at Marxism Today. I did not realise how
profound and enduring its arguments about the decline of the left, the
novelty of Thatcherism and the characteristics of our time were likely to
prove. They seem as relevant now as when they were first written.

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920411

