FT922-4392

FT  05 JUN 92 / Divided feelings about Russia split former USSR into two
camps: Deepening mutual distrust is evolving where once there were hopes of
a loose commonwealth


   By JOHN LLOYD and CHRYSTIA FREELAND


THE post-Soviet states are not evolving towards the loose confederation they
envisaged when they founded the Commonwealth of Independent States six
months ago: instead, they are developing ever deeper mutual hostilities,
within whose framework two alliances are beginning to form  - one pro- and
one anti-Russian.
This is accompanied by an increasing assertiveness on the part of Russian
leaders, including those who came to power on democratic, anti-totalitarian
programmes. Says Mr Sergei Stankevich, a state adviser to Mr Boris Yeltsin,
the Russian president: 'It is important for Russia to defend the legal and
other rights of Russians outside of Russia. If it doesn't, it will seriously
weaken the stature of the Russian president.'
For political leaders in Ukraine, Moldova, Azerbaijan and the three Baltic
states - now emerging as a loose, potentially anti-Russian alliance -
political leaders fear that the old empire is striking back. Ukraine, the
largest of these, is the decisive force in such an alliance - and the
judgment of Mr Mykola Mykhalchenko, political adviser to Mr Leonid Kravchuk,
the Ukrainian president, is widely shared: 'Russia wishes to become the
successor of the old Russian empire. It has an economic crisis and its
leaders are trying to rally the country around nationalist-patriotic ideas.'
Ukrainian leaders and parliamentarians, alarmed by the decision of the
Russian parliament to declare illegal the 1954 transfer of the Crimea from
Russian to Ukrainian jurisdiction, think it is not an isolated action: Mr
Mykhalchenko believes that Russia will make claims for border regions in
Estonia and Kazakhstan as well as eastern Ukraine and Crimea, where there
are areas of majority Russian populations.
The Baltic states are more concerned with continued stationing of Russian
troops on their territories. General Pavel Grachev, the Russian defence
minister, has said that troops will not be pulled out until 1999 - a
timetable all the Baltic states have rejected. Estonia yesterday announced
it was breaking off all talks with Russia on the issue.
Mr Stankevich is indignant over Baltic claims that Russia is behaving like
an imperialist power, especially since, in his and many Russians' view,
legislation on citizenship and language introduced in these states
discriminates against the Russians, who make up some 40 per cent of the
Latvian population and more than 30 per cent in Estonia.
'The independence of the Baltic states was the cause of the Russian
democrats: we cannot be blamed for the imperialist past. But now we are
blamed for the troops being there. Meanwhile, our complaints about the abuse
of human rights of Russians are ignored.'
Moldova is the most alienated of the former Soviet states: its parliament
has gone so far as to consider a declaration of war on Russia. Its militia
is engaged with the forces of the separatist Russian population of the
TransDnestr region, and it suspects that the Russian 14th army is heavily
engaged on the side of the separatists.
Though Ukrainians are as numerous as Russians in the TransDnestr area, they
have tended to stay out of the fighting - and Moldova is careful to
distinguish between them. Moldovan foreign minister Nikolai Tiu visited Kiev
yesterday after talks with Russian ministers - where he stressed that his
government appreciated the neutral stance taken by Ukraine and that distrust
for Russia remained high.
Says Mr Nikon Paslaru, spokesman for the Moldovan presidency: 'The
pro-imperialist tendency has become more evident. Earlier, Russian diplomats
had to take into account the views of other republics. Now, when it has
become clear that the CIS will end, Russia takes off the mask and spits on
everyone else.'
Not on everyone. Russia has a sphere of influence which it is increasingly
defining: it includes the central Asian states, especially Kazakhstan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, with which it has signed treaties of close
co-operation and which, with Armenia, are mostly within the treaty of
collective security, signed last month in Tashkent.
Both Mr Nursultan Nazarbayev, the Kazakh president and Mr Islam Karimov, the
Uzbek president, have made an alliance with Russia the cornerstone of their
policy: Mr Karimov even told the newspaper Pravda that 'Uzbekistan sees no
future for itself without friendship with Russia' - a strong echo of the
flatulent protestations of Soviet The sphere includes Armenia - since that
small, poor republic has discovered that it remains surrounded by Moslem
states at least potentially hostile to it, and needs Russia's support once
more. The 7th Russian Army is likely to stay in place, and Russian support
courted. By contrast, Azerbaijan - with which Armenia is in a state of
undeclared war over the enclave of Nagorno Karabakh - inclines towards
Moldova and Ukraine, from the latter of which have come many officers to act
as technical advisers to the developing Azeri army.
The other states - Belarus, Georgia, Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan - are in
different ways seeking to differentiate themselves from Russia without
provoking it. All, especially Belarus, acknowledge their huge economic
dependence: but they have stayed out of a close, security arrangement.
Georgia has stayed out of the CIS.
On some accounts, the area of legitimate Russian intervention is any former
Soviet state, whether 'friendly' or not. General Grachev earlier this week
said Russia had the right to intervene in any neighbouring state when it
felt there was a danger of foreign interference - a doctrine which could be
used to legitimate a hostile intervention as much as a friendly one.
It is too early to say these two emerging blocs are hostile, and it is
evident that they had contradictory as well as common interests. But on one
side, there is a feeling of the flexing of Russian muscles: on Russia's
side, there is resentment at the imputation of imperialism, yet Russia
insists on a great power status and the definition of a sphere of influence.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920605

