FT923-9770

FT  03 AUG 92 / Small businesses brave harsh trading climate


   By PETER NORMAN


BRITAIN'S manufacturers are facing harsher trading conditions, particularly
among small companies, according to three reports released today.
Small manufacturing companies have suffered a fresh fall in new orders and
are less confident about business prospects than three months ago, according
to the Confederation of British Industry.
The London Chamber of Commerce predicts increasing insolvencies in coming
months among small manufacturing companies in the capital after a worsening
of cashflow in the second quarter of this year.
More broadly, the latest monthly survey of UK purchasing managers says
manufacturing activity has fallen since June while orders have declined
significantly.
The three reports bear out the gloomy conclusions of last week's quarterly
survey of manufacturing trends from the CBI, which pointed to falling output
and further job cuts over the next four months.
Mr Richard Brucciani, chairman of the CBI Small Firms Council, said the
decline in new orders was slower than at any time last year. 'This can
hardly be described as an encouraging development,' he said. 'In April,
small businesses were predicting an increase in business. That failed to
materialise.'
The London Chamber of Commerce found that many of the 242 companies polled
expected falling profits in the next six months and no increase in turnover.
'Small manufacturers are being hit by weak demand, high interest rates and
the late payment of debts,' said Ms Jacqui Ginnane, chief economist.
The Institute of Purchasing and Supply, which claims to represent UK
purchasing managers spending a total of Pounds 250bn a year, said its latest
purchasing managers' index presented a discouraging picture. The index,
which reflects managers' reports about data, including output, new orders
and employment, fell to 48 in July from 50.2 in June and was well below the
55.1 level recorded in April.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920803

