FT924-6123

FT  23 NOV 92 / The Week Ahead: Results Due


COMPETITIVE pressures in the food industry have worsened over the summer
period, and will be commented on this week by both food manufacturers and
retailers.
Argyll, the Safeway supermarket group, should still show a good increase in
interim pre-tax profits when it reports on Tuesday.
Estimates are for a rise from Pounds 177.8m recorded a year ago to Pounds
200m or so this time.
Argyll is expected to have achieved better sales growth than its main
competitors and margins are rising.
On Wednesday Tate & Lyle, the sugar and sweeteners group, will reveal the
damage caused in the US from overcapacity in the sweetener market and the
delay in getting approval for Sucralose, its calorie-free sugar substitute.
Provisions, redundancy costs and the start-up costs for Sucralose will cut
profits for the year to end September from Pounds 234.6m to around Pounds
190m.
Northern Foods by contrast, will on Thursday announce higher interim profits
of Pounds 67 to Pounds 68m against Pounds 55.2m, despite higher interest and
depreciation charges and a competitive squeeze on some divisions.
Growth in earnings per share will be limited after last year's rights issue
to pay for the Express acquisition.
Kwik Save is expected on Wednesday to report an increase of about 10 per
cent in pre-tax profits for the year ended August to about Pounds 112m from
Pounds 101.7m.
Its market share is thought to have increased from 7.6 per cent a year ago
to around 9 per cent.
Interim results from Thorn-EMI on Tuesday are expected to provide little
excitement as the music business has been in the doldrums.
Thorn itself has warned the City not to expect too much while the newly
acquired Virgin music business will have made virtually no contribution in
the first half.
The rental business, however, has remained fairly resilient and forecasts
for the interim are for around Pounds 95m (Pounds 94.9m).
Earnings are likely to be diluted by about 17 per cent to 15p due to the
Virgin acquisition.
Thorn is likely to face questioning from analysts about the impact of the
slowdown in the music market, particularly in Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921123

