FT921-375

FT  30 MAR 92 / Election 1992: Fiery leftists' ardour is dampened


   By RALPH ATKINS


THE DRIZZLE is turning to a downpour in Derby. About 60 mostly elderly
voters have forsaken television's Inspector Morse to sit on red plastic
chairs at Murray Park Community School.
Before them, Michael Meacher, Labour's social security spokesman, is hurling
hatred at the government. His subject is the poor. Tall and dark-haired, his
slight lisp makes him appear to spit as he vents anger. He is regarded as
among the most leftwing of Labour's shadow cabinet. He is not telegenic or
lovable; he is too much the old fashioned socialist to be given a high
profile by national strategists.
'From the scale of greed, of selfishness and materialism for which the
Tories stand, these people have drawn a blank,' he says. The ending of the
earnings link for state pensions? 'Frankly it puts the Maxwell robberies
into a kind of kid's play.'
He derides as a 'searing indictment' the lot of those on income support. 'It
is now for them a more spartan regime than it is in prison,' he says. 'I'm
sick and tired of hearing people on six-figure salaries saying there isn't
the money to help those who spend in a year what they spend in a week.'
The audience listens politely. Beside Meacher sits Margaret Beckett, Labour
candidate in Derby South and the serenely tough shadow chief secretary to
the Treasury.
Her effect is to control what Meacher says. He jokes about being 'squeaky
clean' in his spending pledges. It is like a Howitzer firing blanks.
Other flammable socialists in the shadow cabinet have been sidelined. Frank
Dobson, energy spokesman, is scarcely seen on television.
Transport spokesman John Prescott's bilious contempt of the government has
been re-directed. He promises new schemes but says the finance will come
from the private sector.
A reporter at a press conference asks if this is the future of socialism?
'I've no worry about socialism getting its money from wherever it comes,'
pants Prescott.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920330

