FT923-9534

FT  05 AUG 92 / Russian reforms 'near to collapse'


   By JOHN LLOYD


   MOSCOW


MR Arkady Volsky, the powerful head of the Russian Union of Industrialists
and Entrepreneurs, said yesterday that reform in Russia was 'on the edge of
collapse', and called for immediate policy changes.
His call was backed by leaders of the Civic Union, the political bloc which
Mr Volsky helped form. They said that if the government did not adopt an
alternative reform programme to be presented in mid-September, President
Boris Yeltsin should ask for its resignation.
Mr Joseph Diskin, a member of the Civic Union's consultative council and the
author of the alternative programme, said there were no longer any 'good
options' left for the economy, and only the enforcement of order could
prevent catastrophe. Income tax should rise, fuel prices should be fixed,
and the government must ensure that the increasingly separatist regions of
Russia pay federal taxes - by force if necessary.
Mr Volsky is widely viewed as a prime minister-in-waiting, or at least as a
figure who can dictate policies to the government. His new, and more extreme
than before, attack on the government comes at a time when it has
substantially relaxed its grip over credits to enterprises. It is also
signalling that it may not be able to meet the targets of 9 per cent
inflation and a budget deficit at 5 per cent of GNP by the end of the year,
which it agreed with the International Monetary Fund in order to receive a
Dollars 1bn (Pounds 523m) advance this month.
International experts in Moscow see these targets as unattainable.
At the same time, a struggle has broken out between the government and Mr
Victor Gerashchenko, acting chairman of the Central Bank, over Mr
Gerashchenko's intention to provide Rbs1,000bn in credits to enterprises to
help them pay off Rbs3,000bn of debts which they have contracted over the
past few months.
Mr Andrei Nechayev, the economics minister, said yesterday he believed the
bank would soon cancel the order it sent out to commercial banks authorising
the provision of credit. He was immediately contradicted by Mr Gerashchenko,
who said in an interview with Izvestia that he had no such intention -
though he might 'take the government's views into account'.
Heading for a showdown, Page 12

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920805

