FT923-10924

FT  28 JUL 92 / UK Company News: Chairman goes as Mosaic signals direction
change


   By PAUL CHEESERIGHT, Midlands Correspondent


THE BOARD of Mosaic Investments, the acquisitive mini-conglomerate based in
Birmingham, has dismissed Mr Brian Disbury, its Pounds 130,000 a year
executive chairman, and signalled a change in direction against a background
of falling profits.
Yesterday it announced that pre-tax profits for the year ended April 30 had
fallen from Pounds 7.56m to Pounds 4.24m. The decline was not unexpected as
last March the group issued a profits warning and saw its share price lose
40 per cent of its value in a single day.
Yesterday the price remained at 95p, still hovering at the bottom of its
1992 trading range.
Mr Disbury was relieved of his position last Friday. 'Compensation terms are
still being discussed,' the group said.
While a replacement for Mr Disbury is sought, Mr Greg Hutchings, a
non-executive member of the board since 1987 - the year Mr Disbury became
chief executive - will act as non-executive chairman. Mr Hutchings is the
chief executive of Tomkins, also an aggressive but a much larger
conglomerate.
The departure of Mr Disbury, allied to the closure or disposal of
loss-making interests and the sale, earlier this month for Pounds 10.4m, of
the group's engineering and automotive division to its management, showed
that Mosaic had abandoned its policy of diverse growth.
The search for small niche companies operating in varied markets - a policy
with which Mr Disbury was associated - is being replaced by a more focused
approach concentrating on display and packaging products and specialised
promotion services.
'What we are determined to do is to change direction in some respects,' said
Mr Leon Angrave, managing director. 'If we were going to move forward and
restore credibility with our friends in the City, we needed to be under
different leadership,' he added.
A group statement observed that a change in leadership had been necessary
for some months. Mr Disbury, who had obviously been at odds with his board,
refused yesterday to dwell on the situation: 'Policy differences there might
have been, but there are certain ways of going about things - that's all
I'll say.'
Mosaic was caught by the length of the recession. Mr Angrave acknowledged
that the position deteriorated shortly after the announcement, last
December, of the first half figures. Then the group talked of the rewards
'of serving many different markets' and of its confidence in 'a satisfactory
outcome for the full year.'
The first half accounted for over 75 per cent of the full year profits,
which were generated on turnover of Pounds 48.6m (Pounds 42.8m). Earnings
per share were halved to 16.26p (32.39p) but the dividend is held at 9.25p
with a final of 5.5p.
Although Mosaic said that its current trading was 'mixed' and there was no
sign of sustained economic recovery, the sale of its engineering and
automotive business had eliminated debt. Mr Hutchings said the group was now
'in a position to face the continuing recession with resilience.'

The Financial Times


London Page 19

920728

