FT922-3975

FT  09 JUN 92 / The FT Review of Business Books (13): IBM's humble pie -
Industry


   By ALAN CANE


THE SILVERLAKE PROJECT by Roy Bauer et al. Oxford Pounds 20, 236 pages
SILVERLAKE illustrates how to eat humble pie without suffering indigestion
in public. The eponymous lake is a lagoon in Rochester, Minnesota, a sleepy
mid-Western town famous for wheat and the Mayo Clinic. It is also the
internal code name for a family of computers which International Business
Machines (IBM) designed there between 1985 and 1988.
The computers, the mid-range AS/400 family, are now among the most
successful products that IBM, the world's largest computer manufacturer, has
developed. Silverlake is not, however, about technology. Rather, it is a
study of how IBM, the archetypal market-driven company, lost contact with
customers and markets in the 1980s and the measures it has been forced to
adopt to retrieve the situation.
On the way, IBM Rochester was awarded America's prime business quality
accolade, the Malcolm Baldridge Award. This is no empty honour, but the
measure of a world class operation. The feat which won Rochester the
Baldridge was to build a competitive, innovative computer family in two
years rather than the usual four, turning many of IBM's shibboleths on their
heads in the process. IBM worshipped technological excellence; Rochester
asked customers what they wanted and gave it to them. IBM made a religion of
secrecy; almost everything about Silverlake was known before it was
launched, through innumerable meetings with customers, the press and
software developers. IBM was stiffly hierarchical; Rochester gave its people
authority and the resources to make their decisions count. IBM is now
attempting to spread these ideas through the rest of the company.
Silverlake the Computer is a product of endless working groups and
troubleshooting teams. Silverlake the Book, seems to have been produced the
same way. Three of the key Rochester executives collaborated in the writing
as well as Jerry Wind, Lauder Professor at the Wharton Business School, and
Patrick Houston, a writer seemingly employed to knock the manuscript into
shape.
The result, alas, is dry and two dimensional. It fulfils neither the role of
continuous narrative nor management text, although it aspires to both. (It
lists, for example, ten principles of general management which contributed
to Rochester's success and which the authors believe have general
applicability.)
It is no Soul of a New Machine, Tracy Kidder's rollicking book about Data
General in the 1970s. Silverlake's characters are crudely drawn and left
emaciated on the page. The director of the Rochester development laboratory,
Tom Furey, for example, is given credit for developing the vision which
inspired the Silverlake development. Yet little is said to explain the
motivation or leadership qualities of this pivotal character.
On the other hand, much is made of the isolation of Rochester, of the
feelings among executives there that they were staffing an outpost of the
empire of which not much was expected. One wonders whether it was easier for
these self-confessed 'hicks . . . as far removed from the power centres of
corporate America as you could get' to expose the sluggishness, marketing
ineptitude and technological arrogance which remain at the root of IBM's
problems, than for those at the centre of the company.
I visited Rochester once and was duly impressed by its sense of pride in its
Baldridge Award. The fine lettering commemorating the award on a
complimentary, US-made ballpoint pen wore off within days.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920609

