FT923-15720

FT  01 JUL 92 / Europe, the state of the union: Jokers in single market pack


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


With the Danes' rejection of the Maastricht treaty, the EC's future has been
thrown into uncertainty. Today Britain takes over as president of the
Community. Can John Major give it new direction? In a special four page
pull-out FT writers assess the prospects
JUST BEFORE midnight on December 31 a match will be put to the first in a
chain of bonfires lit to mark the end of the British presidency of the
European Community.
Those beacons should also celebrate the achievement of the single European
market - one of the British presidency's principal aims, and the culmination
of seven years' hard work since Lord Cockfield, then EC internal market
commissioner, kindled the first flame in June 1985.
But however joyful the celebrations, however vigorous the back-slapping, and
however useful the measures which will come into force on January 1, 1993,
the project is riddled with actual and potential problems, linked to the
completion, implementation and enforcement of the Cockfield programme.
Until June 2, when Denmark voted 'no' to the Maastricht treaty, sins of
omission looked likely to be the biggest stain on the virtue of the single
market. Internal market hardliners argued that even if Lord Cockfield's
target of nearly 300 measures was achieved, free movement of goods, persons,
services and capital would be hampered by derogations (time limited
exceptions), deferrals and the EC's understandable tendency to ignore
politically sensitive candidates for harmonisation.
But the Danish referendum result has focused the attention of nervous EC
governments on the more pressing problem of subsidiarity - the real or
imagined 'sins of Commission'.
This concern is easier to understand if one recalls that this is the same
single market which spawned a series of notorious 'rows' between Brussels
and member states over alleged threats to the British sausage and the
prawn-cocktail-flavoured crisp, the Spanish tilde, German beer and countless
other objects of national pride.
Critics of the Commission's supposed over-centralising tendency say such
apparent meddling in the nooks and crannies of Europe's daily life was one
reason for the Danes' narrow rejection of Maastricht.
Commission officials are quick to stress that single market legislation is
the direct result of the EC leaders' decision to sign the Single European
Act in 1986, and that each measure is debated by ministers and their
officials before it is agreed. What is more, they say, ministers are happy
to hide behind 'Commission plans' if it shields them from domestic political
flak.
But the criticism has struck a chord with Mr Jacques Delors, the Commission
president. Since the Danish vote he has regularly underlined the fact that
January 1, 1993 should end the wave of EC single market legislation, and
last week he suggested that the principle of subsidiarity could override the
objective of a flawless single market.
That creates a new headache which the Commission, Britain and the other
states must try to solve over the next six months. How can the Community
ensure implementation and enforcement of measures without encouraging an
image of the EC as a haven for nit-picking legislators? And at what point
will member states settle for an imperfect single market in the interests of
subsidiarity?
This is a particularly delicate problem for the British government. Although
it is a strong supporter of the single market and meticulous in its
attention to the detailed impact of harmonising measures, many Brussels
bureaucrats believe it has also contributed to the poor image of the
Commission.
A committee of experts, chaired by Mr Peter Sutherland, competition
commissioner from 1984 to 1988, is examining ways of ensuring the European
playing field is properly levelled and stays level after 1992. With an eye
to the subsidiarity principle, some form of co-operation between member
states is certain to be at the heart of the committee's proposals. That
could be combined with an enhanced role for national courts.
For example, a Dutch widget-manufacturer having difficulty exporting to
Spain after 1992 could appeal to an arbitration council - a sort of clearing
house for single market concerns - or take his complaint to a national
court, thus relieving the Commission and European Court of the burden.
But one senior Commission official points out that such solutions have
several fundamental flaws, which could lead to new distortions of the
market. 'The problem is that national enforcing machinery is very varied,
quite apart from the problem of which national authority is more efficient.
Even those which are equally efficient are efficient in different ways.'
At the same time, the Commission would still have a role as watchdog, and
national courts' decisions on EC law would still be subject to appeal to the
European Court. The burden on the central institutions would be almost as
great.
As for a 'de minimis' rule, establishing once and for all that the
Commission would only intervene in large cases of market distortion - that
solution might hamper the development of the internal market for the small
and medium-sized enterprises which Brussels believes are at the heart of
future European prosperity. 'I'm a bit reluctant to accept that an obstacle
to free trade which puts a small firm out of business is less important than
something which has an impact on a big company,' says the same Brussels
official.
In the meantime, the British presidency has to work towards the symbolic
completion of the internal market. Much of it is already there. The final
directive giving insurance companies a single European passport was slotted
into place at Monday's meeting of finance ministers, for example, and the
essentials of a single market for banks have been agreed. Mutual recognition
of qualifications - praised by Mr Delors last week as a prime example of
trust between member states - has also been achieved, allowing EC citizens
to work in any Community country.
But apart from the practical difficulties which may arise after January 1,
there are still some notable omissions.
Mr Ben Patterson, a British MEP, is preparing a report on the internal
market which will be presented to the European parliament in Strasbourg next
week. 'What's becoming quite clear is that there are a lot of quite tricky
tidying-up matters which need to be done,' he says. 'If you're talking about
having a complete single market as Big Ben strikes midnight on December 31,
we're not going to have it.'
Politically, the trickiest outstanding objective is an end to border
controls on people by 1993, which could be scuppered by British opposition.
In the economic field, however, it is Britain which will have its work cut
out persuading member states to liberalise EC road haulage,
telecommunications (the UK wants an end to monopolies over ordinary phone
calls) and the energy market. All are priorities for the UK, but energy and
telecoms are such sensitive national interests that Lord Cockfield did not
even include them in his original list of measures.
Even getting close to a full house of single market measures during the next
six months will require some sleight of hand and a great deal of hard work
by Community institutions. Some redundant or unwanted measures may be
postponed or dropped altogether. Britain could also find itself cajoling
ministers into extra meetings and frog-marching MEPs into special plenary
sessions of the parliament to clear the backlog of single market measures.
'One thing is sure,' says a British official, 'we will make sure that by the
end of the year we will have got between 90 and 95 per cent (of the original
Cockfield measures).'
Whether the outstanding directives are then used to light the New Year's Eve
bonfire will presumably depend on how sensitive member states are by that
stage about the pernicious influence of Community legislation.
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                     SINGLE MARKET LEGISLATION
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Outstanding issues given priority by UK presidency
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Tax treatment for losses of subsidiaries in another member state
Value added tax (including binding directive on VAT rates)
Excise duties
Excise structure
Agriculture measures (health standards, plant protection, EC law on
plant breeders)
Standards on food irradiation
European Company Statute (voluntary harmonisation of company law)
EC trade-mark office
Legal protection of biotechnological inventions
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Other outstanding issues
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Aujesky's Disease (pigs)
Second revision of the safeguard clause concerning the veterinary sector
Freedom of movement and right of residence for paid workers and their
families
Rules on cross-border mergers (10th company law directive)
Compulsory harmonisation of company law (5th directive)
Takeover rules (13th directive)
Rules relating to tax arrangements for carry-over of losses
12th VAT directive concerning expenditure on which tax is not deductible
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920701

