FT923-10683

FT  29 JUL 92 / South Korea finds solace in slowdown: Recent statistics
indicate the heat is off the economy


   By JOHN BURTON


   SEOUL


GOVERNMENT officials in Seoul have greeted a recent raft of statistics with
ostensible relief as the figures indicate that the overheated economy is
cooling down.
The GNP growth rate during the first half of 1992 slowed to 7.3 per cent
against 9.3 per cent a year ago, according to the Economic Planning Board
(EPB), the main economic policy agency. Inflation was almost halved to 3.8
per cent from 6.2 per cent and the current account deficit shrank to Dollars
4.1bn (Pounds 2.1bn) from Dollars 5.5bn.
The improvement is mainly the result of a strict monetary policy which has
reined in domestic demand, reduced imports and narrowed the trade deficit.
Massive public construction projects, which fueled inflationary pressure
over the last three years, have also been curbed and spending on public
construction next year will be frozen at this year's level.
Moreover, the government has achieved unexpected success in persuading trade
unions to lower their pay demands. Wage growth could slow to around 10 per
cent this year against the annual rate of 20 per cent over the past five
years.
The government is hoping that the good economic news will bolster the
fortunes of the ruling Democratic Liberal party in December's presidential
elections where the economy is expected to be an issue.
But unfortunately, public attention has focused on many negative
consequences of its monetary policy. Bankruptcies jumped 66 per cent in the
first half of 1992, reaching a record high. The figures include the failure
of 18 listed companies, which undermined investor confidence and depressed
the stock market.
None the less, the government appears determined to curb money supply during
the second half of the year and to implement an austerity programme to
include a review of defence spending, despite the potential military threat
from North Korea.
The planning board has committed itself to limit this year's growth in the
broad M2 measure of money supply to 18.5 per cent against 18.6 per cent in
1991. This follows an average growth rate of 19 per cent in the second half
of the 1980s.
The Bank of Korea, the country's central bank and a strong advocate of the
tight monetary policy, recently stated that the government is progressing
toward its target of a 'triple seven' economy: a 7 per cent GNP growth rate,
7 per cent inflation and a Dollars 7bn current account deficit.
The conservative bank predicts that the economy will grow 7.3 per cent
against 8.4 per cent in 1991 and that inflation will slow to 8 per cent from
9.3 per cent last year.
The current account deficit is projected to shrink to Dollars 6.7bn from
Dollars 8.7bn in 1991 as the trade deficit narrows to Dollars 4.3bn. Exports
will rise by 9 per cent, reflecting a recovery in overseas markets and the
depreciation of the won. Imports are forecast to grow by 5.6 per cent,
although rising oil prices remain a source of concern.
Officials continue to claim that the economy will stabilise within two
years. The prospect of lower inflation and falling interest rates will
accelerate liberalisation of the antiquated financial system, which is
hampering performance by keeping interest rates high.
The government has promised to implement financial liberalisation measures,
including interest rate deregulation and the free flow of capital, once the
economy improves. In one sign of increased confidence, the Ministry of
Finance recently announced that some of these steps scheduled to take effect
after 1994 would be introduced ahead of schedule.
Business leaders, including the Federation of Korean Industries, are warning
that the economy is heading for a crash landing and are clamouring for
easier credit.
Corporate bond rates are almost 17 per cent, although they have gradually
fallen in recent months. Small and medium-sized businesses have to pay even
higher rates on the secondary market since they have difficulty in getting
bank loans. The credit squeeze, combined with sluggish sales demand, is
causing the wave of bankruptcies.
The government plans to adopt measures to funnel more credit to smaller
companies to save them from bankruptcy. Banks will be required to direct 45
per cent of their lending volume to small concerns, an increase of 5 per
cent. Moreover, the government will help guarantee loans made to small
companies by short-term finance companies.
Meanwhile, steps to reduce loans to the country's industrial conglomerates
are being taken. The government claims that borrowing by the conglomerates,
or chaebol, are depriving the small business sector of capital. A freeze has
been imposed on cross loan guarantees among chaebol subsidiaries.
Many securities analysts believe that the corporate sector is exaggerating
the extent of its problems. They predict that earnings for most of the big
business groups will increase next year as interest rates fall.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920729

