FT921-15427

FT  10 JAN 92 / UK Company News: Missing Maxwell funds include Scitex
proceeds


   By ROBERT PESTON and RAYMOND SNODDY


INVESTIGATORS have dis-covered that Pounds 107m of the funds missing from
the Maxwell pension funds are the proceeds which should have been remitted
from the sale of a 15 per cent holding in Scitex, the Israeli manufacturer
of electronic typesetting equipment.
The shares were sold in October. However, the proceeds were taken by Robert
Maxwell Group, one of the big Maxwell private companies, according to
confidential documents prepared by Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte, the
accountancy firm which carried out the first investigation of the collapse
of the Maxwell empire.
The disclosure that the pension funds had owned the Scitex shares is a
surprise.
Mr Maxwell always implied that he had made the investment with his own money
and was feted in Israel for having made substantial investments.
In October, he announced the sale of the shares on notepaper headed 'Robert
Maxwell Group'. In the press release, he said that the shares had been
bought originally by Robert Maxwell Group in 1989 and the clear implication
was that Robert Maxwell Group was also the seller.
The press release refers to the disposal of a 19 per cent stake in Scitex.
Arthur Andersen, the accountants acting as administrators to the Maxwell
private companies, said yesterday that between 70 per cent and 80 per cent
of those had been owned by the common investment fund of the Maxwell pension
funds and not by Robert Maxwell Group.
Mr Maxwell had secretly sold the shares to the pension funds in June 1990.
But pensioners never learned of the deal, because the most recent annual
reports they received covered the funds' activities in the year to April 5
1990.
The disclosure that Mr Maxwell was using pensioners' assets to make his
Israeli investments - and not his own money - may affect Mr Maxwell's
reputation in Israel, where he was buried in a ceremony worthy of a national
hero.
Mr Maxwell also used pension fund money to acquire a stake in Teva, an
Israeli pharmaceutical company. These Teva shares, worth Pounds 44m, were
also transferred out of the pension funds.
Coopers' report says the shares were pledged as security against the Maxwell
private company's loans from National Westminster, the UK clearing bank,
Lehman Brothers, the US investment bank, and Credit Suisse, the Swiss Bank.
The pension funds are trying to reclaim the Teva shares and may resort to
legal action.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920110

