FT924-6028

FT  24 NOV 92 / Dirty oil in Japan's political machine: Scandal hearings
that could end a faction's dominance


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER


THE central pillar of Japanese politics looks set to crumble.
That pillar is the Takeshita faction, the largest grouping within the ruling
Liberal Democratic party. It has dominated Japanese politics since the
mid-1970s when it was led in an earlier incarnation by then prime minister
Mr Kakuei Tanaka.
It has made and broken Japanese prime ministers. Its power is recognised in
the White House where its leaders visit for talks separately from the
Japanese cabinet.
On Thursday Mr Noboru Takeshita, the faction's titular head, will give sworn
testimony to parliament over his role in the Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin scandal.
This will give an official airing to allegations that in 1987 his supporters
enlisted the help of the then leader of Japan's largest organised crime
syndicate to quell a right-wing campaign against Mr Takeshita's bid to
become prime minister.
The exposure could signal the demise of Mr Takeshita's political authority,
at a time when the faction's leadership is extremely unstable.
Mr Takeshita brought together the alliance which supports Mr Keizo Obuchi,
the faction boss recently elected to replace Mr Shin Kanemaru, who was
forced to resign after admitting he had received an illegal donation of
Y500m (Pounds 2.7m) from Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin, a trucking company. That
alliance could fall apart without Mr Takeshita's authority to hold it
together.
Meanwhile Mr Ichiro Ozawa, the faction's crown prince, and Mr Tsutomu Hata,
the finance minister, are preparing to split from the faction, taking about
36 members of the parliament's lower house with them.
Scandals and factional power struggles are the lifeblood of Japanese
politics. There have been 18 political scandals since 1945. Many have
involved larger sums than the Tokyo Sagawa Kyubin case and some have led to
the resignations of serving prime ministers without leaving any lasting mark
on the political system.
How far the consequences in this scandal extend will depend on two central
characters - Mr Ozawa and Mr Kiichi Miyazawa, the prime minister.
Mr Ozawa is an ambivalent politician. He has risen to the top as an insider,
a dealmaker and money-raiser, first the protege of Mr Tanaka and then Mr
Kanemaru. He masterminded the LDP's 1990 election victory when many thought
the party risked losing its lower-house majority. It is now thought this
victory was funded with Sagawa Kyubin's donations.
Only two months ago he apologised to the Takeshita faction for failing to
protect Mr Kanemaru from a probe into his illegal dealings. He then fought
an unsuccessful campaign to claim the faction leadership as the chosen
successor of the disgraced kingmaker.
However, since his bid for power was thwarted, Mr Ozawa has sought to
transform himself into the standard bearer of a younger generation of
political leaders. He claims to be fired with a quasi-nationalist mission,
to modernise the country's inward-looking political institutions so that
Japan can rightfully claim and responsibly wield its growing international
power.
In an interview in Bungei Shinju, a political magazine, he explained: 'In
the cold war era Japan did not need a political view, the only political
concern was how to divide up the budget. Japan enjoyed its economic
prosperity thanks to support from the US. Now the cold war is over Japan
must change its political structure to have a responsibility to the world.'
The ambiguity in Mr Ozawa's position makes it difficult to predict how he
might wield the power of the new faction.
Some radical possibilities are being suggested by Tokyo's political rumour
mill. One idea is that the government's unpopularity over the Sagawa scandal
may force a vote of no-confidence in the Miyazawa government. If Mr Ozawa's
36 members abstained, Mr Miyazawa could lose, which would bring down the
government.
This might force the LDP to call an election while its popularity is low
because of the potent combination of scandal and gathering recession. There
is a precedent: in 1980 the Ohira government was brought down when 69
dissident LDP members abstained in a no-confidence vote.
An even more radical possibility is that the Ozawa forces may ally with
younger members of the Socialist and trade union parties to create a
cross-party grouping to campaign for an overhaul of Japan's electoral and
political funding system. In private, supporters of Mr Ozawa and Mr Hata
claim they have already calculated how many non-LDP politicians would join a
new grouping.
Mr Shigezou Hayasaka, a leading political analyst, said: 'Ozawa is one of
the few politicians who could change Japanese politics. This could be the
first step towards re-organising Japanese politics, including the opposition
parties.'
The Takeshita faction's weakness may provide Mr Miyazawa with an opportunity
to assert his independence by working in alliance with Mr Ozawa and the
LDP's other main factions, the Mitsuzuka and Watanabe factions.
Creating such an alliance would be fraught with difficulty. It could be
sealed only by offering the Ozawa faction a share of the seats in the
cabinet which could enrage the Takeshita faction.
In the past week Mr Miyazawa has sought to regain the political initiative,
taking charge of the LDP's often confused response to the Sagawa Kyubin
case, and pledging that the 1993 budget will be expansionary to allay
business criticism that economic policy is being overlooked by the
concentration on the scandal.
Yet Mr Miyazawa, a former bureaucrat, may lack the strength to stamp his
authority on the party, particularly at a time when it will be beset by
crises. The economy is mired in a deep downturn, the Sagawa Kyubin scandal
is not running out of steam and calls for political reform are becoming more
insistent. At the same time, the world anxiously expects Tokyo to seal the
Uruguay Round of trade talks under the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade by facing down its powerful agricultural lobby and pledging to open up
its protected rice market.
Mr Ozawa can afford to wait and watch, keeping his options open. Mr
Miyazawa's government will be making policy on the run for the foreseeable
future.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921124

