FT922-13257

FT  13 APR 92 / Major focuses on industry


   By PHILIP STEPHENS, Political Editor


MR JOHN MAJOR has put government support for British industry at the centre
of his post-election strategy with the appointment of Mr Michael Heseltine
to head an enlarged Department of Trade and Industry.
Mr Heseltine's move, part of a weekend cabinet reshuffle which saw Mr Norman
Lamont confirmed as chancellor, was described by senior Whitehall officials
as an attempt to make Mr Major's administration more 'industry-friendly'.
The reshuffle, the first real opportunity Mr Major has had to stamp his
authority on the cabinet since taking over from Mrs Margaret Thatcher 16
months ago, saw a large-scale redistribution of cabinet responsibilities.
Mr Kenneth Baker, the former home secretary, and Mr Tom King, the former
defence secretary, were among four ministers to lose their jobs. Among the
newcomers, Mr Michael Portillo, an unapologetic Thatcherite on economic
policy, takes charge of public spending as the new chief secretary.
The new cabinet line-up, with Mr Kenneth Clarke promoted to home secretary
and Mr John Patten given responsibility for education, signals Mr Major's
intention of giving the government a more responsive image while sticking to
the core of its economic strategy.
The prime minister has balanced promotions for those on the left and centre
of his party with comparable moves for the most prominent figures on the
right. Mr Michael Howard, a leading free-marketeer, takes over an expanded
environment department.
Some ministers had expected Mr Lamont to be moved from the Treasury, but Mr
Major was said to have been impressed by the chancellor's determination to
curb inflation in the approach to the election. Mr Lamont will also be a key
figure in piloting through the House of Commons legislation to give effect
to the treaty on economic and monetary union agreed at Maastricht.
Mr Major's decision to reward Mr Heseltine for his vigorous role in the
election campaign will give the DTI much greater influence in shaping policy
towards business. He will take the department of employment's previous
responsibilities for small businesses and the DTI will also take charge of
the oil and coal industries.
The European Market, Page 2
Lex, Page 16
How Mr Major's wares are seen overseas, Page 19

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920413

