FT921-11953

FT  29 JAN 92 / German money supply rises at rate of 9.5%: Soaring M3 figure
dashes hope for interest rate cut


   By QUENTIN PEEL


   BONN


BROAD money supply in Germany increased at an annual rate of 9.5 per cent in
the last three months of 1991, after a further sharp acceleration in
December, the Bundesbank announced yesterday.
The figures were cited yesterday as clear justification for the bank's move
in raising interest rates by a half percentage point last month, and suggest
there is little likelihood of any relaxation in its determination to bring
inflation in the economy under control.
The latest figures show that in December M3 money supply - the measure which
includes bank deposits of up to four years' term, and other savings accounts
as well as cash in circulation and current accounts - increased by 5.7 per
cent compared with the figure in December 1990, against 5.1 per cent in
November and 4.7 per cent in October.
The acceleration in the growth of money supply was fuelled primarily by the
expansion of credit from commercial banks to both enterprises and
individuals, the central bank figures show, with rises respectively of 12
and 14 per cent.
Over the last six months of the year, M3 money supply increased at an annual
rate of 8 per cent, and over the last three months, by 9.5 per cent,
according to Dr Otmar Issing, a member of the Bundesbank management board,
speaking in Bonn yesterday.
'In overall economic terms, everything is certainly not ideal,' he told a
conference on investing in Germany. The current inflation rate of over 4 per
cent was 'disturbingly high.'
'A central bank which is duty bound to preserve price stability cannot be
satisfied with that,' he added. 'Our task must be to protect the credibility
of monetary growth by bringing it back within the growth framework (of 3.5
to 5.5 per cent).'
The Bundesbank also had an international responsibility to preserve D-Mark
stability, he said. 'However unwelcome the consequences of a strict monetary
policy may be in one or another case. . . . the Bundesbank must maintain its
anchor role and take the necessary measures to preserve it.'
Monetary stability was an essential element in the attraction of Germany as
an investment destination, he said. But monetary policy alone could not make
it attractive. On the other hand, he underlined that longer-term capital
market interest rates actually fell in Germany after the Bundesbank raised
its discount and Lombard rates in December, a demonstration of trust in the
policy of monetary stability it represented. Dr Issing left his audience in
no doubt about the central bank's continuing worries about the high level of
public sector debt, arising from the state governments, and the Treuhand
privatisation agency in the east, as well as from central government.
'Regardless of the origin of state debt, we are running the risk of all the
charges suffered by other countries with unrestrained state debt: high
interest rates, excessive burdens on private investment capacity, and
restriction of the room for manoeuvre of financial policy,' he said.
It was now essential that there was a containment of public sector
consumption, dismantling of state subsidies, and to a much more radical
extent than hitherto, cutting back projects in the west of the country to
finance recovery in the east.
As for the current wage demands, there would be serious dangers for both
stability and economic growth if wage rises in both east and west continued
at the level of 1991. 'A complete change of thinking is needed,' he said.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920129

