FT922-565

FT  26 JUN 92 / UN may consider military force to end Bosnia fighting


   By ROBERT MAUTHNER, Diplomatic Editor and DAVID BUCHAN


   LONDON, LISBON


INTERNATIONAL military intervention in Bosnia may be considered by the
United Nations Security Council within the next week, if ceasefires in the
region continue to break down.
European Community heads of government meeting in Lisbon today are also
expected to express their willingness in principle to support intervention.
The five permanent Security Council members have been holding intense
consultations over the last few days on stepping up sanctions against
Serbia.
It is widely expected that, within the next week, the council will be asked
to approve a resolution which could even go as far as providing for
international military intervention in Bosnia.
At talks in London between Mr Edward Perkins, US ambassador to the UN, and
senior Foreign Office officials, there was general agreement on the need for
urgent action to stop the slaughter of civilians in Bosnia and to allow
Sarajevo airport to be opened to humanitarian supplies.
Whether such action would include the use of military force remains to be
decided. But Mr James Baker, US secretary of state, said this week the US
had not ruled out participation in 'some multilateral operation'.
Since then, officials say the 'permanent five' have talked in terms of
military intervention if Serb militias continue to obstruct UN relief
operations in Sarajevo and to stop relief passing through the city's
airport.
The nine-nation Western European Union might be among organisations called
upon by the UN to supply military forces for the region. A newly constituted
ad hoc group of WEU foreign and defence ministry officials is due to meet in
London today to discuss contingency plans for the dispatch of joint military
units to flash-points such as Yugoslavia.
WEU ministers agreed in Bonn last week to give the organisation a genuine
military capacity, which would enable it to take part in international
operations.
However, member countries made clear in their so-called 'Petersberg
Declaration' that they would participate in peacekeeping activities only at
the request of other international organisations such as the UN.
Serbs agree to halt shelling, of Sarajevo civilians, Page 3

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920626

