FT924-741

FT  22 DEC 92 / International Bonds: World Bank plans two global issues in
the new year


   By BRIAN BOLLEN and REUTER


THE World Bank is planning two global bond issues in the first few weeks of
1993. The bank is looking at the 30-year end of the yield curve for its next
global US dollar issue, early in the new year, said Ms Jessica Einhorn, the
bank's treasurer, probably to raise a maximum of Dollars 1.5bn.
The bank is also planning its first global D-Mark issue, to raise about
DM3bn, for the end of January or early February.
The bank is considering including a feature allowing the dollar bonds to be
stripped of their coupons, which would then be sold as a separate series of
zero-coupon issues.
'The consensus view is that this would make it more marketable to
investors,' said Mr Kenneth Lay, the bank's director of financial
operations.
The bank plans to use the global structure for all future large
transactions, whatever the pattern of international demand at the time of
issue, said Mr Lay.
Now halfway through its fiscal year, the bank is reviewing its borrowing
programme for 1992-93.
Of the original Dollars 13.5bn target, about Dollars 7bn-equivalent has been
raised.
Landeskreditbank Baden-Wurttemberg (LKB) has established a Dollars 1bn Euro
medium-term note programme as part of its plans to increase its borrowing on
the international capital markets.
The bank, which has an explicit Baden-Wurttemberg state guarantee and a
triple-A debt rating, plans to raise DM7bn to DM8bn internationally in 1993,
up from DM5bn this year, said Ms Gertraud Foos-Olsson, deputy director of
the bank's new issues and derivatives department.
This will account for about half its total borrowing requirements of DM15bn
to DM16bn, with the rest being raised domestically, Ms Foos-Olsson said.
The bank plans to tap the Eurodollar bond market at least twice next year
for up to half the total, and make at least two large benchmark issues in
the international D-Mark market to raise Dollars 1.5 to Dollars 2bn.
LKB also regards French francs and Euroyen as currencies where it should
borrow at least once, and does not rule out further issues in currencies
where cheap funds are available, in addition to its strategic programme. A
trip to the samurai market for around Y25bn is lightly pencilled in.
The Euro-MTN programme allows for the issue of paper in a wide range of
currencies with maturities between one month and 30 years and was arranged
by Merrill Lynch International. There are nine other banks acting as dealers
in addition to Merrill Lynch, including three from Germany.
LKB's preferred minimum maturity under the programme will be two years, and
the bulk of borrowing under the programme will be in the five to 10-year
range, Ms Foos-Olsson said. The programme will also be used to make small,
opportunistic Eurobond issues and possibly for longer term subordinated
debt.
It does not exclude setting up a global programme in the next two to three
years, but feels that its borrowing needs are not large enough, and prefers
to keep its Eurobond and yankee bond programmes separate.
LKB expects to sign in February a Dollars 750m US MTN programme, which it
plans to use for longer maturities. That programme is being arranged by
Morgan Stanley, which will be joined as a dealer by Merrill Lynch, JP Morgan
and Salomon Brothers.
The Japanese Ministry of Finance is likely to lower the minimum credit
rating for corporate issuers of straight and warrant bonds, to BBB from the
current A, further broadening the pool of potential issuers, Reuters
reports.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921222

