FT921-11906

FT  29 JAN 92 / Arts: Sidewalk Sidney - Manchester Royal Exchange


   By CLAIRE ARMITSTEAD


Randhi McWilliams' prize-winner from the Mobil Playwriting competition is a
two-hander pushed way beyond its natural length. This is a reflection not so
much on the Mobil judges, who are dealing with raw scripts, but on the
production team who should surely have done more to knock it into shape.
McWilliams is a West Indian Londoner whose theme is the familiar one of
generational conflict between the immigrants of the 1950s and their
British-born offspring. His innovation is to extend the gap by a generation,
ignoring the children of the immigrants to look at what has happened to
their grandchildren. Abandoned shortly after birth by his teenage mother,
Dominic has been brought up by his grandmother, now dead, and his
grandfather, Sidewalk Sidney, a tetchy repository of all the injustices
meted out to his family and his community.
McWilliams' point, and it is a mature one, is that the issues of the old are
different from the issues facing the young. Dominic has a white girlfriend.
He is attacked twice during the play - but neither is the straightforward
racist assault that his grandfather assumes it to be. The first is a simple
knife attack by a black youth, while the second happens when he is mistaken
for a mugger as he rescues an old white woman from a black gang.
What McWilliams seems to be gesturing at is that outdated prejudices are
preventing young blacks from realising their potential. Sidney's
cantankerous bitterness conceals the soul within him, which is glimpsed
through his love for his grandchild and his unappreciated talent as a
song-writer. With stick raised in rebellion against the great colonialist in
the sky, Eddie Osei cuts a fine figure, grumbling comically to his dead wife
or thundering, Learlike, against his fate. Charlie Caine also does well to
ride the powerhouse of emotions that propel Dominic from amused indulgence
to drunken anger.
Sidney will never be able to accept his grandson's values - he moans about
the changes that Dominic has made to his songs, but those songs are the key
to a cultural reconciliation between the two. In order to make his
grandfather proud of him, Dominic must find a pride in his grandfather.
One can see why the play appealed to the Mobil panellists: it has an
attractive wisdom and a marvellous command of a West Indian patois that is
rich, rough and comically rude. It does not, however, display an innate
grasp of theatrical structure: the characters seldom stray from their
monologues, and the second act splinters into a series of crude episodes to
which director James Maxwell's only solution seems to be to turn the lights
up and down.
The tone, the design, the pacing are fatally prosaic. One can only hope that
McWilliams' Mobil winnings give him the space to develop along more
satisfying lines.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

920129

