FT921-416

FT  30 MAR 92 / Survey of Lloyd's of London in World Insurance (1): In the
eye of the storm - Mounting losses at Lloyd's threaten to ruin some of the
people who back its insurance activities with their personal fortunes. Amid
criticism over the apportionment of these losses and calls for radical
overhaul, it faces its biggest ever challenge


   By RICHARD LAPPER


LLOYD'S of London is about to enter the most testing period in its 305 year
history buffeted by waves of criticism after reporting insurance losses last
year, the first for more than 20 years.
During the next few weeks agents will be telling Names - the individuals
whose assets back underwriting at the market - how much money they need to
pay as a result of insurance losses run up in 1989. Losses will amount to
more than Pounds 1.35bn. Names face more pain next year when 1990 losses -
which could be at least Pounds 400m - are reported. Many more Names will
leave Lloyd's as a result, joining the exodus of 10,000 who have quit since
1988 and hundreds could be obliged to sell houses and other assets to meet
liabilities. The impact is bound to revitalise the political controversy
that has swirled around the market over the past 12 months and which became
most intense in February when MPs raised allegations that market insiders -
Names who have jobs with Lloyd's agents and brokers - were avoiding the
worst losses and that the burden was falling disproportionately on outside
Names.
It is also likely to increase the pressure on the Lloyd's Council, the
market's governing body, to implement a series of reforms proposed in
January by the task force, a committee made up of leading underwriters and
brokers and led by Mr David Rowland, the chairman of Sedgwick, the
international insurance brokers.
The task force's report proposed a series of reforms which aim to strengthen
the market's capital base, cut costs, improve competitiveness and help
Lloyd's increase its declining share of the international market for
specialised commercial insurance and reinsurance.
Among the recommendations are a proposed modification of the principle of
unlimited liability as well as an overhaul in the system of governance,
designed to strengthen the independence of regulation and to improve the
management and the development of centralised back-up services.
In the longer term the report envisages the participation in the market of
corporate capital and advocates the creation of a system whereby Names'
participations on syndicates could be traded.
It reflects the thinking of a new elite of professional insurance managers -
loosely grouped around the Lloyd's Underwriting Agents Association - which
has emerged during the 1980s and which is less attached to tradition, more
professional and more outward looking than the Lloyd's establishment has
been in the past. Privately some task force members accept that the
introduction of corporate capital will pave the way for the physical
integration of the whole of the London insurance market - in which the
modernist glass and steel Lloyd's building would eventually house an
international insurance exchange made up of Lloyd's syndicates - backed by
corporate capital as well as Names - and the subsidiaries of London market
companies.
To move towards this radical vision, however, the market must surmount a
series of short and medium term difficulties, stemming largely from
insurance losses which have been made between 1988 and 1990. Lloyd's must
still deal with the fall-out from two areas of loss. Names on syndicates
specialising in catastrophe reinsurance - especially those which
participated unsuccessfully in the spiral, where syndicates and London
market companies insure each other's high level exposure to loss  - are the
immediate casualties.
Catastrophe losses such as Piper Alpha, hurricane Hugo and the European
storms of 1990 have affected a sizeable minority of Names
disproportionately.
But Names on four groups of syndicates face losses of Pounds 700m in 1989 -
about half the total losses expected by the market as a whole. Hundreds of
other Names also face potentially huge losses as a result of claims on US
liability insurance policies, stemming from court awards to victims of
asbestosis and government-ordered clean-ups of polluted sites.
More than 1,000 Names have launched legal actions - alleging negligence by
their agents, and in one case by Lloyd's itself - in a bid to recover
losses. They have been encouraged by the Pounds 116m out of court settlement
in February by another 1,000 Names in the Outhwaite case, a result which
could also encourage more Names to sue.
The legal actions generate bad publicity, which could damage the market's
standing. Efforts by about 800 Names seeking to prevent Lloyd's from drawing
down on their assets to pay insurance claims are causing cash flow problems
for some agencies and syndicates.
Ultimately there are fears that the market could become gridlocked by
criss-crossing disputes between Names and their agents. This would increase
the urgency of attracting corporate capital, further underlining the
importance of the rapid implementation of the task force's reforms.
In the meantime immediate prospects for profits in 1992 are improving as
rates in the key marine, aviation and reinsurance markets rise following a
reduction in the supply of capital to the market. Summing up the mood Mr
John Wetherell, a leading non-marine underwriter, says 1992 will see 'the
high tide and the turn'.
Even so no one is underestimating the difficulties that lie ahead. Mr Robin
Warrender, the chairman of London Wall Holdings, one of the biggest agency
groups at Lloyd's, says that the results for 1989 and 1990 - which Lloyd's
will report in June this year and June 1993 - are like 'two trenches full of
black vipers'.

The Financial Times


London Page I

920330

