FT922-4000

FT  08 JUN 92 / Arts: Prokofiev's October


   By DAVID MURRAY


At the Festival Hall on Saturday, Neeme Jarvi conducted the Philharmonia in
a typically adventurous programme (sponsored by AFG). In the middle came
Mozart's clarinet concerto, with large, impassioned choral cantatas by Arvo
Part and Prokofiev jostling it from either side.
The Mozart soloist was the superb Richard Stoltzman: faultless line, and
subtle as ever, but more buttoned-up than his norm. Stoltzman seemed to be
aiming to elevate it above its amiable station. Less delicacy would have
been more fun.
Not the least interesting thing about Part's and Prokofiev's monster
cantatas was that they proved to be, respectively, so much worse and so much
better than one might have expected. The 'dissident' Estonian composer has
described his 1968 Credo - banned after its first performance - as 'the
turning-point of my entire creative output': in it he foreswore his earlier,
unpopular flirtation with 12-note composing in favour of stern white-note
tonality and Russian Orthodox piety, the neo-mediaeval, crypto-minimalist
style that has made him a cult figure now.
Yet his Credo is just a piece of raw music-theatre, sincere though its
motives may have been. It begins and ends with churchly pastiche from the
choir. The central episode, however, consists of increasingly dissonant
music which culminates in an ultra-loud improvised cacophony, 90
Prokofiev's 1937 October Cantata should have been much worse, like most of
those Soviet works by composers who were made offers that they couldn't
refuse. Not only did it have the approved popular extravagances - an extra
military band, a percussion section swollen by machine-gun imitations and a
siren for the 'Revolution' set piece, and a team of six accordions - but
most of the words were taken straight from speeches by Lenin and Stalin.
At the close of this first British performance it was bizarre, though
poignant, to hear the Philharmonia Chorus declare (in hopeless Russian) that
'the blood our people shed' was 'strengthening faith in our powers and
mobilising us to a new struggle to win new victories for communism'. Yet
much of the music Prokofiev devised was sour and abrasive enough that no
premiere transpired. Only in 1966, when Prokofiev - and Stalin - had been
dead for 13 years, was October at last performed. By then the Stalin
settings (including the finale]) had become unacceptable and were duly
omitted.
As Jarvi demonstrated, October is an unbridled shivaree, but also a parade
of honest Prokofiev trouvailles. Broad lyrical lines, often angular and
underpinned by a hard, relentless pulse ;baleful churnings, that were never
the stuff to give the troops; for the orotund propaganda heights, a prosaic
kind of fervour in dogged even-notes.
October illuminates Prokofiev's transition from eager European cosmopolite
back to prudently Sovietised Russian, more vividly than anything else he
composed at that crucial time. We are in debt yet again to Jarvi's intrepid
foraging.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920608

