FT923-15567

FT  01 JUL 92 / A long haul to privatisation: Profits from running trains
will depend on track charges, says Richard Tomkins


Think of it: a few years from now, Britain's railways will be largely run by
the private sector. Gone will be the surly employees, the lack of
information, the delays and cancellations. Private railway companies will
compete for passengers' custom by giving them good service and reliable
trains at an affordable price.
Or will they? Today, British Rail is expected to announce its worst
financial result in seven years - a loss of more than Pounds 140m for the
year to March 31, and even that is only after receiving government subsidies
of nearly Pounds 900m. If this is the state of Britain's railways after a
decade of restructuring, it is tempting to ask, what private-sector company
is going to be in the least bit interested in running them?
When the government's long-delayed white paper on rail privatisation appears
in a fortnight's time, the plans will look like this:
BR will be split into two separate bodies. One will continue to own the
tracks; the other will operate the trains. The track-owning body will charge
the train operator for the use of its tracks.
The train-operator will gradually be privatised. Passenger services will be
franchised out to the private sector, and the freight and parcels operations
will be sold.
Private-sector companies will be allowed to run their own passenger or
freight services on BR's tracks.
A rail regulator will be created to make sure all train operators get fair
access to BR's tracks.
The main feature of these proposals is that, faced with the poor financial
performance of the railways, the government has given up hope of selling
them off in their entirety. Instead, it has decided to leave the financially
burdensome track infrastructure with British Rail and pursue the less
ambitious notion of privatising the trains.
This makes sense. Bus operators, after all, do not own roads, nor do
airlines own airports; and would-be train operators such as Stagecoach, the
bus operator, and Virgin, the airline, have expressed no desire to become
owners of tracks.
The trouble is that even with responsibility for the tracks stripped away,
companies like Stagecoach and Virgin are interested only in cherry-picking
one or two of the most lucrative train services. There has been no
discernible interest from any quarter in the idea of franchising the great
bulk of BR's operations: nor is there likely to be unless some tough
questions are satisfactorily answered.
The most obvious one is whether there is any money to be made from running
trains. British Rail's latest figures will offer little encouragement on
this score. No doubt the private sector would prove more successful at
extracting profit from trains than British Rail. Even so, its prospects of
doing so will depend crucially on what it is charged for the use of the
tracks.
The reason why this figure is important is that rail infrastructure costs
are so high. For a lorry owner, infrastructure costs are barely an issue:
access to the roads, in the form of the annual vehicle licence fee,
typically represent only 4 per cent of operating costs. For airlines, too,
airport and air navigation charges represent only 10 per cent of outgoings.
But for British Rail, track costs amount to 48 per cent of the total.
At present, British Rail has no system for allocating track costs to
individual trains. Ownership of the tracks is split between the four main
business sectors - InterCity, Network SouthEast, Regional Railways and
Railfreight - each of which meets its track costs out of general revenues.
When one business sector runs a train over another sector's tracks, the
track owner has no idea how much it should be charging the train operator
for the trip. Instead, it charges a token fee intended to reflect the
marginal extra cost of accommodating the extra train.
The significance of this system is that it artificially inflates the
profitability of train services which get cheap rides over other sectors'
tracks. To take the most notorious example, the Gatwick Express, a
high-frequency InterCity service running between London Victoria and Gatwick
Airport, makes big profits because it runs entirely on Network SouthEast's
tracks, so paying only a marginal contribution towards its track costs.
Freight trains, too, run largely on other sectors' tracks. Services like
these are virtually the only ones on British Rail which make profits.
All this could change once a proper system for charging track costs has been
set up. Just conceivably, an accurate identification of costs will reveal
that some services have been losing less money than previously thought. More
likely, the bigger impact will be the revelation that the profitability of
the few apparently lucrative services is illusory, so further reducing the
prospects of getting the private sector interested in running any of them.
Efficiency gains may enable the private sector to bring lossmaking services
into profit. But British Rail's latest figures will serve as a warning of
the acute vulnerability of railways to swings in the economic cycle.
Moreover, will the private sector seriously be interested in entering such a
business with 48 per cent of its costs not only fixed, but under the control
of a state-owned monopoly supplier?
Paradoxically, the services which turn out to be the most attractive to the
private sector may prove to be those with the poorest commercial prospects.
Ministers have already made it clear that subsidies to Network SouthEast's
commuter services and Regional Railways' branch lines will continue after
privatisation. The government envisages franchising out these lossmakers for
periods of five or 10 years to whichever private-sector company requires the
smallest subsidy to run them.
For the private sector, the clear appeal of this set-up is security.
Franchisees would have little control over revenues: fares on subsidised
services would doubtless remain under political control, and levels of
service would be specified under the terms of the franchise. Any subsidy
would therefore have to be based on a formula which protected the franchisee
from downturns in traffic beyond its control. In other words, it would enjoy
a guaranteed profit.
There are, however, strong objections to such an arrangement. It seems
almost inconceivable that the Treasury would be prepared to lock itself into
a deal that required it to subsidise guaranteed profits for the private
sector. It would also go against Treasury principles to accept fiscal
obligations stretching years into the future, particularly if they extended
beyond the date of a general election.
Neither is it clear how passengers would benefit from the deal. With
revenues fixed, a franchisee would have little or no incentive to improve
services. Rather, its best option for increasing profit would be to cut
costs - a move unlikely to result in more or better services.
And where, besides, would franchisees obtain their rolling stock? New trains
are extremely expensive: the fleet on order for Network SouthEast's suburban
lines in London and Kent, for example, is costing British Rail some Pounds
600m. Unlike buses or aircraft, trains tend to be custom-built for the
routes they serve, so they cannot easily be bought or sold on any
after-market. No private-sector company could invest so much in assets which
would be at risk of being rendered worthless if a franchise were not
renewed.
More likely, franchises would come complete with whatever British Rail
rolling stock was already in use. In all probability, franchisees would end
up taking on British Rail's staff, too. But then, one has to ask, if the
assets and the people were to stay the same, would privatisation make any
difference?
It is possible to be optimistic. After all, the same question could have
been asked of any of the other utilities and corporations that have
undergone privatisation: yet most of them have been transformed by change of
ownership.
The catch in this case is that, although there may be a change of
management, a franchise arrangement would leave ownership of the assets with
state-owned British Rail. One of the biggest potential benefits of
privatisation is the opportunity it offers to take railway investment out of
the straitjacket of the public sector borrowing requirement. If that
opportunity is thrown away, there is every reason to suppose that the
railways will continue to be dogged by underinvestment.
Two possible conclusions may be drawn from all this. The first and most
depressing is that, for all the fuss and fanfare that will accompany the
white paper and subsequent legislation, privatisation will go largely
unnoticed by the railway passenger. The likes of Stagecoach and Virgin may
find profitable niches for the odd private-sector train; lossmaking services
on a handful of rural branch lines may be tentatively franchised out; but
the vast majority of passenger services will continue to be operated by the
same old British Rail in the same old way.
But there is an alternative. The prospects for rail privatisation would be
transformed if only the private sector could see a way of making an
acceptable return from it. The main reason why it cannot do so is that
expensive-to-use railways simply cannot compete with cheap roads.
The success or failure of privatisation will therefore hang on the
government's willingness to level the playing field between the two modes.
That means either pumping massive subsidies into the track-owning side of
British Rail to reduce or eliminate charges to users, or heavily increasing
the cost of using the roads. Neither option is attractive; but if the
government fails to choose one of them, privatisation of the railways may be
left not so much on the slow track as up against the buffers.

The Financial Times


London Page 20

920701

