FT922-4371

FT  05 JUN 92 / Military spares throw spanner in the works


   By DAVID WHITE


THE MINISTRY of Defence found it was buying spanners for Pounds 941 each
when it could obtain them elsewhere for less than one eighth of the price.
By switching to an alternative supplier, it reduced the cost of the spanners
 -for use on heavy-vehicle hub nuts - to Pounds 113.
In another case, army invest-igators queried the price being asked for
forked crowbars - Pounds 84 each. Another manufacturer, brought in to
reverse-engineer the crowbar, made it for Pounds 19.
These cases are among those cited in a report by the National Audit Office,
the public spending watchdog, into the military spares business. The price
difference on the two orders alone amounted to Pounds 268,000.
The report also identified other savings - including Pounds 580,000 a year
saved by buying spares for British Aerospace's Rapier missile system direct
from sub-contractors - but said there was room for improvement.
The MoD spends Pounds 2bn a year on spares and holds more than 2.7m
different items in its inventory. It carried out an extensive study five
years ago to check on suspicions that it was overpaying for spares.
It put potential savings at Pounds 75m a year. Proposals included
diversifying suppliers and purchasing in larger quantities. But the audit
office report found that 'some of the proposals are by no means widely
applied'.
More spares contracts were now being awarded after competition, but the
proportion in value terms was still only 25 per cent in 1990-91. That
compared with a figure of 44 per cent in the overall MoD procurement
programme and 66 per cent for military spares purchases in the US.
The MoD could also take more advantage of quantity discounts. The audit
office found that the total cost of one RAF purchase was greater than if it
had ordered a slightly larger quantity.
Ministry of Defence: Prices Paid for Spare Parts. National Audit Office.
HMSO. Pounds 6.40.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920605

