FT922-7109

FT  20 MAY 92 / Thai army crackdown fails to stop unrest spreading


   By VICTOR MALLET and PETER UNGPHAKORN


   BANGKOK


A MILITARY crackdown on pro-democracy activists in Bangkok failed to clear
protesters off the streets yesterday as demonstrations continued for a third
day and unrest spread to other parts of the country.
The beleaguered government of General Suchinda Kraprayoon, the prime
minister, has withheld details of casualties in the bloodiest clashes seen
in the Thai capital since 1976, but information from hospital doctors
suggested that at least 50 people had been killed since Sunday night.
The US stepped up its pressure on Bangkok to resolve the crisis peacefully -
suspending its role in a joint military exercise. It said a normal
relationship with the Thai government under current conditions was
impossible.
Last night several thousand demonstrators barricaded a highway outside
Ramkhamhaeng university in eastern Bangkok. Although gatherings of 10 or
more people are banned under the state of emergency, security forces kept a
low profile and allowed a protest rally at the university to pass off
peacefully.
Thousands of protesters were also reported to have held a rally in Songkhla,
a university town in the south of Thailand. Smaller demonstrations have
taken place in other towns, including the resort island of Phuket.
The privy council met yesterday in emergency session and a group of
influential academics submitted an appeal to King Bhumibol Adulyadej to
break the deadlock. Thais are beginning to hope the king will intervene to
resolve the matter as he did at the time of anti-government student
demonstrations in 1973.
The academics also suggested that General Prem Tinsulanonda, prime minister
from 1980 to 1988, should return to the post, and that constitutional
amendments to reduce the power of the military should be passed within three
weeks, but that parliament should not be dissolved.
Many shops, offices and banks reopened in the capital but hurriedly closed
again at midday as rumours of looting and violence swept through the city.
One hotel boarded up its windows.
'There's quite a lot of panic in commercial circles,' said one foreign
banker. 'There's going to be very little commerce tomorrow.'
Some bank branches ran out of cash and queues grew at automatic tellers and
petrol stations. By evening, normally a time of acute traffic congestion,
Bangkok's streets were almost deserted. Soldiers, harried by groups of
youths in the city centre, set up roadblocks and searched motorcyclists, who
have been at the forefront of some rioting.
On the stock market the SET index fell by nearly 9 per cent to close at
667.84, down 65.05, its largest single daily fall.
Some tourist flights into Bangkok were cancelled as foreign governments
advised their nationals to stay away.
Although Gen Suchinda and the military have regained a measure of control
over the capital, many Thais question whether he can continue to govern the
country. The heavy-handed suppression of the demonstrations and the abrasive
statements issued by the prime minister and his commanders has further
alienated the inhabitants of Bangkok.
A parliamentary debate on constitutional amendments originally seen as a way
out of the crisis, scheduled for Friday, has been postponed indefinitely.
The military are using the state media to portray the violence as urban
rioting. During yesterday morning's violence, angry protesters burned down
the state lottery building and the government public relations department,
both traditional targets of demonstrations against corruption and media
censorship.
Investment fears over Thailand's stability, Page 4
Ugly roar from a young tiger, Page 18
Military might crushes Thai equities, Page 39

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920520

