FT922-13333

FT  11 APR 92 / Lloyds 'ready' to bid for Midland: Counter-offer hinges on
the terms of Hongkong's takeover move


   By ROBERT PESTON


LLOYDS BANK is likely to make a bid for its rival, Midland Bank, if Hongkong
and Shanghai Bank does not offer enough for Midland in its takeover attempt,
sources close to Lloyds said yesterday.
An adviser to Lloyds said it 'stands ready' to make an offer. 'We are
continuing to look at the situation.'
Another source said Lloyds' continued interest in buying Midland explained
why it had resolutely refused to make any public statements on the subject.
If it were to make a statement about a bid, its scope for changing its mind
would be limited by the Takeover Code.
Hongkong Bank and Midland are in negotiations about the terms of Hongkong
Bank's offer, which is expected to be made in the next fortnight. If
Hongkong Bank offers too little for Midland, Lloyds may make a
counter-offer.
It is understood that Lloyds made an offer of around 400p per Midland share
during a secret takeover approach last month.
Hongkong Bank is expected to offer Midland's shareholders a mixture of
shares and loan notes. In other words, the value of its offer is directly
linked to the strength of its own share price. Since it disclosed its
intention to buy Midland, its shares have fallen by 16 per cent in sterling
terms to 283p last night.
If Midland's talks with Hongkong Bank were to falter, Lloyds would have
little hesitation in pouncing, a source said. 'Midland would be wide open.'
Lloyds also believes it can convince Midland's shareholders they should
support a bid from it rather than from Hongkong Bank. A takeover by Lloyds
would lead to big cost savings, as the two banks would be able to combine
their branch networks, close superfluous outlets and reduce staff by 20,000.
The alternative deal with Hongkong Bank would not lead to comparable
savings.
Lloyds believes it can also make a strong case against the takeover of
Midland being blocked by the UK and European competition authorities.
The re-election of a Conservative government has reduced the likelihood that
a bid would encounter overwhelming resistance in Whitehall and Westminster,
Lloyds feels.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920411

