FT921-11722

FT  30 JAN 92 / Survey of Saudi Arabia (10): Soaring prices set the pace -
Stock market


   By MARK NICHOLSON


THERE is no better measure of Saudi Arabia's business buoyancy than its
stock market. Prices have soared in the past year, doubling the market index
to 175.5 points by the end of 1991.
Moreover, new share issues are generating the kind of excitement among Saudi
investors which is the stuff of misty-eyed nostalgia in London - along with
the market practices which are bringing tears to the eyes of the Saudi
Arabian Monetary Authority (Sama), the market's regulator.
In October, for example, Savola, the successful vegetable oil company, saw
an offer of 1.2m shares to raise capital from SR120m to SR300m subscribed 14
times with 1.6m applicants applying for a total of 15m shares.
After having enthusiastically advertised the offer, Savola found itself
sitting on a rather handy SR4.8bn of pre-payment and was forced urgently to
launch a scheme to return the surplus cash to applicants until a means of
share allocation was decided upon. Some unkind critics suggested at the time
that the urgency of the scheme was not entirely Savola's idea.
The latest new issue, and the biggest in Saudi Arabia's history, is an 8m
share offering by Riyad Bank to increase its capital tenfold to SR2bn. The
offer closes at the end of this month, by which time the bank is confident
that it will have been subscribed three or four times over.
This should be no surprise, given that the shares issue price is SR475
against a going rate for the rest of Riyad Bank shares of more than SR5,000
at the time of issue.
Moreover, although Sama has sought to clamp down on sharp trading practices
by limiting the sale of shares to buyers over the age of 15, bankers in the
kingdom nevertheless report some fairly impressive 'stagging'.
One banker claims that a single investor walked into a bank branch in the
capital to apply for Riyad shares carrying a sheaf of no less than 10,000
photocopied identity cards to support 10,000 applications. Another investor
is said to have turned up with 4,000 photocopied identity cards.
In so far as a donor consents to giving his name to a keen investor, there
is little Sama can do about this practice. Among the sophisticates of
Riyadh, the going rate for the sale of a name is apparently SR250. However,
more crafty investors with a four-wheel drive vehicle are said to make trips
deep into the desert where a clutch of bedouins can be persuaded to hand
over their name, for investment purposes, for the price of some coffee and
dates.
With the soaraway stockmarket such an attractive magnet for funds which
Saudis seem increasingly keen to bring back into the kingdom, Sama is
keeping a close eye on the market - for which all trading takes place
on-screen and exclusively in bank branches.
The market's 50 listed companies have a total market capitalisation of some
SR50bn, although the bank's investment departments which handle the trading
claim that only 10 per cent or so of outstanding shares are actually traded.
'Saudis with big holdings in companies tend to like to hold on to them,'
says one bank trader.
The market is closed to direct foreign investment. Brokers outside the
banking system are also prohibited. Nevertheless, bankers say they are
growing used to a small number of individual investors who seem to have been
particularly active and liquid market players over the past year.
For the first two weeks in January, the market saw an average of 600-700
trading daily with a daily turnover of about 100,000 shares. And prices
continue to boom.
According to Riyad Bank figures, for the first week in January, for example,
the worst performing of the 11 listed bank shares, one of the strongest
sectors, was Arab National Bank, up a paltry 77 per cent on a year earlier.
Riyad Bank itself led the way with a 180 per cent rise on the year in a
sector which averaged share price rises of 124 per cent.
Utilities, with dismal single-figure price rises over the year, presently
lag the market which is now led by National Shipping Company, shares in
which rose 405 per cent over 1991.
But given the huge surplus of cash available to Saudi investors to spend on
domestic stocks - aside from bank deposits they hold an estimated SR40bn in
cash outside the banking market - bankers and regulators are watching the
markets climb very closely indeed.
Saudis do not have to look further than Kuwait to see what happens when a
surging stock market whets the appetite of enthusiastic Gulf investors -
never ones to turn down the chance of a big, quick return. The informal
Kuwaiti Souq al Manakh stock market soared gaily skywards during the early
1980s only to plummet during the oil price slump, leaving total paper debts
of no less than Dollars 94bn.
The Kuwait government is even today mulling over plans finally to write off
the remainder of that debt - a move which will cost the emirate's stretched
exchequer a tidy Dollars 7bn.

The Financial Times


London Page VII Photograph Some investors are even said to make trips deep
into the desert where a clutch of bedouins can be persuaded to hand over
their name, for investment purposes, for the price of some coffee and dates
(Omitted).

920130

