FT922-7338

FT  19 MAY 92 / Europe fears refugee influx as war spreads: Civil conflict
displaces more than 1m people from former Yugoslav territories


   By JUDY DEMPSEY, LAURA SILBER, ROBERT GRAHAM and MICHAEL LITTLEJOHNS


   LONDON, BELGRADE, ROME, NEW YORK


THE displacement of over 1m people - the largest movement of refugees in
Europe since the second world war - could increase sharply if, as many fear,
the war in Bosnia-Hercegovina spreads to other cities, officials from relief
agencies said yesterday.
This grim warning was made as Italy, bracing itself for an exodus of
refugees, called for urgent talks with its European Community partners.
Some 600 people reached Trieste at the weekend, prompting fears that it
could face a massive influx of refugees after a 21-day ceasefire agreed by
Serb, Moslem and Croat leaders yesterday quickly broke-down amid renewed
outbreaks of shelling in Sarajevo.
Under the latest truce, brokered by UN officials in the Bosnian capital,
Serb-led Yugoslav federal forces claimed they would withdraw from Bosnia.
It follows a string of failed truces that have frustrated international
efforts to end fighting that broke out after multi-ethnic Bosnia seceded
from Yugoslavia in March.
Sarajevo has been shattered by pitched battles between Serb irregulars
backed by the federal army and a loose amalgam of Bosnian Moslem and Croat
forces since early April.
Despite the ceasefire agreement, the exodus is expected to continue. Last
night a train with some 2,000 Bosnian refugees was being held up at Zagreb
station pending clearance from either the Italian or Austrian authorities.
'The killing and the fighting is leading to an acute refugee crisis. It will
get worse,' said Mr Michael Steiner, co-ordinator of Germany's humanitarian
aid mission in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia. Mr Steiner said the Croatian
government was finding it increasingly difficult to deal with the growing
numbers of refugees.
Croatia is looking after 484,000 refugees. An estimated 200,000 have fled
eastern Slavonia, eastern Croatia, after being driven out by Serb militants
and the federal army last year. The remainder have come northwards from
Bosnia after fighting started six weeks ago. Most are being put up in
schools, hotels, halls, or by Croatian families and relatives.
But resources and space are running out. Yesterday, Mr Zvonomir Separovic,
Croatia's foreign minister, sent a letter to the foreign ministers of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe appealing for assistance.
'The wave of refugees is not ending. Croatia is accepting them but cannot
take care of them. Europe has to decide whether to accept them or help to
give them a chance of survival,' he said.
Mr Steiner said the war in Bosnia could increase the number of refugees by a
quarter of a million. 'This situation is becoming desperate here, and in
Bosnia,' he added.
Before the ceasefire was announced, Yugoslav federal army troops and Serb
irregulars yesterday attacked Tuzla, northern Bosnia, which until recently
was an oasis of co-existence between the Moslem, Serb and Croat communities.
Apparently, the attack is retaliation for nine federal soldiers killed last
week.
Ms Nenda Nachampassak, an official at the UN High Commission on Refugees in
London, said innocent people in Bosnia were 'fleeing out of fright and
panic.
'We still want to try and get a convey to Sarajevo (the capital of
Bosnia-Hercegovina).'
'There are 100,000 children in the city. A quarter of them are under the age
of three. They have no milk . . .'
As part of the diplomatic drive to end the bloodshed in Bosnia, Mr Andrei
Kozyrev, Russian foreign minister, yesterday arrived in Belgrade.
Mr Kozyrev is due to meet Serbian president, Mr Slobodan Milosevic, and will
visit the capitals of the former Yugoslav republics.
Croatia and Slovenia will become independent members of the United Nations
under separate resolutions approved by the Security Council yesterday,
writes Michael Littlejohns in New York.
Bosnia-Hercegovina has also applied and is expected to be cleared shortly,
further confirming the break-up of the old Yugoslav federation, a UN
founder-state.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920519

