FT921-14178

FT  17 JAN 92 / Arts: London International Mime Festival


   By CLAIRE ARMITSTEAD


The London Mime Festival is upon us again, provoking the usual groans among
fogeys old and young about their least favourite four-letter word and the
usual fluster of spirited defences. Let us call a halt for the time being on
ancient prejudices and try to trace some sort of common denominator for the
20 or so ensembles currently giving their all in the capital. Tricky. Many
of them use language. They draw on cabaret, clowning, puppetry, staking
their identity, it seems, more to their origins than to the work in hand.
And what are those origins? A quick flick through the festival brochure
reveals that - except for a select band marked 'international' - all are
either European or North American. Even the international collaborations are
predominantly Euro-American. This could, of course, be an accident of
selection, or it could be a reflection on the festival finances (it is
cheaper to bring a troupe from Holland than Honduras; and for the purposes
of this festival, they must all be called 'mime').
A more interesting possibility is that the grouping reflects the stage the
English theatre and its audiences have reached in redefining themselves to
take on board European developments in visual and physical theatre. Many of
these companies would happily appear at festivals elsewhere in the continent
as part of a mainstream theatre programme.
The UK has not got that far yet, although the subsidised companies are just
beginning to take advantage of their expertise. (Linda Kerr Scott, who gives
her solo show Ave Maria at the festival this week, has appeared as Lear's
Fool for the RSC; Theatre de Complicite, of which she is a member, gave its
version of Durrenmatt's The Visit at the Royal National Theatre).
So we are left with a largely Euro-centric community of performers whose
passport to credibility often seems to be to have Jacques LeCoq on their
curriculum vitae (see how the name of the French mime maestro glisters in
the programmes of Theatre de Complicite). I couldn't say if this applies to
the personnel of Talking Pictures, which presents two shows at Battersea
Arts Centre, because the festival's efficiency did not extend to programmes.
This UK-founded company, classed with the international brigade because it
uses performers from a variety of countries, displays a typical patchwork of
influences and intentions. The director of its first show, the aptly titled
Europeans, is Stephen Daldry, director designate of the Royal Court whose
championship of European plays has done so much for the Gate Theatre over
the last couple of years.
Billed as 'a fast-forward comedy of European manners', the piece is a
slickly performed homily about the dangers of withholding help from the
newly democratised nations of the Eastern bloc. Arriving in Strasbourg for
the 'conferenzia', three tatty delegates from an unnamed Slavonic country
gawp their way into audience with the image-obsessed French, the chaotic
Italians and the poker-stiff English via the only common language language
they can find: text-book Latin. As their case is heard and rejected, the
lights go down, the conference table splinters into three and they trundle
round the stage in tanks, while a corrupted version of the Internationale
signals the ascendancy of a new nationalism and fascism.
As far as it goes, it is well done. The performances, by Jon Potter,
Clarissa Malheros and the superb Dominique Grandmougin, dig deep into the
lunacy of Euro-politics. But they are prevented by their chosen format from
moving beyond national stereotypes into any more complex or profound
reflection of realpolitik. A battery of skills is wastefully employed to ram
home a single message. This is mime teetering on the edge of textual
theatre, which reveals the danger of using words without a script.

The Financial Times


London Page 15

920117

