FT923-10806

FT  28 JUL 92 / International Company News: US aims to beat the credit
crunch - Measures to help small companies raise capital


   By PATRICK HARVERSON


The Securities and Exchange Commission is expected to rubber stamp proposals
today making it easier and less expensive for small US companies to raise
equity and debt capital.
The agency is keen to see the proposals, which were unveiled in March,
introduced quickly because it is concerned about the credit crunch facing
small companies in need of capital.
Although the US economy is officially out of recession, business activity is
advancing at a snail's pace, and the country's lenders have remained
cautious about extending credit to high-risk borrowers. So cautious, in
fact, that small companies have found their regular sources of capital -
banks, insurance companies, venture capitalists and regional securities
firms - all but drying up in the past year.
The banks have been reluctant to lend because the recession and problem
loans have forced them to tighten their credit standards, leaving many young
companies, which have not got an earnings track record, out in the cold.
There has been a similar retrenchment by insurance companies and venture
capitalists which are shying away from high-risk lending. Regional
securities firms, which were regular underwriters of small businesses, have
raised fees to levels many young companies cannot afford.
Against this background, the SEC decided it had to help - the result was the
measures due to be approved today.
The most interesting proposal will allow small companies to gauge the
market's mood before committing themselves to the cost and time of
registering and launching a stock or bond issue.
At the moment, companies of any size cannot solicit general interest in
their securities without registering their plans with the SEC. Under the
proposal, a small company will be able to get lists of likely investors and
send them - and the SEC - letters or brochures introducing the company and
outlining its plans.
If the company receives enough of a response, it can begin registering and
eventually issuing the securities. If the response from investors is tepid,
the company can drop the offering, without having incurred too many
unnecessary costs.
The SEC also plans to increase the limits on how much small companies can
raise in the markets without being liable for full reporting requirements.
To ease those reporting burdens, the SEC will allow small companies to file
less detailed, and thus less costly, quarterly and annual reports.
Finally, the SEC will make it easier for mutual funds to invest more money
in small companies.
The SEC's initiative has been applauded by advocacy groups for small
companies. They see the measures as welcome support in a system where their
interests are often overlooked by a regulatory community and government that
focus their attention on the needs of big business.
While the SEC plans to ease the burdens on seeking new capital, small
companies have found another ally from an unlikely source: the American
Stock Exchange (Amex). It now allows small companies to list their shares on
its auction-based stock market.
In April the Amex launched its Emerging Company Marketplace (ECM), an
'incubator market' for companies with market values of less than Dollars
2.5m and therefore too small to meet listing standards.
The ECM not only gives small companies access to equity capital, but also
confers upon them, via the Amex listing and regulatory cover, a legitimacy
that raises their profile in the financial community. For Amex, the ECM
allows it to compete for new listings against other markets and compensates
for stocks lost to bigger rivals like the New York Stock Exchange.
For many small companies, the only alternative to the ECM is either the
electronic Nasdaq market or the 'pink sheets', where stocks are traded
over-the-counter (OTC). However, in these markets investors are sometimes
deterred by wide spreads and, in the case of the pink sheets, by inadequate
regulatory protection.
By enabling small companies to list on the ECM, Amex believes it provides
them with a more efficient place to trade and a broader following among
investors.
Many of the 25 companies listed on the ECM are exactly the type that would
have difficulty raising funds elsewhere - innovative companies in
high-technology businesses which must invest in research and development
before producing a regular stream of revenues.
Amex says ECM listed companies have fared well so far. It claims that during
its first three months ECM stocks performed on average 17 per cent better
than the main Nasdaq index, and spreads narrowed dramatically compared with
Nasdaq, because there were no market makers taking a chunk out of the
difference between the buy and sell prices.
However, these SEC and Amex initiatives have not escaped criticism. Investor
groups and some state regulators are concerned that investor protection may
have been sacrificed for easier capital formation.
There have been many examples over the years of investors being defrauded
when investing in small, new companies which do not disclose full details of
their businesses. Critics worry that the SEC proposals and Amex's incubator
market leave investors exposed to unscrupulous or badly run companies.
Countering such criticism, the SEC says the proposed measures will not
undermine high standards of investor protection, while the Amex points out
that ECM listed companies are closely watched and some of its supervision -
of big shareholders in ECM stocks, for example - has been tightened.

The Financial Times


London Page 22

920728

