FT924-11996

FT  22 OCT 92 / UK Company News: Credit Lyonnais homes in on BfG - The
battle over the sale of a German bank


   By DAVID WALLER


   THERE have been two bids for Germany's BfG bank in recent weeks


one from a bank and one from a baker.
The offer from Mr Horst Schiesser, proprietor of a Berlin bakery, is in
keeping with the farce and intrigue which has characterised the long-running
cross-border imbroglio over Aachener und Munchener Beteiligungs (AMB) -
Germany's second-biggest insurance company - and its BfG banking subsidiary.
However, this offer from Mr Schiesser, a man famous in Germany because he
once made an audacious but unsuccessful bid for the whole of eastern German
industry, was rejected out of hand by AMB.
Far more serious, from the point of AMB shareholders, is a bid that will be
put on AMB's table today by Mr Jean-Yves Haberer, chairman of Credit
Lyonnais, one of France's largest banks.
He is meeting Mr Wolfgang Kaske, his opposite number at AMB, and is thought
likely to offer somewhere between DM1.8bn (Dollars 1.13bn) and DM3.6bn for a
60 per cent stake in BfG, Germany's sixth-biggest bank. Also attending the
meeting will be Mr Hans Matthofer, chief of BGAG, the trades union holding
company which is BfG's other shareholder.
Credit Lyonnais is keen to get into the German banking market, and BfG is
the only sizeable bank in Germany which is up for sale. Although there is
bound to be haggling over the price, it seems certain that a deal will be
done. This will pave the way for a resolution of AMB's fate.
AMB, with annual premium income of DM12bn and a market capitalisation of
around DM3.5bn, is the second-biggest participant after Allianz in the
German insurance market, Europe's largest. It bought its 50 per cent plus
one share stake in BfG five years ago in the hope of developing
cross-selling opportunities. Instead, it acquired a severe headache: the
troubled BfG has cost its shareholders several billion D-Marks and nearly
cost AMB its independence.
The imminent deal over BfG was the keystone of this summer's surprise
rapprochement between AMB and Assurances Generales de France (AGF), the big
state-owned French insurer. Mr Helmut Gies, chairman of AMB's supervisory
board, went over the heads of his management board - and shareholders - and
struck a deal with the French. Mr Wolf-Dieter Baumgartl, then chief
executive, resigned in protest. Under the terms of the deal, AGF would help
find a French buyer for BfG, while the two big insurance companies would
work towards forging a closer business alliance.
Relations between the two, which had plumbed depths of hostility, have
improved dramatically. Unconfirmed reports suggest that representatives of
AGF and Dresdner Bank, its German ally, are about to be appointed to the AMB
management board.
So is the saga complete? Not quite, says Mr Nicolaus-Jurgen Weickart, a
Frankfurt lawyer. He has played an important role in Germany's limited
number of hostile takeovers. He intends to marshal the forces of AMB's
independent shareholders to challenge the AMB/AGF rapprochement. Acting on
behalf of a single, unidentified client who owns a 1 per cent stake in AMB,
he has gathered together a further 9 per cent of the company's shareholders
who, he says, are opposed to the deal.
'I find it astonishing that the ordinary shareholders in AMB have not had a
say in all this,' he says. 'The whole affair smacks of corporate Germany
putting together deals under the table in smoke-filled rooms. There has been
no transparency at all.'
In the absence of hard-and-fast rules governing takeover activity in
Germany, it is standard corporate practice to try to wrestle control by
buying a large blocking stake rather than making a full takeover bid. Mr
Weickart claims that the French are on the verge of obtaining effective
control of AMB - without having to pay a premium for that control and
without even making an offer to all shareholders.
Therefore he has taken steps which, he claims, may force AGF to make a full
bid for the company, to the benefit of ordinary institutional and other
shareholders. If this happened it would be a sensational development for M&A
in continental Europe.
His strategy hangs on the fact that under a quirk of German corporate law,
AGF does not yet have full voting rights on its 25 per cent-plus stake. It
is up the AMB management board to recognise these rights, as it has said it
would do as part of this summer's reconciliation.
Mr Weickart's legal initiative means that shareholders will get the
opportunity to vote on the sale of BfG and on the move to recognise AGF's
votes at an extraordinary general meeting. AGF will not be able to vote its
full holding with the result that despite the support of large AMB
shareholders like Dresdner Bank and Munchener Re, the big Munich reinsurance
group, the vote may be close. If the vote is lost, AGF may be forced to make
a full bid.
A key role will be played by Fondiaria, the large Italian insurance company
which owns 20 per cent of AMB but whose interests have been marginalised as
a result of AGF's manoeuvres, Mr Weickart says.
The prospect of a closely-fought extraordinary general meeting - likely to
take place around the turn of the year - will ensure that the AMB saga has
at least several months left to run.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

921022

