FT922-464

FT  27 JUN 92 / Briefcase, Q&A: CGT and IoM bonds


IN 1979 I purchased two single premium life insurance bonds from an
insurance company registered in the Isle of Man. I was, at the time, a UK
citizen in long-term overseas employment, had gone through official Bank of
England emigration procedure some years before, and was accepted by the
Inland Revenue as not resident and not ordinarily resident in the UK.
From 1972 onwards I owned houses in the UK and Spain, both available for
occupation. In 1980 medical problems led me to retire to Spain, and
subsequently to the UK where I have become resident.
My enquiry relates to the tax status of the Isle of Man policies. I have
been told that if I encash them I will be liable to income tax on the gain,
in the year of encashment, but subject to 'top slicing relief' as if they
were normal UK single premium bonds. To date I have not drawn any income
from the bonds, or dealt with them in any way.
1. Is my understanding that the bonds are treated in a similar manner to
normal UK single premium bonds correct?
2. What would be the tax position (income, capital gains, inheritance) if I
transferred ownership to my wife and she later cashed the bonds, during my
lifetime or after my death?
3. Would a transfer to my wife trigger any form of tax liability?
4. What would be the tax position if the bonds remain in my ownership until
my death (ie what would be the position for my executors)?
1. Yes - because the policies were issued before November 18 1983.
2. Surrender: Income tax on the excess of the proceeds over the premium,
subject to top-slicing relief from higher-rate tax (currently 15 per cent)
but not from age surcharge (currently 12 1/2 per cent).
Death: Income tax on the excess of the surrender value (before your death)
over the premium, subject to topslicing relief as on surrender.
3. No.
4. Income tax as though you had surrendered the policies immediately before
dying. IHT as part of your estate.
No legal responsibility can be accepted by the Financial Times for the
answers given in these columns. All inquiries will be answered by post as
soon as possible.

The Financial Times


London Page VI

920627

