FT921-15206

FT  11 JAN 92 / Property: Values which characterise UK market - Households
which still live in dreamland


   By JOHN BRENNAN


DREAM VALUES are not factors that can be found in the professional valuation
tables. The term has no base in a dictionary. Yet this jumbled mix of an
affliction and a blessing ideally characterises the UK housing market at the
beginning of 1992.
The affliction expresses itself as an unwillingness to make a move, quite
possibly a necessary move, because of the sheer power of a dream value.
Once a figure, or a range of values, has become stuck in the mind of a
homeowner it takes either an unusually persuasive sales agent or an
inescapable move to persuade an owner to think in any other price terms.
The blessing of dream values, at least as far as the property finance and
transfer industry is concerned, is clear enough. The vast majority of
homeowners are sitting quietly, confidently waiting for things 'to get back
to normal'.
There have been no mortgage riots; no mass repayment of old home loans; no
general withdraw of deposits from home lenders whose prospects of lending
into the 1990's at the same kind of security as in past decades may be
thinning out.
Dream values that are unchallenged encourage quiescence; and no matter how
bluntly you might say to your immediate neighbour that his or her home could
be worth a third less than at the dreamers' peak of the sales market in
1988, they will not believe you. Indeed, why should they absorb bad news
when it is unnecessary to break the dream?
The 'wealth effect', which helped to fuel consumer spending before the
housing market reverse, depends upon these dream values.
While residential housing values were rising towards Pounds 1,000bn
nationally, any semi-detached owner could afford to enjoy adding several
hundred pounds to his or her credit card bills with a good conscience.
With that personal housing-worth total down to nearer Pounds 600bn, and
either static or still declining, any owner who is not won over by dream
values might be expected to be suffering from the reverse of the 1980s
wealth effect.
In practice, apart from the obvious wealth reversals of repossessions and
forced sales, most owners have merely become significantly more selective in
their spending.
It is the silence of the majority that enables lenders to keep repeating,
without challenge, the belief that no long-term or irredeemable damage has
been done to the principle of owner-occupation.
In a pre-Christmas note on affordability of housing, the Halifax Building
Society's David Gilchrist and Gary Marsh give full weight to the main change
in the economic background to house prices and the effect on interest rates
and inflation of sterling's membership of the European Exchange Rate
Mechanism.
No prospects of runaway inflation mean no equivalent prospects of soaring
property price rises. But these are points that have not yet sunk into the
dream price households.
Even the Halifax recognises that it is less a philosophical certainty and
more the lack of practical accommodation alternatives that enables it to say
that the society research team 'remains confident that the current recession
will end, and that when it does, owner-occupied housing will continue to be
the preference and aspiration of most of the UK population.'
Lenders' confidence looks secure so long as not too manyhomeowners have been
forced to awaken from those dream values before we get 'back to normal.'

The Financial Times


London Page XIV

920111

