FT923-6599

FT  22 AUG 92 / Private View: The philosopher who believes in tarot and God
 -Christian Tyler meets The many-sided Michael Dummett and finds that
arguing with a logic professor can be taxing


   By CHRISTIAN TYLER


MICHAEL Dummett is an expert on the game of tarot. Most people associate
tarot cards only with fortune-telling, with gypsies in tents. Since Michael
Dummett is also Wykeham Professor of Logic in the University of Oxford, this
upsets him very much.
It is not just that his treatise on the early-15th century Italian card game
gets stashed away in the 'Occult' section of bookshops; his reputation as a
serious - some would say brilliant - philosopher is compromised.
The professor's fascination with tarot is a kind of antidote to another of
this many-sided man's passions: race relations. Dummett not only believes
that Britain's immigration policy amounts to a coded encouragement of
racism, he has suffered for his beliefs.
In 1967, he was arrested with his wife, Ann - a former director of the
Runnymede trust and a race relations professional - for demonstrating
outside an Oxford hairdresser which refused to serve black customers.
(Charges were dropped and the home secretary, Roy Jenkins, apologised).
Life has its hazards for the philosopher with a conscience. When Dummett
publishes his extra-curricular views - as he did in The Tablet in June,
saying Oxford undergraduates could no longer write decent English and that
the meaning of the terms 'university' and 'degree' was being shamelessly
diluted - he is, inevitably, accused of illogicality.
'Everyone thinks of that joke,' he said. 'It's absolutely maddening. I can't
write a letter to the newspaper without some idiot writing and saying 'If
that's logic, then I'm a blah, blah . . .'
Dummett is a non-ideological left-winger who resigned from the Labour Party
in 1956 because the Hungarian workers' call for a sympathy strike was
rejected by the Trades Union Congress and suppressed by the British media.
He likes jazz and used to read a lot of science fiction. What is more, he
believes in God.
I thought professors of logic were supposed to be atheist, I said.
Dummett laughed in astonished disbelief. 'Why do you say that?'
Most people would say it was contradictory.
'Well, that's a very thoughtless thing to say. Why should they say that?'
The prospect of having to argue with the Wykeham Professor of Logic at
Oxford - before lunch, too - was unappetising. I muttered something about
mediaeval superstition having been swept away by the fresh air of
rationalism.
If there's no contradiction, I said, can you explain why not?
'You'd need to point out the contradiction.'
I experienced an inward struggle. I cited materialism, the philosophical
theory that says mind, soul and personality are just names for bundles of
physiological occurrences. If you believe in God, I asked, do you need to be
a philosopher at all?
'I've sometimes thought that if I didn't believe in God, I wouldn't think it
was worth going on with philosophy. So it's just the opposite of what you
say. As for the things you're talking about, they are superstitions.
Materialism is one modern superstition, and determinism is another.
'When you talk about materialism, you need to be clear first what
constitutes matter. It's not a very easy question to answer, actually.'
The professor took pity on me. 'Obviously, there's a contradiction between
believing in God and being an out-and-out materialist. But I don't think to
be a professor of logic you need to be an out-and-out materialist. In fact,
I think it is indefensible. So, I'm still perplexed about the contradiction.
I think it's only to do with the zeitgeist that religious belief is
intellectually extremely unfashionable.'
Dummett was the son of non-practising Anglicans who rejected religion in
adolescence but converted to Catholicism before he was 20. I asked if it had
been a reasoning process.
'Yes, that's right. It wasn't through contacts at all.'
So you got there by yourself?
'I got there by myself.'
Dummett sat in the corner of a deep sofa, eyes half closed, chain-smoking
cigarettes. Once, without even looking, he reached in his shirt pocket and
swapped cigarette holders in mid-smoke. At times he pondered deeply,
sage-like, before replying; at others, he chuckled heartily through his
words and looked like a tubby schoolboy.
I wondered if there was a connection between his philosophy and his other
views. Is it possible, I asked, that philosophers incline to one or other
opinion merely out of temperament?
'Yes, it's certainly possible. But the value of their work lies in the
strength of their arguments or otherwise. It doesn't matter why they believe
what they do.'
Are your political views the result of temperament?
'I wouldn't put it as strongly as that. But I think you're quite right. They
don't come from patient exploration of the kind philosophers go in for
professionally. I hope they're coherent with my other views, but they
certainly don't stem from philosophical work at all.'
When I suggested that the popular picture of a professor of logic was of a
sexless, cold-blooded creature, a brain-in-a-bowl, not a leftish political
activist with five children, he was tickled.
'Why? I don't think professors of logic have to be any one kind of person.
Of course, when you're engaged in philosophical enquiry, you've got to be
very careful to follow arguments where they lead. But that doesn't seem to
me to mean you shouldn't react strongly to injustice or hatred or
oppression.'
He was not so amused when I asked him if he understood racism and could
sympathise with xenophobes.
'No, I don't sympathise with them at all.'
Isn't it natural to fear and resent . . .
'I don't know what's human and natural,' he interrupted. 'It may be human
and natural to behave as people are behaving in Bosnia at the moment. But it
has to be curbed.
'I really don't know whether, if conditions were different, English people
would be yelling for the expulsion of the Scots, killing them, destroying
their houses and putting them in camps. I mean, it's also human and natural
to behave to other people in a decent way.'
Do you get emotional to the point where you can't concentrate on your work?
'I suppose you could say that. When I was heavily involved with immigration,
that took an awful lot out of me. For some years I did my teaching and
lecturing but didn't attempt to do any creative work. These are very
distressing things, particularly if you deal with individual people in
trouble.'
Dummett's fame is due to his interpretation of Gottlob Frege, the German
pioneer of mathematical logic. The theme of his life's work has been to
remove the metaphorical traps in arguments for and against the real
existence of things - whether objects, numbers or mental states - and to
show that realism is much harder to defend than people think it is.
He agreed that philosophy - but not only philosophy - is suffering in an age
when an economic justification is sought for everything that costs public
money.
Does philosophy make progress?
'I wouldn't engage in it if I didn't think progress was made - although some
philosophers think differently. One can't easily ask what are the
established results of thousands of years of philosophy.' He laughed
cheerfully.
But I did ask what impact philosophy has had on the way we behave.
The professor went into deep thought for a long two minutes. He surfaced and
said: 'Well, I think - this is not a thing I'm totally happy with - the way
in which people are disposed to make a distinction between what's a fact and
what's an evaluation. That's a very crude effect but it is an effect.'
Nor had philosophy been squeezed out by science. 'The most obvious example
is the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Scientists can use the theory
but they don't know what it means exactly. When they debate that, they are
doing philosophy. The aim of philosophy is understanding what you can
already deal with in a restricted context.'
Dummett retires at the end of next month. Such is the state of university
finances, a replacement for the post he inherited from A J Ayer has not yet
been chosen. He plans to revise two of his philosophy books and to write a
successor to his 1984 book Voting Procedures which, he thinks, did not sell
because it was too mathematical. Typically, he will not be setting out with
a conclusion, to advertise his preferred brand of proportional
representation (PR).
'I'm reluctant to say it's about PR because I don't even accept the normal
definition of PR. It must be intelligible, even to people who shudder at the
sight of an equation. I realise that to get people interested there mustn't
be any equations at all.' The Wykeham Professor of Logic roared with
laughter.
Underneath, perhaps he is afraid his book on electoral reform will also end
up on the shelf marked 'Occult.'

The Financial Times


London Page XVI

920822

