FT921-14047

FT  17 JAN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Major says Labour 'in a shambles'
over plans - Opposition proposals to end the National Insurance
contributions ceiling have given the Tories an unexpected opportunity


   By DAVID OWEN


MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, accused Labour of being 'in a shambles'
over its tax plans yesterday, as the government sought to capitalise on the
uncertainty over the timing of Opposition plans to abolish the ceiling on
National Insurance contributions.
Mr Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, might be considered 'a tax dodger' on
policy rather than personal matters, Mr Major added, during heated exchanges
which were dominated by economic issues.
Labour, for its part, preferred to concentrate on unemployment, with Mr
Kinnock claiming that Mr Major's record in this particular area was 'even
worse' than his predecessor's.
Why was the government not prepared to do anything useful to stop the
'remorseless' rise in unemployment, Mr Kinnock asked.
Unemployment had climbed by nearly 1m during Mr Major's time as chancellor
of the exchequer and then prime minister, he added.
Mr Norman Lamont, the present chancellor, joined in the assault on Labour's
tax intentions, calling on the party to clarify its own mind about its plans
for National Insurance.
There was nothing wrong with 'massive increases in public expenditure',
provided the party advocating them was open in admitting it planned 'massive
increases in tax to fund them', he said.
The chancellor also branded the contributions 'the tax on middle managers'.
Mr Patrick Nicholls, Conservative MP for Teignbridge, chose to highlight a
different aspect of Labour's National Insurance policy, calling on Mr Major
to confirm that it would 'actually punish anyone who earned Pounds 390 in a
single week'.
Labour's proposals would impose 'a massive tax burden' on 4m ordinary
people, he maintained.
The prime minister joined in by suggesting that Labour 'simply did not
understand that point when they drew up their policy'. Under Labour,
everyone would 'pay more National Insurance contributions in a single week
if they earned above 1/52nd of the statutory upper earnings limit', he said.
He cited newspaper reports stating that Labour's tax plans would represent
'the largest ever peacetime tax increase'.
Labour had 'promised explicitly that anyone earning less than Pounds 21,000
a year would not pay a penny extra in income tax or National Insurance', he
said.
That was clearly 'wrong' and Labour should 'admit that and do so publicly'.
In his earlier remarks, Mr Major had claimed Labour's 'muddled statements'
showed that 'you cannot trust them on tax'.
He added: 'They shift their position from day to day. The only thing that is
certain is that a party that promises to spend and spend is a party that
would have to tax and tax.'
These remarks followed a question from Mr Gwilym Jones, Tory MP for Cardiff
North, in which he suggested that it was 'the height of irresponsibility'
for Labour to 'pretend you can have massive increases in spending from day
one of a government' while merely phasing in the necessary tax increases.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920117

