FT921-14370

FT  16 JAN 92 / EC formalises the split-up of Yugoslavia


   By Our Foreign Staff


THE European Community yesterday sealed the formal end of the Yugoslav
federation by recognising Croatia and Slovenia as independent states.
But it put off extending recognition to the other breakaway republics of
Macedonia and Bosnia-Hercegovina.
The landmark decision by the Community was tempered by disagreement among
the Twelve over tactics and fears that it could complicate negotiations at
the EC peace conference on Yugoslavia's future.
The findings of the conference's arbitration commission under Mr Robert
Badinter, the French constitutional expert, expressed the reservation that
Croatia had not agreed to the conference's plans to accord self-government
to majority Serbian areas inside Croatia.
However, President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia undertook this month to 'accept
entirely' the peace conference provisions for autonomy and minority rights.
The differences within the EC were underlined when Germany yesterday assumed
full diplomatic relations with Croatia and Slovenia, ensuring that it stayed
in front of the rest of the EC to the very end.
The arbitration commission's reservations on the question of human and
minority rights in Croatia failed to cause even a flicker of hesitation in
Bonn, where the government spokesman, Mr Dieter Vogel, expressed confidence
that the German pressure for diplomatic recognition had been an important
contribution towards the realisation of a genuine ceasefire there.
The Dutch government, however, was among those most concerned at premature
recognition of Croatia. It said it had agreed, while 'expecting the Croatian
government to see to it that all the shortcomings mentioned ..will be
remedied'.
Mr Piet Dankert, the Dutch junior minister for EC affairs, speaking in
Bavaria, said the continual German threats to press ahead with recognition
regardless of its partners' views was 'a very unhappy beginning to the
common foreign and security policy, for which the path was cleared at the
Maastricht summit.'
France said it might not send an ambassador until Croatia met the required
conditions, while Britain said it was considering the question of sending
ambassadors to Croatia and Slovenia.
In Belgrade, the Serb-controlled federal government reacted with predictable
anger to the EC decision, accusing it of 'violating international law'.
While Serbian officials insisted the move would not affect Yugoslavia's
international status, Mr Dobrosav Veizovic, the deputy foreign minister,
said it would jeopardise the EC and United Nations peace process.
In Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia-Hercegovina, officials said they were
disappointed but not surprised that the EC declined to recognise its
independence.
'I understand that the EC's arbitration commission has recommended that we
hold a republic-wide referendum,' said Mr Rusmir Mahmutcehajic, Bosnia's
deputy prime minister. 'We will carry out this.'
In Skopje, the capital of Macedonia, a government official said the EC's
objection was based on the principle of 'not alienating Greece, which
objected to the name Macedonia being used for our independent republic.'
The Badinter report's finding that Macedonia should also be recognised is
bound to bring pressure on Greece to relent.
Editorial comment, Page 20

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920116

