FT923-15643

FT  01 JUL 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: S African troubles lift
platinum price


   By KENNETH GOODING, Mining Correspondent


PLATINUM'S PRICE rose strongly in London yesterday following an overnight
rally in New York. That was sparked by worries about the present political
instability in South Africa, which supplies more than 65 per cent of the
western world's requirements.
The metal's price closed in London yesterday at Dollars 381.25 a troy ounce,
up Dollars 14 from Monday's close, a gain of nearly 4 per cent in one day
and its highest level for nearly a year.
There had been a change of market sentiment, possibly helped by the buoyancy
of base metal prices in the past few days, said Mr Tim Pearce, principal
trader at Johnson Matthey, the world's biggest platinum marketing group.
The market was now less worried about the lack of growth in Japan's economy
and more concerned about the possibility of strikes hitting South African
mines. Platinum is mainly used in catalysts, particularly those used to
clean up noxious emissions from cars, and the Japanese motor industry is
experiencing a difficult year.
Ms Rhona O'Connell, analyst at Williams de Broe, part of the Banque
Bruxelles Lambert group, suggested, that South African supplies were not
threatened because any miners' strike there would damage further gold mines
already teetering on the brink of disaster.
However, the platinum market was tight, stocks were 'minimal' and consumers
were living hand-to-mouth. So, despite the speed of yesterday's rise, prices
between Dollars 370 and Dollars 380 an ounce were sustainable, said Ms
O'Connell.
In its recent platinum review, Johnson Matthey pointed out that Russia's
platinum export sales spiralled out of control last year to reach a record
1.1m ounces. This helped to drive down the price from an average of Dollars
472 in 1990 to Dollars 376. Mr Jeremy Coombes, author of the review,
suggested the Russians recognised that damage had been done and he forecast
export sales this year would fall back to between 600,000 and 700,000
ounces. JM forecast that platinum supply and demand should be in balance in
1992 and this should enable the price to climb back to Dollars 400 an ounce
by the year-end.

The Financial Times


London Page 32

920701

