FT921-3667

FT  13 MAR 92 / Leading Article: Policy choices for the US


IN PAST US presidential elections, foreign observers have often been
frustrated by the lack of attention paid to foreign policy. Decisions made
by a US president can sometimes have more effect on the fate of people in
other parts of the world than decisions made by their own national leaders;
yet those parts of the world may not be mentioned by presidential
candidates, and the vast majority of the electors may cast their votes
without having even heard of them.
This year's election is different. Not that the details of foreign policy
are receiving any more attention than before. But, thanks especially to Mr
Patrick Buchanan, the US's world leadership role itself has become an
election issue. Mr Buchanan has tapped into a strong current of popular
feeling which holds that, having won the Cold War, the US can now afford to
leave the world to its own devices, and needs to do so in order to
concentrate on solving its economic and social problems at home.
Those who would follow Mr Buchanan's isolationism all the way are still
probably quite a small minority. There is no mass movement, for example,
calling for the immediate withdrawal of all US forces from Europe. Nor, in
spite of all the 'Japan-bashing', does there appear to be strong support for
protectionism: it is the less protectionist among the Democratic candidates
who have done best in the primaries so far. There is not even much criticism
of President Bush's foreign policy as such. His opponents are, by and large,
quite happy to concede that foreign policy is what the president is good at.
Domestic problems
But what many Americans do feel is that foreign policy takes up much too
large a share of his time and effort, while problems at home are crying out
for more attention. Before Mr Buchanan on the right, the message was
powerfully rammed home by Mr Harris Wofford, the surprise victor of last
November's Senate by-election in Pennsylvania, on the left: 'It's time to
take care of our own.'
That message has certainly reached Mr Bush, via the primary results. He has
not yet translated it into convincing remedial action on the home front -
which is hardly surprising, for in reality there is no automatic
correspondence between presidential time spent on a problem and progress
towards its solution. Nor is it quite fair to say, as one Democratic
congressman has, that 'for the next three months, Patrick Buchanan is going
to be president of the United States'. Foreign policy has not come to a
sudden halt. On several international issues - the Uruguay Round, the
Arab-Israel peace process, Iraq's continued defiance of UN resolutions,
re-employment of Soviet nuclear scientists - the administration continues to
be very active.
Pulling teeth
What is true is that Mr Bush has less and less freedom of manoeuvre when it
comes to spending money on his foreign policy objectives. To withhold loan
guarantees from Israel is proving surprisingly easy. But to get money out of
Congress for IMF recapitalisation, or to pay for UN peacekeeping efforts in
Cambodia and Yugoslavia, is like pulling teeth. Above all Mr Bush has, in
former president Richard Nixon's words, done 'pathetically' little to help
'Russia's first democratic, free-market-oriented, non-expansionist
government'. Stung by the criticism, he pleads that 'there isn't a lot of
money around', and in one sense this is clearly true, with the budget
deficit expected to reach Dollars 400bn next year - especially for a
president who now says his biggest mistake was to abandon his 'no new taxes'
pledge in 1990.
If asked to choose between saving Russia and improving America's schools or
urban infrastructure, there can be little doubt what the voters will say.
But that need not be the choice. Mr Bush is still committed to maintaining
1.6m men under arms over the next five years, at a cost of about Dollars
1,200bn. It would surely make sense to spend a few billion of those dollars
now, on foreign policy objectives which, if achieved, would make the US more
secure even with much smaller armed forces.

The Financial Times


London Page 16

920313

