FT923-9703

FT  04 AUG 92 / Technology: EDI on the book shelves


   By PAUL TAYLOR


It is estimated that 70 per cent of all trading documents printed by
computer are re-keyed into another computer by their recipients,
representing considerable time and cost.
One way to reduce this wasted effort is to introduce electronic data
interchange (EDI) which allows for computer-to-computer handling of
structured information like orders, delivery notes, invoices, credit notes
and other commercial communications between trading partners.
In the UK, booksellers are the latest retailers to embrace EDI. First
Edition, of Otford, Kent, began supplying EDI services to the book community
last month following a three-month pilot scheme involving five publishers
and four booksellers/suppliers.
The potential market for EDI among booksellers is substantial. As Mark
Hodder-Williams, managing director of First Edition, notes: 'This is an
industry with 15,000 producers and over 500,000 product lines.'
Dillons, one of the biggest UK booksellers, estimates that it alone handles
1.5m invoices a year which, if placed end to end would reach from London to
Leeds. The company spends about 11,000 hours a year keying them into
computers.
First Edition, formed by Book Data, the book database company, and Vista
Computer Services, the computer systems market leader in the UK book
publishing industry, is providing EDI to the book industry based on the INS
Tradernet service. First Edition subscribers receive the INS Intercept-Plus
software for use on any PC clone, an electronic mailbox, full installation
and consultancy, plus staff training.
The service provides publishers, wholesalers, the library community and
bookshops with access to a low-cost, fast and reliable 24-hour
computer-to-computer service for exchanging commercial documents in agreed
formats defined by the Book Industry Communication, the official
co-ordinating body for EDI in the book industry.
EDI is expected to offer a number of advantages to booksellers including
speeding up communications, eliminating repetitive data entry, increasing
accuracy, enhancing customer service and reducing operating costs.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920804

