FT924-6102

FT  23 NOV 92 / Survey of Eastern France (3): Industrial turnaround - An
emphasis on technical education pays off in Nancy


   By WILLIAM DAWKINS


IT IS hard to imagine that Nancy, an elegant and prosperous town with some
of the finest 18th century buildings in France, has ever seen an industrial
crisis.
Yet the area around the largest town in Lorraine has lost more than 10,000
jobs over the past decade, mainly from the state-owned steel plants at
nearby Pompey and Neuves-Maisons.
Over the same period, more than 8,000 new jobs have been created, partly
thanks to a wave of foreign investment, and partly thanks to start-up
businesses fostered by the departmental and city authorities. As an
industrial centre, Nancy, has traditionally been a base for chemical,
clothing and food-processing industries. It has also developed as a
financial and administrative capital.
'We have survived the crisis of re-industrialisation better than Lorraine as
a whole because of our tradition of technical education,' claims Mr Bernard
Guerrier de Dumast, deputy mayor and president of Nancy Technopole, the
town's technological showpiece. The Technopole, built up over the past 20
years by the city and regional authorities, provides cheap office space and
advice for about 100 small businesses grouped on Nancy's university park,
with start-up capital available through the Institut Lorrain de
Participation. The intellectual nucleus for all this comes from Nancy's
three universities - the first of its universities was founded as far back
as 1572 - and its five prestigious civil service technical schools, which
were originally established to train engineers for the coal and steel
industries. They are now being encouraged by the Technopole to bring forward
high technology projects that could be turned into commercial propositions
on site. The body responsible is Promotech, a small business consultancy
service backed by the city authorities, which estimates that 80 per cent of
its clients are still in business 10 years after starting up. Nancy does
not, unlike some other towns, pump aid into start-up businesses, emphasises
Mr Guerrier de Dumast - 'that would be complete folly and only harm the
businesses which already exist,' he explains. 'On the other hand, our job is
to help them do well.'

The Financial Times


London Page II

921123

