FT921-11747

FT  30 JAN 92 / International Bonds: EIB raises Ecu500m in issue of
floating-rate notes


   By TRACY CORRIGAN


THE European Investment Bank yesterday raised Ecu500m in floating-rate
notes, with its third issue structured as a block trade - that is, with
lower fees and without an underwriting group - so far this year.
The deal was considered aggressively-priced, at a discounted margin of 58
basis points below the London interbank offered rate (Libor). In addition,
the EIB once again squeezed the fees for both the three lead underwriters
and the small selling group.
However, EIB paper is exempt from withholding tax for Italian investors, so
the demand for the offering was concentrated in Italy. Most dealers said the
issue would have to rely almost solely on Italian placement. 'The Italian
effort will have to be very strong, because it takes a story to sell paper
at this level,' one syndicate manager said.
An outstanding issue of nine-year EIB floating-rate notes is currently
trading at about 51 basis points under Libor. However, that paper is trading
at about a 2-point premium to par, a deterrent for some investors.
There were also some reports of demand from money-market funds. Short-term
rates in the Ecu market are currently high compared with other markets, and
with the rest of the Ecu yield curve. Six-month Libor currently stands at
about 10 3/8 per cent, while the UK's recently issued Treasury notes are
yielding about 8 1/2 per cent.
Also in the Ecu market, KFW International Finance launched a successful
Ecu250m five-year deal, arranged by Deutsche Bank. The deal was considered
fairly-priced, and took away any bitter taste left by the aggressive pricing
of KFW's last deal, a Dollars 300m 15-year deal launched early this month.
The Ecu deal met strong demand from German and Swiss retail investment, as
well as from institutional players. The deal closed at 99.96 bid, the level
of its initial fixed reoffer price.
Traders speculated the EIB's FFr3bn 10-year offering of fixed-rate bonds,
expected to be launched today, would also be structured as a block trade.
Sources at the Bank of Italy denied reports that Italy is considering
launching a FFr7 to FFr10bn offering of long-dated bonds, and said Italy
would not be tapping any offshore market in the 'foreseeable future'. But,
banks continue to present the Italian authorities with proposals for
long-dated transactions in both French francs and Ecu.
In the dollar sector, Telecommunicacoes de Sao Paolo (Telesp) launched a
Dollars 100m three-year deal, puttable after two years, via Banque Indosuez.
The deal met strong demand, particularly from retail investors, encouraged
by a hefty 650 basis point yield spread (to the put option). Telesp is an
operating subsidiary of Telebras, the Brazilian telecommunications utility,
which paved the way with a deal last year.
Also in the dollar sector, two fixed/floating-rate offerings for Mitsubishi
Bank and Long-Term Credit Bank were targetted at Japanese investors.

The Financial Times


London Page 27 Table (Omitted).

920130

