FT921-11991

FT  29 JAN 92 / International Capital Markets: Japanese scale down SE reform
proposals


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


   TOKYO


THE JAPANESE Ministry of Finance has been forced to scale down plans for
liberalisation of the country's fixed stock exchange commissions, expected
to be implemented as early as next year.
Recommendations by an advisory panel to the ministry urged that while
Japan's was the only leading stock market where commission rates on
stockbroking were fixed, liberalisation should be implemented gradually,
starting with large-lot transactions.
Fixed stockbroking commissions have been blamed as the main cause of
brokers' payment of compensation to favoured clients. Due to the lack of
price competition, Japanese brokers chose to win the favour of large clients
by offering compensation on their stock losses.
The Ministry of Finance earlier planned to revise Articles 130 and 131 of
the Securities and Exchange Law, the base for the present fixed-rate
commission system. However, the review has been met by bitter opposition
from the securities industry, which argues that liberalisation will lead to
higher small-lot rates, thus driving individuals and other small-lot
investors away from the stock market.
Mr Shogo Watanabe, chairman of the Japan Securities Dealers' Association,
yesterday expressed displeasure with the advisory panel's recommendation. He
said hasty liberalisation would cause serious problems.
The advisory panel has appointed a working group to discuss details of
commission deregulation, including the timing of implementation, over the
next year.
Meanwhile, the Ministry of Finance said it had completed its review of the
financial system. Reform bills to be submitted to the current Diet -
parliament - session include the establishment of a financial markets
watchdog, and tightening of penalties imposed on violators of the Securities
and Exchange Law.
The review of barriers separating banking and securities industries, and
interest rate deregulation by the ministry is also underway.
Moody's, the US credit-rating agency, has placed the long-term ratings of
Tokai Bank, a Japanese commercial bank, and its three subsidiaries, under
review for possible downgrades.
Moody's said the review of Tokai's Aa3 rating was prompted by the bank's
'growing vulnerability to asset quality deterioration'. Tokai has been
involved in a series of illegal loan schemes, where non-bank financial
institutions extended loans totalling Y63bn (Dollars 512.2m) based on
deposit receipts, allegedly forged by the bank's former employee, as fake
collateral.
Tokai recently announced it would take over the loans of the non-bank
institutions.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

920129

