FT922-4003

FT  08 JUN 92 / Economics: UK data expected to confirm fears that inflation
is 'not yet licked'


   By EMMA TUCKER


THE emphasis in the UK this week has been very much on inflation. The annual
rate of retail price inflation in May is expected to confirm the
Chancellor's fears that inflation is 'not yet licked', with the City
forecasting a rise of 4.4 per cent in the year to May. In April the annual
rate was 4.3 per cent.
Although the downward progress of retail price inflation has been bumpy,
producer price inflation - the prices of goods at the factory gate - has
been making better progress. The annual rate has fallen from 5.1 per cent in
November last year to 3.8 per cent in April. The City expects producer price
inflation to drop again in May to 3.7 per cent.
May producer prices are also expected to have risen in the US. Economists
are forecasting a monthly rise of 0.3 per cent, which would be the biggest
monthly increase in seven months. This would mainly reflect higher energy
prices.
With retail demand showing signs of growth in all the major sectors of the
economy of the US, retail sales are also expected to have risen quite
strongly in May.
week, with the median of forecasts in brackets from MMS International, a
financial information company, include:
Today: UK, April credit business (Pounds 75m); Canada, May housing starts
(178,000); Europe, Whitsun - most European markets closed; Australia,
Queen's birthday - all markets closed.
Tomorrow: UK, May producer prices index - input (up 0.2 per cent on month,
down 0.4 per cent on year), output (up 0.2 per cent on month, up 3.7 per
cent on year), output excluding food, drink and tobacco, April housing
starts; US, April wholesale trade, Presidential primary in North Dakota;
Japan, April machinery orders; Canada, April motor vehicle sales (up 4.3 per
cent on month); Luxembourg, EC finance ministers meeting; Germany, half day
holiday - Frankfurt only.
Wednesday: US, April housing completions; Canada, April department store
sales (up 1.8 per cent on year); Sweden, unemployment rate; Portugal, Camoes
Day - all markets closed.
Thursday: UK, May Confederation of British Industry distributive trades
survey published; US, May producer prices index (up 0.3 per cent), excluding
food and energy (up 0.3 per cent), May retail sales (up 0.6 per cent),
excluding autos (up 0.4 per cent), May M1 (up Dollars 10bn), May M2 (flat),
May M3 (down Dollars 2bn), M1 (up Dollars 3.8bn), M2 (up Dollars 4.8bn), M3
(down Dollars 6.5bn) for week ended June 1, initial claims for week ended
May 30 (400,000); Australia, May employment (up 10,000), May unemployment
rate (10.5 per cent), April retail trade (up 1 per cent); Japan, trade
balance (Dollars 6.1bn surplus); Denmark, trade balance excluding ships.
Friday: UK, May retail prices index (up 0.2 per cent on month, up 4.4 per
cent on year), excluding mortgage interest (up 5.4 per cent), first quarter
construction output; US May consumer prices index (up 0.3 per cent),
excluding food and energy (up 0.3 per cent), April business inventories (up
0.1 per cent), May real earnings, Denmark, May current account; Spain,
consumer prices index (up 0.3 per cent on month, up 6.5 per cent on year);
Japan, Bank of Japan publishes May Tankan report.
During the week: Germany, April trade balance (DM3bn surplus), April current
account (DM0.5bn deficit), April retail sales West (down 2 per cent on
year), April wholesale prices index (up 0.3 per cent on month), March
capital account, March long-term capital account; Holland, May consumer
prices index (up 0.2 per cent on month, up 4.4 per cent on year).

The Financial Times


London Page 11

920608

