FT924-11489

FT  26 OCT 92 / Euro-rebels try to outstare Major: The Revolt Over
Maastricht


   By ALISON SMITH


MR JOHN MAJOR'S presence at the 50th anniversary of the battle of El
Alamein, a turning point in the Second World War, offers an almost
irresistible comparison with the launch of his own counter-attack against
the band of Tory Euro-sceptic rebels.
But even before the hand-to-hand combat over the line-by-line scrutiny of
the Maastricht Bill, Mr Major has to win his vote in the paving debate in
the Commons on November 4. The skirmishing in the run-up to that debate
resembles not so much a battle as a game of poker - albeit with high and
ever-rising stakes.
The Euro-rebels are sceptical about the government's stomach for a fight.
They point to a catalogue of issues where the government has bowed to party
opinion: the resignation of Mr David Mellor; the pit closures programme and,
most significantly, the economy, with a change of priorities away from the
battle against inflation to the strategy for growth.
So, on past performance, the rebels may feel justified in dismissing as a
bluff the prospect of a general election if they play a winning hand and
delay the Maastricht Bill.
There has been a whiff of concession already on timing.
The decision to schedule the statement on public spending and a related
economic debate between the paving debate on Maastricht and the start of the
detailed discussion of the bill itself is clearly an attempt by ministers to
win over Tory backbenchers who believe that debating Maastricht instead of
the economy makes the Commons look irrelevant and out of touch.
Having won that concession even before last Thursday's rebellious meeting of
the backbench 1922 committee which voted to advise a delay in the discussion
of Maastricht, Tory Euro-sceptics might also ponder how far an election is
an ultimatum that Mr Major could deliver, even assuming he is not bluffing.
Over the past few days Mr Major has underlined that the policy on
Maastricht, to press ahead with the debate and with the bill, was agreed by
all the cabinet on Thursday and came not from him alone but from the
government collectively.
Coded messages in ministerial speeches at the Tory conference this month
suggested that not all ministers feel as committed to the agreement as Mr
Major. If the government were defeated in the debate next week there might
be Euro-doubting ministers who would distance themselves from present policy
by talking of 'opportunities' in the new situation, much as 'opportunities'
were found after sterling's hurried exit from the European exchange rate
mechanism.
In the event of a defeat in the Commons next week Mr Major might feel that
the government's authority had been so undermined that it should resign and
go to the country. But he would have to carry his cabinet colleagues with
him.
The powerful executive of the 1922 committee would also doubtless have views
on any decision to call an election unless the government had actually lost
a motion of confidence.
The question of bluff is not all on one side. As previous Tory revolts have
shown, rebels find it easier to talk up their concern than to vote against
the government.
Another possibility, and one the rebels have to take seriously, is that
defeating the government might lead to a change of leadership.
That is not a risk-free option for the Euro-rebels, in spite of their
bravado.
Senior ministers point out that Mr Major reflects the mood of the party on
Europe more closely than any of his cabinet colleagues. Any short-term
successor, such as Mr Kenneth Clarke, the Home Secretary, or even the
wounded Mr Michael Heseltine at trade and industry, would be more likely to
come from the Euro-enthusiast wing of the party. Baroness Thatcher's chances
of a comeback are regarded as non-existent - in spite of her continuing hold
over the Tory imagination.
As Mr Douglas Hurd, foreign secretary, warned at the Tory conference, the
danger if a less representative leader than Mr Major took over would be that
the party may tear itself apart.
That might mean an early election won by Labour. Even though individual
Euro-sceptics kept their seats, the incoming Labour government would adopt
the social chapter of the Maastricht agreement, which is certainly not part
of the Tory rebels' gameplan.
In the approach to the debate, Tory whips will be using their traditional
mixture of threats and promises to finesse a government victory, while
ministers also have some room for manoeuvre over the precise terms of the
motion. Not all the cards have been dealt and there is still all to play
for.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

921026

