FT924-6184

FT  23 NOV 92 / Arts: A Nielsen experience - Concerts


   By ANDREW CLEMENTS


The symphonies of Sibelius and Nielsen must sit at the very centre of any
celebration of the music of Scandinavia and Finland. The Barbican's 'Tender
is the North' festival naturally has cycles of both; on Thursday this week
Colin Davis will set out on his Sibelius pilgrimage with the LSO, while
Simon Rattle and the City of Birmingham Symphony are currently offering the
Nielsen canon in three weekly programmes.
In Friday's concert Rattle conducted the Second and Fourth Symphonies,
separated by an account of Mahler's Kindertotenlieder with Olaf Baer as
soloist that was an unfortunate distraction; his voice sounded so
distressingly threadbare and out of condition it cast a pall over the
performance. Rattle's virtues in Nielsen, though, are joyously
straightforward and correct. He takes no liberties, never attempts to lard
Nielsen's melodic lines with extra expressiveness, and drives the music from
start to finish with unflagging energy and pinpoint architectural logic,
relying upon the CBSO deliver it with maximum vividness.
Just why Rattle's Nielsen seems so convincing was partly explained in a
television documentary on BBC2 on Saturday. The conductor wrote and
introduced Carl Nielsen: A Life in Six Symphonies, guiding viewers with
great lucidity through each of the works with the help of Robert Simpson,
most faithful of Nielsen's advocates, a smattering of archive film, and
extracts from the symphonies performed by the CBSO. The programme ended with
a magnificent account of the Third, Sinfonia espansiva.
Along the way there were fascinating points that one longed to be amplified
 -Rattle's description of the Fifth Symphony as the greatest work to come
out of the experience of the First World War, and the Sixth as a response to
the modernism of Stravinsky and Schoenberg; most challenging of all,
perhaps, Simpson's admiration for Nielsen as the sanest of 20th-century
composers.
Certainly there is a triumph of tonality in these symphonies, a close
kinship with and extension of the tradition of 19th-century romanticism. As
Rattle's performance of the Second on Friday made plain, there is a great
deal of Brahms and Dvorak in its make up, just as the finale of the Fourth
seems Nielsen's nearest approach to his exact contemporary Sibelius. If
abandoning of tonality is regarded as a symptom of neurosis, then ergo
Nielsen becomes a model of mental stability. But if musical psycho-history
is not as straightforward as that, then his music is harder to place, and
more intriguing; the autobiographical relationship between his life and his
symphonies becomes central and unresolved. These are great symphonies, the
Third, Fourth and Fifth especially, and like all such products of a
post-symphonic age especially troubling and teasing.
City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra: Barbican Hall; final concert 28
November. 'Carl Nielsen: A Life in Six Symphonies': BBC2 television.

The Financial Times


London Page 13

921123

