FT922-428

FT  27 JUN 92 / Hawks & Handsaws: To the rescue, again


   By MICHAEL THOMPSON-NOEL


I WISH I'D never joined Ross Perot's team. I was in Bahrain last weekend,
breakfasting with sheikhs on muesli and figs, a sand-storm raging, when the
man who would be president telephoned from Dallas, heedless of the time
difference, to pick my brains on world affairs.
'How are you, boy?' asked Ross Perot. 'I must say you're an asset. But you
do skip around - one minute here, the next someplace else. Where are you
now, boy?'
'Bahrain,' I replied.
'Never heard of it,' said Perot. 'Is it a neighbourly kinda place? Upright
and church-going? An enemy of moral laxity? A friend of America's? I
couldn't tolerate a member of my election team prancing and cavorting in
some heathen spot. You're not playing roulette, boy? Terrible thing,
roulette. It breaks up whole families, causes untold anguish. I have said it
before and I will say it again: there's no room on my payroll for anyone who
plays roulette.'
'Of course I'm not playing roulette, Mr Perot,' I said. 'It's six in the
morning. I'm breakfasting with sheikhs. We've just finished our muesli. Now
we're eating figs. To answer your first question: Bahrain is neighbourly,
upright and moral. It's halfway down the Gulf. I'm sure you needn't worry
about it. There are sand-storms every day. Temperatures over 50`. Absolutely
ghastly. The smallest place imaginable. Just a few sheikhs, cosseted by
air-conditioning. In terms of the Middle East, it is a very small
pomegranate.'
'That's the boy,' said Ross Perot. 'You have a wonderful knack for telling
me things I don't know in plain and simple language. I'm glad you're on the
team. Write me a position paper on the Middle East and fax it to me here in
Dallas. The media keep complaining that they don't know what I stand for.
With you in the line-up, I'm able to disabuse them. Is your money getting
through?'
Ever since Ross Perot recruited me two weeks ago to help him win the
presidency, I have received a cheque for Dollars 35,000 every second or
third day. I have bought two Mercedes and an ice-cream machine.
'Yes, thanks, Mr Perot,' I said.
'Excellent. I'll call you mid-week.'
And so he did, on Wednesday, catching me at Wimbledon - Centre Court, Row B
 -where my mobile phone started chirruping just as Croatia's Goran
Ivanisevic boomed down his 33rd ace against Mark Woodforde, a plucky little
Aussie.
'Where are you now, boy?' asked Ross Perot.
'Wimbledon,' I whispered, embarrassed by the frigid stares of those to left
and right.
'Who are you watching?'
'Mr Smarty Pants versus Mr Carrot Top.'
'What's the score?'
'The score hardly matters. Every time Mr Carrot Top shows a flicker of
defiance, Mr Smarty Pants shells him with another four aces or bombards him
with astounding cross-court drives.'
'Good,' said Ross Perot. 'It gladdens me when members of my team show a
healthy interest in sport. Just as long as it doesn't interfere with their
duties, or their never-ceasing war against moral laxity. Thankyou for your
position paper on Middle East affairs, boy. You certainly know your stuff.
It has given the Committee To Elect Ross Perot a great deal to chew on. Now
I want something else - to meet Maggie Thatcher. Can you fix a dinner?'
'Why Maggie Thatcher? She's yesterday's potatoes, a sad and bitter woman.'
'You mean something's happened to her?'
'Of course it has,' I said. 'She was removed in a coup. Her successor is
John Major.'
'Jumping rattlesnakes]' said Ross Perot. 'The things I learn from you. I've
never heard of John Major. But then Europe is a mystery to me, boy, along
with Asia, Africa, Morocco, Mongolia, Queensland, New Zealand, South and
Central America and the North and South Poles.'
'Holy Toledo]' I exclaimed.
'What's the matter?' asked my boss.
'Mr Smarty Pants has just cannoned down his 34th ace.'
'Forget the tennis,' roared Ross Perot. 'It's a wimp's game, boy. A game for
lesbians and long-hairs. Talking to you always reminds me that the reason I
don't stand for anything is that I don't, in fact, know anything. You
overwhelm me, boy. I want you here in Dallas. I'll send a plane to fetch
you. Get here quick.'

The Financial Times


London Page XX

920627

