FT923-10896

FT  28 JUL 92 / UK agrees to minimum VAT rate across EC


   By ANDREW HILL


   BRUSSELS


BRITAIN yesterday conceded the principle that the EC needs a legally binding
minimum standard rate of value added tax.
In a meeting chaired by Mr Norman Lamont, the UK chancellor, EC finance
ministers reached provisional agreement on a package of binding excise
duties and VAT rates, ending five years of fierce debate.
The deal set the seal on the most significant example yet of the Community's
growing influence over national fiscal policy.
The agreement, which will have little immediate effect on prices when it
comes into effect on January 1, also marked the first important achievement
of the British presidency of the EC and a large step towards a single Europe
free of border controls.
Ironically, Britain was, until recently, the most vehement opponent of moves
to cede tax sovereignty to Brussels. Mr Lamont's role in forging a
compromise with his European colleagues immediately drew heavy criticism
from Euro-sceptic MPs in his own party.
Sir Teddy Taylor, secretary of the Tory European Reform Group, said: 'It is
tragic that the government has made the first real concession on the right
of Brussels to determine tax levels.'
But the chancellor mounted a staunch defence of the deal. 'The agreement on
VAT safeguards the UK's existing zero rates,' he said. 'It preserves the
flexibility of future British governments and parliaments to set VAT rates,
it requires no increase in any UK tax rate or duty, and it protects the
interests of the Scotch whisky industry.'
The agreement sets a minimum standard VAT rate of 15 per cent until the end
of 1996, when it would come up for review. There is no maximum rate.
Formal agreement on the whole package of legislation on VAT and excise
duties will have to wait until a number of specific disputes among
individual member states have been sorted out. Ministers have promised to
resolve their differences by Thursday. The package also covers duty on
cigarettes and other tobacco products, alcohol and mineral oils, such as
heating oil.
Most countries' VAT rates have already moved into line with last year's
non-binding political agreement on indirect tax and excise duties. Germany
will have to raise its standard rate from 14 per cent, and Spain will move
from 13 per cent next month.
The agreement removes one of the largest obstacles to a barrier-free Europe.
With VAT rates broadly harmonised, member states will no longer have an
excuse to retain customs controls beyond the end of this year.
Scrapping such controls would save Europe's governments some Ecu8bn (Pounds
5.5bn) a year in manning border posts, and businessmen and road hauliers the
trouble of filling in some 60m customs and tax documents a year.
There is still confusion about whether member states have committed
themselves to having a legally-binding minimum VAT rate for ever. Mr Lamont
indicated that the directive would lapse if ministers failed to reach
unanimous agreement on a renewed legally binding minimum before 1996. The
Community would then be subject only to last year's non-binding accord.
Others disagreed. Mr Jorge Braga de Macedo of Portugal, Mr Lamont's
predecessor as president of the finance ministers' council, believed the
legally binding minimum would be automatically renewed if they failed to
agree. That would deprive dissenters, possibly including Britain, of any
effective veto.
Ministers also agreed a two-tier system of excise duty on spirits, which
will leave current rates of duty in the EC unchanged, but freeze duties at
existing levels between Ecu550 and Ecu1,000 per 100 litres of alcohol.
Member states with duty above Ecu1,000 per 100 litres, such as Britain, are
unlikely to take up the option to reduce their rates.
Issues still outstanding include the difference in duty on British and
Spanish sherry, and the possibility of a French-style control levy on wine
being extended to all member states.

The Financial Times


London Page 1

920728

