FT921-14070

FT  17 JAN 92 / Call to protect BA from US competitors


   By CHARLES LEADBEATER, Industrial Editor


BRITISH AIRWAYS should be pro-tected from increasing competition from US
airlines in Europe until the US aviation market is opened up to foreign
carriers, according to an MPs' report published yesterday.
The report will be welcomed by BA, which has become increasingly critical of
the government's policy of allowing US airlines greater access to British
airports.
The study by the Commons transport committee says that further moves to open
up the UK market should be tied to moves to allow BA cabotage rights in the
US. Cabotage allows an airline based in one country to operate domestic
services in another country. BA has also pressed the US to ease restrictions
on foreign ownership of American airlines.
The committee calls on the government to maintain restrictions on landing
rights at London airports as a bargaining counter in future talks with the
US authorities. It says: 'These are early days in the new battle for
transatlantic market share and we trust the government will see a role in
developing opportunities for British carriers as well as providing better
services for consumers.'
An agreement last year allowed American Airlines and United Airlines, the US
groups, to take over routes from Heathrow Airport previously operated by Pan
Am and TWA. The deal ties the US carriers to keeping their services to the
level operated by UK airlines for three years. The committee suggests that
these restrictions should be lifted only if there is progress to create a
'level playing field' with the opening-up of the US market.
It says the Department of Transport significantly overestimated the benefits
of the deal when it was negotiated last March. Mr Malcolm Rifkind, the
transport secretary, said then that the deal would bring British airlines
financial benefits of Pounds 200m a year. The department has since
recalculated the impact of the deal after BA complained it was worth only
Pounds 130m.
The report recommends that the European Commission should introduce a
special merger regulation to prevent its plans to liberalise the air
transport market from being undermined by growing industrial concentration.
Developments in European Community Air Transport Policy. HMSO, Pounds 14.10.

The Financial Times


London Page 8

920117

