FT922-4052

FT  08 JUN 92 / UK Company News: Hongkong expects holders to accept bid -
The Battle for Midland


   By SIMON HOLBERTON


   HONG KONG


MR WILLIAM Purves, Hongkong and Shanghai Bank's chairman, said yesterday
that he expected Midland Bank shareholders to follow their board's strong
advice and accept his bank's offer for the British clearer now that Lloyds
Bank had withdrawn from the contest.
Hongkong Bank convenes an extraordinary general meeting of its shareholders
tomorrow to approve its Pounds 3.9bn offer for Midland. At that meeting
shareholders would also be asked to withdraw the restriction limiting any
one shareholder from owning more than 1 per cent of the bank.
Mr Purves said that the bid 'seems to be moving in the right direction'. On
Friday, just hours after the department of trade and industry allowed Lloyds
to buy up to 10 per cent of Midland, it had decided to withdraw from the
fray.
'I don't anticipate anyone appearing on the horizon in the next 18 days,' Mr
Purves said in an interview. 'But until the offer is closed and declared
unconditional one can not be certain.'
He said he did not expect that any of Midland's large shareholders would
hold out and not accept the bid.
'If we do not have 50 per cent on the 25th (of June) then the offer is
dead,' he said. 'In that event I would think the Midland share price would
fall back by 100p to 150p. So I think it's unlikely that people would want
to risk that.'
He said that once the offer went unconditional it would be left open for a
period to allow for a mopping up exercise. He said the bank wanted to settle
the transaction in July.
'Once it is unconditional we can sit down with Midland. There is a lot of
work to be done if we are to get the synergies we promise.' The bank
predicts synergies will result in extra profits of Pounds 800m over the
first four years of the merger.
Looking back on the contest for Midland, Mr Purves admitted that there had
been the 'odd distraction' but that it had gone according to plan.
'We planned to go down this route and we did,' he said. 'The only thing we
got slightly wrong was not realising that institutional shareholders of
Midland would not be interested in holding our loan stock. They did not
believe it would trade at par.
'Because of this we revised the offer so there was a cash alternative. We
also revised it because of the planned sale of Thomas Cook. That will add
about Pounds 100m to Midland's profit this year.'
It was Mr Purves and Sir Kit McMahon, former Midland chairman, who conceived
of the marriage between the two banks in the wings of the 1987 International
Monetary Fund conference in Washington. But yesterday Mr Purves declined to
take personal credit for the success.
'This is not a personal thing, it's a corporate thing. The board has been
very supportive and a large team has worked on it.'

The Financial Times


London Page 18

920608

