FT924-6237

FT  23 NOV 92 / The ERM Realignment: Realignment blurs view of money union


   By LIONEL BARBER


   BRUSSELS


THE ROAD to European Monetary Union (Emu) is paved with good intentions. But
after the latest realignment inside the Exchange Rate Mechanism - the third
in just over two months - doubts about the feasibility of the Emu enterprise
seem certain to grow.
In Brussels yesterday, EC officials portrayed the weekend devaluations of
the Spanish and Portuguese currencies as a logical response to currency
market pressures aimed at enhancing stability within the European Monetary
System (EMS).
But stability has come at a price. Rather than signalling progress toward a
common European currency for the Twelve, the latest realignment underlines
the division of Europe into two tiers, with the prosperous upper half built
around a D-Mark zone to which France is clinging doggedly with its 'franc
fort' policy.
Germany's reluctance to lower interest rates during the 10-hour-long weekend
meeting of the European monetary committee not only suggests continuing
tensions within the ERM, it is also a statement about the balance of power
inside the EC.
This time, there was no repeat of the deal last September when Bonn traded a
0.25-point cut in the Lombard rate for a 7 per cent devaluation of the lira.
Having had its arm twisted by the politicians two months ago, Germany's
central bank was in no mood to undergo similar treatment again last weekend.
When bleary-eyed European monetary officials produced a communique early on
Sunday, they nevertheless chose to emphasise that progress toward the goal
of Emu set out in the Maastricht treaty remains on track.
Hence the reaffirmation of the need for ERM members to improve convergence
on price stability, and the commitment of the Spanish and Portuguese
governments to 'convergence programmes' aimed at matching the best
performers in the Community on inflation, deficits and government debt.
Yet at this moment, pressure is building in Brussels and other EC capitals
for a more flexible approach. Officials, including Mr Jacques Delors,
European Commission president, are worried that the convergence programmes'
built-in tendency toward deflation may have to be adjusted during the
current recession.
Without abandoning the long-term goal of convergence, or diluting the
criteria required for the final locking of exchange rates by the best EC
performers, Mr Delors is leaning toward policies which would stimulate
short-term growth - a significant shift in thinking from the more rigid
approach adopted in the late 1980s, when growth was strong and the fresh
push towards Emu began.
The two chief ideas circulating in Brussels are the creation of a European
Investment Fund to lend money for new infrastructure projects, particularly
road and communication links with eastern Europe, and a burst of Community
lending for public works programmes, financed through up to Ecu5bn (Pounds
4bn) borrowing on the international capital markets.
EC finance ministers will hear more about the planned growth initiative when
they gather in Brussels today. With Mr John Major, UK prime minister,
apparently offering guarded support, there is a reasonable chance of a
debate - but no decisions - on a growth package taking place at the EC
summit in Edinburgh.
Equally, ministers will hope to make progress on the Delors II package for
increasing the EC budget by almost one third over the next five or seven
years. The trick is to avoid the mistake of the late 1970s, when an EC-led
growth effort stoked inflation, says one EC official.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

921123

