FT924-924

FT  21 DEC 92 / Australian Bonds: Question mark hangs over the sector


   By KEVIN BROWN


THE Australian credit markets moved into the traditional Christmas slowdown
last week with few economic indicators to chew on, but with a question mark
hanging over them: has the long rally in bond yields ended, or is the market
simply drawing breath?
Trading has been subdued since the last easing of monetary policy in June,
when a 75 basis point cut in official interest rates to 5.75 per cent marked
the 12th successive reduction since rates peaked at 18 per cent in January
1990.
The move triggered a rally which reduced the 10-year bond yield to 9.3 per
cent, a cut of nearly five percentage points since the rally began in 1989.
At the short end, the 90-day bond dipped briefly below 5.5 per cent before
slipping back in August to just below 6 per cent. Since then, rates have
hardly moved, and the only excitement has been the fortnightly instalment of
the federal government's ADollars 18bn bond tender programme.
One reason for the apparent plateau is that the domestic economy continues
to perform sluggishly, and most analysts say traders are increasingly
worried that growth may fizzle out next year. There appeared to be few
supporters for the upbeat view expressed on Friday by Mr Bernie Fraser, the
Reserve Bank governor, that growth in gross domestic product was likely to
reach 4 per cent by the end of 1993.
By contrast, Mr Ralph Willis, the finance minister, admitted on the same day
that the government may have to reduce its own tentative forecast of 3 per
cent growth for 1992-93
Some private forecasters are even more pessimistic. Ms Ivana Bottini, a
Citibank economist, points out that Australia needs 4 per cent growth in GDP
to cut unemployment, currently at a post-war record of 11.4 per cent.
In the face of slow overseas growth and the depressing effect of high
unemployment on domestic demand, Australia faces a danger of moving back
into recession in the middle of next year, says Ms Bottini.
Even the good news does not look as good as it did. The long rally was
underpinned by a steady fall in the rate of inflation from more than 8 per
cent in 1989 to 0.8 per cent in June.
However, the authorities have been unable to reduce interest rates further
because of the weakness of the Australian dollar, which has depreciated by
more than 13 per cent on a trade weighted basis over the past 12 months.
That may change over the next three months if the Labor government decides
to cut interest rates further in a last ditch attempt to stimulate economic
growth before the next federal election, due by June.
For that reason, the bond curve may steepen in 1993 as short yields fall in
anticipation of an easing of monetary policy. But uncertainty is likely to
cause the yield curve to move up and flatten once the election campaign gets
under way.
In the longer term, investors will be watching for signs of sustained
economic recovery, continued low inflation and political stability. Traders
say a resumption of the rally is possible if all those factors emerge,
especially if the currency stabilises and foreign investors return to the
market.

The Financial Times


London Page 18

921221

