FT924-11985

FT  23 OCT 92 / FT Quarterly Review of Personal Finance (17): Anxiety over
Europe - The Professionals / The four believe that Germany is heading for
recession, and that this spells wider danger


   By DAVID DODWELL


If you can keep your head when all about you
Are losing theirs . . .
THE PAST tumultuous month has been a time to recall Rudyard Kipling's famous
test of manliness.
Indeed, it must have been close to the mind of Newton's Howard Beaufort,
when he said in his latest market commentary: 'A refusal to panic, combined
with a reasoned and continual re-appraisal of the changing investment
circumstances, are the maxims for weathering the present storms.'
Perhaps the most most sanguine will have been Baillie Gifford's Douglas
McDougall: with 60 per cent of his portfolio outside the UK, he has reaped
significant windfall gains, at least in sterling terms, as the pound has
tumbled on the world's foreign exchanges. His 15 per cent French bond
holding will also have provided a much needed point of strength.
Howard Beaufort has also been swift to emphasise that more than half of his
UK equity holding - which now amounts to 48 per cent of the portfolio - is
in exporters, or significant overseas earners.
Needless to say, the problems of the government in restoring confidence in
its economic management skills have played a large part in the turbulence of
the UK equity market over the past month. Our professionals do not expect
Britain's exit from the European Monetary System to lead to any substantial
cuts in interest rates, or a quick sprint for inflation-inducing growth -
which means they continue to favour 'high quality growth stocks' rather than
cyclicals. But some remain more skittish than others.
There is consensus that Germany is heading towards recession, in part
because of what Gartmore's Paul Myners calls Bonn's 'monetary overkill'.
They agree with Howard Beaufort that this spells wider European dangers:
'ERM or no ERM, a recessionary and increasingly uncompetitive Germany spells
danger for European economic growth.'
With currencies in the 'Deutsche Mark block' now so strong against sterling,
the temptation to liquidate European holdings is considerable  -
particularly in view of the consensus that the dollar is set to strengthen
further after a little local difficulty around the US presidential election.
The four agree that bonds continue to provide a safe haven, and that the
Pacific region has a monopoly on economic buoyancy for the medium term.
Beyond that, their strategies remain as contrasted as ever:
Douglas McDougall (Baillie Gifford) plans to cut his European equity
holdings from 25 per cent to 20 per cent, transferring these funds to
south-east Asia, which now also accounts for 20 per cent of the portfolio.
Instead of boosting his bond holdings, he has halved his French bond stake
to 7 1/2 per cent, and used the proceeds to buy US bonds.
He is keeping aloof from the US equity market, where he sees the public,
corporate and personal debt overhang as a brake on the economy. He sees
Japan retaining its basic economic strength, but says equities are too
expensive after the market's recent recovery. He plans to add to his 5 per
cent holding 'at lower levels'.
Paul Myners (Gartmore) agrees with Douglas McDougall about the US markets,
but has divergent views on Japan, using the recent rally in Tokyo to get out
of the market. 'It is clear what a mess Japan's economy is in,' he says.
He has moved with the strongest conviction in Europe, where he foresees
looming recession and currency turbulence. He has sold his entire 15 per
cent equity holding, adding instead to his bond holdings - 10 per cent in
Europe and 5 per cent in the US. He has also raised his equity holdings in
Asia (ex-Japan) by 5 per cent to 17 1/2 per cent, being convinced that
strong market performances will be enhanced by currency gains.
Howard Beaufort (Newton Investment Management) mixes strong views with
rather more gentle action. He is selling a 4 per cent holding in Spain on
uncertainty over its currency, and is mixing the proceeds with some of his
cash to buy a 6 per cent holding in a Dutch bond.
Rather than shifting out of UK equities, he favours exporters and
overseas-earning counters. He nevertheless acknowledges that 'devaluation
and a floating currency puts very high risk premiums back into the price of
UK financial assets'.
In response to deepening gloom over Europe's economic prospects, he is
concentrating on 'established growth areas' like food-manufacturing and
pharmaceuticals, and on dollar or D-Mark earners in the 'virtuous core' of
Switzerland, Holland and France. Tim Howe (Singer & Friedlander) looks to an
early end to volatility in the UK, but is trimming his equity holdings by 2
per cent to 58 per cent, and remaining a holder of 'quality
internationally-based equities'. He is also resisting any shift to cyclical
stocks.
He expects the D-Mark to weaken in 1993 'as the reality of (German)
stagflation becomes apparent', and expects currency volatility in Spain. So
he is capturing some currency gains by trimming European holdings by 3 per
cent to 7 per cent. He has used this stake to buy US equities, where he
feels the chance to take advantage of a strengthening dollar outweighs the
danger of a 'triple dip' in the US economy.
In contrast to Paul Myners, he is adding to his equity holdings in Japan,
while taking profits in Hong Kong and selling his Latin American holdings.
The net effect of this is to trim his stake in the Pacific region from 8 per
cent to 6 per cent.
He remains a 'happy holder' of D-Mark bonds, but plans to reduce this
holding as German interest rates fall. Meanwhile, he has locked into a 5 per
cent holding in UK gilts 'to protect the portfolio from falling UK base
rates and to lock in a gross redemption yield just over 9 per cent.'

The Financial Times


London Page XV

921023

