FT921-14057

FT  17 JAN 92 / Watchdog plays down Wakeham gas-price pledge


   By DEBORAH HARGREAVES


THE OFFICE of Gas Supply (Ofgas), the industry regulator, yesterday played
down assurances British Gas said it had received from Mr John Wakeham,
energy secretary, that could enable it to raise domestic prices.
Mr Wakeham's assurances encouraged British Gas to agree on Wednesday to
sweeping changes to its industrial gas business proposed by the Office of
Fair Trading. The OFT proposals include halving the British Gas share of the
industrial market to 40 per cent and shifting its pipeline business to a
different company.
But Sir James McKinnon, director-general of Ofgas, said yesterday that Mr
Wakeham had no influence over customer prices. Sir James said the pricing
formula that sets customer prices is 'nothing to do with government unless
the law is changed'.
Sir James has agreed to review the new formula on domestic prices for the
next five years in view of the changes to British Gas's business brought
about by the OFT proposals. The formula will come into force in April.
British Gas believes it has a strong case for revising this formula, which
limits price increases to five percentage points below the rate of
inflation. But although Sir James has said he will look at the formula, he
has not agreed to make specific changes. He rejects the idea of allowing the
company to push up domestic prices to compensate for the loss of industrial
business.
Mr Robert Evans, British Gas chairman, said on Wednesday that Mr Wakeham had
given him assurances that the review of the tariff formula would be fair to
everyone. Mr Evans said the company could call on the energy secretary's
assurances if Ofgas would not permit a price rise.
British Gas wanted to secure the right of appeal on pricing to a higher
authority before agreeing to the OFT's proposals. The OFT had threatened to
refer the company to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission if it had not
agreed to the proposals by yesterday.
A pricing review would take many months, and Mr Wakeham may have left office
before it is complete. He is standing down at the general election. The
Department of Energy said yesterday that the regulator should be fully
independent in pricing matters. That leaves British Gas with little room to
manoeuvre on domestic prices.
The City remained un-decided yesterday. Shares had gone up 4 per cent in
value on Wednesday on relief that British Gas had avoided an MMC
investigation. But the market lost its confidence yesterday, and British Gas
shares fell 2 1/2 p to close at 242 1/2 p.
'It is difficult to see much growth in the UK gas business in coming years,'
said Mr Ian Graham, a stockbroker at County NatWest in Edinburgh. 'The
company's growth will have to come from its global gas business and its
exploration and production division, which is riskier.'
Parliament, Page 10

The Financial Times


London Page 9

920117

