FT922-13265

FT  13 APR 92 / The weaknesses of strength: Europe


   By IAN DAVIDSON


After last Thursday's general election, it looks as if Britain is once again
the odd man out in Europe. The governments of France, Germany and Italy have
all been hammered in recent elections by a wave of protest votes; the
British government alone has managed to get solidly re-elected.
This striking contrast cannot be explained in terms of merit. The setback
suffered by the Andreotti government in Italy may be a long-delayed and
well-deserved punishment for decades of incompetent and corrupt
administration. But by most ordinary yardsticks, France and Germany enjoy
standards of economic management and political government which are not
merely worthy, but manifestly superior to those of Britain. The return to
power of the Conservatives in Britain, and the ferocity of the popular
rejection of the Mitterrand administration in France, are equally difficult
to justify.
These differences are relatively uninteresting, however, compared with the
fact that there is now one issue common to a number of European countries,
and that is the issue of constitutional reform. At first glance, this may
seem a pure coincidence. In Britain, proportional representation was a hot
subject when the country was facing the prospect of a hung parliament. In
Italy, the question of electoral reform has forced its way on to the agenda
as a result of the election disaster. In France, constitutional reform has
been placed on the agenda by President Mitterrand as part of his political
end-game.
Yet this coincidence may not be quite as fortuitous as it looks. First,
there is a fairly obvious correlation in each of these countries between the
shortcomings of government performance and the defects of the constitutional
systems. In France, for example, there are some real advantages in the
quasi-regal presidency; the drawback is that the president is so powerful
that the government ceases to be responsible and the parliament ceases to be
significant.
Second, almost every western European country will have to re-examine and
perhaps reform its constitutional arrangements, in the context of the future
development of the European Community. France will have to revise its
constitution in order to give residents from other Community countries the
vote in local French elections; Italy will have to change its budgetary
machinery if it wants to keep up with monetary union in Europe.
Britain's Conservatives will naturally reject both halves of this
proposition. They will, of course, claim their clear election victory last
Thursday as the ultimate vindication of Britain's existing constitutional
arrangements, starting with its first-past-the-post voting system. This
system, unique in Europe, has once again ensured that a minority of votes
produces a majority in parliament. Therefore the government can once again
reject all talk of electoral reform, bills of rights, freedom of
information, devolution and the protection of the citizen.
Yet the government would be making a mistake if it were to conclude that
these constitutional issues, which were debated so intensely during the
election campaign in anticipation of a hung parliament, can now be stuffed
back in the broom closet.
During the election campaign, Mr John Major argued against proportional
representation on the grounds that it would prevent 'strong' government. The
trouble is that strong government is either unnecessary in present
circumstances, or it is disreputable. A country may need strong government
in wartime, because popular sacrifices may be required which are not readily
volunteered. But if there is no such national emergency, strong government
is merely government for the convenience of the governors: one which has the
power to impose partisan or ideological policies against the will of the
people.
There is no shortage of suitable words to describe good government. Perhaps
we need stable government; or reasonable government; or moderate government;
or considerate, government; or rational, responsible or even intelligent
government, for heaven's sake. What we do not need is strong government. In
the past 45 years, Britain has had many bouts of strong government; just
look at the results.
One reason why we do not need strong government, in Mr Major's sense, is
that it is by definition highly centralised government. As it is, British
government is already far too centralised, and this defect was made worse by
Mrs Thatcher. Centralised government may have been appropriate for Britain
and France in the era of expanding empires in the 19th century; it makes no
sense for countries inside the European Community.
The future development of the Community will unavoidably mean progressive
transfers of competence from national capitals to European institutions.
Those transfers will be increasingly difficult to handle politically, unless
national governments become more responsive to national electorates, and
also counter-balance lost sovereignty through the devolution of other
competences closer to the grass roots. Mr Major's victory will not protect
him from the need to make constitutional changes as a counter-point to the
developing Community.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

920413

