FT922-13309

FT  13 APR 92 / Management: Revolution behind closed doors - US boards have
been described by a critic as '10 friends of management, a woman and a
black'. But Martin Dickson says that bosses now have something to fear from
non-executive directors.


   By MARTIN DICKSON


A remarkable display of muscle-flexing by non-executive directors of General
Motors is sending shock waves across corporate America and may lead to a big
shift in the balance of power in US board rooms.
The potential winners: shareholders and non-executive directors. The losers:
entrenched management.
On Monday of last week the GM board's non-executive members, tired of the
company's heavy losses and impatient at its pace of change, took matters
into their own hands.
Led by John Smale, a former chairman of Procter & Gamble, the consumer
products group, the directors demoted two of the company's top managers,
including the right hand man of Robert Stempel, the chairman.
They also changed the functions of the board's executive committee - which
theoretically wielded power between board meetings but in practice never met
 -to make it a more active body to offer advice to Stempel. And at its head
they installed Smale.
The upshot is that while Stempel is still running the company on a daily
basis, he has a powerful group of directors breathing down his neck - and
one which is plugged in to a more comprehensive flow of information about
the business.
This, coupled with the demotion of his lieutenant, Lloyd Reuss, GM's
55-year-old president, sends a simple but powerful message: perform, or
else. Reuss was replaced by Jack Smith, head of GM's international
operations, who has also been appointed chief operating officer.
America's non-executive directors have a well deserved reputation as 'rubber
stamps', passively accepting the decisions of day-to-day management. Yet
over the past few years an increasing number have been trying to shed this
image.
Directors of motor manufacturer, Chrysler, recently resisted efforts by Lee
Iacocca to stay on as chairman after his retirement date. And last autumn
the board of Compaq Computer dismissed Rod Canion, chief executive and
co-founder of the business, in a clash over poor results and management
style.
But such behaviour at a company like General Motors, the largest industrial
business in the US, is nothing short of revolutionary. For decades, the
company has been a by-word for insularity and bureaucratic complacency.
So the GM directors have created a powerful example which other companies
may now follow. 'This is a landmark development for the US,' says Howard
Sherman of Institutional Shareholder Services, a Washington-based group
which advises large US investors on corporate affairs. 'An act like this
will really galvanise a lot of boards.'
In the US, as in the UK, non-executive directors are meant to act on behalf
of shareholders as a supportive check on the managers hired to run the
business. But too often, say critics, they are merely 'the parsley on the
fish'.
It is impossible to quantify just how influential non-executives have become
because much of the action takes place behind closed doors. Dressing-downs
as public as that delivered at GM remain rare.
Still, ISS's Sherman says his extensive discussions with outside directors
makes clear that 'they see their jobs very differently from just two years
ago'.
An important factor is the increasing importance in the US of institutional
investors demanding better 'corporate governance' - insisting that managers
should be more responsive to shareholders.
The corporate governance movement was given a fillip by the 1980s takeover
wave. On the one hand, this encouraged managers to introduce anti-takeover
'poison pills' which protected their positions, but did not necessarily best
serve shareholders. On the other, it made investors realise that it could be
cheaper, and more effective, to simply change the management of a poorly
performing company than go through the loops of a bid battle.
In its early stages the corporate governance movement concentrated on
correcting specific abuses by management, such as 'poison pills'. But over
the last two years, it has begun to say that a much more comprehensive
change in the way boards are constituted and run is needed. Fix the board,
runs the argument, and most other problems will fix themselves.
But that is a great deal easier said than done. The first problem is the
nature of the individuals chosen to serve as non-executives. A company's
outside directors will typically consist of senior managers from other
businesses, often friends of the chief executive, together with a sprinkling
of retired politicians, celebrities and worthies.
Graef Crystal, one of America's best-known critics of management pay-scales,
has described boards as '10 friends of management, a woman and a black'.
'Directors are picked because the chief executive knows them and knows they
are likely to be on his side,' says Robert Monks, a leader of the corporate
governance movement, who highlighted the issue last year when he
independently fought an unsuccessful campaign to get a board seat at Sears,
Roebuck, the ailing stores group.
In theory, investors have the ultimate say over the choice of directors,
since a shareholder vote is necessary for them to be elected to the board.
Until recently, investors tended simply to nod through management's nominees
but there are now signs of growing dissatisfaction with this process.
For example, some corporate governance activists have been trying to set up
a data base of potential outside directors. Investors also played a big role
in selecting nominees for the board of Lockheed, the aerospace group, when
it found itself under threat from a corporate raider a year ago.
But even if some independent spirits do make it on to a board, they are
likely to find it hard to take effective action.
Most large American companies have a majority of non-executive directors on
their board but most also combine the positions of chairman and chief
executive. This gives a company's top manager immense powers to set the
agenda of the board which is meant to be monitoring his performance.
Here too there are signs of incipient shareholder revolt. At Sears, Roebuck,
shareholders have put down resolutions for next month's annual meeting
calling for the roles of chairman and CEO to be split.
Institutions are also trying to limit the power of chief executives by
ensuring that board sub-committees, where much of directors' most important
work is done, are controlled by outside directors.
For example, the California Public Employees' Retirement System (Calpers),
the largest US public pension fund, and United Shareholders Association,
another corporate governance group, recently pressured Ryder System, a large
truck leasing business, into changing its corporate by-laws to ensure than a
majority of directors, and all members of its pay and nominating committees,
are non-executives.
Yet even if such reforms are carried out, non-executives can remain
ineffective if they lack information. A powerful chief executive can keep a
great deal from his board, whose non-executive members are busy people with
limited time to spend digging around the business.
The GM board's action in this area is particularly intriguing. First, Smale
appears to have spent many hours inside the company conducting a survey on
senior executives' performance before launching last week's bombshell.
Second, his assumption of the executive committee chairmanship means that
non-executives should be better placed to receive quick intelligence of what
is going on.
Ross Perot, the combative Texan billionaire who was ousted from the GM board
in 1986 after criticising management, used to describe his fellow directors
there as 'pet rocks'. Last week the rocks stirred, and the result could be a
small earthquake in many board rooms.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920413

