FT924-11264

FT  27 OCT 92 / Ferry operators accused of pricing collusion


   By RICHARD TOMKINS, Transport Correspondent


CROSS-CHANNEL ferry operators have been accused by British hauliers of
colluding to profit from sterling's devaluation by imposing big currency
surcharges on cross-Channel freight tariffs.
The Freight Transport Association, a trade body representing freight
carriers, yesterday said it would almost certainly lodge complaints with the
Office of Fair Trading and the EC competition directorate if the surcharges
were not withdrawn.
Within the past few days, all three of the biggest cross-Channel ferry
operators - P&O European Ferries, Sealink Stena Line and Brittany Ferries -
have announced freight surcharges for British carriers.
In letters to hauliers, the ferry companies have said the surcharges are
necessary because the value of sterling receipts has fallen relative to
costs incurred in foreign currencies.
From November 1, they plan to introduce a sliding scale of surcharges for
customers paying in sterling, varying from week to week according to the
exchange rate. At sterling's present level, the surcharge would be about 10
per cent.
British carriers say there is no justification for surcharges because at
least half the ferry operators' income comes from Continental carriers in
foreign currencies. That means their currency gains are at least equal to
their losses.
The carriers are also accusing the operators of collusion on the grounds
that the rates of the surcharges, where comparable, are identical; that they
all come into operation on the same date; and that the letters to the
hauliers are similarly worded.
Collusion between cross-Channel ferry operators is forbidden after the UK
government's refusal of repeated requests for permission to co-operate on
services and fares.
All three ferry operators yesterday denied acting together. Sealink said its
move had come first, while the other operators said they had followed suit
because they regarded the surcharges as justified.
The Road Haulage Association, representing hauliers, said it would lobby
minsters over the surcharges.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921027

