FT924-6154

FT  23 NOV 92 / GPA to ask banks to change covenants


   By ROLAND RUDD


GPA Group, the aircraft leasing company, will today ask more than 100 banks
to change the covenants in its borrowing agreements so that they are
cash-flow related instead of being linked to equity and profits.
The request is part of the group's financial reorganisation, which also
includes a request to its banks to defer repayment of up to Dollars 900m
(Pounds 596m) of bank debt until September 1996.
GPA's bank creditors, who meet today at the InterContinental Hotel in
London, will hear that Mr Maurice Foley, deputy chairman, has put off his
retirement for a second time, to become GPA's project co-ordinator.
Bank creditors - whose loans are fully secured on aircraft - may be relieved
that they are being asked to make relatively modest concessions in the
restructuring.
However, holders of GPA's Dollars 1.5bn (Pounds 900m) unsecured debt, mostly
in the form of bonds and medium-term notes, are not expected to be asked to
make any substantial sacrifices in the restructuring.
One banker said he thought it would be fairer if both the banks and the
unsecured creditors made sacrifices. However Mr Foley said: 'It is important
that we honour our commitment to them (the unsecured creditors) since we may
wish to tap the capital markets next year.'
GPA expects to breach borrowing covenants because of the deterioration in
its trading performance and the company's failure earlier this year to raise
Dollars 800m in its aborted flotation. It therefore wants the covenants in
its borrowing agreements to be based on cash flow. GPA reported Dollars 285m
net cash flow from leases - after the deduction of interest - in the year to
March 1992.
A number of GPA's bankers, contacted by the Financial Times, said they
recognised they would have to take the first step in restructuring the
group. However, some bankers are concerned about how GPA intends to deal
with its obligation to make a Dollars 1.5bn repayment in September 1996.
GPA said agreement with banks is partly dependent on agreement with
manufacturers to postpone deliveries of up to 200 aircraft due in the next
two years.

The Financial Times


London Page 17

921123

