FT921-15475

FT  10 JAN 92 / Bush in Japan: Trade surplus remains a source of friction


   By ROBERT THOMSON


   TOKYO


THE smiles, the handshakes, the Global Partnership and the Tokyo Declaration
may be intended to convince a US audience that President George Bush has
prised open a 'closed' Japanese market, but they do not mean that bilateral
trade friction has come to a sudden end.
Japanese officials said last night they had addressed 73 of 86 trade-related
complaints formally lodged by the US. But 'addressing' does not necessarily
meaning resolving to the long-term satisfaction of the US.
At the heart of US-Japan trade friction is Japan's Dollars 40bn (Pounds
22bn) trade surplus with the US, the most obvious target for US congressmen
looking for an apparent indicator of unfairness. The often obscure details
of the particular items in dispute are of less political significance.
That surplus has been on the rise in recent months, with demand for Japanese
products increasing in tandem with the erratic stirrings of recovery in the
US economy, and Japanese government officials fear it will continue
increasing. If that is the case, last night's warm exchanges will soon be
replaced by heated argument.
Mr Nicholas Brady, the US treasury secretary, addressing a luncheon on
behalf of Mr Bush, said: 'Japan's trade surplus is too high and its market
access too limited.' He warned that the health of the broader relationship
depended on reducing trade tension by 'eliminating barriers to trade and
investment'.
'We have waited a long time, but now the time has come for equal access.
Fair play is in both our interests,' Mr Brady said.
But Mr Robert Mosbacher, commerce secretary, was not as certain that the
time has come. Asked if outstanding issues had been resolved to his
satisfaction, he replied: 'We always have trouble making agreements with the
Japanese, but we are making progress.'
Progress was made on the issue of computer procurement by the Japanese
public sector.
Tokyo has agreed to lower the purchase figure triggering a public tender for
computer procurement, and to ensure that various quasi-government bodies
abide by the purchasing guidelines. But, like a few of the other concessions
seemingly made in the past three days, the new regulations were essentially
agreed on last year.
The two countries have agreed to 'reinvigorate' the Structural Impediments
Initiative (SII) talks, which began two years ago and were designed to
remove 'structural' obstacles to bilateral trade, for example, by demanding
that Tokyo increase public works investment. Japan has resisted US demands
for a fresh round of negotiations, but the countries agreed yesterday to
make 'new commitments' to improve the business environment.
On the imbalance in direct investment between Japan and the US, Tokyo
restated its intention to encourage foreign companies by extending the tax
carry-over period for losses from five to seven years, and allowing an
acceleration of depreciation charges.
Several of the Global Partnership provisions will depend on the outcome of
investigations by Japan's Fair Trade Commission, the anti-monopoly body. The
commission will investigate whether Japanese companies are unfairly
excluding competitors in the paper and glass industries.
But Tokyo was unable to convince the country's politically influential
lawyers to give way to US demands for greater access to the legal market and
could only offer to 'redouble its efforts to resolve the issues'.
Japanese officials were relieved that they were not forced to make a
specific commitment to open the rice market, though Japan yesterday formally
recognised the importance of 'tarification', the replacement of existing
trade barriers with a tariff regime.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920110

