FT924-11937

FT  23 OCT 92 / Skulduggery on the low road to Congress: George Graham finds
candidates slinging mud as they seek seats in the Senate and House


   By GEORGE GRAHAM


PRESIDENT George Bush has spent much time on his campaign trips lamenting
that this is the dirtiest political year he can remember.
Some commentators have agreed but the presidential race has seemed genteel
in comparison with some of the mud-wrestling contests in Congressional
elections across the US.
Incumbent members have faced uphill struggles against opponents who have
gleefully leapt on, and often distorted, the number of cheques they may have
overdrawn at the now defunct House of Representatives private bank.
Some, however, have been accused of much, much more; Congressman Steny Hoyer
of Maryland, chairman of the House Democratic caucus, for example, is the
target of radio advertisements which stop a whisker short of charging him
with condoning cocaine sales by employees of the House post office, under
his authority.
Mr Hoyer, however, can take comfort from the fact that it is his
institutional role which is under attack.
Others have seen their personal lives come under close and critical
scrutiny. An election in a Georgia district just north of Atlanta is widely
seen as the most vituperative battle so far. It is between Congressman Newt
Gingrich, the minority whip in the House and number one on the Democratic
hit list of Republicans they would like to see defeated, and Mr Tony Center,
a trial lawyer. The latter ran radio advertisements calling Mr Gingrich a
'deadbeat dad' for failing to make child support payments to his ex-wife.
'The same Newt Gingrich who used taxpayer money for his limo had to be
ordered by the court to pay for his kids' heat and electricity. No more
perks, no more lies, no more Newt,' the Center ad said.
It also accused Mr Gingrich of serving divorce papers on his wife the day
after her cancer operation. A Gingrich spokesman said divorce papers were
never served.
Mr Gingrich countered with a television advertisement accusing Mr Center of
working to withhold child support payments from two children whose mother
had not paid him the legal fees she owed.
'Center actually sued to strip a four-year-old and a one-year-old of their
child support to pay his own legal fee. He even claimed his own fee mattered
more than the children's food, medicine and shelter,' the ad said.
The level of abuse in the race is viewed by campaign managers as an
indication of how close it is likely to be. The district ought to be
Republican, but Mr Gingrich is a newcomer to the area, and won his party's
nomination by only 980 votes after a heated primary.
In the Colorado Senate race, dirty tricks have also run wild. Mr Ben
Nighthorse Campbell, the pony-tailed Olympic judoka and jewellery designer
who is now the only Native American in Congress, had to fire two aides who
called in under false names to a radio show featuring his opponent, Mr Terry
Considine, and tried to lure him into expressing an extreme view on
abortion.
Sometimes, however, the mud flies back in the thrower's face. Mr Rick Reed,
the Republican with the near -impossible task of challenging Hawaii's
popular Senator Daniel Inouye, resorted to advertisements claiming that he
had forced his attentions on his hairdresser 17 years earlier. The
advertisement included a tape-recording of the hairdresser made without her
knowledge and used without her consent.
Mr Reed has been forced to withdraw the ad, and has been rebuked by Hawaii's
state Republican party chairman, Mr Jared Jossem. 'I think it cost Reed
votes,' Mr Jossem said.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921023

