FT921-511

FT  28 MAR 92 / Weekend London: The most civilised place in town - The
Wallace Collection


   By PATRICIA MORISON


VISITORS to London who also read the FT's art pages will know already that
each of London's Big Four - the British Museum, the National Gallery, the
Tate Gallery and the Victoria & Albert Museum - has acquired new galleries.
And yet, when the tourist season is well under way, you might not fancy the
idea of heading the same way as thousands of other people. Which of London's
many dozens of other museums offers the hope of first-rate entertainment for
the mildly misanthropic?
The first choice is absurdly obvious. Two minutes' walk from the hell of
Oxford Street, you will find Manchester Square and the grand brick facade of
Hertford House. This 18th century mansion, restored beautifully in the
1980s, houses the Wallace Collection: in all London, there is not a more
civilised place.
The marquesses of Hertford, members of a colourful family, amassed the
collection between 1750 and 1890. Much of its character comes from the
fourth marquis, who lived at the chateau of Bagatelle in the Bois de
Boulogne, Paris; his collection of paintings by Boucher, Fragonard, Watteau,
and Lancret has no equal in Britain. Almost as notable is the 19th century
French collection, particularly strong in Orientalist and historical scenes
such as Delaroche's Princes in the Tower.
The house is full of sumptuous, 18th century French furniture, among it
pieces made by Riesener for the empress Marie Antoinette. There are masses
of clocks and three rooms of magnificent Oriental and Renaissance arms and
armour plus bronzes, maiolica and porcelain, miniatures, boxes, and
fascinating little 17th century wax portraits.
As an art collection, the Wallace is first rate and wonderfully varied.
Nothing is ever lent, so you must either go to Manchester Square or miss the
masterpieces by Titian, Rubens, Rembrandt, Velazquez, Van Dyck, Reynolds -
and, of course, Frans Hals's Laughing Cavalier.
Sir Richard Wallace, the marquess's illegitimate son, was also a passionate
Francophile. His widow, who had once been a Parisian perfume-seller,
bequeathed the contents of Hertford House to the nation. Entry is free and
there are many guided tours. Tel: 071-935-0687.
Until the end of October, a natural pair for the Wallace is the exhibition
at the little Queen's Gallery at Buckingham Palace (071-930-4832). It
features paintings and furnishings collected by George IV as prince regent.
His close companion in mischief was none other than the disreputable third
marquess of Hereford, each spurring the other to fresh extravagances. Sadly,
Carlton House, for which George laid out such a fortune, no longer survives
but the exhibition, hung in rich red, well captures a society of dazzling
opulence.
You will have to wait until 1993 to see Apsley House, another grand mansion
with a magnificent collection, because it is closed for repairs. As for the
Courtauld Gallery's collection of Old Masters and Impressionists, it is too
well-known to need introduction. Remember that it has moved from Bloomsbury
to Somerset House on the Strand. But if this is your first visit to the new
home, prepare for a shock. To my eye, at least, the colours of the new
galleries are bilious and the lighting and general standard of decor
decidedly peculiar.
For beautiful paintings in a classic country house setting, you should visit
Kenwood House in Hampstead Lane, on the north edge of Hampstead Heath. The
great white building was remodelled by Robert Adam in the 1760s but was to
have been pulled down after the First World War. Mercifully, the Earl of
Iveagh saved it and also bequeathed his collection, which includes
masterpieces by Vermeer, Gainsborough, Rembrandt and Reynolds. Approached
through rhododendron woods, the house looks south across parkland. If you
have children who are allergic to art galleries, one partner can take them
down to the lake or feed them ice cream in the outdoor restaurant while the
other enjoys the collection. Kenwood is very popular with Londoners but
during the week it should not be too crowded (tel: 081-348-1286).
You should also head in the opposite direction, to south-east London and the
Dulwich College picture gallery. It is reached easily, first by train and
then a short walk along a leafy road. Built by architect Sir John Soane in
1811, this fascinating building was the first purpose-built art gallery in
Britain. It contains fine 17th and 18th century paintings, including works
by Poussin, Claude, Rembrandt, Rubens, and Murillo.
Soane's own house, at 13 Lincoln's Inn Fields just off the Strand, was made
into a museum (tel: 071-405-2107) and remains an inspiring example of what a
talented architect can do to create the illusion of space. In Henry James's
novel The Reverberator, a pair of adulterers choose the Soane museum on a
wet afternoon as their place of assignation, down by the famous sarcophagus
of Seti I. Those with more innocent intentions will find paintings by
Hogarth and Canaletto, among others, and Soane's fascinating collection of
antiquities.
My final recommendation is another great man's house - without artistic
pretensions, it is true, but with a remarkable atmosphere. Like Soane,
psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud was a great collector. However, most people who
visit the Freud Museum at 20 Maresfield Gardens, Hampstead, are as attracted
by the famous couch and the green tub chair as by the antiquities.
Freud spent his last year in this house, and Anna Freud lived and practiced
here as an analyst until her death in 1979. The study is intensely
evocative, as are the home movies screened upstairs in which the elderly
Anna describes the life of the household (tel: 071-455-2002).

The Financial Times


London Page XI

920328

