FT924-8136

FT  12 NOV 92 / World Trade News: US plans to push ahead export drive


   By DAVID DODWELL, World Trade Editor


WASHINGTON will over the next five years aim to boost exports from 10 per
cent to 15 per cent of GNP, a leap of Dollars 250bn (Pounds 165bn) at
current prices, according to Mr John Macomber, retiring chairman of the US
Export-Import Bank.
After three years as chairman, during which Eximbank has more than doubled
the exports it backs, from Dollars 8bn in 1989 to Dollars 17bn this year, he
says the bank's role has been transformed 'in terms of scope, size,
programmes and influence on US trade policy.'
He has seen export credit cover for projects in India rise from Dollars 100m
in 1990 to Dollars 1.1bn today, with Dollars 2.5bn working through the
system. Cover for projects in Mexico has risen from Dollars 2bn to Dollars
7bn in three years.
He concedes a cheap dollar has helped boost recent export gains, but does
not feel a stronger dollar will slow headway: 'The dollar is too cheap; even
if it were to strengthen as much as 20 per cent, I still don't think it will
effect our competitive position. Amer-icans really are for the first time in
a very good trading position.'
Mr Macomber is shy about his Eximbank achievements. But he may take much of
the credit for tightening disciplines in the bank that have forced greater
budgetary transparency. He has begun to coax back US private bankers after a
decade in which the Latin American debt debacle made them allergic to trade
finance. Even today, he says overseas banks account for 40 per cent of
Eximbank's business.
He appears unruffled to leave the bank amid controversy over its admission
of export credit subsidies: 'Export credit agencies will lose their
credibility unless they are really up-front about their costs. We wouldn't
have export credit agencies in a perfect world, But there are always areas
where commercial finance is not available, but should be.'

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921112

