FT924-6522

FT  20 NOV 92 / Government Bonds: D-Mark offers safe haven from currency
turmoil


   By SARA WEBB and PATRICK HARVERSON


   LONDON, NEW YORK


SWEDEN'S decision to float the krona yesterday afternoon after repeated
speculative attacks on the currency hit some of Europe's high-yielding bond
markets which remain vulnerable to currency turmoil, and encouraged further
switching into the safe haven of the D-Mark.
The Riksbank, Sweden's central bank, initially raised the key marginal
lending rate from 11.5 per cent to 20 per cent in a bid to defend the
currency.
But as the rise in interest rates appeared to have little impact, the
Riksbank decided to abandon its link to the Ecu and float the krona,
subsequently lowering the marginal lending rate to 12.5 per cent.
The outflow of currency from Sweden over the past six days reached SKr160bn
 -far more than during the September currency crisis when the key marginal
lending rate was raised to 500 per cent. Dealers estimated the Riksbank's
reserves of about SKr185bn had come close to depletion. The krona was
effectively devalued by 9.4 per cent against the D-Mark.
Swedish government bonds fell when the marginal rate rose to 20 per cent,
but as the krona was allowed to float and the marginal rate was cut, bond
yields tumbled.
The yield on the benchmark bond due 2003 moved from Wednesday's close of
11.11 per cent to peak at 11.20 per cent, before falling to 10.30 per cent.
Yields on six-month treasury bills dropped from 18 per cent to 11 per cent,
dealers said.
'It (floating the krona) was very bad news for the currency, but good news
for the bond market,' said one dealer, pointing out that without the
constraint of its Ecu tie, short-term interest rates are expected to fall
further, providing a boost to the economy.
However, any further rally in the bond market is expected to be domestically
driven as international investors remain concerned about potential exchange
rate risk.
The turmoil in the Swedish markets took its toll on some high-yielding
European bond markets, as participants wondered which of the more vulnerable
currencies would next come under attack from speculators.
Italian bond futures tumbled on news that the krona would float, on fears
the lira might be the next target for speculators.
The Italian market had opened on a positive note following Wednesday's
easing in Dutch and Belgian interest rates, as this had raised hopes of a
German interest rate cut.
But news of Sweden's financial turbulence pushed up short-term interest
rates, from 14.03 per cent to 15 per cent for one-month Libor, increasing
the funding costs for market participants.
The futures contract opened at 95.25 and dropped to 94.45 by late afternoon
before edging up slightly.
DESPITE some bad economic news that would normally have been positive for
the bond market, US Treasury prices eased across the maturity range
yesterday as some investors took the opportunity to book some profits earned
in recent days.
In late trading the benchmark 30-year government bond was down  3/8 at 101
1/32 , yielding 7.532 per cent. The short end of the market was also lower,
with the two-year note down  1/16 at 99 13/32 , to carry a yield of 4.554
per cent.
The day's economic figures should have been good for sentiment. The Labor
Department reported that jobless claims rose 31,000 in the first week of
this month, a much bigger rise than anticipated. Later, the Commerce
Department announced that housing starts fell 1.1 per cent in October, a
worse reading than forecast.
Although the data gave a mild boost to the short end of the market early on,
some investors felt that recent gains in bonds had been overdone, and
initiated a quick sell-off.
SHORT-dated German government bonds benefited from the nervousness in some
of the peripheral European bond markets, ending higher on the day.
The Liffe bund futures contract opened at 91.26 and edged up to 91.34 before
ending at around 91.32. Dealers said the bund market rose initially on
short-covering and hopes of an easing in German rates.
But as news of the Swedish decision emerged, dealers noted switching out of
high-yielding markets into short-dated German paper, which then outperformed
the long end of the market.
UK government bonds ended slightly lower, as funding worries continued to
trouble the market and gilts appeared unable to hold on to Wednesday's
gains.
The benchmark 9 per cent gilt due 2008 fell to 102 17/32 , down  3/16 from
late on Wednesday, to yield 8.79 per cent.
JAPANESE government bonds ended close to the highs of the day, as
short-covering helped to push up bond prices sharply towards the end of the
trading session.
The bond market opened on a weak note as the Tokyo stock market continued to
rebound for the second day, wiping out hopes of lower interest rates.
The Nikkei stock index rose to a high of 17,007.82 in late morning, but lost
some of the early gains and eased back to close at 16,871.31. The March
futures contract climbed to 107.70, against Wednesday's close of 107.50.

The Financial Times


London Page 29

921120

