FT922-4221

FT  06 JUN 92 / Minding Your Own Business: Gnome improvements


   By CLIVE FEWINS


THERE IS nothing like a gnome to cheer you up in a recession. Forget the
Private Eye advertisments and the decades of being shunned by polite
society: the little fellows are working overtime to keep us happy during
these difficult days.
At least that is the view of Tessa and John Newman, who for the last four
years have concentrated exclusively on selling garden gnomes. Their company,
De Gama, stocks all sizes, in just about every pose that is not deviant, in
the converted coach house at the rear of their large Regency terrace house
in Bath.
'Apart from a brief dip at the end of last year the gnomes have been selling
better than ever during the recession,' said Tessa. 'We are currently
carrying nearly 200 different styles and expect to sell about 50,000 and to
turn over about Pounds 500,000 in the current financial year.' After 20
years in the importing business - originally they concentrated on Spanish
ceramic ware - the Newmans reckoned they had seen all types and style of
gnome before deciding to concentrate on plastic German models. That was four
years ago. They rapidly found they sold so well that there was little space
left in their warehouse for other lines. The gnomes had taken over.
'Concrete gnomes were too crude and heavy. They chip very easily and rarely
have the fine outlines of our plastic models,' said Tessa.
'Ceramic ones are usually much nicer and we are building up our own range of
these, made by a West Country potter. However, although frostproof, they
break easily - particularly if there happen to be vandals around. Really
they are more suited to indoor conditions.
'On the other hand the plastic ones look equally good inside or outside.
They do not break unless very badly handled, and they retain their colours.
About 15 years ago people didn't seem to like plastic gnomes at all. But all
that seems to have gone now.
'Plastic gnomes seem perfectly acceptable and I would say that about 50 per
cent of gnomes sold in this country are plastic.' Another change in recent
years has been the trend towards keeping gnomes indoors. In urban areas this
may be a result of vandalism, but the Newmans have another theory.
'When you have them in the home they do help to cheer the place up,' John
said. 'During the recession I have noticed that we have sold many more
smiling ones. I say a gnome in the home is worth two in the garden.'
Serious collectors - some people have hundreds - like to keep their gnomes
under cover for security purposes.
'Perhaps this is also because many people laugh at huge collections of
gnomes in the garden. They are after all, things that people either love or
loathe,' said Tessa.
'Many people look upon them as pets without the tie and there is no doubt
that a gnome can bring a great deal of pleasure to many different sorts of
people,' said Tessa.
'We have a huge correspondence, especially from people that want to build up
their collections, but also from people who like to talk about their gnomes;
they even send us poems written about them.'
Even though the indoor market has grown, the UK gnome market is small
compared with Germany and Switzerland.
'The UK market is reckoned to be a quarter of the size of the Swiss one,
despite the fact that our population is much greater,' John said.
'Only 8 per cent of gardens in this country have gnomes in them, whereas in
Germany and Switzerland it is far higher.' The Newmans would like to change
that by expanding the network of agents covering the 400 UK retail outlets
De Gama serves. They aim to sell to some of the big chains of garden centres
where gnomes are not at present welcome.
'We smiled when we saw the recession coming on. It has certainly helped us,'
John said.
'Let's hope there are no booms round the corner. That is the time when
people go out and spend their money on other, more expensive things like big
cars and exotic holidays.'
They could buy one of the Newman's top-of-the-range gnomes: 1 metre high.
One, complete with wheelbarrow, retails at about Pounds 200 compared with
the Pounds 13-Pounds 14 for an average size De Gama gnome.
The greatest possibility for expansion seems to lie in bespoke and
personalised gnomes, says John.
'Providing there is a run of about 1,000 we can do bespoke ceramic gnomes
for specific promotional purposes,' he said.
'We are just realising the potential of this, with orders from businessmen
who want special gnomes that might look like themselves or their customers.
'Companies are also beginning to see the value of gnomes as giveaways at
Christmas, or as promotional tools of a different kind. Really there's a
potential for a whole new breed of Lord Gnomes all over the country.'
De Gama. 5, Raby Place, Bath BA2 4EH.

The Financial Times


London Page VII

920606

