FT924-8300

FT  12 NOV 92 / O&Y warns of liquidation threat


   By BERNARD SIMON


   TORONTO


OLYMPIA & York has warned creditors that failure to approve a
debt-structuring plan later this month will probably lead to the company's
bankruptcy and the forced liquidation of its assets.
O&Y, which was the world's biggest property developer before it filed for
court protection in May, said in a letter to lenders that unsecured and
under-secured creditors were likely to receive nothing if it is forced into
liquidation.
This group of creditors holds more than CDollars 4bn (Pounds 2.08bn) of
O&Y's total debt of CDollars 13.5bn. The restructuring proposals cover
CDollars 8.6bn of debt.
Thirty-four groups of creditors will vote on O&Y's proposals at meetings
scheduled to be held in Toronto between November 25 and November 30.
Canada's Companies Creditors Arrangement Act, under which O&Y is operating,
is silent on the precise proportion of votes required for the plan to go
ahead. The final decision will rest with an Ontario judge.
The company hopes to obtain the approval of all 34 groups, but is confident
that it can implement the restructuring without the endorsement of some of
the smaller groups whose claims relate to specific buildings.
The approval of the unsecured creditors, whose vote is scheduled for
November 30, is viewed as crucial.
In their present form, O&Y's proposals provide for the unsecured and
under-secured creditors to acquire a 90 per cent equity stake in the parent
company, Olympia & York Developments.
O&Y's US and Canadian properties would be spun off into two new separate
companies in which creditors would also have a substantial shareholding.
The viability of the plan depends heavily on an upturn in the North American
commercial property market.
O&Y's proposals assume a substantial increase in rental incomes over the
next five years to finance improvements in the buildings which it will
continue to manage.
The plan does not cover the Canary Wharf project in London's Docklands or
negotiations with lenders to specific US properties.
Mr Gerald Greenwald, O&Y's president, said in his letter to creditors that
the initial 250-page restructuring plan might be modified in the course of
negotiations over the next two weeks.

The Financial Times


London Page 23

921112

