FT921-3965

FT  12 MAR 92 / Kenya claims opposition parties have military wings


   By REUTER


   NAIROBI


THE Kenyan government, in its strongest attack yet on its recently legalised
rivals, said yesterday that opposition parties had set up military wings for
a campaign of violence, sabotage and political intimidation, Reuter reports
from Nairobi.
A government statement said the main opposition party, the Forum for the
Restoration of Democracy (FORD), had 300 men under arms, including a
'Libyan-trained terrorist squad', and was expecting 500 to join them after
guerrilla training abroad.
FORD General-Secretary Martin Shikuku dismissed the accusations as nonsense
and challenged the government of President Daniel arap Moi to arrest members
of the alleged squad.
'Failure to do so must lead us to conclude that it is a total fabrication,'
Mr Shikuku said. 'The ball is in the government's court.'
The government statement said FORD's military wing planned to sabotage power
and telephone lines, shoot demonstrators and disrupt water and transport
systems. FORD would then blame the violence on the government.
It said another unnamed opposition party also had a military wing but gave
no details.
The government had told the security forces to take swift action, it added,
but it did not mention any specific measures.
The statement is the latest in a recent spate of mutual accusations by
government and opposition ahead of multi-party elections expected later this
year.
The government statement, which is certain to increase the political
temperature after riots in the capital last week, also accused FORD of
fanning tribal clashes in which at least 20 people have died in the last six
weeks.
Earlier yesterday, riot police and gangs of youths clashed in a rundown part
of Nairobi, witnesses said. A few shops were broken in to and at least one
car was overturned and set ablaze, but police quickly gained control of the
situation, they said.

The Financial Times


International Page 5

920312

