FT924-11540

FT  26 OCT 92 / Survey of Germany (8): A Ruhr-based powerhouse - WestLB is a
growing force on the public banking scene and is now helping to reshape the
sector


   By DAVID WALLER


MR EDZARD REUTER, chief executive of Daimler Benz and Mr Hilmar Kopper,
chief executive of Deutsche Bank, together with Mr Wolfgang Schieren,
chairman of the supervisory board at the Allianz insurance colossus, are the
three most powerful businessmen in Germany.
A strong candidate for the fourth most powerful is Mr Friedel Neuber, chief
executive of the Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale, (WestLB).
This institution's raison d'etre is to act as house bank to the government
of North-Rhein Westphalia and to act as umbrella organisation to the
region's savings bank - but under Neuber, the Dusseldorf-based WestLB has
become considerably more than that.
It is a Ruhr-based powerhouse whose controversial manoeuvres are helping to
reshape the public banking sector. It pursues an aggressive industrial
policy and - depending on the way the league-table is calculated - it is
Germany's third or fourth biggest bank, a clear rival to Commerzbank and the
two big Bavarian private sector banks in terms of size.
It has also moved aggressively overseas, linking up with Standard Chartered
of London in 1989 in a bid to boost its investment banking and pan-European
activities.
Since the beginning of the year, the bank has bought a 15 per cent holding
in Autania, a machinery company; a 10 per cent holding in the Asko retail
group; a 20 per cent stake in Harpener.
More recently, it and its LTU travel associate bought a 90 per cent stake in
the UK Thomas Cook travel company and WestLB bid to acquire a 30 per cent
stake in Touristik Union International (TUI), a Hanover-based travel
company.
Other large industrial holdings include 32 per cent plus of Preussag, the
steel and engineering group, 10 per cent of Deutsche Babcock, and 13 per
cent of Hoesch, the steel group, which allowed the bank to play a pivotal
role in the hostile (by German standards) acquisition of the company by
Krupp, a rival steel-group from elsewhere on the Ruhr.
Altogether, the bank is said to have spent DM1.6bn on industrial
acquisitions since 1991.
RECENTLY, Mr Neuber brushed aside criticism that he was pursuing an
industrial policy for its own sake.
At a conference on Frankfurt in late September, he said that the sole
criteria for investments in industrial companies was - as in other areas of
the business - whether they would yield a good return.
'We can't afford to make industrial investments for the long term unless
they are going to generate a satisfactory return,' he said.
He took the example of the bank's enagement in the travel industry. It took
its stake in Lufttransport Union (LTU) in 1989 when the family owners of
this Dusseldorf-based charter-flight operator were seeking a financial
partner.
More recent acquisitions - of Thomas Cook and the planned purchase of a
stake in TUI - are designed to strengthen LTU's position in the European
market by inducing 'vertical integration' with tour operators and travel
agents.
With Hoesch/Krupp, WestLB was merely assisting in a process of necessary
rationalisation for the German steel industry in the face of pan-European
competition, Neuber said. It supported the controversial scheme out of
conviction that a merger was economically necessary, he argued.
The criticism WestLB has received in connection with these purchases is as
nothing when compared to the outcry which has accompanied the bank's
attempts to expand its influence in the public banking sector of northern
Germany - and since reunification two years ago, in eastern Germany too.
'Wild-west politics,' is how Peter Fischer, economics minister of the state
of Lower Saxony described WestLB's attempts to get control of the Landesbank
Schleswig-Holstein in Kiel.
He went so far as to accuse Neiber of meddling with the investment plans of
Hanover-based Preussag (30 per cent-plus owned by WestLB) as a means of
putting pressure on Norddeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale (NordLB - the
Landesbank for Lower Saxony, based in the state capital of Hanover) to
withdraw a rival bid for a stake in the Kiel-based bank.
The accusation was sharply rejected, the battle continued. The Hanover-based
NordLB has won the right to run the Landesbank functions of two east German
Lander: Sachsen-Anhalt and (from the beginning of next year)
Mecklenburg-Vorpommern.
Formally, no decision has been reached over Kiel, but three out of five
members of the Schleswig Holstein's management board resigned in early June
after it appeared likely that a stake of slightly less than 50 per cent
would go to Dusseldorf and not Hanover.
True to form, WestLB has also been active in the rationalisation of the
Landesbanken in southern Germany. Its original bid to assimilate Helaba, the
Hessen central bank, was rejected some years ago.
This summer WestLB and the SudwestLB (the Stuttgart-based Landesbank for
Baden-Wurtemberg) defeated a rival bid from Helaba to win approval to buy a
50 per cent stake in the Mainz-based Landesbank Rheinland-Pfalz.
The SudwestLB itself took a 25 per cent stake in the Landesbank Sachsen
Girozentrale, the new Leipzig-based central bank for Saxony.
Whether Neuber and the WestLB are able to continue their controversial
activities - in German industry as much as in public-sector banking -
depends on Germany's banking authorities. Tough new capital adequacy rules
are to be introduced next year.
WestLB will be able to comply with these easily if it is allowed to have
access to the equity of a housing finance subsidiary it bought from the
government of North Rhein Westphalia last year.
If this is not approved, it is unlikely that Neuber will be quite so
expansionist or aggressive in the future.

The Financial Times


London Page IV

921026

