FT924-11485

FT  26 OCT 92 / PM may be called in MPs' coal probe


   By DAVID OWEN


MR JOHN MAJOR, the prime minister, may be summoned to appear before the
all-party trade and industry select committee during its investigation into
the coal industry and UK energy policy.
That follows weekend newspaper reports that Mr Major agreed to intervene
personally to obstruct a European Community initiative to block Colombian
coal imports on anti-dumping grounds during a south American visit this
summer. Downing Street said yesterday that the possibility of an
anti-dumping action had not been discussed and that it would be a matter for
the European Commission.
It acknowledged that energy had been on the agenda during the visit, which
included a trip to a BP oil rig.
The committee - under the chairmanship of Mr Richard Caborn, the Labour MP -
is set to begin its inquiry tomorrow by questioning Mr Michael Heseltine,
trade and industry secretary.
Mr Stan Orme, a former Labour energy spokesman who sits on the committee,
said yesterday that he planned to question Mr Heseltine on the Colombian
allegations. He would also ask Mr Heseltine whether it was true that the
government was 'deliberately encouraging' miners to take the redundancy
terms that were on offer.
Mr Caborn said yesterday that the committee's principal aims in tomorrow's
questioning would be twofold: to determine the reasoning behind the original
decision to lay off 31,000 miners; and to obtain an assurance that the
committee would not be refused access to information given to the government
during the course of its own inquiry.
'We don't want the government saying in January, 'If you had seen all this
information, you would have come to a different conclusion',' Mr Caborn
said.
He confirmed that the committee would be prepared to hear commercially
confidential evidence in camera.
The committee aims to finish its inquiry by mid December so that its report
can be prepared over the Christmas recess.

The Financial Times


London Page 7

921026

