FT924-12123

FT  22 OCT 92 / Economic Viewpoint: Snake oil cures for depression


   By BY SAMUEL BRITTAN


The early 1990s have seen the collapse of the greatest experiment in state
direction in world history in the former Soviet Union, which now faces
hyperinflation and possible collapse. They have also seen the disintegration
of the much-vaunted Swedish 'third way'. At the same time western capitalism
looks in bad shape. Alas, only China, which combines emergent capitalism
with ruthless dictatorship, and openly models itself on Pinochet's Chile,
seems to be experiencing satisfactory economic growth - not a model for
those who believe that man does not live by bread alone.
For most of the western world, depression is a threat. In the UK it is
already occurring. In terms of indices such as real GDP, the recession is no
worse than that of the early 1980s. The difference is that the current
recession has been going on for so long and threatens to become worse. It is
also characterised by the number of companies which feel themselves
vulnerable, which are on the verge of sacking more workers, axing projects
or going into liquidation.
Until Black Wednesday the problem was that high domestic indebtedness was
holding back spending at home, while export-led growth was inhibited by a
sluggish world economy and a lack of competitiveness - not against the ERM,
but against the falling US dollar.
There is a parallel between the world problem of developing-country
indebtedness which burst 10 years ago and that of UK home owners with
negative equity today. Just as the central bankers in 1982 organised first
aid to enable overseas debt to be serviced and keep the banking system
afloat, a similar scheme is needed for home borrowers today. The new
Treasury authorisation for higher unsecured lending by building societies
points in the right direction, but is inadequate and too late.
The depreciation of sterling - so far 14 per cent on the index - has not had
its usual stimulatory impact because of the body blow Black Wednesday
delivered to confidence. The same demoralisation has deprived the two 1
percentage point cuts in interest rates of their normal effects. The
government's humiliation on coal has eroded confidence further and given
fresh life to an untenable view of full employment, which demands employment
at the same jobs and at the same or higher wages, irrespective of demand for
the final product.
Most dispiriting of all, judging by the FT letters column, is the number of
businessmen who expect economic leadership from government, as if the UK
were a single concern managed by a Whitehall Gosplan. When will they take a
lesson from their Italian counterparts and look for salvation at their own
hands and be pleased if government is not too corrupt, feeble and arbitrary,
as it is in most of the world most of the time?
The idea of the government 'going for growth' is the oldest piece of
claptrap in the business. No wonder John Major announced it out of the
corner of his mouth to the lobby, nine days after his chancellor had said
that he could not 'kick-start' the economy. Does one have to say yet again
that governments can spend - which on some rare occasions can be helpful -
but that lasting growth comes from the efforts of individuals and businesses
responding to market demand and technological opportunity?
Of course official policy has a role. Jonathan Wilmot of Credit Suisse First
Boston asks in his latest jeremiad: why are central bankers, governments,
the IMF, and many others still fighting the 1970s battle against inflation
and budget deficits when the real enemy is depression? One answer he
suggests is that too many people have been crying 'wolf' for too long. He
mentions the late 1970s, the 1982 world recession and debt crisis, the Wall
Street crash of 1987 and the Japanese stock market crash of 1991, all of
which were widely expected to lead to depression. He could have gone back
further.
The most dispiriting period I remember was in the early 1970s after the oil
price had risen fivefold. The world was faced by the combined threat of
depression and spiralling inflation; and in the UK the Heath government was
forced out of office by a miners' dispute which makes the present one look
like a storm in a teacup.
Fears of a world depression were indeed widespread much earlier. During the
late 1950s and early 1960s, Harold Macmillan used to harangue his
chancellors with tales of a new world slump, when they were struggling with
the problems of inflation and overfull employment; and truth to tell, I then
thought it radical and enlightened to be on his side against the
fuddy-duddies.
There has never been a shortage of people, ranging from City greybeards to
authors of paperback Marxist tracts, warning of coming economic collapse.
They were frequently joined by hard-headed industrialists who wanted cheap
money and plenty of it. During all this time we would have been better off
concentrating on halting inflation, promoting competition, and improving
supply performance.
Another reason for being sceptical of the prophets of doom is that they have
been dominated by fears of a repeat of the 1930s Depression, when US real
national income fell by a third in real terms and the value of world trade
fell by two-thirds. There can be depressions, such as those of the 1870s in
Europe and the 1890s in Britain, which are a good deal worse than the
post-second world war recessions, but which stop short of anything seen in
the 1930s.
Meanwhile, many of the financial talking classes cannot wait to see the end
of what they regard as the right-wing policies of the 1980s such as
de-regulation, curbs on union power, marginal tax cuts, privatisation and a
greater role for markets. Lifting their champagne glasses, and trying not to
look in my direction, they declare that these ideas have had their day and
that all who espouse them will be swept away. Meanwhile their expectations
of Bill Clinton (not yet in the White House) are so inflated that no mortal
can live up to them.
So may I put my head on the chopping block and say that the New Realism of
the 1980s, some of which began in Britain under Lord Callaghan in the late
1970s and some of which was carried forward by Labour governments in New
Zealand and Socialist governments in France, was a change for the better and
likely to stand us in good stead during both recession and recovery.
All these policies will be more, rather than less, necessary if a demand
stimulus is to be accompanied by growth rather than frittered away in higher
pay and prices. One reason why the US New Deal ran into the sand and a full
recovery not reached until the second world war was because President
Roosevelt tried to boost pay, prices and union membership rather than just
to maintain spending power.
Nor was there anything wrong with the switch in many countries in the 1980s
towards a nominal framework for macroeconomic policy. This framework could
have been explained without the monetary mysticism and the civil war between
the domestic and exchange rate monetarists, which has only benefited the
inflationists and the dirigistes.
A coherent nominal framework - that is, a cash objective for total spending
in the economy - is a safeguard both against runaway inflation and depressed
demand. We need public spending cuts, tax increases or a 'tough budget' as
much as we do a hole in the head.
I could accept nearly all Christopher Dow's New Deal-type suggestions
(Letters, October 21) for public works, tax holidays, guarantees for private
investment and so on, as long as it is made clear that these are expressed
in money terms. If public and private-sector employers fritter away the
proceeds in pay and price increases though, there will be no more to come;
in that case, there ain't gonna be no growth. One of Macmillan's wiser
warnings was against Britain being 'a sea of inflation in a world of
deflation'. Although he was wildly premature about the latter, the dangers
of Britain inflating all on its own remain.
However, the main danger of demand expansion being eroded by inflation comes
from the prospect of a sinking exchange rate. This warning may seem to go
against the experience of the 1930s when, after the UK went off gold, the
Bank rate was pegged at 2 per cent and the UK achieved a world lead in
recovery with an average growth rate of 4 1/2 per cent a year.
Leave aside the awkward fact that the recession did not touch bottom until
1933. There were other important aspects. The 30 per cent depreciation of
sterling did not trigger off inflation because world prices, and especially
American ones, were falling rapidly. That kind of deflation is fortunately
not now in prospect.
Even more important is that after a couple of years sterling rose again. The
pound recovered against the dollar after Roosevelt took the US off gold; and
against the franc when the Popular Front government did the same for the
French currency in 1936.
So in the medium term there was no depreciation of sterling. Contrary to
popular myth, the 1930s was not a period of free floating. After 1933
central banks co-operated successfully to 'stabilise' the market. From 1936
onwards a tripartite agreement between the US, France and the UK operated,
rather like an ERM without published bands.
The present danger is not that interest rates are cut too quickly now -
rarely does any authority do anything too quickly. The main fault of the
Bank of England and Treasury in floating rate periods has been
short-termism. They have been far too preoccupied with putting a brake on
the speed of sterling's fall over a few weeks, but much too complacent about
its downward drift over several years.
Thus I do not worry how low sterling will fall this winter but where it is
going to be in two or three years' time. Simply being told by the Treasury
that the inflationary implications of exchange rate movements will be taken
into account in setting policy cuts no ice whatever. Nobody is going to
believe a single word about good intentions for the future.
Nor is it sufficient just to call for a more independent Bank of England. We
would be no better off if interest rate changes were henceforth announced
'by the Bank of England with the approval of the Treasury' - a formula which
was used in the earlier post-war decades.
I know no better constraints in current international circumstances than a
statement that the government will return to the ERM as soon as
circumstances permit. Even that would not carry high credibility, but would
point in the right direction. If Tory backbench sentiment does not permit it
then we just have to remember that it is not for nothing that John Stuart
Mill called the Tories the stupid party.

The Financial Times


London Page 19

921022

