FT924-917

FT  21 DEC 92 / Survey of Japanese Industrial Review (2): Harsh environment
prevails - Corporate finance


   By ROBERT THOMSON


JAPANESE executives have been hoping against hope that the Tokyo stock
market will return to its former state, and that raising funds will again be
as easy as it was in the late 1980s when equity issues and equity-linked
bonds were quickly consumed.
The focus on the Nikkei stock market average has been particularly intense
for companies which issued warrant bonds in the late 1980s, because low
stock prices have ensured that most of these issues have remain uncoverted,
creating a hefty refinancing burden.
An overhang of about Dollars 75bn in warrants due to mature next year is
only one of several changes to the financial environment in Japan, where
capital was raised at almost zero cost during much of the 1980s and
companies bolstered core profits through a flurry of zaiteku, or financial
engineering.
For the past two months, the Nikkei stock average has struggled to stay
above 17,000, widely regarded as the turning point beyond which prices could
again fall sharply.
Meanwhile, Japanese banks have a growing burden of non-performing loans,
forcing them to be far more selective about lending, and limiting their role
in refinancing exercises.
In this harsh environment, Mr Yutaka Tanaka, managing director of finance at
NKK, the steel maker, is remarkably buoyant. He explains that the company's
conservative habits in the past have provided reassurance for its banks,
which are now reluctant to lend to companies thought to have over-indulged
in stock or property speculation.
NKK issued Dollars 700m in warrant bonds in December 1988, and another
Y130bn in convertible bonds in July 1989. The company's share price peaked
at Y1,040 in February 1989, and has since slid with the Nikkei index,
hovering around Y260 at the end of November.
About 1 per cent of the bonds were converted, forcing Mr Tanaka to find
Y220bn to refinance the debt this fiscal year. He has chosen bond issues in
the Euromarket, two of which have already raised Y120bn, with another two
issues scheduled in coming months to complete the refinancing.
'I really didn't think there would be a serious problem and we have not had
any problems. With the issues maturing, people have to find some new
investment. They have to put their money somewhere, and we have had no
trouble attracting investors,' Mr Tanaka said.
He is still interested in the equity warrants market, but says the amounts
now being raised are too small to attract a company with the needs of NKK:
'With requirements of our size (total debt Y1,200bn), we are really only
interested in issues of a minimum Dollars 500m or Dollars 1bn. Smaller
issues are costly and troublesome.'
While NKK appears to be easily weathering the warrants storm, smaller
Japanese companies are likely to have more difficulty in the coming year.
The difficulty will be compounded because Japanese banks, very willing to
lend to the likes of NKK, are wary of commiting funds to smaller, more
vulnerable companies.
Mr Mutsuo Shinoyama, senior economist at the Daiwa Institute of Research,
said a persistent problem was that companies had yet to get accustomed to
operating in an environment where funds would cost from 4 to 5 per cent:
'They were getting their money at almost zero cost or 1 per cent. That is
not normal. They will have to think very carefully about their investments.'
The higher cost of funds is forcing companies to review capital spending
plans and intensify their cost-cutting. The core profitability of Japanese
manufacturers has been in decline for the past decade, although the poor
returns were not as pressing during the late 1980s when companies were
easily able to supplement their income with zaiteku.
Apart from a public offering in Tokyo, the range of funding options remains
much the same as in 1988, although more expensive. Companies needing to
refinance issues could turn to equity warrants, convertible bonds, Euroyen
bonds, bank loans, or a straight bond issue in the domestic market, strictly
regulated but increasingly active.
Mr Kazuyoshi Hashimoto, finance director at Asahi Breweries, which had a
Dollars 1bn warrant bond issue in August 1989, says 'equity finance is
difficult' given the continuing weakness of the Tokyo stock market, and
straight bonds in the domestic market are a possibility, but 'the interest
rates are not very attractive'.
'When you add up the costs of issuing bonds, it is much cheaper to be
financed by institutions such as life insurance companies, city banks and
long-term credit banks.
'The short-term prime rate is about 4.75 per cent, but our rate may be
around 4.25 per cent.'
He said Asahi was still able to add to its income by issuing commercial
paper and depositing the funds, earning between 0.3 per cent and 0.5 per
cent on the deal. Mr Tanaka at NKK said his company could do the same, but
doesn't because zaiteku is frowned upon at the steel maker.
Asahi has not been tempted to offload any of its low-yielding bank shares to
increase financial income. Some Japanese industrial companies sold the
shares of their less important banks earlier this year, loosening the
traditional relationship, but Mr Hashimoto says the low yields on Asahi's
banks stocks do not bother him.
'We have their shares and they have our shares. If you look at it, the yield
appears low, but the relationship is important. If we had trouble, they
would assist us, and that is reassuring. It's impossible to calculate the
real benefits of the relationship.'
As for when Asahi expects to be able to issue equity again on the Tokyo
market, Mr Hashimoto is as uncertain as other as Japanese executives: 'It
all depends on when the stock market recovers, but it is likely to be about
two years from now. Investors are not willing to buy stocks at the moment.'
 ------------------------------------------------------
           JAPANESE CORPORATE BOND ISSUES
 ------------------------------------------------------
Fiscal year           No of issues        Amount (Ybn)
 ------------------------------------------------------
1987                      27                   915
1988                      28                   749
1989                      21                   729
1990                      52                 2,067
1991                      63                 2,427
1992 (first half)         40                 1,680
 ------------------------------------------------------
Source: Bond Underwriters' Association of Japan
 ------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page 22

921221

