FT924-12155

FT  22 OCT 92 / OFT review clears detergent makers


   By GUY DE JONQUIERES, Consumer Industries Editor


THE LAUNDRY detergents market has escaped a reference to theMonopolies and
Mergers Commission, the Office of Fair Trading said yesterday.
Sir Bryan Carsberg, director-general of fair trading, said he had seriously
considered the case for a monopoly reference. He had decided against it
after a review by the OFT found no evidence of anti-competitive behaviour by
Procter & Gamble of the US and Lever Brothers of the UK, which dominate the
business.
Sir Bryan said he would continue to watch out for evidence of P&G and Lever
Brothers abusing their market power. The two companies account for about 90
per cent of laundry detergent sales, worth more than Pounds 800m a year.
Sir Bryan said detailed financial information provided by the companies did
not show that price competition was ineffective and he was encouraged by
recent improvements in productivity.
The OFT has monitored the detergents market since 1981 when P&G and Lever
Brothers, part of the Anglo-Dutch Unilever group, were released from
undertakings imposed after an MMC investigation in 1966. The OFT launched a
more detailed review almost two years ago, prompted by a sharp rise in the
two companies' advertising expenditure.
Sir Bryan said he had been concerned that high levels of advertising
spending might prevent new competitors from entering the market, but noted
its relation to product innovation. He said: 'At the present time,
competition between Procter & Gamble and Lever Brothers appears to be
active, and there is also competition from retailer own-label brands.'
The companies welcomed the announcement, having argued that competition
between them had intensified recently because of heavy investment in
research and production equipment to expand and modernise product ranges.
The OFT accepted undertakings from Anthony Green & Co and Lavery Rowe, its
advertising agency, that they would stop publishing misleading
advertisements for depilatory products. The action followed a complaint by
the Advertising Standards Authority, which had sought to get the companies
to drop claims that the products retarded the re-growth of hair.

The Financial Times


London Page 11

921022

