FT921-1261

FT  25 MAR 92 / UK Company News: Interest reduction helps Wolseley meet
estimates


   By ANGUS FOSTER


WOLSELEY, the heating and plumbing distributor which owns the Plumb Center
chain, yesterday announced an 11 per cent profits decline due to recession
in the UK and US.
Mr Jeremy Lancaster, chairman, said there were some signs of improvement on
the US East Coast but conditions in California and the UK made predictions
for the year 'extremely difficult'.
The group reported pre-tax profits of Pounds 33.7m (Pounds 38m) for the six
months to January 31. The figure was helped by interest savings of more than
Pounds 2.5m, mainly due to lower inventory levels.
Although this helped reduce gearing to less than 20 per cent from 30 per
cent, Mr Lancaster said low borrowings also showed the depth of the
recession. 'I would rather have my money in lavatories than in the bank,' he
said.
Turnover increased to Pounds 876.2m (Pounds 854.5m) but would have fallen
slightly without exchange rate movements.
US sales improved to Pounds 478.8m (Pounds 426.4m) although operating
profits dropped to Pounds 13.7m (Pounds 15.8m). Familian Corp incurred a
first half loss in California although Carolina Builders fared better. Group
profits were boosted by Pounds 1.3m from beneficial dollar exchange rate
movements.
In the UK, the 211-branch Plumb Center chain maintained sales but margins
came under pressure due to falling inflation and price competition.
Brossette, the leading French plumbing and heating distributor acquired in
February, made no contribution.
The interim dividend is unchanged at 3.1p, payable from earnings of 9.86p
(11.3p) per share.
COMMENT
These results were as anticipated, but only after lower than expected
interest payments. With no signs of recovery in the UK or California,
previous forecasts of unchanged full year profits of about Pounds 80m now
look optimistic, even accounting for a Pounds 5m second half contribution
from Brossette. Furthermore, should UK sales recover, margins will lag
pending clearance of stock bought before the slowdown in inflation.
Nevertheless, Wolseley is a quality company which has coped well with
recession before. Its dominance in the UK provides future stability, there
is further scope for growth in the US once recovery beckons and France has
interesting options in the medium term. Forecast full year profits of Pounds
77m to Pounds 78m put the shares on a p/e of more than 18 times. With
recovery still over the horizon, they are expensive.

The Financial Times


London Page 24

920325

