FT922-436

FT  27 JUN 92 / Arts: Fiddler on the hoof


   By PETER FREEDMAN


KLEZMER MUSIC, the Jewish music of Eastern Europe, played a key influence in
the development of jazz but was itself long ago taken for dead. Now,
however, it is in the throes of an improbable revival in both Britain and
abroad.
Giora Feidman was 13 when he played his first professional engagement by
accompanying his father in the klezmer band performing at a Jewish wedding
in his native Argentina - the fourth generation of his family to take up
klezmer. Forty-three years on and Feidman is known as the 'King of Klezmer'
and the leading figure in an extraordinary international boom of interest in
this a form of music until recently taken for dead. He has been in Britain
to launch the four-week Jewish Music Festival, which started this week.
Bands of klezmorim used to travel to Jewish settlements of Poland, the
Ukraine and Romania to play at weddings and other festivities. Klezmer music
was dance music and the arrival of the klezmorim in town meant that the good
times were about to roll. Jews, along with Gypsies, were the most active
musicians in Eastern Europe.
The klezmer boom has now hit Britain. Giora Feidman, now based in New York,
played at the Barbican last Tuesday and plays in Glasgow tomorrow and BBC2
screened Fiddler on the Hoof, a documentary telling the story of klezmer
from its roots in the Old World through its development in the New.
Meanwhile, the Klezmer Festival Band, Britain's first professional ensemble,
plays in Weybridge tomorrow.
A simple definition of klezmer seems elusive. Some call it Jewish gypsy
music; others simply Jewish jazz. 'It's Jewish good-time music', offers
Simon Broughton, producer of the BBC documentary. 'It's wild and crazy. But
it can also be deep and soulful.'
Though its roots are considerably older, what would today be recognised as
klezmer probably dates from the early 18th century. The distinctive flavour
of klezmer stems from its unusual combination of musical sources. It blends
traces of Middle-Eastern music with elements of Jewish liturgical chant,
along with musical influences from the Balkans, Hungary, Poland, Russia and
wherever else the Jews settled. The main klezmer instruments are violin and
clarinet, largely because they were the most portable.
The wave of Jewish immigration to America since the end of the last century
brought klezmer with it. But the next generation of American Jews wanted the
music of the New World, not the Old, so klezmer players got sucked into
jazz, where many went on to become big-name soloists. Early Benny Goodman is
hardly distinguishable from klezmer, while George Gershwin's music, which is
the subject of Feidman's Glasgow concert, owes an almost equal debt.
Klezmer in America eventually gave up the unequal survival battle against
jazz. The Holocaust then wiped out the Jewish communities and hence
klezmorim of Eastern Europe, while the Soviet Union strove to suppress
Jewish culture and music. Klezmer became the lost music of a lost world.
Or so it seemed, until around the mid-1970s, when two factors sparked what
has been called the great klezmer explosion. The first was Feidman's
decision to quit his job as lead clarinettist of the Israeli Philharmonic to
dedicate himself to klezmer. The second was the efforts of two young
American Jews who unearthed some old 78s, transcribed the music and formed a
band to play it. Old people loved it. Young people loved it even more. There
are now some 100 bands in America.
and Klezmer is not merely a Jewish cult. Bands have also been formed by the
likes of Don Byron, a black New Yorker and top jazz clarinettist. And they
play to mainstream audiences at venues like Carnegie Hall.
The early efforts of the American klezmer enthusiasts was simply to
reconstruct klezmer music. The emphasis has now moved on from reviving to
developing it. Thus, nine of the 15 songs on Feidman's newt album are new
and written specially for him, including one by a Palestinian composer.
Klezmer is taking off in new directions.
Details of the Jewish Music Festival on 081 458 3618.

The Financial Times


London Page XVII

920627

