FT924-5918

FT  24 NOV 92 / UK Company News: A question of regaining market credibility
 -Amstrad's quest to regain its reputation as an innovator


   By PAUL TAYLOR and LOUISE KEHOE


AMSTRAD, the consumer electronics group which is the subject of a Pounds
113m buy-back bid by its founder and chairman, Mr Alan Sugar, faces two
unresolved legal disputes of particular interest to shareholders when they
gather today for the group's annual meeting in London.
The law suits relate to the group's ill-fated 2000 series computers launched
in the late-1980s and designed to spearhead the company's push into the
lucrative corporate market for personal computers.
Until then Amstrad and Mr Sugar had ridden the crest of a consumer spending
wave as one 'blockbuster' product after another boosted turnover, profits
and the share price.
Hot on the heels of innovative audio products, such as the ready stacked
hi-fi system, came the enormously successful PC1512, the first low-cost
personal computer system - launched in 1986 and aimed at the mass market.
By 1988, eight years after its listing, turnover had topped Pounds 625m and
pre-tax profits reached Pounds 160.4m.
But one prize still eluded Amstrad. Although its first generation PCs had
captured the lion's share of the home computer market, manufacturers such as
IBM and Compaq still dominated the buiness PC market in Britain and Europe.
In the autumn of 1988 Amstrad set about plugging the gap with a new range of
more powerful PCs. However, within months it was clear that some of the new
PCs had reliability problems associated with their disc storage devices.
Amstrad was forced to recall many of the machines and spent between Pounds
6m and Pounds 7m in recall and modification charges. In the case of one of
the models, the PC2386, it took 18 months to identify and rectify the fault.
But by then the damage had been done. In the fast moving PC business the
Series 2000 machines were already old. Market prices had dropped and
specifications had changed.
Amstrad was forced to write down the value of its inventory to more
realistic levels and record a Pounds 20.4m exceptional item against profits
in the year to June 30 1991.
But arguably Amstrad suffered a much more serious, but unquantified loss in
terms of its reputation and credibility as a business PC manufacturer.
Certainly there is little doubt that the Series 2000 disaster set back its
attempts to enter the corporate market - a setback which the group is still
trying to overcome.
Amstrad began legal action in California last year against the two US
manufacturers of the disc drives which Amstrad claims were faulty.
In separate suits Amstrad has been seeking a total of Dollars 291m (Pounds
193m) in damages and compensation from Seagate and Western Digital, the
manufacturers which supplied the disc drives.
Both companies have vigorously denied liability and Western Digital
subsequently issued a counter claim for the 'exceptionally large expenses it
made in helping Amstrad resolve its problems.'
Since then Amstrad has suffered further setbacks. The case against Seagate
was dismissed by the California court in April on jurisdictional grounds and
Amstrad was told to refile in a 'proper forum' - the UK courts. So far
Amstrad has not yet done so.
Similarly the suit against Western Digital was also dismissed on
jurisdictional grounds on November 4, but Amstrad was given permission to
refile within 30 days.
Although Amstrad's latest annual report makes no specific mention of the
suits the two cases have a particular importance now that Mr Sugar has
launched his 30p-a-share offer for the 65 per cent of Amstrad he does not
own.
The offer document includes a letter from Amstrad's directors which notes in
its section on litigation that although '. . . the Directors and Mr Sugar
believe the group has a strong legal case, the extent and timing of any
recovery is uncertain'. Kleinwort Benson, Amstrad's financial advisers, also
confirm that the implications of the legal action were examined 'in some
detail'.
Nevertheless Mr Sugar says the board is still 'considering' whether to
pursue the legal action, even though he accepts that a positive settlement
could boost the cash in Amstrad's balance sheet, and therefore the value of
its shares.
Whether or not the legal cases are pursued, shareholders are likely to
remember the unfortunate 2000 series as the turning point in Amstrad's
fortunes.

The Financial Times


London Page 26

921124

