FT923-15403

FT  02 JUL 92 / Brady looks to G7 for commonsense solutions: The US approach
to Munich


   By MICHAEL PROWSE


MR Nicholas Brady, US treasury secretary, was in fine form as he briefed
reporters on next week's Munich summit of the Group of Seven industrial
nations.
Running through the main economic items on the agenda - support for Russian
reforms, the flagging momentum of world growth and the stalled Uruguay Round
trade talks - his manner was that of a plain-spoken businessman looking for
commonsense solutions.
A top priority for the US, he said, was to agree measures to strengthen
global growth. He implied this was central to all else the G7 leaders might
want to achieve. Reform efforts in the former Soviet republics, for example,
would be easier if they occurred against a backdrop of buoyant world growth.
He did not quite say 'I told you so' but he was evidently gratified that the
risk of a global slowdown was now widely recognised. 'We're talking about a
communique that's going to enthusiastically support the concept of a growing
world,' he said.
He indicated this would mark a sharp departure from previous summits and IMF
meetings, when US demands for more stimulative policies had been poorly
received, raising doubts about Mr Brady's ability to read the mood in
foreign capitals.
He said the US would press for lower interest rates worldwide but that the
summit was likely to focus on fiscal measures to support growth. Ignoring
the US's decade of record budget deficits, he indulged in a headmasterly
review of German and Japanese policies.
Plainly trying to put pressure on Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa
ahead of the summit, he lavished praise on the Y7,000bn-Y8,000bn (Pounds
29bn-Pounds 33bn) fiscal stimulus proposed at the weekend by Japan's ruling
Liberal Democratic Party. He said it could potentially have as big an impact
as the historic stimulus announced in 1987, which signalled a shift from
export-led to consumer-led growth.
As Mr Brady spoke, however, the LDP plan still had not been endorsed by Mr
Miyazawa or the Japanese cabinet.
Turning to Germany, Mr Brady declined to say he was satisfied with Bonn's
fiscal policy. But he welcomed recently-announced steps to curb the German
budget deficit.
Without a hint of a smile, he suggested that President George Bush's 1990
budget agreement with Congress had shown the world how to achieve lower
interest rates. Fiscal restraint in the US, he said, had allowed the Federal
Reserve to cut short-term interest rates from over 8 per cent to 3.75 per
cent. Other countries could achieve lower interest rates if they, too, put
their fiscal houses in order.
On Russian reforms, Mr Brady casually admitted that summit leaders were
likely to agree a rescheduling of the Dollars 65bn external debt of former
Soviet republics even though negotiations between Russia and the
International Monetary Fund on a standby programme of economic reforms
remain bogged down. This will set a precedent because debtors are invariably
expected to agree a tough programme of reforms with the IMF before gaining
the benefits of a rescheduling deal.
Mr Brady must have been aware his bland statement would increase pressure on
IMF negotiators to accommodate Russia. The main hurdle, according to a
senior Canadian official, is Russia's belief it deserves different treatment
from small Third World borrowers obliged to accept numerous detailed
conditions on loans. The Russian view seems to be that a broader commitment
to economic reform should be sufficient in the case of a major world power
such as Russia.
The Uruguay Round trade negotiations were 'enormously complicated' but
absolutely vital, Mr Brady said. In 35 years on Wall Street, he had found
that the complexity of negotiations increase geometrically according to the
number of participants. However, waving a dossier of papers detailing the
importance of exports for US growth and jobs, he suggested the US was ready
to step up efforts to achieve progress in the talks. If he could wave a
magic wand over any one issue at the summit, it would be trade. Achieving
freer trade would be among the most important goals for the international
community in the post-Cold War era.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920702

