FT921-15232

FT  11 JAN 92 / Markets: What will Labour do to nest eggs? - Serious Money


   By PHILIP COGGAN, Personal Finance Editor


WILL THE Labour party steal your nest-egg? The Conservative party raised
this spectre this week, creating the inevitable frightening headlines in the
Tory section of the Press.
Labour has made a few firm commitments: to abolish the ceiling on National
Insurance contributions (currently Pounds 390 a week or Pounds 20,280 a
year); to raise the top rate of tax to 50 per cent a year; and to impose a
surcharge of 9 per cent (equal to the NI rate) on those non-pensioners who
receive income from savings of over Pounds 3,000 a year. Funds raised would
be used to increase pensions and child benefits.
Other parts of its policy are less clear and the Conservatives exploited
this confusion by suggesting this week that Labour would have to raise basic
rate tax by 10 percentage points (to 35 per cent) to pay for its promises.
Labour says that, on the contrary, its plans for further public spending
will be financed by economic growth. (As the economy grows, the government's
tax revenues increase.)
Which you believe will obviously depend on which party you are inclined to
support. The cynical might reason that a 35 per cent tax rate would be
politically disastrous and that, even with economic growth, some of Labour's
promises could take a very long time to implement. One should also remember
that, under Margaret Thatcher, the top rate of tax was as high as 60 per
cent until 1988.
Savers should not be led astray by the more enthusiastic of the Tories'
supporters in the media. Contrary to Press reports which have appeared this
week, pensioners need not worry about the possibility of an investment
income surcharge. Labour has made it clear that it will not apply to people
of over the state pension age. Those who retire before the state pension age
will not pay the surcharge on money derived from pension annuities.
For the bulk of the electorate. therefore, it is far from clear that a
Labour government would mean higher taxes, and indeed many would gain from
the higher child benefits and pensions.
Nevertheless, many Weekend FT readers will be adversely affected. Andrew
Dilnot, of the Institute of Fiscal Studies, writing in the FT this week,
estimated the cost of Labour's plans at various income levels. Those earning
Pounds 25,000 a year would lose Pounds 425; on Pounds 30,000, the loss would
be Pounds 875; on Pounds 40,000, it would be Pounds 1,775; on Pounds 50,000,
it would be Pounds 3,765; and those on Pounds 100,000 would face a hit of
Pounds 13,175 per annum.
This estimate does not include the effect on the surcharge on those with
investment incomes of over Pounds 3,000. If you had savings of Pounds 50,000
and earned 10 per cent a year, then the extra tax charge would vary from
Pounds 180 a year (on those in the basic rate band) to Pounds 680 (for those
who fall in the top rate). Those with Pounds 100,000 savings would, on the
same assumptions, face an additional yearly charge somewhere between Pounds
630 and Pounds 1,630.
In addition, Labour is likely to make some, as yet unspecified, change to
Capital Gains Tax. A strong possibility seems to be that the annual CGT
threshold will be set at the same level as the personal allowance for income
tax (currently Pounds 3,295).
Readers will understandably be anxious to avoid these impositions. Some
choices are simple. If you have savings, and have not already opened a TESSA
(Tax-Exempt Special Savings Account), then do so. It pays tax-free interest
if you hold it for five years; if you have to withdraw your money
beforehand, you will be no worse off than if you had left it in a building
society account all along.
The 36th fixed and the 5th index-linked issues of National Savings also look
attractive. The former pays 8.5 per cent tax-free if held for five years;
the equivalent of a gross 20.7 per cent for a top-rate taxpayer under
Labour's plans. The latter pays 4.5 per cent above the rate of inflation
tax-free; whether it is better than the 36th issue, depends on whether
inflation over the next five years is above or below 4 per cent.
None of the above products pay commission, however, so the financial
services industry is concentrating its efforts elsewhere. Personal Equity
Plans, where income and capital gains are tax-free, are being widely touted.
And it will shortly be time for the annual Business Expansion Scheme bonanza
 -investors in such companies can reclaim tax at their highest marginal
rate.
There are dangers, however, in all this enthusiasm for tax avoidance. The
first is that there are worse things in life than paying taxes. You may
resent paying tax but a poorly performing PEP or BES could cost you far more
than the taxman. Beware of investing in something solely for tax reasons,
and while some PEPs are good value, do not invest in the first to send you a
brochure.
The second problem is that higher taxes will dent your income. You may find
it more difficult to make ends meet. Thus you could find expensive savings
commitments an unnecessary burden, and you may be forced to eat into
previous savings to meet current expenditure. If you surrender a PEP
quickly, the charges will have eaten into your savings. If you surrender a
BES before five years, you will lose the tax relief.
Those who will be hit by a Labour tax increase should accordingly make sure
they have sufficient cash in their building society and deposit accounts;
they could need those liquid assets after the election.

The Financial Times


London Page II

920111

