FT922-4299

FT  06 JUN 92 / Brazil steps in as summit broker


   By DAVID LASCELLES and CHRISTINA LAMB


   RIO DE JANEIRO


BRAZIL is trying to broker an agreement between the developed and developing
worlds which would unlock financial resources to deal with global
environmental problems.
At present, both sides are far apart, with Third World countries demanding
large increases in aid, and donor nations anxious not to commit themselves
to outlays over which they would have little control.
Brazil is proposing that money be advanced through overseas development
assistance (ODA); the International Development Agency (IDA) and the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) (both arms of the World Bank); the regional
development banks; and private investment.
Significantly, the Brazilian proposals do not include the 'Green Fund' which
has been demanded by the Group of 77 (G77) developing countries. This has
made Brazil's plan more acceptable to the donor nations who are resisting
the creation of a new aid agency. But Third World countries might find it
harder to accept for the same reason.
Mr Rubens Ricupero, the Brazilian chairman of the contact group discussing
financial resources, said the proposals did not contain hard numbers. But
officials said they estimated that the commitments would amount to Dollars
6bn-Dollars 9bn a year. Aid of Dollars 5bn (Pounds 2.7bn) has been mentioned
as realistic.
Agreement on a financial package is crucial to the success of the Earth
Summit. It will flesh out Agenda 21, the action plan which the Summit is
supposed to approve. This will need massive financial support to enable
Third World countries to play their part in dealing with global
environmental problems.
Initial reactions from G77 countries on the Brazilian proposal were angry
and last night's meeting of G77 ministers was expected to be stormy.
Mr Zulfikar Qureshi from Pakistan, which chairs the G77, said the GEF could
only be acceptable as a fund if it was expanded in scope, financial
resources and governance and added that such decisions should be taken at
Rio.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920606

