FT922-13437

FT  11 APR 92 / Finance & The Family: Can the battered Tokyo market recover?
 -Experts who believe the Nikkei can bounce back and


   By EMIKO TERAZONO


IN SPITE OF yesterday's 7 per cent jump in the Tokyo stock market, recent
sharp declines have battered confidence and left investors holding Japanese
stocks shell-shocked.
With the Nikkei stock average 57 per cent off its peak in the late 1980s,
the main question is whether the time is ripe to buy Japanese stocks, or
whether share prices have further to fall.
The Nikkei stock average is at levels last seen in the mid-eighties, the
period before the 'bubble' of asset inflation in the stock and real estate
markets in Japan began. Considering the strength of the economy and
corporations, a further fall in share prices could make Japanese stocks look
cheap.
Most fund managers and brokers agree that shares are fairly valued at
'pre-bubble' levels. The bottom for the current decline is projected in the
13,000 to 15,000 range and many predict that a rebound of the market will be
sharp.
Some fund managers believe that the scope for Japanese shares to fall far
from current levels could be limited. Harry Lange of Fidelity Investment
Management in Tokyo says the actual risk in buying shares has significantly
reduced. He adds that it is safer to buy than to wait for a rebound, since a
recovery, once it starts, could be quick.
However, given the pessimism prevailing in the market, it will take courage
to jump in. Andrew Ballingal of Barclays de Zoete Wedd in Tokyo warns that
the Nikkei average, which has gone from one extreme of late 1980s, may fall
to the other - as low as 12,000  - in the next few months.
On the other hand, Ballingal says that, since there will be little time to
jump in once a rally starts, investors should start considering buying at
current levels and buying on declines. On a 12-18 month view, buying shares
below the 20,000 level should offer favourable returns.
Looking at economic fundamentals, the 'doomsday scenario' of the Japanese
economy put out by some pessimists may be overdone. The Japanese economy
grew 3.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1991 and most economists do not
expect a negative figure for this year.
Employment grew by a year-on-year 2.3 per cent last month, and the
unemployment figure is low at 2 per cent. Profits at Japanese industrial
companies are expected to pick up from the middle to the year. According to
Chiharu Shima at UBS Phillips & Drew, profits for 300 listed companies
(excluding financials), are expected to grow 1.7 per cent for the fiscal
year ending March 1993.
The main culprits of the recent falls in share prices are the bank and
speculative issues. The plunge in bank stocks seems to represent continuing
asset deflation in Japan's financial and real estate markets.
Bank stocks were heavily bought in the past few years as they were seen as
leading beneficiaries of the sharp rise in stock and property prices in the
late 1980s. The popularity was supported by heavy unrealised gains on
cross-holdings and increased profits from property related lending.
However, falls in the stock and real estate markets have undermined the
banks' capital value, and most financial institutions face a rise in bad
debt from real estate related loans.
As in the UK and US, the problems the financial institutions face will
probably take time to solve. However, the end of the asset speculation, also
represented by the sharp declines of speculative issues, will mean a
healthier stock market.
'The market is shedding the excesses, and seeds for a healthy stock market
are been sown,' says Chris Grubb, general manager of Jardine Fleming
Securities in Tokyo.
The fall of the Nikkei is the third, following those in April and October
1990. Three of the four post-war bear markets experienced three sharp
downswings followed by rapid recoveries. If the pattern repeats itself, the
market could rebound in the near term.
The Nikkei could see further declines within the next six months but, with
the US stock market looking overvalued and European markets facing higher
interest rates, on a mid-term view, some argue that Japan is worth
considering.
Jason James at James Capel in Tokyo says that, since Japanese industrial
shares are at their cheapest levels against US and UK counterparts for 20
years, buying Japanese investment funds weighted in the manufacturing
sectors is a wise choice.
The price-to-book ratios, which indicate a company's share price relative to
its net asset value, have fallen sharply for industrial blue chip companies.
For example, the consolidated PBR for Nissan, the car maker, is at 0.83,
while for Hitachi, the electronics group, the figure has fallen to 0.91.
Small companies, which tend to grow faster in a recovery and potential
beneficiaries of structural changes and deregulation, may also offer
favourable returns, according to some experts.

The Financial Times


London Page V

920411

