FT921-449

FT  28 MAR 92 / BA avionics plant to be built in Wales will create 400 jobs


   By ANTHONY MORETON, Welsh Correspondent


BRITISH Airways is to build a Pounds 23m avionics servicing plant at
Llantrisant near Cardiff which will eventually employ 400 people, it was
announced yesterday.
Simultaneously General Electric, the US aero-engine maker, forecast that the
workforce at its Cardiff-area engine maintenance centre would rise from
1,000 to 1,350 by the end of this year.
Mr John Major, the prime minister, announced both developments during an
election visit to south Wales. He said the region had become a powerful
magnet for inward investment.
Work on the avionics centre will begin in September and the unit should be
in operation two years later. Lord King, chairman of British Airways, who
accompanied the prime minister during the first part of the day, sought to
reassure the 300 workers now employed by the airline on avionics at London's
Heathrow airport.
Transfer of the plant to Cardiff would not involve any redundancies at
Heathrow, he said. 'The 300 workers there will be offered the chance of
moving to Wales or continuing their employment with the airline in other
sections at Heathrow.'
The avionics plant will be BA's second big investment in the Cardiff area.
Two years ago the airline announced that it was to build a Pounds 70m
aircraft maintenance base next to Cardiff airport to service its fleet of
Boeing 747 airliners, again moving the work from Heathrow. The base will
employ 1,200 people, and recruiting is expected to begin soon.
General Electric bought its engine maintenance centre from BA last December.
Mr Brian Rowe, senior vice-president of GE aircraft engines, said the plant
would become 'the European centre for maintenance for this part of the
world'.
It expects to overhaul some 500 engines, mostly Pratt & Whitneys and
Rolls-Royces, and some 200 auxiliary power units this year.
It will eventually also handle the new generation of engines which the US
company is to supply to BA for the latest model of the Boeing 747.
Holgates, a north Wales-based confectionery manufacturer, yesterday
announced a management buy-out led by its managing director, Mr Peter
Saunders, from its parent Nestle. The move safeguards 75 jobs. Mr Saunders
bought Holgates in 1976 and sold it to Rowntree Mackintosh 1983.

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920328

