FT922-4351

FT  05 JUN 92 / Parliament and Politics: Assets identified by receiver


   By ANDREW JACK


THE RECEIVER to Robert Maxwell's personal estate has identified assets
totalling several million pounds that might be claimed by creditors of the
business empire, it emerged yesterday.
Most are subject to claims by other parties, though, while investigations
into any possible funds held through trusts in Liechtenstein have proved
extremely difficult.
Mr Peter Phillips, a partner in Buchler Phillips, the accountancy firm, the
court-appointed receiver to Mr Maxwell's estate, is to appear before Mr
Justice Ferris next week to discuss his attemptsto trace assets held by the
family.
He was appointed by the court after Mirror Group Newspapers issued a writ
against Mr Maxwell's estate in December for sums it claimed were owed to the
group.
Mr Phillips said yesterday: 'We have traced an amount not in the tens of
millions of pounds.' Assets found include bank accounts and several
relatively small shareholdings.
Mr Maxwell held a stake of more than 15 per cent in the Bank of Sofia in
Bulgaria. He also had about Pounds 16,000-worth of shares in both P&O and
Ansbachers, as well as holdings in US corporations.
He was a Lloyd's Name on a number of insurance syndicates and a member of
the Outhwaite action group, which received a Pounds 116m settlement in
February, now being distributed. His estate will receive his portion of the
settlement without any deductions to settle his outstanding obligations to
Lloyd's.
Mr Phillips emphasised that there were other 'third party claims' on many of
the assets, including from Arthur Andersen, the accountancy firm, who are
administrators to the private Maxwell companies.
He said he was unable to discuss the position of assets held through
Liechtenstein. 'We have not broken through the webs of confidentiality.'
While the personal assets of Mr Kevin and Mr Ian Maxwell, Robert Maxwell's
sons, have been frozen, it is not possible to do the same to someone who is
deceased. Mrs Betty Maxwell, his widow, may also have independent assets
outside the control of the receiver.
Mr Phillips has submitted two reports to the court detailing assets
identified and their value. The second was submitted about five weeks ago
and is still being considered by the judge.

The Financial Times


London Page 12

920605

