FT921-446

FT  28 MAR 92 / Clarke pledge on CTC programme


   By ANDREW ADONIS


THE city technology college programme will expand if the Conservatives form
the next government, Mr Kenneth Clarke, education secretary, said yesterday.
The proposal, which features in the Conservative manifesto without any
detailed commitment, took educationalists by surprise. If it is to be more
than cosmetic, it may cost several hundred million pounds to implement. At
present only 15 such colleges are open or planned.
When the CTC initiative was launched in 1988 by Mr Kenneth Baker, then
education secretary, the cost of setting up the colleges was intended to
come largely from business and industry. Few private sponsors were found,
however, and more than three quarters of the start-up cost has come from the
Treasury. The cost to the government so far has been nearly Pounds 100m,
against Pounds 30m to the private sector.
Until yesterday, ministers had played down ideas of establishing new CTCs,
and talked instead of devoting extra technology funding to existing schools.
But Mr Clarke said in an interview in yesterday's Times Educational
Supplement: 'CTCs have been a great success and we shall be able to get
more.' On cost, he said he was 'attracted to the 80/20 split' between public
and private-sector funding. 'I shall be able to get more sponsors,' he
added. 'I don't think it was possible when the Labour party was threatening
the schools.'
Labour and the Liberal Democrats are committed to ending the CTC initiative
and placing the colleges under local education authority control.
Mr Jack Straw, shadow education secretary, accused Mr Clarke of 'making up
policy on the hoof'.
Mr Matthew Taylor, Liberal Democrat education spokesman, said: 'Mr Clarke is
stubbornly refusing to let a failed policy drop. CTCs are the key to the
two-tier system the Conservatives are creating, which involves extra funding
for some schools at the expense of the rest.'

The Financial Times


London Page 6

920328

