FT923-15581

FT  01 JUL 92 / Parliament and Politics: 'Another place' welcomes Thatcher


   By IVO DAWNAY


THE baroness looked unusually demure and self-effacing in her black hat and
scarlet robes. Only the determined grip on her handbag was familiar.
But then, this was no longer a mighty prime minister. It was a timorous
debutante on her first day in a new political playground - another time and,
as they say in the Commons of the neighbouring chamber, 'another place'.
Her audience by its size alone left no doubt, nonetheless, that her arrival
was a special occasion. As Baroness Thatcher of Kesteven progressed towards
a former member of her cabinet, the lord chancellor, the House of Lords'
scarlet benches were as packed as for the Queen's formal opening of
parliament.
In the front row of the opposition benches, two other former prime
ministers, Lord Wilson and Lord Callaghan, looked on. Just a row along sat a
handful of her most loyal Commons supporters, Euro-sceptics all, like
banished knights cast out of court.
Before the ceremony, Mrs Thatcher had conceded it to be 'a very nervy'
occasion. 'It is such a hot day - too hot to be wearing such heavy clothes,'
she said.
In the event she was as cool as ever, escorted by her sponsors, Lord Joseph,
her one-time political mentor, and Lord Boyd-Carpenter, once her boss at the
ministry of pensions.
The arcane rites - dating from 1672 - were observed. Slow progresses, a
brief kneel at the feet of Lord Mackay of Clashfern at the Woolsack, the
swearing of oaths to uphold the safety and defence of the kingdom and the
Church and the triplicate doffing of hats.
Then with a less formal handshake with Lord Mackay and a roar of approval
from the chamber it was over. The political rubicon of the central lobby
that divides Lords and Commons had been crossed.
Returning to the Chamber in her more familiar blue, the new baroness
respectfully held her tongue as Baroness Chalker defended the prime
minister's opposition to a referendum on Maastricht.
One peer, Lord Mounteagle, spent 43 years summoning up the courage to speak
between his swearing-in and his first address to the chamber. With a
Maastricht debate tomorrow, Baroness Thatcher is expected to make her
speaking debut a little sooner.

The Financial Times


London Page 10

920701

