FT921-14318

FT  16 JAN 92 / Technology: Barnacles forced to jump ship


   By TIM BURT


On a summer's night in 1988 a fireball engulfed one the largest oil
platforms in the North Sea, the Piper Alpha, killing 167 workers and
throwing burning metal and spouts of fire and smoke into the sky.
The heat from the blaze was so intense that the MSV Tharos, the firefighting
vessel assigned to the rig, was forced out of the area.
Survivors of the disaster condemned the reaction of the Tharos, a ship built
on the advice of Red Adair, for failing to turn its high-powered hoses on
the rig.
Research scientists now claim Tharos was ineffective on the disaster night
because its cooling systems were so clogged with marine organisms that it
could not develop full power in its engines and firefighting equipment.
The organisms - ranging from barnacles and mussels to microscopic bacteria -
flourish in the seawater taken on-board ships through cooling pipes below
the waterline.
On the Tharos and other vessels 'fouling' by such organisms has been blamed
for blocking pipes and jamming valves, causing serious corrosion and leading
to a loss of power.
Concerned at criticism of the Tharos, the owners, Occidental, turned to
scientists at the University of Sheffield who have pioneered a system which
prevents the build-up of marine organisms in ocean-going vessels.
Occidental, whose North Sea assets have since been sold to the Anglo-French
joint venture Elf Enterprise, abandoned the old anti-fouling system on its
firefighting ship and installed equipment developed by Biofouling and
Corrosion Control (BFCC), a company which was set up by academics in
Sheffield under a technology transfer scheme.
Led by Brent Knox-Holmes, the BFCC team discovered that they could nearly
eliminate fouling in pipes by creating an electrolysis in the sea water
using a metal oxide electrode producing chlorine and a copper electrode
producing copper ions.
The current from the metal oxide electrode converts the sodium chloride  -
or salt - in seawater into chlorine, which deters marine organisms.
The scientists found the chlorine acted in synergy with copper ions from the
other electrode to disrupt any further settlement of algae or molluscs.
In the past, fouling was controlled by either dousing pipes with large
amounts of sodium hypochlorite - a hazardous chemical not easily stored at
sea - or dissolving copper directly into the water, an expensive and
environmentally damaging solution.
Following commercial tests at laboratories in the UK and US, the BFCC system
has been adopted by AP Moller, the Danish shipping line, which has fitted 21
vessels with the new copper-chlorine treatment. According to Knox-Holmes,
the Danes were attracted by the low environmental impact and reduced
maintenance costs of BFCC.
He claims the BFCC system is 90 per cent more efficient than dousing with
sodium hypochlorite and 80 per cent better than using copper on its own.
His arguments have convinced not only the environmentally-aware
Scandinavians (Fred Olsen Line and J Lauritzen Shipping are using BFCC too),
but also industrial concerns such as Amoco and Conoco.
Orders from the two oil exploration companies have marked the successful
move from anti-fouling on ships to other applications. Amoco has fitted BFCC
equipment on four gas platforms, while Conoco uses the system on three oil
rigs.
With patents awarded in Britain and the US, and others pending in the Far
East, the academics at BFCC are now looking at ways of adapting their system
for power stations, desalination plants and fresh water use.
'We are setting new standards for biofouling control', says Knox-Holmes.
'Had the MSV Tharos had our system installed at the time of Piper Alpha, it
might have developed full power to hose down the rig,' he adds. 'Our system
is not just cleaner but safer.'

The Financial Times


London Page 13

920116

