FT922-745

FT  26 JUN 92 / Anglo signs break through labour code


   By PHILIP GAWITH


   JOHANNESBURG


ANGLO AMERICAN Corporation, South Africa's largest company, has signed a
ground-breaking labour relations agreement with the National Union of
Mineworkers (NUM).
The code of conduct accord is one of the most significant developments in
South African labour relations since the legalisation of black trade unions
in 1979. The code, the first of its kind in the industry, is aimed at
eliminating violence in the mines and the violation of a wide range of
labour and civil rights. It applies to all the gold and coal mines managed
by Anglo.
At a signing ceremony this week, Mr Marcel Golding, assistant general
secretary of the NUM, which has more than 300,000 members, said the
agreements were of 'major historical significance'. The code, and the
accompanying agreement on dismissal and disputes procedures, arose out of
the bitter 1987 miners' strike and took four years to negotiate.
Relations at the mines between unions and management, and between workers
themselves, have often been fraught and violent. In November last year, 86
people died at Anglo's President Steyn gold mine near Welkom in clashes
during a national stayaway to protest against VAT.
The code seeks to balance the rights and responsibilities of managers, union
leaders and union members in a way which acknowledges fundamental liberties
and avoids violence and intimidation.
Important labour rights are recognised, such as the right to freedom of
association, peaceful picketing and full disclosure of relevant information
and there is a commitment to job and skills development to correct past
imbalances. Sensitive matters such as wearing political insignia and singing
and dancing at mass meetings are also dealt with.
These rights are balanced by limitations which essentially protect the right
of management to manage, and individual workers to dissent from union
activities without fear of violence.
Mr Bobby Godsell, the industrial relations director at Anglo, said that at a
time when national political negotiations were deadlocked it was instructive
that two parties deeply divided, with a history of violent conflict and
vastly different ideological beliefs, had negotiated such an important
agreement.

The Financial Times


London Page 4

920626

