FT924-12213

FT  22 OCT 92 / US accuses EC as trade talks collapse


   By DAVID DODWELL, FRANCES WILLIAMS and DAVID GARDNER


   LONDON, GENEVA, BRUSSELS


WORLD TRADE reform talks broke down in Brussels last night as US negotiators
said the European Community had backtracked on compromises over farm
subsidies which had seemed likely to produce a breakthrough.
It is understood that a meeting has been called today at the White House to
discuss immediate imposition of Dollars 1bn (Pounds 623m) sanctions against
the EC's oilseed subsidy regime.
Pressure has mounted on President George Bush in recent weeks from US soya
producers and Republican congressmen for swift action on oilseeds and only
the prospect of a breakthrough in the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (Gatt) has kept them at bay.
US negotiators said serious differences remained over the oilseeds dispute.
They said the EC had also backtracked on issues thought to have been settled
 -such as limits on the volume of subsidised EC farm exports.
The EC yesterday remained firmly of the view that the negotiations are not
yet over.
The EC-US dispute over subsidised farm trade has blocked progress towards a
Uruguay Round agreement for almost two years. At risk is a deal which could
add Dollars 100bn a year to world trade, providing a fillip to both
developed and developing economies.
The latest push was seen by a beleaguered President Bush as a last-ditch
effort to achieve a breakthrough that would win votes in the presidential
election on November 3.
Observers fear that if President Bush is defeated, which seems likely, his
Democratic successor will have no interest in pressing for an early
agreement.
Delay would put the entire Round at risk and would be likely to trigger a
number of simmering trade disputes - the most immediate of which is over
oilseeds.
A senior US official said yesterday: 'It appeared last week that both sides
had moved closer to an understanding that would enable us to achieve a
breakthrough on agriculture. It now appears that for internal political
reasons the Community is backing away from that understanding. This will
make it virtually impossible to conclude an agreement in the near future.'
The oilseeds row was the immediate cause of the breakdown but this had led
to a fraying of agreements tentatively reached last week on cuts in
subsidised cereals exports.
French refusal to see any cut in its lucrative cereals exports had cast a
shadow over the negotiations. Paris signed up in May to a reform of the EC's
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) that is more restrictive than the subsidy
cuts called for by Gatt. But French officials last week said in Brussels
they did not believe the reform would work or be adhered to.
The European Commission, negotiating on behalf of the EC, nevertheless
intends to hold France to its commitments under the new CAP, said EC
officials in Brussels. They believe that any hope now of clinching a deal
depends on not reopening the CAP reform - the underpinning of any Gatt deal.
Much will also depend on the extent to which Germany is prepared to put
pressure on France, its closest ally, to reach a settlement.
On oilseeds, the US has made successive concessions towards the EC, which
insists that its internal farm reforms can bring output down to 9.5m tonnes
a year. It is understood that the US would 'look at a way of getting a
production outcome without looking at a specific production number'.
But an official said yesterday that the US had to have 'a mechanism that is
clear and understandable' and that would enable the administration to give
firm assurances to farm lobbies that a particular EC production ceiling
could be set.
'We are being asked to take the EC on good faith, and in all honesty there
is no trust that the EC will carry out any commitment on that basis,' he
commented.
The American Soyabean Association and two other oilseed grower groups
yesterday wrote to Mrs Carla Hills, the US trade representative 'totally'
rejecting the EC oilseeds proposal. 'It amounts to little more than a
sanction of current EC oilseed plantings and what the EC already plans under
CAP reform,' they said.
Clinton tiptoes around trade issue, Page 6

The Financial Times


London Page 1

921022

