FT924-12046

FT  22 OCT 92 / Commodities and Agriculture: NZ dairymen set to cream off
profits - The industry is brimming with optimism


   By TERRY HALL


THE NEW Zealand dairy industry is brimming with optimism three months into
its new season. Mr Dryden Spring, chairman of the Dairy Board, forecast this
week that the industry would earn NZDollars 3.5bn (Pounds 1.16bn) in
1992-93, NZDollars 500m more than in the 1991-92 year.
Increasing optimism is seeing a sharp rise in the price of both dairy cattle
and farms. Dairy farmers are expecting a payout of about NZDollars 6 a
kilogram of milk fat this season - 50 cents more than Mr Spring told farmers
to expect when the 1991-92 season ended in June.
This is stirring stuff for an industry which began the 1991-92 season from a
low base and was thrilled to end it with a higher than expected pay out of
NZDollars 5.20 a kilogram. Total payments to farmers were higher, having
been topped up by individual dairy companies.
Judging by past experience the October pay out is likely to be a
conservative one, and the board will closely monitor the season with further
reviews probable in February and at the end of the season. The board will
not be drawn on how much extra may be paid.
Industry executives say, however, that while the future is not guaranteed,
most farmers are counting on an average pay out of about NZDollars 6 a
kilogram. The average farmer producing 25,000 kg of milk fat a year expects
to see his income rise by some NZDollars 25,000 over last season's.
Mr Spring said that he expected earnings this season would be almost double
the depressed 1988 figure, underlining the industry's continuing success in
adding value to its raw product. Export volumes have risen by only 12 per
cent in that time.
Most dairy farmers had not recovered from the spending cuts forced by
falling prices of two season's ago, the chairman said, and he expected that
the extra income would be spent on maintenance and fertiliser. Two factors
had stopped the board's forecasts being even better: an increase in European
Community export subsidies, which was expected to bring lower prices, and
the continuing absence of Russia from the dairy market.
Increases in world dairy prices generally and greater sales to the growing
markets of Asia and Latin America were the main reason for the increasing
optimism, Mr Spring said. Though world prices had slipped from the peaks of
two to three months ago, they were still well ahead of last year for most
products except butter.
Skim milk powder is selling for USDollars 1,990 a tonne, compared with
USDollars 1,550 last season. Butter is down from USDollars 1,500 to
USDollars 1,440. Mr Spring said trade liberalisation was the main reason for
increased sales to Latin America. Up to 1981 sales were mainly in bulk going
to government buying agencies, but privatisation had opened the way for
value added products. Branded dairy consumer products in Latin America had
risen in value from NZDollars 30m to an estimated NZDollars 140m this year.
Latin America was now New Zealand's biggest market in volume, though it
trailed Europe in earnings. He said the Asian dairy market was growing at 5
per cent a year.
The board reports that in the 1991 year returns for most dairy products
rose, with cheese up 15 per cent and milk powder and casein up by more than
33 per cent. Butter returns were also somewhat higher.
It says it is difficult to forecast butter prices as this depends on future
purchases from the former Soviet Union, a key market.
No worthwhile payments have been received from the NZDollars 270m debt from
last season, and this is causing some concern within the board. While it is
known that the Russians want more butter, the board is unlikely to provide
it till some progress is made on paying what is already owed. Some
settlement is expected, however, as recent loans from the West should give
the former Soviet Union money to spend, and there has been progress on money
owed for wool, leading to a resumption of that trade.
The board says the skim milk powder market looks better. Over the last month
the EC has cut its export subsidies, leading to a rise in prices. EC
consumption of milk, and conversion to cheese and butter, has picked up
sharply in the current season, and this is also seen as a positive in
cutting the community's export capacity.

The Financial Times


London Page 30

921022

