FT923-6363

FT  25 AUG 92 / Terms set for Yugoslav talks: Four-point 'code of behaviour'
calls for end to ethnic cleansing


   By JUDY DEMPSEY and IVO DAWNAY


THE UNITED NATIONS and the European Community will ask all parties in the
war in the former Yugoslavia to accept four basic principles as a means of
negotiating a long-term solution to the crisis in the Balkans.
The principles, described by UK officials as a code of 'civilised
behaviour', will be presented at the UN/EC-sponsored peace conference which
opens in London tomorrow.
'All the parties in the former Yugoslavia will be asked not to take
territory by force, not to engage in ethnic cleansing, to respect borders
and to improve and then close all detention centres,' a UK official said.
But an EC diplomat said any attempt to place all sides in the war in
Bosnia-Hercegovina on the same footing would be a 'grave mistake'.
'The conference is making a serious mistake if it thinks it can spread the
share of the blame evenly across all sides,' he said. 'The Bosnian people,
particularly the Moslems, have lost most in this miserable war. Croatia and
Serbia have tried to carve up Bosnia,' he added.
British officials said that the conference chairmen were not intending to
establish pre-conditions for attending. 'The point is we have to apply
pressure, even by further sanctions, as a means of ending this bloodshed and
preventing the war from spreading,' an official said.
The conference, which is expected to end on Friday, will be chaired jointly
by Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali, UN secretary-general, and Mr John Major in his
capacity as head of the EC presidency. Mr Major called the conference after
the collapse of last month's EC peace talks on the former Yugoslavia in
London.
But British and other EC officials yesterday held out little hope that the
conference would achieve any success  - at least in the short term. Mr
Boutros Ghali, who arrived in London last night, said: 'I believe we will
not solve the problem, but at least find the beginning of the solution.'
Mr Douglas Hurd, Britain's foreign secretary, said on BBC television that
the conference would back greater sanctions as a means of applying pressure
on Serbia to stop the war in Bosnia.
Japan, Russia, China, and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference will
also be represented at the talks, as will the US.
The presidents of the six republics of the former Yugoslavia will attend, as
well as Mr Milan Panic and Mr Dobrica Cosic, prime minister and president
respectively of the unrecognised Yugoslavia, which now consists of Serbia
and Montenegro.
Bosnian president Mr Alija Izetbegovic, who is expected in London tomorrow,
will put forward a comprehensive peace plan aimed at reconstituting the
government of the independent republic.
Meanwhile, in the besieged Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, Bosnia's forces
continued their offensive aimed at taking the western, Serb-controlled part
of the city.
Balkan sights set on Kosovo province, Page 2

The Financial Times


London Page 14

920825

