FT921-14306

FT  16 JAN 92 / Personal View: A cri de coeur for industry


   By MICHAEL KEEVILL


The UK economy is in such deep recession that unusual measures to stimulate
economic activity without causing inflation need urgently to be considered
and promoted.
The principal political parties will need to come up with original ideas to
meet the public demand for fundamental new thinking.
Rather than wait for them, industrialists have been searching for a business
solution.
Construction, the fundamental economic kick-starter, is in deep stagnation.
Everything from concrete and bricks and steel to window frames, wallpaper
and lighting are, or soon will be, feeling the knock-on effects.
Architects and surveyors, electricians and plumbers have become unemployed
or underemployed and the effects are felt in the High Street.
Currently there are more than 2.5m people without work who in 1991 cost the
state more than Pounds 800m in unemployment benefits alone.
Banks, insurance companies and building societies are affected. Yet
throughout the UK, local authorities are sitting on massive balances of
funds from the sale of council houses. The total is estimated at Pounds 6bn.
Yet the Treasury will not permit more than 25 per cent of these balances to
be spent. Why not?
Every local authority has a massive repair schedule it cannot meet.
Potentially good housing stock is deteriorating. The effect on surrounding
property is bad and probably leads to other drains on the public purse in
terms of street crime and vandalism.
At the same time, many thousands of people are living in overcrowded
conditions - particularly in London - in bed and breakfast accommodation
costing many thousands of pounds a month. What other problems is the
community storing up for itself in terms of disease and violence?
If a housing repair and modernisation drive involving smaller companies as
well as the big builders were launched, there would be an immediate stimulus
to the construction industry. This would feed through to the rest of the
economy without being inflationary.
The same sort of programme could be applied to schools. Too many of them are
falling apart and cannot be upgraded for want of resources.
The lighting industry, which has a turnover of Pounds 650m and employs
17,000 people, believes the time has come to get a grip on this situation.
It is, of course, an interested party. It wants to start moving sales too.
Merely to stand back and observe a continuing run-down will not do much for
business, and may present too easy a market opportunity for future imports.
The Lighting Industry Federation would like the government to match the
funds held by the local authorities, and so give councils an incentive to
move fast to seize a share of Whitehall 'new money'. A better partnership,
long overdue, between central and local government might be established.
Everyone would like to see the back of the so-called cardboard cities which
disfigure city centres. These too could be tackled by a more active building
industry.
Blocks in inner cities that need refurbishment could be converted to single
people's accommodation, to provide, say, maximum two-year tenancies before
the occupant had to make his or her own arrangements. Much concrete, piping
and timber, and many bricks, and, yes, light fittings, would soon be needed.
This activity would create jobs and, above all, homes, and could be begun
very quickly.
Architects, surveyors, builders and plumbing and electrical contractors
would leap to respond to this challenge.
Can the politicians?
The author is president of the Lighting Industry Federation and managing
director of Arrow Plastics.

The Financial Times


London Page 21 Illustration (Omitted).

920116

