FT921-1443

FT  24 MAR 92 / Tough Polish draft budget cuts subsidies


   By CHRISTOPHER BOBINSKI


   WARSAW


POLAND'S centre right coalition government has cut subsidies and social
welfare in a tough draft budget designed to recoup international
credibility, spur exports and curb domestic demand.
The draft now passes to parliament where it faces a month-long scrutiny by
the 29 parties, many elected in opposition to market reform policies
introduced by the first two post-communist governments.
The International Monetary Fund, which has suspended disbursement of its
Dollars 1.6bn loan facility because of the soaring budget deficit, gave
conditional backing for the budget provided Mr Andrzej Olechowski, the
finance minister, managed to keep the budget deficit below Zl 65,550bn
(Pounds 2.8bn), equivalent to 5 per cent of GDP.
Implementation of last year's Paris Club agreement under which Poland's
official creditors agreed to a 50 per cent reduction in the country's
Dollars 33bn (Pounds 19bn) official debt is linked to Poland's conformity to
terms agreed with the IMF.
Mr Jan Olszewski, the prime minister, originally favoured an easing of
economic policy, but yesterday called on parliament to recognise the
importance of retaining the confidence of the IMF.
Poland's crisis deepened as the recession pushed thousands of state
industries into loss, cutting the major source of tax income, while social
welfare spending soared.
Mr Olechowski said corporate taxes were to be eased and the debts of some
companies would be re-scheduled to help industry survive. But the average
level of indirect taxes on consumer goods is to rise from 5.4 per cent to
7.5 per cent coupled with tighter state sector wage controls.
Real incomes of health, education and government administrative staff and 8m
pensioners will fall. Mr Olechowski, said Poland managed to keep within its
spending limits over the first quarter, but a broader political coalition
was needed to ensure that the budget was passed 'in the face resistance from
various social groups'.
The government is hoping to finance a part of its budget deficit with World
Bank loans and support from western governments. It also hopes to raise Zl
10,000bn by selling one and three-year government bonds.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920324

