FT924-11308

FT  27 OCT 92 / Survey of Sri Lanka (17): Difficult year for reforms - The
Tea Industry


   By DAVID PILLING


From a distance the squat tea-processing factory in the hills above Kandy
looks fully functional. But close up one discovers bolts across its doors
and windows and it rapidly becomes apparent that the machinery has long lain
idle and the plant been left to fall into disrepair.
The factory serves as a useful analogy for Sri Lanka's tea industry as a
whole, which superficially appears to be in a healthy state. Tea remains the
country's highest net earner of foreign exchange and Sri Lanka has
outstripped India as the world's top exporter.
Last year it produced a record crop of 240m kg, although severe drought
earlier this year will hit 1992 production hard.
Look more closely, though, and the picture becomes less rosy. Sri Lankan
yields are extremely low, averaging 1,100 kg a hectare, according to local
tea broker Forbes and Walker. This compares with yields of about 1,700 kg/ha
in India and more than 2,000 kg in Kenya.
Far from being a money-spinner, tea has been a tremendous drain on the
treasury. The two state corporations that have run the estates for the past
17 years have received estimated subsidies to the tune of SLRs400m a month.
Since 1980 the Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation has recorded profits
in only five years, and the Janatha Estates Development Board in only two.
Most observers blame such poor performance on the nationalisation in 1975 of
the largest estates under the populist government of Mrs Sirima
Bandaranaike. Before this, total plantation produce accounted for about 70
per cent of foreign exchange earnings, a figure that had dropped to below 30
per cent by last year. That partly reflects the diversification of the
country's export base, but is also the result of state mismanagement,
corruption and political interference in the running of the estates.
Replanting of high-yielding tea varieties has been sporadic - with only 24
per cent completed by 1990 - and the unwieldly state corporations have been
ponderous in their response to changing international markets.
Sri Lanka continues to produce predominantly orthodox teas, with only 3 per
cent CTC (cut, tear and curl) production, even though demand has shifted
markedly to the latter which now accounts for 68 per cent of the world
market. Factories have been slow to install the necessary machinery and much
of the original equipment has not been replaced since the turn of the
century.
The need to rationalise the entire sector has led the government to swallow
hard and take the controversial decision of placing the estates under
private management. Of the country's 502 estates, 449 were regrouped into 22
enterprises, the management contracts for which were put out to tender. The
remaining 53 estates were considered too run down to be offered to the
private sector.
Mr Maxwell Fernando, a consultant at Forbes and Walker, is confident that
private managers can turn the industry around. The estates, he says, are
'being privatised not for the kind of ideological reasons that led to their
nationalisation in the first instance, but for pragmatic reasons of
productivity and viability.'
Mr Fernando believes new management teams can reduce costs, which he
describes as 'the highest in the world', and raise productivity. 'There was
absolutely no financial control in the state management days. Let's hope
things will now change.'
He also hopes that managers will be more responsive to markets now that 'the
shackles of bureaucracy have been removed'. CTC production should increase
and there may be moves to enter niche markets such as scented teas.
Management contracts will run for an initial five years and will be extended
if performance is satisfactory. The new companies, which are expected to
absorb any operating losses, are to be paid on a profit-sharing basis, with
10 per cent of profits to be given to the workforce. The government is to
remain in control of hiring and firing, leading to concern that political
manipulation may continue.
Mr Fernando admits that the nature of the management contracts 'raises the
danger that they will fall prey to short-termism', a tendency that has long
hampered the industry. He believes, however, that management teams are
merely a stage towards fully fledged privatisation, a view privately shared
by senior government officials.
The World Bank is more critical. The contracts drawn up with the management
companies are unlikely to 'provide the incentives for adequate investment
and longer-run profit maximisation that would come from private ownership',
it says in its latest country report.
Labour relations remain highly sensitive, given Sri Lanka's ethnic tensions
and the fact that 90 per cent of plantation workers are Indian Tamils,
brought in by British planters last century. Analysts say plantations are
heavily overstaffed and that certain working practices are inefficient. The
government admits that the strength of plantation worker unions has caused
it to tread cautiously.
The implication is that, given a free hand, private companies might cut the
workforce substantially. There may be a possibility, however, of redeploying
workers as estate crops are diversified into such areas as cut flowers,
fruit and vegetables.
The preponderance of Indian Tamil labour has already led to a watering down
of privatisation proposals. When Indian tea companies - hit by loss of
production in strife-torn Assam - bid for the management contracts,
deep-rooted Sinhalese fears of Indian domination were stirred. The
government intervened, restricting bids to nominally Sri Lankan companies.
Sri Lanka could not have chosen a more difficult year in which to implement
such reforms. The four-month drought has already cut production drastically
and Forbes and Walker is predicting a total crop for 1992 of about 180m kg,
some 23 per cent down on last year. Higher prices may help to compensate.
Despite such difficulties, many of the new management teams believe they can
move into profit relatively quickly. 'I'm fairly confident that we can turn
it around in 1 1/2 years,' says a chief director of one company.
He feels that productivity can be raised substantially simply by reversing
the neglect of the past 15 years. Of this period, he says: 'Mismanagement is
an understatement. There was no management at all.'

The Financial Times


London Page X

921027

