FT921-15544

FT  09 JAN 92 / Arts: Dinner Dance - Lyric, Hammersmith


   By ALASTAIR MACAULAY


Unsubtle and coarse in several ways, the dance-theatre group The Kosh is
well named. In this two-act Dinner Dance, writer David Pownall and
choreographer-director Sian Williams treat a group of seven characters from
two contrasting angles, neither of them rewarding.
Act One is 'A Slice of Life,' in which we follow the lives of three couples
and a female despatch rider in brief scenes, soap-opera style, all set in
the same kitchen. A working wife grows tired of her unemployed husband and
his hopes of starting a family. A bible-freak ('Well, at the moment you rang
I was reading the Psalms of David') dates a black girl. Two gay lovers break
up ('Being a junk jewellery salesman does have its limitations'). Don't ask
about the girl cyclist. For emotional depth or psychological penetration,
this all scores less than Acorn Antiques.
Most scenes are spiced with mime-dance-acrobatic ingredients. I guess this
is meant to suggest the intensity of the things left unsaid, but in practice
it makes each character look (a) phoney (b) melodramatic (c) narcissistic.
One gay man replying to his lover: (pirouette across the kitchen, backbend
over a work-surface) 'I can't trust you to do anything for me]' Bible freak
to his black chick: 'You look' (is suddenly lifted high in the air by two
unseen men) 'terrific]' And the way characters keep making entrances and
exits from or into the fridge or kitchen cupboards is a hoot.
Act Two is called 'Throw Caution to the Wind.' Here the seven characters
(and their poor accompanying 'cellist) are dressed in harnesses, kneepads
and not a lot else. It looks like a bad bondage party. The music (thanks,
Howard J. Davidson) is standard soft-core rock - stuff to energise to. I
imagine that what occurs here is an attempt at transcendent lyricism
modelled on the famous 'Golden Section' in Twyla Tharp's 1981 The Catherine
Wheel. But, whatever its concept, it is fatally constricted by the
deliberately strenuous, crude movement style.
The dancers stamp athletically and do a few acrobatic feats, but they look
even more tense and self-conscious than in Act One, and they maximise the
effort involved. The eventual image is one of totalitarian perversion,
marked by competitive aggression. Then they chant a finale: 'I. I want. I
need . . . Ever am I alone with you, and thou, and she, and him, and her and
me.' The singing is as strenuous as the movement; half the performers sound
hoarse.
Nothing about this performance cheered me, but I must mention the overall
Kosh features that are most depressing. Dinner Dance is so straitjacketed by
its own effortful manner that it never makes clear what kind of social
comment it intends. Is Act Two supposed to show the same characters,
conflicts and problems as Act One? Or does it hope to express a lyrical
release in which ordinary social character is forgotten? Impossible to say,
because neither is achieved. Sadder yet is the brutalising effect that this
kind of show has on its executants. Any kind of refinement - technical or
spiritual - is out of place here.

The Financial Times


London Page 15 Photograph Dinner Dance - Act 2, 'It looks like a bad bondage
party' (Omitted).

920109

