FT921-3954

FT  12 MAR 92 / FT European Water Conference: East Europeans warned of
privatisation dangers


   By RICHARD EVANS


THE development of privately financed and managed water industries
throughout central and eastern Europe could be jeopardised by 'dubious'
contracts offered by western companies, a London conference was warned
yesterday.
International bankers told a Financial Times conference on the European
water industry there was a chronic need for western involvement in the
region to bring derelict industries up to standard.
But such involvement could bring problems. Mr Anthony Pellegrini of the
World Bank said: 'Local governments in eastern Europe have little experience
in dealing with sophisticated western companies ...they are not familiar
with typical lengths of concessions or management contracts, with tariff
adjustment clauses and most importantly, they are not familiar with
competitive bid methods.
'As a result, some contracts are being offered with dubious terms. If this
continues, it may in the end jeopardise the development of the private water
sector in central and eastern Europe. Unless proper standards for contracts
are implemented, a backlash against the private sector may develop that ..
could harm both the private companies and the best interests of the local
governments.'
Mr Pellegrini, chief of the World Bank's infrastructure division in Europe,
the Middle east and north Africa, said private western funding offered the
potential for more innovative and efficient management, maintenance and
operation, but he advised local governments to seek independent advice
before signing anything.
The scale and range of the work that needed to be done was considerable, he
said. The central planning system had left the water and sewerage utilities
with insufficient operating budgets, lack of management expertise, lack of
chemicals and supplies, and plant and equipment that was often only
partially functioning due to lack of maintenance.
The former eastern bloc countries are now considering new forms of ownership
and management and are tending towards the French system, where assets are
retained in the public sector and the operations run by the private sector,
rather than the complete privatisation undertaken in England and Wales.
Mr Francis Carpenter of the European Investment Bank, owned and financed by
EC member states, said bringing the east European water industry up to
scratch would be a major task, and a necessary one, because several of the
main river basins were shared with western Europe.

The Financial Times


London Page 2

920312

