FT922-4104

FT  08 JUN 92 / Maastricht in the Balance: EC ministers to pursue single
market


   By DAVID GARDNER and CHRISTOPHER PARKES


   BRUSSELS, BONN


EC finance ministers meeting in Luxembourg tomorrow will try to give the
impression of business-as-usual, despite uncertainty over the future of the
Maastricht treaty, by advancing measures to create next year's single
market.
Ministers will have their first formal look at Spain's 'convergence'
programme, under provisions whereby the 12 examine each member state's
efforts to prepare for economic and monetary union (Emu), by converging
their fiscal and monetary performance towards targets set by Maastricht.
Following Denmark's rejection of the treaty last week, this increasingly
important exercise in mutual bullying will be watched more closely by
markets anxious about whether Emu and a single currency are now feasible by
the target dates of 1997, or 1999 at the latest.
Ministers will also have their first serious discussion on the European
Commission's plans to increase EC revenue by more than 30 per cent from now
to 1997. This increase partly flows from Maastricht pledges to increase
fiscal transfers to Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece, the Community's
poorest members.
The size of the increase is hotly opposed by Germany and the UK, the EC's
two biggest net contributors. But if the EC tips itself into a further
argument about money, the prospects of ratifying Maastricht could be clouded
further. The most potent weapon of the Irish government, for instance, which
is holding a referendum on June 18, is EC cash.
The finance ministers will also continue the EC's increasingly controversial
efforts to persuade the UK to harmonise its value added tax rates with the
rest of the Community as part of the single market.
Christopher Parkes adds from Bonn: Chancellor Helmut Kohl said yesterday EC
leaders would agree to accelerate the pace of enlargement at their next
summit in Lisbon later this month.
'The train will not stop,' he added in a robust response to the Danish
referendum's 'no' to political and monetary union. 'We want to step up the
pace rather than slow it down,' he said in a radio interview.

The Financial Times


London Page 3

920608

