FT922-4227

FT  06 JUN 92 / Finance and the Family: Mexico's bulls are running - A good
performance but remember the risks


   By SCHEHERAZADE DANESHKHU


LATIN America has proved an enormously popular emerging market and Mexico
has been a prominent part of its success. Last year, Latin American
Investment Trust was the best performing of all investment trusts with a
rise in its net asset value of 124 per cent. In November, 40 per cent of its
fund was in Mexico but this has now dropped to 29 per cent.
Although Mexico's performance has been good, like other Latin American
markets, it has a potential for volatility that means it is no place for
savings you cannot afford to lose.
The Mexican stock exchange rose by 103 per cent last year and, with a market
capitalisation of Dollars 134bn to the end of March 1992.
The government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has followed free
market policies, cut the government budget deficit, removed tariff barriers
and privatised state-owned industry. Talks are proceeding over a free trade
agreement with the US and Canada.
Kevin Carter, of Providence Capitol, which last September launched Latin
American Companies, a unit trust with Mexico as the largest holding, expects
the US will want to head a trading bloc of its own to rival Europe and
Japan. 'It is inconceivable that Mexico will not be integrated with the US.
Mexico can be seen as as a low-cost production centre for the US while
America is a huge market for Mexico,' he said.
The Mexican market was flooded with new stock issues last year as industry
sought financing ahead of the free trade pact which is due to be signed next
year. The trend is set to continue. Around 80 companies were privatised last
year including 12 banks.
About two dozen companies issued stock last year. The first and largest was
Telmex, the country's telephone monopoly, which has been the most actively
traded stock. Other large companies followed, including Cemex, the
state-owned cement company and Banacci, the largest financial group. Mexican
companies placed around Dollars 4.8bn (Pounds 2.66bn) of stock last year and
have raised another Dollars 3.6bn so far this year, with more to come.
However, the market is dominated by the top six companies which account for
more than 70 per cent of the trading volume.
President Salinas's economic management team has been praised for being
young, dynamic and pragmatic. It brought down inflation from just under 30
per cent in 1990 to 18.8 per cent last year. Real GDP growth was 4 per cent
in 1991 compared with 3.4 per cent the year before.
As a result, many fund managers regard Mexico as more than an emerging
market.
In one sense, Mexico's market has 'emerged' with the approval given by the
Securities and Investments Board at the end of May for unit trust investment
in the Mexican stock exchange. This means that the 10 per cent limit on unit
trust investment in Mexico as an an unapproved market has been lifted.
SIB said it took the decision in response to requests from a number of fund
managers.
One was Martin Currie which has two unit trusts with a Mexico weighting of
9.5 per cent - its international growth fund and an emerging markets fund.
'We are delighted it has happened,' said Alan Maidment, of Martin Currie
Unit Trusts and chairman of the regulations committee of the Unit Trust
Association.
'The argument has been that Mexico is well-regulated, big and efficient and
it was illogical to have a restriction when other markets such as Portugal,
which is tiny and not well-developed, had approval,' he said.
The way into Mexico for most investors will be diluted. Investing directly
in Mexican stocks is only for the very wealthy with a firm conviction that
the market will continue to perform superlatively in the future.
There are few single country funds and most of these, such as Mexican
Horizons, an investment trust managed by John Govett, are geared to the
institutional market. Latin American Securities manages an open-ended fund,
listed in Luxembourg and investing solely in Mexico. Minimum investment is
Dollars 5,000. Schroders has two Mexico funds which are quoted on the New
York stock exchange.
However, most private investors are likely to be better off spreading their
risk between Mexico and other countries through a regional, or an emerging
markets fund. Barings has a closed-end investment company, called the Puma
fund, launched in March 1991 which is run in Boston and is quoted on the
London Stock Exchange. It specialises in Latin America and its Mexico
weighting is around 40 per cent although this proportion can drop if stocks
in neighbouring countries look more attractive.
'Most of the leading Mexican companies are expecting very strong continuing
growth in earnings and that does not include the North American Free Trade
Area', said Maurice de Bunsen, director of Barings. Investment is easier
thanks to the availability of information about its companies.
One blot on the horizon is the size of Mexico's trade deficit which
increased from Dollars 3bn in 1990 to Dollars 11bn last year. However, de
Bunsen said much of this is due to the purchase of capital goods which are
necessary for the regeneration of industry.
The main growth sectors are construction and retail, both of which are
fuelled by a credit boom, according to Federico Laffan, Mexican analyst at
Latin American Securities. Its Latin American investment trust grew by 64
per cent in the year to May 1 but its Mexico weighting has dropped because
of better opportunities elsewhere.
The industrial sector has been affected by the recession in the US. Around
70 per cent of Mexico's imports and exports go through its giant neighbour
and depressed prices for steel, chemicals and other industrial products has
hit the sector.
While the stock market is still expected to perform well this year, the
volume of new issues is causing concern. The market rose by 30 per cent in
the first two months this year and hit an all time high last week but
performance was flat in-between.
'Mexico is driven by foreign investment and the volume of new issues, which
have been great, are being digested by the market,' said Laffan. 'We are
bullish in the medium to long term but for the moment we think the market
will be flat and are keen not to have too much exposure.'
Robert Davey, fund manager of Schroders Latin American Fund, agreed but said
the market is still undervalued. The prospective price-earnings ratio is
only 12.5 and earnings growth is expected to be 25 per cent. Davey has
increased the Mexico weighting which stands at 36 per cent.
The new issues have improved the liquidity of the market but most foreign
investment is still concentrated in the larger companies.
Some fund managers are therefore looking forward to the flotation of smaller
companies as a way of getting into a greater number of sectors. 'The future
of Mexico has to be what it is doing domestically and that means offers from
the the second line Mexican companies will be significant,' said James
Fairweather, who manages Martin Currie's emerging markets unit trust.
His outlook is bullish. 'We think the outlook for the economy in 1993 will
be very good. It is still undervalued and there is a great deal of
opportunity in fast growing companies.'
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
FACTFILE: Mexico
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------
Population 1991:                                                  82.6m
Gross Domestic Product 1991:                              Pounds  156bn
Market Capitalisation 1991:                               Pounds 54.9bn
Inflation Rate, Feb 1991:                                  17.3 percent
Interest Rate, May 1992 (annualised 91 day Treasury Bill): 13.5 percent
Exchange Rate, June 2 1992:                          Pounds 1 = P5493.4
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Financial Times


London Page V

920606

